
It took little more than a century for Nairobi's sprawling mass to erupt from 
the highland savannahs of centralKenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>
. Commercial towers thrust upwards from the central core, flanked to the east 
and west by suburbs that flow for miles before eventually giving way to farms 
and grasslands - yellow or green depending on the season. Kenya's economy is 
booming, boosted by a lively and innovative tech industry; but while evidence 
of new money can be seen almost everywhere you look, only a small minority of 
the city's three million inhabitants ever get to touch it.

The rich tend to live to the north and west of the city centre, where 
meandering roads trail through green suburbs dotted with gleaming villas and 
bright blue pools. Or at least, that's what we might have seen were it not for 
the gated roads, security guards and imposing walls topped with barbed wire. 
Driving through one day our Kiberan fixer, Jobe, asked me if this was what 
Europe looked like."We don't have as many walls," I replied, prompting an 
ironic chuckle.

To the south, luxury homes give way abruptly to the informal settlements and 
slums of Kibera, the focus of yesterday's piece whose NGO-infested slums I'll 
return to later in the series. Mud and steel shacks cluster behind trees at the 
end of a putting green, marking a border between rich and poor so 
sharply-defined that from the air it looks as if some great socio-economic 
force-field has been erected to keep the two apart.
 An aerial view of the distinct border between the rich suburbs of Nairobi and 
the northern edge of the dense Kibera slums (via Google Earth). 
The eastern half of the city houses a much poorer population, but appearances 
can be deceptive. Immigrants from neighbouring Somalia have formed a thriving 
economy in Little Mogadishu, a former Arab neighbourhoodprofiled by Katrina 
Mason in the FT recently 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d4979b30-bf98-11e1-bb88-00144feabdc0.html#axzz22L8imr3q>
 that turns over an estimated US$100 million annually. It was to the east, in a 
rather less wealthy neighbourhood that we found ourselves at the battered 
entrance to Pumwani Maternity Hospital.

We were assured that Pumwani was an 'amazing' place, where we would get to 
have an 'emotional experience' staring at all the cute little African babies 
and their hopeful young mothers. This was the experience captured recently by 
the photojournalist Marco Di Lauro, who exhibitedaward-winning photos of the 
facility 
<http://www.reportagebygettyimages.com/news/marco-di-lauro-s-kenyan-maternity-ward-feature-to-be-exhibited-in-arles-france/>
 in France last September - images of happy young mothers in spacious, friendly 
and brightly-painted wards. Other journalists have written in glowing terms 
about the facility: "New mothers appreciated at Pumwani Maternity Hospital!" 
gushesone reporter 
<http://www.keycorrespondents.org/2011/05/10/new-mothers-appreciated-at-pumwani-maternity-hospital/>
.

Unfortunately there had been a miscommunication about the nature of our visit, 
and Doctor Omondi Kumba, the man in charge, was visibly surprised to see us; 
though not as surprised as he would be once the realisation dawned that he had 
just invited a dozen reporters into his office. With admirable speed and grace 
he composed himself, and began filling the SD card in my Zoom recorder with a 
stream of facts and figures that, like jigsaw pieces from some twisted sadist, 
made less sense the more of them we tried to fit together.
 The entrance to Pumwani Maternity Hospital (photographed by Charlott 
Schönwetter) 
The basics were clear enough. With 350 beds and sixty babies delivered each 
day – around a quarter of them by caesarean section - Pumwani is the largest 
maternity hospital in EastAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. It 
is staffed by just twenty doctors, supported by 180 nurses."We are supposed to 
have about 250 or 300 [nurses]," Dr Kumba told us, but this was apparently 
impossible due to 'budget issues.'

The hospital serves some of Nairobi's poorest, and its fees are supposed to 
reflect that."Our delivery fee is very minimal," Kumba explained: 3,000 Kenyan 
Shillings (around £30) for a normal delivery, 6,000KSh for a C-section, and 
400KSh per night for the bed - patients stay for two or three nights in most 
cases. That figure is heavily subsidised – at a private hospital the costs 
would be many times higher – but still there are those who can't pay. "Every 
month we have a list of patients who are unable to pay and we waive the fee," 
Kumba claimed,"we waive about a million shillings per month." 

A nurse brought tea into the room, joining a small gaggle of awkward-looking 
nurses and matrons - all women - forming a mini-entourage in Kumba's shabby, 
colonial-era office. When she placed his drink on the conference table he 
ordered her to move it to his desk, flaunting petty power in the self-conscious 
and unconvincing manner of a man grasping for authority but never quite able to 
reach it; king of his own, meaningless domain.

The government were supposed to pay back the waived money, but Kumba claimed 
that in fact the hospital did"not get even one shilling" from them or the city 
council."They [the City Council] only pay our salaries, that's all." Everything 
else from drugs to electricity had to be paid for by revenue from patients. 
Donors were strangely absent, save for a few boxes of mosquito nets in the 
corner of his office that had been donated by a passing Nigerian pop star. No 
wonder that in the first six months of 2011 alone, three hundred and forty-two 
infants died at birth - two deaths each and every day. This was a hospital 
desperately in need of more funding... or was it?

That wasn't the only missing money: "We were told that every other hospital 
gets 2 million shillings per month to cover maintenance, gardening, and other 
expenses," Mark Thoma, the lone economist on our trip, recorded on his blog 
that day 
<http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2012/06/the-pumwani-maternity-ward.html>
,"but this one does not. We asked why, and the answer was: he wished he could 
tell us, but he didn't know." I was sitting immediately to Kumba's left during 
the group interview, far closer than Mark, and as the economics professor asked 
his question a matron behind me leaned in and whispered to her boss:"We are not 
supposed to talk about this."
 A memo to staff reminds them of the importance of the "political neutrality 
and integrity of state and public officials." 
We wanted to know more about the fate of the women who couldn't pay. "We are 
forced to waive because you cannot retain a mother who has delivered and cannot 
pay, the government policy is that you cannot detain a mother because she is 
not able to pay," Kumba explained, helpfully reminding us that kidnapping 
post-natal women is legally-dubious.

"We have a social worker who will look at the family background and the income 
of the mother, the social status of the mother, the relatives and the husband 
and reach a conclusion that this mother will not pay, even if you retain her 
for two months, there's nowhere she's going to get this money," he continued, 
"so let her go. And we sit down as a committee and we approve that she goes." 

Hang on, I thought, what happens to the women while this investigation is 
happening? The nimbler mind of Salon's Irin Carmon beat me to the question:"But 
you do retain them for a while?" "For two weeks," Kumba replied, "as we 
investigate."

We wanted to push further, but it was time for the scheduled emotional 
experience. Eight of us at a time shuffled into a narrow corridor, kept at a 
stifling heat for the newborns. Awkwardly we picked our way past a long line of 
topless mothers, who either clutched their babies to their breasts, or watched 
them through windows as they lay in various incubation chambers. We were 
assured that the new mothers had consented to this, but they didn't seem 
overjoyed by our presence. Kumba repeatedly warned us not to post pictures of 
the semi-naked women on the internet, aware on some level at least how 
intrusive this was. Fifty feet later I'd stopped looking at anything but the 
floor, and the cool, boob-free air outside couldn't be reached too soon.

We continued deeper into the hospital, sparse but apparently 
<http://nationimmigration.com/blog/uncategorized/pumwani-maternity-laboratories-closed/>
 clean and well-maintained aside from the peeling paint and the odd broken 
window. The Chinese government promised to invest KSh800 million in improving 
the hospital's infrastructure last year, but I couldn't find any evidence that 
it had reached these buildings. Free condom dispensers lay empty and spent, 
their contents long since ejaculated into the eager hands of patients 
apparently not too keen on a second visit.
 A condom machine at Pumwani Maternity Hospital stands empty, its patients 
apparently not to eager to come back. 
Perhaps I had been unsettled by all the boobs, but the further we walked the 
more uncomfortable I felt. Some of the patients were clearly in distress, and 
Mumsnet's Lynn Schreiber recordeda particular moving encounter at her blog 
<http://saltandcaramel.com/people-not-numbers/>: "One woman sat with her back 
to us, crying softly. When one of the organizers of the trip spoke with her, 
she explained that she was waiting to leave after having lost a baby. She was 
sharing a ward with women who had just given birth and who were cuddling their 
babies." Nobody seemed particularly concerned about her mental well-being.

Doors opened into examination rooms where women lay curled up on beds, their 
backs to us, facing the wall. Signs on the wall warned staff of the dangers of 
careless political remarks. Lynn rightly describes the hospital as "regimented 
and cold." Throughout the tour, conflicting emotions played with my judgement: 
the urge to connect with vulnerable mothers not quite overcoming the fear that 
I was a tourist in their tragedy.

The scale of that tragedy would only become apparent after we left, and had a 
chance to investigate further 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/06/29/imprisoned_for_giving_birth/>. In May 2009 a 
local journalist with a hidden camera found 44 new mothers held in a locked 
room at the nearby Kenyatta National Hospital. Soon after, the Kenya Network of 
Grassroots Organizations (KENGO)found 34 mothers held in 'inhuman' conditions 
at Pumwani 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/aug/13/kenya-maternity-poverty-detained-hospital>
. Vulnerable new mothers, unable to pay their fees, were routinely imprisoned 
with their babies for weeks or months in an attempt to extort money from family 
and friends. Not only were these women imprisoned for giving birth, they were 
charged a nightly rate for their cell, the costs escalating with each passing 
day. The chief public relations officer at KNH, when challenged on this record, 
was unrepentant,saying simply that 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/aug/13/kenya-maternity-poverty-detained-hospital>
:"The culture of not planning for unforeseen circumstances in this country 
needs to change." 

Irin Carmon found and interviewed Margaret 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/06/29/imprisoned_for_giving_birth/>, a local women 
who had given birth at the hospital four times:"Margaret recalled that when she 
was last admitted, a woman was told her baby had died, but when her husband 
demanded to see the baby's body, its skin was peeling, indicating a much older 
corpse. She said she knew of single mothers who have been offered by nurses 
50,000 shillings (about $600) in exchange for their babies." Some of these 
babies ended up in the West, trafficked by people like Pastor Gilbert Deya,a 
bogus bishop from Peckham 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/sep/21/pastor-extradited-kenya-accused-babies>
, south London, who claimed to deliver 'miracle babies' to local women who had 
been told they could not have children.

Irin found others too 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/06/29/imprisoned_for_giving_birth/>. One described 
being forced to sleep on the floor, having to"wrangle some spirits from a 
security guard" in order to treat their own bleeding wounds. Another woman was 
forced to get out of bed the day after her caesarean as staff verbally abused 
her:"Why do you open your legs and give birth every time?" The UN's 2007 
assessment still rings true five years later:

PMH's patients are among the poorest and the youngest women in Kenya, making 
them particularly vulnerable to discrimination and abuse. Women who delivered 
at PMH described decades of egregious rights violations—including unsafe 
conditions for delivery and behaviour by medical staff that abused and 
humiliated women and endangered their lives and the lives of their infants.

[Pumwani] vividly illustrates the Kenyan government's failure to take 
responsibility for severe human rights violations in health facilities.

We had been taken to see a leading African maternity hospital, a place in 
desperate need of funding and support, where we would have an 'emotional 
experience' witnessing the amazing work of a hundred or so hard-pressed medical 
workers bringing shiny new Kenyans into the world. There were glimmers of light 
here and there - the loving smiles of new mothers, brave little infants 
receiving their first vaccinations, the brightly-painted colours of walls that 
had been sponsored by Pampers - but they couldn't mask the rotting heart of the 
institution.

Most maternity hospitals work on the principle that one person enters and two 
people leave. Many of the vulnerable young women who ran the dehumanising 
gauntlet of Pumwani Maternity Hospital were lucky if even one undamaged person 
made it through to the other side. The extent of these problems should be 
self-evident from even a cursory Google search, and yetshockingly there are 
<http://www.keycorrespondents.org/2011/05/10/new-mothers-appreciated-at-pumwani-maternity-hospital/>
journalists 
<http://www.reportagebygettyimages.com/news/marco-di-lauro-s-kenyan-maternity-ward-feature-to-be-exhibited-in-arles-france>
 – evensome from our trip 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/News-Feed/MaasaiMasala/What-women-want/Article1-875141.aspx>
 – who pass through completely oblivious to them.

I'll come back to the role of NGOs later in this series, but we will never get 
good information about Africa if the journalists who go there simply write 
whatever story is put in front of them; whether it's repeating claims that 
Kibera holds a million people, or telling the story of a hospital that could be 
amazing if only it had a bit more money to work with. The problems of Pumwani 
are so widely-reported that few are likely to miss them, and yet incredibly 
some still do. How many similar places remain under the radar for the want of a 
few tough questions, and much advocacy propaganda has been written about them?

As for me, well I received my emotional experience; but the feelings I left 
with were not the ones I had been promised.

Part I: The Missing Millions of Kibera 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/01/africa-propaganda-kibera>
(Part III – "Obama's support for domestic violence" – coming tomorrow)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Declaration of interest: This trip was organized by the International 
Reporting Project <http://internationalreportingproject.org/>, an independent 
journalism organization based in Washington DC. It was funded by the Gates 
Foundation, who have had no editorial influence over this WINDOWS 8 FTW! 
article.

Follow me on Twitter: @mjrobbins <http://www.twitter.com/mjrobbins>
 