
King Priam was premiered 50 years ago this month in Coventry, to mark the 
consecration of the city's new cathedral. The following night,Benjamin 
Britten's War Requiem <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_Requiem> received its 
first performance. Both works spoke pointedly about the experience of war; the 
cathedral had been built alongside the ruins of its medieval predecessor, 
bombed to oblivion on the night of 16 November 1940. Of the two works, it is 
the Britten – with its weaving of the liturgy of the requiem mass withWilfred 
Owen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/wilfred-owen>'s trench-worn 
verse –that has had the most flourishing afterlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/22/benjamin-britten-war-requiem>. 
Sir Michael Tippett's King Priam, with its libretto based on Homer'sIliad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780140447941/the-iliad> – 
is rarely performed and little known.

That may be about to change. King Priam is to receive a concert performance at 
theBrighton festival <http://brightonfestival.org/> this weekend. Meanwhile, 
English Touring Opera <http://englishtouringopera.org.uk/> is advancing plans 
to stage the work in the 2014-15 season, its first UK production since English 
National Opera's in 1995. For the Brighton festival, the work fits into a 
strand devised by guest artistic directorVanessa Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/11/vanessa-redgrave-brighton-festival>
, which takes the Iliad both as the foundational work of literature of the 
western world and as a war poem that still speaks to us of the trauma of 
conflict.

Tippett's own libretto for his opera fits into a tradition, nearly 3,000 years 
old, of responding to, arguing with, and rewriting Homer, a process that began 
with the dramatist Aeschylus, and whose latest iteration isAlice Oswald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review>'s 
2011 poem Memorial, in which the epic's flesh is removed, leaving behind the 
lines that record its heroes' deaths: it is a kind of a versehecatomb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hecatomb>, death piled on death piled on death. 
With the open-ended quality of the Iliad's poetics comes the possibility of 
countless interpretations, infinite vistas that slant out from its humane, 
grand, ringing lines.

For each generation of readers, the Iliad seems to reflect back their own 
experience. Alexander the Great, no peacenik, slept with a copy under his 
pillow, according to tradition. The Iliad we read today – informed by the 
doubts and terrors of modern warfare – is less glory-bound, and more invested 
in pity, fear and loss. Tippett's elaboration of the Iliad reminds me strongly 
of Greek tragedy. Works such asAeschylus's Oresteia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oresteia> are, in effect, sequels to Homer. The 
Oresteia answers the question: what happened when Agamemnon, the leader of the 
Greek troops, got back home? Tippett asks: how did this thing start? How did we 
get to here?

The opera begins with Priam and Hecuba deciding to have their infant son Paris 
killed, because Hecuba has dreamed that her child will cause his father's 
death. The baby is given to a shepherd, who is instructed to carry out the deed 
– but spares him. The boy is brought up in the mountains, until one day his 
elder brother Hector encounters him out hunting and, ignorant of his true 
identity, persuades Priam to bring the boy back to Troy. It is a fundamental 
trope of folklore, this: the child who is abandoned and then turns up to cause 
havoc, or become great, or both – similar tales are told of Moses, of Cyrus of 
Persia, of Oedipus, of Snow White.

Also in the early part of the opera we are brought the judgment of Paris – in 
which the young man is obliged to bestow a golden apple on the goddess of his 
choosing, either Hera, Athena or Aphrodite. Each offers bribes, Aphrodite's 
being the opportunity to possess the most desirable woman in the world. That's 
Helen, who is already married to Menelaus of Sparta. Paris gives the apple to 
Aphrodite, and claims Helen, who abandons her husband. And so the Trojan war 
begins, as the Greeks cross the sea in a mighty fighting force to retrieve the 
stolen bride.

The keynote of all this – and this is something particular to Tippett's take on
Homer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/homer> – is the role of personal 
agency. The answer to the question "how did this happen?" is, for Tippett, 
because people chose. Priam and Hecuba chose to kill their child; the shepherd 
chose to save him; Priam chose to bring Paris home again. Paris chose 
Aphrodite. Helen chose Paris. From these operations of the human will disaster 
spools, inexorably and unstoppably. In the fifth line of the Iliad, we are told 
that "Zeus's plan was drawing to its conclusion". Zeus and the other gods are 
active in the poem – weighing in, supporting their favourite heroes, taking up 
arms. But from Tippett's opera, the gods – aside from Hermes, who acts as 
messenger and go-between – are banished. Responsibility is made to rest solely 
with its human characters. At the same time, they are shown to be in an 
impossible position: there are no right choices.

According to Dennis Marks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/dennis-marks>, who is preparing 
a biography of Tippett, this profound sense of human responsibility is bedded 
in the composer's deeply felt pacifism: he chose to spend five months in prison 
as a conscientious objector in the second world war. Marks, in an essay for
Opera magazine <http://www.opera.co.uk/>, also points out a crucial contrast 
between Britten's War Requiem and Tippett's King Priam. Through Owen's poems, 
Britten takes us right into the trenches, gives raw musical life to the 
experience of combat – still a fresh memory for so many people in 1962. King 
Priam is, perhaps, the work for today. If the Iliad is a poem of the exterior, 
its action fought out on the plain of Troy, then King Priam is a poem of the 
interior, of what happens within the palace walls.

For all the catalogue of brutal slaughter in the Iliad, each kill described in 
vivid anatomical detail, there is only one death shown on stage in King Priam, 
just as the work ends, and that is the death of the old king, too feeble to 
fight. This is an opera about collateral damage. As bombs blow on Syrian 
highways, andMarie Colvin 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/public/news/article874796.ece?CMP=KNGvccp1-marie+colvin&gclid=CJKH94SalrACFQwjfAodOkJv4w>
 is slaughtered in her Homs refuge, King Priam speaks to us.

• King Priam <http://brightonfestival.org/event/628/king_priam/> is at the 
Brighton festival on 27 May
 