
Shrek spin-off Puss in Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144626/puss-in-boots> will be renamed 
"Cat in Boots" in the United Arab Emirates. The P-word was pulled from the 
title amid fears that a "Puss" could cause offence. Meanwhile, star Antonio 
Banderas, who voices the titular feline, was apparently asked not to refer to 
the original title or his character's name during promotional duties at the 
recentDoha Tribeca film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/03/freedom-arab-spring-film-makers>.

Puss in Boots, which premiered in the UK last night, topped the US chart on 
its release earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/07/puss-in-boots-tower-heist>
 and has creamed $178m from the global box office to date. The film sees Puss – 
a Zorro-esque swashbuckler with a thirst for milk and adventure – team up with 
Humpty Dumpty (Zach Galifianakis) and Kitty Softpaws (Salma Hayek) in an 
attempt to steal golden-goose eggs from a giant's castle. The events of the 
film pre-date Puss's debut in DreamWorks Animation's fairytale franchise. He 
first appeared as an unlikely ally to lovable ogre Shrek in 2004'sShrek 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/100880/shrek.2>.

The change in title reflects edits made to previous films deemed to conflict 
with the UAE's moral values. Sex and nudity are taboo, as is any attempt to 
depict a holy power on screen. This resulted,according to Time Out Dubai 
<http://www.timeoutdubai.com/films/features/15329-censorship-in-the-uae>, in a 
cut ofBruce Almighty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96108/bruce.almighty> – a comedy in 
which a man meets God and is granted omnipotence – notable for the complete 
absence of Morgan Freeman as the heavenly father. Similarly,Sex and the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124001/sex.and.the.city> was stripped 
of its sex scenes and subsequently never shown in the Middle East. It was 
rumoured that the popular franchise would have been renamed "Shoes and the 
City" had it been released.

• This article was amended on 28 November 2011. The original said incorrectly 
that the film was renamed at the request of the UAE film censorship board. The 
National Media Council made no objection to the original title. The article was 
also amended to make clear that any request toAntonio Banderas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonio-banderas> not to refer to the 
original title was made in Doha and not in the UAE.
 