
For me, part of the compelling energy of short stories comes from the way they 
can cross boundaries. More than simply geographic, these boundaries can be 
crossed in acts of transgression or empathy, in shifts of understanding or 
emotion and formal innovation.


Sometimes, when a boundary has been breached, it becomes clear that there is 
no going back. At other times, both characters and reader are placed in an 
uncanny limbo, where they wrangle with a sense of dislocation, or unreality – 
maybe exhilarating, maybe alarming.

Whether exploring transgressive acts or life-death moments, the best short 
stories can powerfully communicate the shock of change. But they are also able 
to take their time, to trace transformations in slow motion, to delineate 
states of limbo with precision detail. Emotionally and psychologically, this is 
rich territory for writers and readers.

In my collection of stories, Light Box 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368182/>, this is the 
territory I chose to explore. Outer landscapes and settings are often 
reflective of the borderlands of inner lives: a path beside a canal at night, a 
frozen lake, a foreign city, an island on the other side of the earth. I wanted 
to explore the ways my characters would respond when their perception of 
themselves and the narratives of their lives were challenged. I wanted to 
linger on those moments when the lines are no longer clear and it can feel like 
anything might happen.

1. Axolotl by Julio Cortá <http://southerncrossreview.org/73/axolotl.html>zar 
<http://southerncrossreview.org/73/axolotl.html>
Tracing the metamorphosis of a man into a reptile, this can be read as a love 
letter to literature – to the connective power of writing and reading. What is 
at stake here is the awareness of “the presence of a different life, of another 
way of seeing”. In meticulous detail, the narrator describes the shift of 
perception that takes him from watching axolotls through a pane of glass in to 
their alien experience.

2. Bullet in the Brain by  
<http://pov.imv.au.dk/Issue_27/section_1/artc2A.html>Tobias Wolff 
<http://pov.imv.au.dk/Issue_27/section_1/artc2A.html>
This falls into a subcategory of short story where time is stretched and 
slowed. In this case the boundary – between life and death – is crossed slowly 
enough for the dying man’s brain to experience one last vivid memory. Wolff 
creates a dark but humorous portrait of a jaded man, who, at the moment of his 
violent death, remembers a moment of deeply-felt, long-forgotten joy. Wolff 
also includes an account of everything the man doesnot remember in his final 
moment, giving the reader, in the space of a few paragraphs, a poignant summary 
of a life.

3. Love and Honour and Pity and Pride and Compassion and Sacrifice by  
<http://www.all-story.com/issues.cgi?action=show_story&story_id=305>Nam Le 
<http://www.all-story.com/issues.cgi?action=show_story&story_id=305> 
Should a writer take on a subject and a history that isn’t their own? What 
constitutes inappropriate appropriation – personal or cultural – and what might 
be considered an act of empathetic extension? Le casts himself as a character 
in his own story, as he explores the act of creative transgression that would 
allow him to tell his father’s story of emigration, dating back to the Vietnam 
war.

4. Bezhin Lea by Ivan Turgenev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jun/21/ivan-turgenev-brief-survey-short-story>
A hunter who has lost his way listens to peasant boys scaring one another 
around the fire with tales of the supernatural. Turgenev sets his exploration 
of the delicate threshold between the living and the dead in a vivid landscape. 
A great ghost story that also suggests, with wry warmth, the fragility of life 
and the swiftness with which it can be taken away.

5. An Elegy for Easterly by  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/19/short-stories-elegy-easterly-gappah>
Petina Gappah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/19/short-stories-elegy-easterly-gappah>
From Gappah’s celebrated debut collection, this is an unforgettable portrait 
of life in a shanty town in Zimbabwe – one which has “erupted without City 
permission”, and which at the end of the story is bulldozed. The vulnerability 
of those living in this limbo “of pole and mud, of thick black plastic 
sheeting” is clear: when one woman’s longing for a child leads her to steal a 
newborn from its dying mother, the transgression goes unnoticed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ftop-10-stories-of-crossing-boundaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff420643babfa1c2853a79351ef1e8b2bedbb1767%2F0_194_4233_2540%2F4233.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=KJ%20Orr's%20top%2010%20stories%20of%20crossing%20boundaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ftop-10-stories-of-crossing-boundaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=KJ%20Orr%27s%20top%2010%20stories%20of%20crossing%20boundaries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Ftop-10-stories-of-crossing-boundaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff420643babfa1c2853a79351ef1e8b2bedbb1767%2F0_194_4233_2540%2F4233.jpg>
 A scene from Akira Kurosawa’s film Rashomon, which was based on Akutagawa’s 
book In a Bamboo Grove. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
6. In a Bamboo Grove by Ryū 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/nov/22/abriefsurveyoftheshortst3>
nosuke Akutagawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/nov/22/abriefsurveyoftheshortst3>
Here, the reader crosses boundaries of perspective through the multiple and 
contradictory testimonies of a single event: the murder of a samurai. The 
possibility of any single, reliable truth is undermined. Each account seems 
both real and unreal, making the events recounted increasingly amorphous and 
dreamlike.

7. Wenlock Edge by  <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/12/05/wenlock-edge>
Alice Munro <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/12/05/wenlock-edge>
A young female student agrees to spend an evening with her roommate’s 
controlling older lover. Boundaries of body and mind are challenged in a 
disturbing rite of passage, made more powerful by the girl’s visceral 
retrospective realisation of what has happened to her. Munro is masterful at 
testing boundaries, both literal and metaphorical.

8. Last Night by James Salter 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/11/18/last-night-2> 
A couple, Walter and Marit, are spending the evening with a friend. It is the 
couple’s last evening together because Marit, who has cancer, has chosen to 
die. This story is a devastating exploration of transgression, and involves the 
uneasy compression of a life-death moment with infidelity. Everything happens 
in the space of a few pages and with an economy of style that only accentuates 
the impact.

9. The Enormous Radio by John Cheever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/16/short-story-john-cheever> 
This prescient 1947 story speaks to contemporary concerns about the boundary 
between the private and the public. When Jim Westcott buys a new radio for his 
wife Irene, it is with her happiness in mind. However, the radio has the 
capacity to tune in to the lives of the other residents in their apartment 
block. Initially, the couple are entertained by their newfound ability to 
eavesdrop, but with time the fractured boundary between lives leads to an 
escalation of unhappiness and paranoia.

10. Forgotten Journey by 
<http://thegiganticmag.com/magazine/articleDetail.php?p=articleDetail&id=227> 
Silvina Ocampo 
<http://thegiganticmag.com/magazine/articleDetail.php?p=articleDetail&id=227> 
A girl wants to remember and understand her own birth. When the narrative that 
she has accepted for so long – that babies come from “a large department store 
in Paris” – is challenged by a more accurate version, this challenge feels to 
her “atrocious” and “bloodthirsty”. What I love is the speed with which Ocampo 
establishes the fraught border territory associated with the stories we tell 
ourselves: where security meets vulnerability, where a threatening energy is 
associated with a fresh perspective. As the story ends – after only two pages – 
she is in a strange limbo: she is told the sun is out, but she can see that it 
is dark.

• Light Box by KJ Orr is published by Daunt Books, priced £9.99. It is 
available from the Guardian bookshop for £7.99 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368182/>.
 