
Bridesmaids' Kristen Wiig and Annie Mumolo will reunite for a new comedy which 
is expected to see the former make her directing debut,according to the 
Hollywood Reporter. 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/kristen-wiig-make-directorial-debut-711207>

The currently untitled film will see the pair playing best friends who find 
themselves in over their heads and out of their depths. Other than that basic 
storyline, few other details have emerged of the new project. Mumolo and Wiig 
will also work on the screenplay.

The pair picked up an Oscar nomination for co-writing Bridesmaids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/bridesmaids-review>, which was 
one of the biggest box office comedies of 2011 with an impressive $288.4m 
(Â£178m) on the back of strong reviews. Wiig took the lead role of a single 
jewellery store worker in her 30s whose best friend announces she is getting 
married, while Mumolo had a small part as a nervous plane passenger.

"We're very excited to be writing," said Wiig and Mumolo in a statement. "We 
will be going into a cave for months to finish. An actual cave. We found one 
that's nice and big. We're putting a couch in there."

Tom Rothman of the production company TriStar Productions joked: "Kristen and 
Annie assured me that the film will be a searing and depressing drama, which is 
what the world needs right now. So we grabbed it. Perhaps more to the point, 
these two supremely talented ladies are always ahead of the comedy curve, and 
as we at TriStar push for originality, we are lucky as hell to be in business 
with them. The chance to hopefully make Kristen's first film as a director is 
the cherry on top."

Mumolo is currently working on the screenplay for David O Russell's 
Oscar-tipped biopic of Miracle Mop inventor, Joy Mangano. Wiig recently starred 
in Anchorman 2, Hateship Loveship andThe Secret Life of Walter Mitty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-secret-life-of-walter-mitty>, as well as 
doing voice work on the hit animated comedy Despicable Me 2.

Melissa McCarthy, who enjoyed a breakout role in Bridesmaids, was last year 
reported to be in negotiations to direct Tammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/08/ellen-page-director-miss-stevens>
, a raunchy comedy in which she's also the star. However the film is being 
released next month with her husband and creative partner Ben Falcone in charge 
of the cameras.
 