
Gustavo Kuerten's Australian Open jinx continued in the small hours of this 
morning when he lost in five sets - 5-7, 6-3, 7-5, 4-6, 6-3 - to Czech Radek 
Stepanek in the second round.

But the triple French Open champion, who has now failed to progress past the 
second round in Melbourne in seven attempts, remained upbeat after a marathon 
match lasting close to four hours.

"So far I haven't played my best tennis at this tournament, but I was close to 
winning this match," he said.

"I didn't play bad. A couple of shots here and there and the result could have 
been different.

"I played two bad shots when I had chances to open a lead in the fifth set," 
said Kuerten. "Those are the mistakes that stick in my mind, but I'm not 
worried about the way I'm playing."

But Kuerten, who looked to have dug himself out of a hole after going two sets 
to one down, admitted that time could be running out for him to mount a real 
challenge at the Australian Open.

"I have never thought I've played my game at this tournament so far," said the 
26-year-old. "I always struggle to get my rhythm going.

"I just need a breakthrough in the early rounds here and hopefully it will 
come. But the years are going by so it had better come quick or it will be 
finished."

Stepanek, who won their only other meeting at the Paris Open last year, wore 
Kuerten down with some inspirational shot-making as the number 30 seed wilted 
in the blistering heat.

The Czech, ranked 69 in the world, secured the crucial break in the seventh 
game of the deciding set when he forced Kuerten into a loose forehand.

He next meets top seed Lleyton Hewitt or his fellow Australian Todd Larkham.

Safin saves himself for second week


Third seed Marat Safin warned his rivals that he was saving himself for the 
second week of the Australian Open after his 6-3, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 victory over 
Spain's Albert Montanes in the second round this morning.

The giant Russian, runner-up in Melbourne last year, missed last week's Sydney 
International with a shoulder injury but said he would be at full throttle for 
his third round tussle with Germany's Rainer Schuettler.

"I was trying to throw the ball in the right spot so I didn't hurt my shoulder 
that much," said Safin, who is still using anti-inflammatory drugs to help with 
the pain.

"I am trying to use less power and less energy to be ready for the second 
week."

The 2000 US Open champion committed 53 unforced errors and was given a warning 
for racket abuse in a patchy display at Rod Laver Arena.

But after that moment of frustration early in the third set, Safin began to 
find his range from the baseline.

He broke the 81st-ranked Montanes soon afterwards and took the third set 6-4 
before rushing through the fourth to wrap up proceedings in little over two 
hours.

"The shoulder pain is going away completely. Hopefully by the next match it 
will be perfect," said Safin.

His third-round opponent Schuettler, seeded 31, defeated former Wimbledon 
champion Richard Krajicek 6-3, 7-5, 6-4.

"Schuettler beat Krajicek, so he is playing really good. Every match is going 
to be tough but I'm on my way," reflected the Russian.

Australian Open men's second round results


25-Mikhail Youzhny (Russia) beat Joseph Sirianni (Australia) 6-2, 6-3, 6-3
 7-Jiri Novak (Czech Republic) beat Olivier Rochus (Belgium) 7-6 (7-3), 7-6 
(7-5), 4-6, 4-6, 6-3
 6-Roger Federer (Switzerland) beat Lars Burgsmuller (Germany) 6-3, 6-0, 6-3 
 9-Andy Roddick (US) beat Andre Voinea (Romania) 6-2, 6-2, 6-2 
 Fernando Vicente (Spain) 19-Juan Ignacio Chela (Argentina) 6-3, 6-3, 2-6, 6-3 
 3-Marat Safin (Russia) beat Albert Montanes (Spain) 6-3, 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 
 Radek Stepanek (Czech Republic) beat 30-Gustavo Kuerten (Brazil) 5-7, 6-3 
7-5, 4-6, 6-3
 20-Xavier Malisse (Belgium) beat Anthony Dupuis (France) 6-3, 5-7, 7-6 (8-6), 
7-5
 Alberto Martin (Spain) beat Fernando Gonzalez (Chile) 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 6-1, 
7-6 (7-4)
 10-David Nalbandian (Argentina) beat Jaymon Crabb (Australia) 6-1, 7-6 (7-3), 
6-3
 18-Younes El Aynaoui (Morocco) beat Vadim Kutsenko (Uzbekistan) 6-2, 6-1, 6-4 
 23-James Blake (US) beat Jose Acasuso (Argentina) 6-1, 6-4, 6-4 
 Feliciano Lopez (Spain) beat Robby Ginepri (US) 6-2, 6-4, 6-2 
 31-Rainer Schuettler (Germany) beat Richard Krajicek (Netherlands) 6-3, 7-5, 
6-4
 Andreas Vinciguerra (Sweden) beat Julian Knowle (Austria) 6-2, 0-1 (retired)
 