
Leaders of Labour’s campaign for the UK to remain in the EU have issued a call 
to arms, warning party members and supporters that the referendum could be lost 
unless the left and the unions back the case with more passion.

Senior MPs Alan Johnson and Chuka Umunna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chuka-umunna> are speaking out amid 
concern that the campaign is being dominated by talk of Tory splits, while 
Labour’s broadly united pro-EU stance is almost obscured from view.

There is also worry that the left of the party, including senior figures in 
the union movement and the grassroots organisation Momentum, which backs Jeremy 
Corbyn, are lukewarm in their backing for EU membership and have yet to decide 
how to participate in the campaign.

The appeal for more pro-EU solidarity from Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> comes as polling organisation 
YouGov issues figures showing that, while the Remain side is doing better than 
earlier in the campaign and is narrowly ahead, one in five voters remains 
undecided, leaving the race too close to call.

Johnson said it was now crucial that Labour supporters put “boots on the 
ground” in a movement to persuade working people that EU membership is crucial 
to their lives and prospects.

“The Tories are split on Europe; Labour is united,” he said. “We have to make 
the case to members and get the vote out. It is particularly important for 
trade unions to be active participants, ensuring a bottom-up campaign focusing 
on the adverse effects that turning our backs on our continent will have on 
working people. There is no progressive case for leaving the EU, and we need to 
translate our unity into a victory for Labour values on 23 June.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Flabour-eu-unions-brexit-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169cb7012753d5fcbacda2523bc552c8f9291351%2F0_87_2405_1443%2F2405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%E2%80%99s%20pro-EU%20camp%20urges%20left%20and%20unions%20to%20battle%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Flabour-eu-unions-brexit-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%E2%80%99s%20pro-EU%20camp%20urges%20left%20and%20unions%20to%20battle%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Flabour-eu-unions-brexit-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169cb7012753d5fcbacda2523bc552c8f9291351%2F0_87_2405_1443%2F2405.jpg>
 Chuka Umunna warns that without passionate campaigning the referendum could be 
lost. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
Umunna, a former shadow business secretary who is heading the Labour campaign 
in London, said the referendum was “losable” if Labour failed to make an 
energetic case for EU membership.

“We are not going to win unless most of Labour’s 9.3 million voters … get out 
and vote to maintain our seat at the top table and keep Britain in Europe,” he 
told theObserver. “The organisation that is most united on this issue and, 
therefore, most effective in putting the case to remain ‘In’ is Labour. It has 
been a hugely unifying issue for Labour after the divisions of last year. Now 
we need to … focus on making a patriotic, emotional and positive argument for 
Britain to continue punching above its weight inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the world stage.”

Addressing concerns that some on the left of the party dislike the EU or are 
lukewarm in their enthusiasm, he said: “My message to the left is, if you don’t 
support this full throttle, you will be gifting a big victory to the 
dog-whistle politics of Nigel Farage which, if successful, will unleash a wave 
of nasty nationalism across our country. The EU is not perfect and must be 
reformed, but now is not the time for us to sit on our hands; now is the time 
for us to fight for the politics of solidarity and collaboration, which is core 
to our Labour values and beliefs.”

YouGov’s most recent polling suggests that the Remain side has come out better 
from the first fortnight of the referendum campaign. In the two weeks since 
David Cameron completed his renegotiation, there had been a small but distinct 
shift in opinion towards staying in, with the Remain side now having a slight 
lead.

YouGov boss Stephan Shakespeare 
<https://yougov.co.uk/people/stephan.shakespeare/> said: “The Remain side has 
won the first two weeks… As attention turns away from Cameron vs Boris towards 
the bigger issues, it is fear of the unknown that is dominating minds.”

After the final deal in Brussels, a YouGov poll on 19 February showed the race 
neck and neck, with Leave on 38% and Remain on 37%. Four subsequent YouGov 
surveys have each put Remain in the lead with, on average, 40% support, while 
Leave has not gone above 38%. However, almost one in five people still don’t 
know which way to vote, so there is still a lot to play for.
 