
The Labor frontbencher David Feeney is facing questions after it was revealed 
that he failed to include a $2.3m property in his parliamentary interests 
register.

Feeney, who is in a tight battle with a Greens candidate over his inner 
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> seat of 
Batman, says the purchase of the negatively geared house in Northcote is on the 
public record but he omitted to register it.

“I have today written to the register of members interests seeking to rectify 
my register so that the property is properly found therein,” Feeney told ABC 
radio.

Government's negative gearing claims dismissed by Grattan Institute report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/25/government-negative-gearing-claims-dismissed-grattan-institute-report>
Feeney is under threat from the Greens in the seat of Batman and Greens member 
for the neighbouring seat of Melbourne,Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, said the issue was 
confirmation the voters of Batman need a different representative.

“Australia lost a premier over a bottle of wine,” Bandt told ABC radio, 
referring tothe resignation of former premier of New South Wales, Barry 
O’Farrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/barry-ofarrell-resigns-as-nsw-premier-after-thankyou-card-for-wine-emerges>
.

“What happens to someone who doesn’t declare a $2.3m property?

Feeney told Fairfax Media on Tuesday when questioned about the property 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-david-feeney-didnt-declare-23m-house-and-doesnt-know-if-its-negatively-geared-20160517-gowys9.html#ixzz48x3FxfCq>
 that he didn’t know if the house was negatively geared but later confirmed to 
News Corp that it was. Labor has promised to end negative gearing on all new 
purchases, other than new builds, if it wins the election.

MPs are required to update their register of interests within 28 days and can 
be found in contempt of parliament and referred to the house privileges 
committee for investigation.

Australian election 2016: Peter Dutton says 'illiterate' refugees will take 
Australian jobs – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/18/australian-election-2016-peter-dutton-says-illiterate-refugees-will-take-australian-jobs-politics-live>
Feeney said he bought the property in Northcote to honour an election 
commitment to live in the electorate, but that planned renovations had 
prevented him and his wife from moving in.

“I’ve racked my mind how this omission came to be, I was elected in September 
2013 and bought in December 2013 and in that maelstrom of events I failed to 
update my register.”

“We had the former prime minister Tony Abbott in precisely the same 
circumstances having to update his register for his mortgage.”

But the the federal finance minister, Mathias Cormann, said Feeney was 
“hypocritical to be negative gearing a property when Labor planned to introduce 
a policy reigning-in the practice.

“Under Labor’s policy on negative gearing, all of those Labor members of 
Parliament that are negatively gearing existing investment properties will be 
able to continue to do so while they’re taking that opportunity from everybody 
else,” he told the ABC.

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Flabor-hits-back-at-not-very-scary-scare-campaign-on-negative-gearing-policy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labor%20hits%20back%20at%20'not%20very%20scary%20scare%20campaign'%20on%20negative%20gearing%20policy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Flabor-hits-back-at-not-very-scary-scare-campaign-on-negative-gearing-policy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labor%20hits%20back%20at%20%27not%20very%20scary%20scare%20campaign%27%20on%20negative%20gearing%20policy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Flabor-hits-back-at-not-very-scary-scare-campaign-on-negative-gearing-policy-video&media=>
Labor hits back at ‘not very scary scare campaign’ on negative gearing policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/may/13/labor-hits-back-at-not-very-scary-scare-campaign-on-negative-gearing-policy-video>


 