
Thangam Debbonaire, the Labour MP who was mistakenly appointed to a shadow 
ministerial role byJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, said she spent six weeks 
working on her brief while having treatment for cancer before she was told she 
did not have the job.

Debbonaire, who has since overcome breast cancer, shared her experience on her 
Facebook page, saying she had been appointed as shadow arts and culture 
minister without being asked, and was only contacted six weeks later by the
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader’s office, who then 
told her the announcement had been a mistake.

“I told Jeremy: ‘If this is how you treat me when I’ve got cancer, how will 
you treat me when I haven’t?’” she told the Guardian.

Yvette Cooper calls for 'single unity candidate' to take on Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/yvette-cooper-calls-for-single-unity-candidate-to-take-on-corbyn>
She said she only became aware that she had been given the role when 
journalists began to call her office. Before publicly denying the story, she 
rang the Labour whips’ office to check the facts. They told her that it was 
true, and that Corbyn would be in touch. “It’s a conversation you’d remember,” 
Debbonaire said. “But he didn’t ring me and continued not to ring me.”

Debbonaire, who is now backing Angela Eagle for the leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/im-here-to-win-angela-eagle-launch-labour-leadership-bid>
, said she would have turned down the position had she been formally offered 
it, because of her cancer treatment. She said she would not serve on Corbyn’s 
frontbench even if he were to win the leadership battle.

Debbonaire said she had feared turning down the role because she anticipated a 
backlash if she was perceived as being anti-Corbyn. The MP for Bristol West 
left Twitter after one Corbyn supporter compared her time off for cancer 
treatment to Corbyn’s week-long holiday duringthe EU referendum campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. “If you say anything in 
public that could even be perceived to be a criticism of Jeremy, they pile in,” 
she said.

“In my constituency, many people are supporters of Corbyn, and most of them 
are good, hardworking Labour supporters, but a vocal minority make it their 
business to criticise. Once I was accused of not supporting him when I wasn’t 
at a vote, and I was having chemotherapy.”

Over the next six weeks, she said there was no word from Corbyn, so 
Debbonaire’s office began setting up meetings with arts organisations and began 
working on a new draft of the arts policy.


Her immediate boss, Maria Eagle, then the shadow culture secretary, tried to 
deter her, she said. “She kept saying: ‘Jeremy needs to speak to you’ – and the 
reason, I found out, is because she knew already that I had been removed, but 
protocol is that the person who removes you has to tell you, quite rightly,” 
she said. “But I felt a responsibility to start doing something … Jeremy 
clearly felt no responsibility.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-mp-had-to-wait-six-weeks-to-find-she-did-not-have-shadow-cabinet-role%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede9009c8a1e0575470efb7829b1edb5322d13d8%2F23_192_2459_1476%2F2459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20took%20six%20weeks%20to%20inform%20MP%20she%20was%20not%20a%20shadow%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-mp-had-to-wait-six-weeks-to-find-she-did-not-have-shadow-cabinet-role%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20took%20six%20weeks%20to%20inform%20MP%20she%20was%20not%20a%20shadow%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-mp-had-to-wait-six-weeks-to-find-she-did-not-have-shadow-cabinet-role%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede9009c8a1e0575470efb7829b1edb5322d13d8%2F23_192_2459_1476%2F2459.jpg>
 Maria Eagle tried to deter Debbonaire from pressing on with shadow ministerial 
brief. Photograph: Ian Watts 
Corbyn phoned Debbonaire in late March and said the shadow arts and culture 
minister role would come under Eagle’s brief. He had no further explanation for 
the miscommunication, Debbonaire said.

“This is not the worst thing in the world – cancer is way worse – but I felt I 
had to say something because Jeremy is making a big deal in public about how 
‘if anyone has a problem they can come talk to me’, but it took him six weeks 
to phone me and tell me something everyone else already knew.”

In the days after the phone call from Corbyn, a member of his office said 
Debbonaire could continue with the shadow arts minister brief after all. She 
ultimately resigned three weeks ago, not because of the miscommunication, but 
out of anger at Corbyn’s statement the day after the vote to leave the EU that 
article 50 should be triggered immediately.

“My constituents voted overwhelmingly to stay in the EU,” she said. “Jeremy 
that morning asked for the earliest possible exit. It was very alienating – it 
would be a disaster for jobs and trade.”

A spokesperson for Jeremy Corbyn said: “There was some miscommunication over 
Thangam’s appointment as shadow minister for the arts, and the parameters of 
her role were subsequently negotiated, but at no point was she sacked.”

Debbonaire’s Facebook account of her hiring and firing was followed less than 
24 hours later by a post from the former shadow transport secretary Lilian 
Greenwood, who described feeling undermined by the leader’s office. Posting a 
speech that she had given to her local party on her blog,Greenwood said 
<http://www.liliangreenwood.co.uk/lilian_s_speech_to_nottingham_south_labour_party_members>
 being shadow transport secretary was her dream role and that she had wanted to 
make it work, despite not having voted for Corbyn’s leadership.

Jeremy Corbyn says new Labour members should get leadership vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/owen-smith-calls-for-single-labour-challenger-take-on-corbyn>
Greenwood said she was furious that a shadow cabinet reshuffle began on the 
day of rail fare rises, which she and her staff had spent weeks preparing to 
campaign on. “It let me down, it let my staff down, but most of all it let down 
the Labour campaigners and trade union members, people like you, who had given 
up their time to go out campaigning for us that morning,” she wrote.

Greenwood also said she had been assured by Corbyn’s director of policy that 
he would support HS2, but the Labour leader later suggested to a journalist 
that the line should not stop in central London. “When I raised my concerns, it 
was simply shrugged off,” she said. “It undermined me in front of colleagues 
and made me look weak. It made me feel like I was wasting my time.”

Angela Eagle said in an interview for the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/16/angela-eagle-labour-must-save-itself-from-irrelevance>
 how frustrating she had found her work in the shadow cabinet, with Corbyn and 
the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell. “When I took the business brief, I tried 
to set up a weekly meeting. They were always in the diary, with John McDonnell, 
to talk about the economy,” she said.

“Every single one, bar one, in nine months was cancelled. I would wake up and 
find out that things had been announced in my policy areas in speeches that no 
one had even asked me about, much less asked what my opinion might be.”

One proposal she said she had never been consulted on was the pledge to bar or 
restrict companies from distributing dividendsunless they paid all workers the 
living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/16/jeremy-corbyn-to-confront-big-business-over-living-wage>
, criticised as unworkable even by left-leaning economists such as Danny 
Blanchflower, who had been on the party’s economic advisory committee.

Eagle said company dividends was a good area for Labour to be looking at, but 
said the proposal was “a stupid way of doing it, and if anyone had asked me, 
I’d say it was a good aim but you can’t do it like that – it’s nonsensical”.
 