
Like Joy Hurcombe (Letter, 18 July) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/shameful-treatment-of-jeremy-corbyn-and-shades-of-deja-vu>
 and many others, I appreciate the finer qualities of Jeremy Corbyn and 
celebrate the fact that Labour seems to be getting back to its founding 
principles. However, it is one thing to have those principles, it’s another to 
put them into action. A good designer wouldn’t be able to run Marks & Spencer; 
the best sportspeople are often lousy managers. The parliamentary Labour party 
has first-hand knowledge of Jeremy Corbyn’s management and leadership skills, 
and have obviously found them wanting. I imagine the problem is that they can’t 
explain their fears in too much detail because they will be exploited by the 
Tories.
Jefrey Pirie
Totnes, Devon

• I voted for Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and rejoiced when he 
became leader. I agree with most of his policies and want to see them in place. 
This can only happen if we have a Labour government, and that will not happen 
with Jeremy as our leader. We are a parliamentary party, and the leader has to 
have the backing of a strong frontbench – he does not have this, and does not 
have the support of many Labour voters. I have always been on the left of the 
party and have marched with Jeremy against war in Iraq, Trident and austerity; 
but I want to see a Labour government, so I will not vote for him again in the 
leadership election.
Christina Green
Whitton, Middlesex

• There is no reason why, under Labour’s alternative vote rules, both Angela 
Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> and Owen Smith should 
not stand without splitting the vote. It is to be hoped that both challengers 
and the parliamentary Labour party will understand the difference with first 
past the post. The PLP would be making a mistake by deciding on only one 
challenger.
Ron Medlow
Former secretary, Labour Campaign for Electoral Reform

• If senior Labour MPs wish to ensure the self-destruction of their own party, 
they could not have hit upon a better stratagem for doing so than their 
cowardly refusal to come forward as candidates against Jeremy Corbyn, who most 
of them, quite rightly, consider totally incapable of ever winning a general 
election. Alan Johnson, Yvette Cooper, Hilary Benn, Harriet Harman and Chuka 
Umunna (to name a few) are alienating their most loyal core centre-left voters 
by leaving the nonentities Angela Eagle andOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, to fight it out with Corbyn 
– and probably lose to him. One would have thought that after Scotland they 
might have learned the lesson that loyal Labour voters will not wait 
indefinitely for powerful, charismatic and unifying leadership.
Stephen Porter
London

• Like Sandra Tove (Letters, 18 July), I have been a Guardian reader for over 
50 years and I too am surprised to find myself portrayed as an extremist with 
militant tendencies simply because I agree with, and voted for, Jeremy Corbyn. 
Even more surprising, at my local branch meeting recently when I attempted to 
discuss the treatment of Jeremy and his followers in the press, I was curtly 
informed that actually both Marx and Trotsky are dead. I am still recovering 
from the shock.
Juliet Harvey
Bristol

• Zoe Williams talks of finding a Labour leadership candidate “who isn’t an 
open insult to the people who voted for [Jeremy] Corbyn” (Owen Smith: decent 
bloke, good politics. But is that enough?, 18 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/owen-smith-ed-miliband-labour-crisis>
). As it happens, only one candidate fits that bill, and he is already on the 
ballot. His name is Jeremy Corbyn.
Bruce Paley
Castle Morris, Pembrokeshire 

• A further consideration anent Mr Corbyn is that only once since 1721 have we 
elected a prime minister with a beard.
David Butler
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 