
It's become unfashionable to celebrate political achievement, and Labour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/labour> achievement even less so. And it's 
positively uncouth to be proud of something that this Labour government is 
doing. So, slam me for saying so, but I'm really proud of theNHS 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/health>. 

Not just that it exists and, back in 1948, against the odds, a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government delivered on its 
principle of free healthcare for all. But that today we boast one of the best 
and the fairest healthcare services in the world. It is one of our country's 
greatest assets.

And let's not forget that after many years of chronic underinvestment by the 
Tories - resulting in huge waiting lists, crumbling hospitals and overstretched 
and underpaid staff - serious questions were asked about the future viability 
of theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. This was the intention: to 
break down public belief in the very idea of a free national health service.

Since then, and yes, under this Labour government, the transformation has been 
incredible. Forgive me for trotting out a few supporting statistics: 38,000 
more doctors, 80,000 more nurses, one million more operations being carried out 
each year, the biggest ever hospital-building programme, and nearly all 
patients being treated in hospital within 18 weeks of their GP referral.

But the bigger revolution is in the political climate. Today the future of the 
NHS itself is not is question. Today the demands are for even higher standards 
in the quality of care, for greater flexibility and convenience in treatment 
times, and for more prevention through screening and health checks.

The review of the NHS and the proposed constitution announced this week by 
Lord Darzi and Alan Johnson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2008/jul/01/nhs.health2> reflects this 
maturing era for the NHS. I can't do better thanPolly Toynbee's analysis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/jul/01/health.nhs>. 

The recent renewal of the NHS, which in turn has safeguarded its political 
future, for now at least, is a political achievement nearly as noteworthy as 
the birth of the NHS 60 years ago.

The NHS anniversary is also a time to thank the staff, past and present, who 
have worked in the NHS. Again, it's not always fashionable to say so, but it's 
the nurses, doctors, porters and frontline staff who make the NHS what it is.

Today in my area, Ivan Lewis, the junior health minister, and I are saying 
thank you to the staff of theChristie hospital <http://www.christie.nhs.uk> in 
Withington, one of Europe's leading cancer-treatment hospitals and research 
centres.

We have all had personal experiences of departments, surgeries, clinics and 
individuals who made a difference to our treatment, or that of a relative or 
friend. To mark the 60th birthday celebrations, you can nominate a member of 
staff, a team, a department or even an entire hospital, for a special "thank 
you" from Alan Johnson by going tothis address 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/proud/nhs_i_want_to_say> and giving their details.
 