
Every so often there comes a political moment when a line has to be drawn in 
the sand. Last week's announcement of athree-year cut in the real value of most 
social security benefits and tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/05/george-osborne-link-benefits-inflation>
 is just such a moment. It represents the latest move in the government's war 
of attrition against the social security system and those reliant on it.

It appears that Ed Miliband will draw that line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/dec/08/ed-miliband-george-osborne-welfare>
. He must not listen to the siren voices of some in the party warning against 
walking into the cunning trap set by George Osborne in order to brand Labour as 
defending "scrounging skivers". There is both a principled and pragmatic case 
for Labour making clear its opposition to the forthcoming welfare uprating 
bill. In doing so, it must reframe the debate and reclaim the flag of fairness 
from Osborne.

Cutting benefits is unfair and does not make economic sense. Benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> are already too low to meet 
people's needs. This is partly due to existing uprating policies which, until 
wages stagnated and with the exception of the boost that Labour gave to support 
for children, allowed benefits to fall further and further behind average 
living standards.

The single rate of the safety net of social assistance represented 20% of 
average earnings in the late 1960s; by 2011 it had fallen to 11%. This is the 
context in which to judge Osborne's reference to out-of-work incomes rising 
twice as fast as in-work over the last five years. Moreover, over that same 
period, theJoseph Rowntree Foundation's work on minimum incomes standards  
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/focus-issue/minimum-income-standards>shows that the gap 
between the incomes and needs of the worst-off households widened. It is 
mothers, as the managers of poverty, who bear the main strain in families with 
children.

Cutting benefits does not make economic sense because, as the IMF has pointed 
out <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/fiscpol.htm>, this 
reduces demand: people on low incomes are more likely to spend their money, and 
in the local economy. Thus the multiplier effect of changing benefit levels 
(for good or ill) istwice that of personal tax allowances 
<http://www.ippr.org/publication/55/9438/a-path-back-to-growth>, according to 
the Office for Budget Responsibility.

There is also a pragmatic political case for Labour taking an unequivocal 
stand. To the dismay of some of us, the party refused to oppose the principle 
of a benefit cap for fear of falling into another of Osborne's traps. Yet its 
message was so ambiguous and confused that it allowed the government to claim 
that it opposed the cap â€“ a lose-lose situation if ever there was one. Nor is 
it axiomatic that siding with Osborne against people in poverty would benefit 
Labour electorally. A recentObserver poll found just over half the public are 
opposed to further benefit cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/dec/02/george-osborne-housing-benefit-under-25s>
. And other polling suggests that voters do not respect inauthenticity in 
politicians. They may not look kindly on a one-nation Labour that, for 
political gain, turned its back on those already struggling to get by.

The biggest trap set by Osborne is to lure Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> into colluding with his framing 
of the debate through a divisive rhetoric that pits one group of low income 
people against another, "the person who leaves home every morning to go out to 
work and sees their neighbour still asleep, living a life on benefits". Or in 
the parlance of the moment, "the strivers" v "the skivers".

Much has rightly been made of the fact that approximately 60% of the effects 
of the benefit cut will hit working households. But in using this argument we 
must not imply that the other 40% is hitting "skivers" who don't deserve our 
support. The language of strivers and skivers ispernicious and misleading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/28/robin-hood-poor-welfare>
. Striving is not synonymous with paid work in my dictionary. Generally people 
on benefits are also striving: to find work; to care for their family. Moreover 
the demonising division of the world into strivers and skivers belies the 
constant movement in and out of work at the bottom of an insecure labour market.

Osborne peppered his speech with the new F-word: fairness. But there is 
nothing fair in asking for a sacrifice from the poorest members of society 
while using the money saved to help better-off taxpayers through the rise in 
personal tax allowances and cut in the top tax rate. And to the extent that the 
rich are being asked to make a sacrifice, it's a pin-prick they'll hardly 
notice. There is no equivalence with pushing people at the bottom into the 
hands of food banks at best and loan sharks at worst.

Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> knows that this 
is not the politics or economics of one nation, and he is right to draw his 
line in the sand. We should all support him.
 