
Enthusiasm for Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has waned since the start 
of the year among Labour supporters, according to a survey of more than 100 
constituencies across the country.

The Guardian exercise found many local party officers blaming the softening of 
support on the Labour leader’s performance in theEU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> campaign.

Owen Smith 'furious' at Corbyn's performance against Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/20/owen-smith-furious-at-corbyns-performance-against-theresa-may>
Six months ago the Guardian conducted a similar survey against a backdrop of 
euphoria over huge rises in membership after Corbyn’s election in September. 
While support is more muted by comparison, party officers report that he 
remains ahead and likely to win.

One stark finding in the survey is that there is no evidence of support for an 
alternative candidate – with barely a mention of either Owen Smith, relatively 
unknown until he launched his challenge to Corbyn, or Angela Eagle, whodropped 
out shortly after the survey was completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/owen-smith-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-angela-eagle>
.

Where Labour is headed – constituency parties have their say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jul/20/where-labour-is-headed-constituency-parties-have-their-say>
Among those reporting disappointment with Corbyn, Chris Taylor, campaign 
coordinator in Darlington, whichLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> also holds, said: “There are some 
who voted for him last year who think he hasn’t cut the mustard at all. Members 
expected him to be better but a lot of people think he just doesn’t cut it.”

Samantha Atkinson, chair of the CLP (constituency Labour party) in Clacton, 
which is held by Ukip, expressed pessimism about Labour’s chances at the next 
general election if Corbyn remains in charge. “If Jeremy Corbyn is re-elected, 
then I think we’ll fail. In a way, I hope that there’s a snap election and we 
fail. That way we have a chance to build again.”

Margaret Mullane, secretary of the CLP in Dagenham and Rainham, which Labour 
holds, said: “The CLP voted overwhelmingly for Jeremy at the last leadership 
election and we have been ringing up members regularly and I get the impression 
nothing has changed.”

Others expressed outrage at the parliamentary Labour party for undermining him 
from the start of his leadership and mounting the coup attempt against him.

The Guardian interviewed Labour chairs, secretaries and other office-holders, 
past and present, as well as councillors from 101 of the 632 constituencies in 
England, Scotland and Wales on Thursday, Friday and Monday.


The survey also reveals:

 * A reluctance to acknowledge that the party might split, though some 
expressed fear that this is an inevitable outcome of thecurrent divisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/corbyn-puts-trident-fore-labour-divisions-deepen>
. 
 * Fears that Ukip could exploit the chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/04/can-ukip-capitalise-on-post-brexit-political-chaos>
, especially in seats where they are the second largest party after Labour. 
 * Complaints that many of the new members were not turning up a constituency 
party meetings or helping with leafleting. 
 * Reports of intimidation and bullying – widespread across the country. 
 * Little support so far for deselection of MPs. 
When the Guardian conducted a similar survey in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
, the dominant issue was the prospect of Corbyn remoulding the party amid 
positive feeling about membership rises. Although these increases are still 
being recorded, the dominant theme now is the hardening of divisions between 
those supporting Corbyn and those opposed. Party grassroots officers have 
reported tensions between long-serving members and the influx of new members 
inspired by Corbyn.

David Sedgewick, secretary of the CLP in Denton and Reddish, held by Labour 
said: “There are members who have been here for 10, 15, 20 years who think he 
has to go. Those who have joined in the last year think he walks on water. 
There’s an almost religious-like following and if you criticise him you’re a 
blasphemer.”

Groups supportive of Corbyn such as Momentum, set up in the autumn to back him 
and which has a database of 100,000 followers, object to such descriptions of 
themselves as a cult. While backing Corbyn in the contest, they see their role 
as shifting Labour’s agenda to the left and building a broad-based social 
movement, regardless of whether Corbyn is leader.

They also dispute that Corbyn under-performed in the EU referendum, arguing 
that Brexit was down to Conservative voters rather than Labour.

Jeremy Corbyn vows to vote against Trident renewal as Labour divisions deepen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/corbyn-puts-trident-fore-labour-divisions-deepen>
But others in Labour pin at least part of the blame on Corbyn. Kanti 
Chhabhadiya, constituency secretary for Greenwich and Woolwich, which is held 
by Labour, said: “I think in Woolwich a lot of people changed their minds about 
Jeremy after the EU referendum.”

Pro-Corbyn groups at a national level tend to be reluctant to criticise party 
officers, given the many years of thankless service often involved in their 
roles but also point out that they are not necessarily in tune with the new 
members.

James Schneider, a Momentum spokesman, said of the survey: “There does appear 
to be a disparity between the CLP secretaries and executive officers and the 
membership as a whole. If you look at the YouGov poll, support for Jeremy 
Corbyn is up.”

Both Corbyn and Momentum have publicly denounced any attempts at intimidation 
or bullying. Some pro-Corbyn activists insist it is being exaggerated for 
political purposes. But some party grassroots representatives insist it is real.

About half the people in the survey took part again, with the rest either not 
contactable or declining to participate again. More of those contacted asked 
for anonymity compared with last time.


While many of those contacted stuck to a hopeful line that the party will not 
split, others acknowledged there is a real danger. Asked about the chances of a 
split, Martin Hinds, former constituency secretary in Edinburgh West, which is 
held by the SNP, said: “I wouldn’t be surprised. The people who voted for no 
confidence in Corbyn have painted themselves into a corner. They don’t quite 
realise who they’re dealing with and they’ve got very little room for manoeuvre 
now.”

An executive member of Hull East, which is held by Labour, expressed concern 
about the rise of Ukip. “Ukip is a threat here and to be honest we are worried. 
We are getting out on the doorsteps now trying to get ahead of the problem.”

Additional reporting by Oliver Milne, Jonathan Bucks and Daniel Kraemer

 * This article was amended on Wednesday 20 July to correct the number of 
constituency councillors interviewed from 104 to 101  