
Polly Toynbee is right (Be bold, Labour, and expose the skivers v strivers lie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/06/bold-labour-osborne-skivers-strivers>
, 6 December). George Osborne bringing forward a bill to sanction the cuts in 
welfare benefits set out in the autumn statement is a crude, cynical attempt to 
lay a trap for Labour. If Labour votes against the bill or abstains, Osborne 
will claim it is on the side of the so-called skivers, while the Tories are the 
champions of the strivers. If it votes for the bill he will then cite this vote 
as support for his attack on benefits.

Like many rightwing politicians over the years, when their policies are 
demonstrably failing they reach for a scapegoat. It's often the poor, simply 
because they haven't the power to defend themselves. With courage,Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> could turn Osborne's cynical ploy 
into an opportunity to transform the debate on the issues of welfare, poverty, 
fairness in our society. This means making it clear now that we are not voting 
for this attack on the poorest, which includes cutting benefits to many people 
in work and struggling to survive on low pay. Nobody, especially ordinary 
working people, likes a skiver, but there are mechanisms that can deal with 
this, and if they need improving, well, let's have that debate. In reality it 
is increasingly obvious that it is the wealthy who are ripping us off with 
tax-dodging.

Let's highlight the real facts about the hardship that so many of our people 
are facing and offer our alternative of a fair tax system and investment for 
growth-led employment. Let's build a coalition of all those individuals and 
organisations that are willing to speak out in the same way we did when the 
same politics of prejudice were used against Jews, black people and ethnic 
minorities.
John McDonnell MP
Labour, Hayes and Harlington
 