
Labor frontbencher Tony Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-burke> has taken two free 
trips to China since last October to visit childcare centres built by a Chinese 
company run by businessmen and former political donors Ian Tang and Anthony 
Chan.

Tang, Chan and the former deputy prime minister and Nationals MP Mark Vaile 
are the three directors of 123 AustChina Education Consultancy, whichaccording 
to its website <http://www.123ed.cn/?page_id=502>is operating and setting up 
childcare centres across China. Vaile is also chairman of the company.

Soon after it won government in 2007, Labor came under intense pressure over 
free travel that senior figures – including Burke and the then prime minister,
Kevin Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd> – had 
accepted from companies associated with Tang and other Chinese business figures 
while in opposition.

From 10-17 October last year, Kazaru Pty, a company owned by the lobbyist and 
former Labor minister Nick Bolkus, paid for a trip by Burke to Beijing and 
Shanghai including airfares, accommodation and ground transport. Guardian 
Australia understands the trip was for Burke to open a 123 AustChina centre.

From 6-13 July this year Kazaru paid for Burke to travel to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> again, but this time transfers and 
accommodation were provided by 123 childcare.

A spokesman for Burke said it was “a private trip involving no taxpayer funds 
and has been appropriately declared on Mr Burke’s register of interests”.

“There are a series of childcare centres involving Australian investment in 
Shanghai and Beijing and Mr Burke visited established and developing sites in 
both cities,” he said.

123 AustChina also lists on its website as a “partner” organisation called 
Shimau Property Holdings, the company of Chinese-born Australian citizen and 
billionaire property developer Hui Wing Mau.

Tang’s telecommunications company, BeijingAust China Technology, paid for 16 
visits by ALP politicians to China during the Howard government years, 
including Kevin Rudd, Wayne Swan and multiple trips by Burke.

Tang has connections on both sides of politics. He is on the board of the 
Australia China Chamber of Commerce, andthe biography on its website 
<https://austcham.org/about-us/> says that in 2010 he and “his partners from 
Australia and Hong Kong founded the 123 AustChina Education Consultancy 
(Beijing) Company Ltd, which specialises in early childhood education, 
especially in the operation and investment of international standard 
kindergartens in China. The 123 Group traces its roots to Australia through its 
former cooperation with ABC Learning Centres, previously the largest 
kindergarten operator in the world.”

ABC Learning went into voluntary liquidation in 2008.

As manager of opposition business in the House of Representatives, Burke leads 
Labor’s political attacks against the government. But the independent MP Andrew 
Wilkie has also raised questions recently about some of Burke’s travel claims, 
which Burke insists are within entitlements.

The government has set up a “root and branch” review of the rules governing 
publicly funded travel entitlements afterthe Speaker, Bronwyn Bishop, was 
forced to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/02/brownyn-bishop-resigns-as-speaker-tony-abbott-announces>
after an ongoing controversy over her claims – including a $5,200 helicopter 
ride.
 