
Lady Gaga has penned an open letter alongside the New York governor, Andrew 
Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo>, to support a new law 
to protect university students from the “epidemic of sexual violence” on 
campuses.

“Every fall, young men and women head off to colleges across the country, 
dreaming of bright futures and the experience of a lifetime,” the piece, 
publishedon Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6590572/lady-gaga-andrew-cuomo-enough-is-enough-legislation>
 reads. “They’ve worked hard for the chance to become a part of their new 
campuses, and they set out full of hope and excitement.”

Unfortunately, for thousands of these students, that dream turns into a 
nightmare because of the unacceptable epidemic of sexual violence that is 
currently plaguing colleges and universities. It is a shocking reality that 
many in academia, government, and society in general still refuse to 
acknowledge.

On 17 June, New York lawmakers will decide whether to pass Cuomo’s Enough is 
Enough 
<https://www.ny.gov/programs/enough-enough-make-all-new-york-college-campuses-safe>
 policy, which aims to combat sexual assault at all universities and private 
institutions in the state.

Lady Gaga, who told Howard Stern in 2014 that she had been sexually assaulted 
when she was 19by a producer 20 years her senior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/02/lady-gaga-reveals-she-was-raped>
, has backed the legislation. In the run up to the decision, Cuomo has been 
screening the documentary Hunting Ground, about sexual assault on college 
campuses. It features a new Lady Gaga song,Till It Happens to You 
<https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6451064/diane-warren-lady-gaga-song-till-it-happens-to-you-hunting-ground>
.

The extract concludes:

“Thankfully, New York has an opportunity to stand up for its students, and 
take the critical steps toward facing this crisis head on. The bill currently 
beforeNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> state legislature 
will address the issue of sexual violence on college campuses, giving the state 
the nation’s strongest laws to target campus sexual assault. This is a campaign 
that will protect students, and it’s exactly what we need.

“By passing legislation such as the bill currently before the New York state 
legislature, we can turn the tide on this issue so that students can realise 
their dreams on campuses that are safe spaces. That’s why we are joining 
together to take a stand against sexual assault on college campuses. Quite 
simply, enough is enough.”
 