
Alasdair Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>, author of the 
classic novel Lanark and one of Scotland's outspoken literary figures, has said 
that those who appoint English people to major cultural jobs in Scotland are 
"Scotophobic".

He suggested that this was a deliberate anti-independence strategy: "You've 
got to bear in mind who the people are who choose the heads of Scottish 
national companies: bankers, insurance people, there may be one or two artists. 
These are people who don't want an independent Scotland," he said, noting 
further the appointment of English people as the heads of the National Theatre 
of Scotland and the funding body Creative Scotland last December he threw a 
virtual hand grenade into theScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> debate when he 
wrote an essay last year dividing the English in Scotland into "colonists and 
settlers".

His statements were severely criticised in some quarters, but the author, 
speaking at the Edinburgh International Book Festival, stood by his comments. 
"Scots bodies who appoint heads of bodies are Scotophobic when it comes to 
their own kind," he said.

The original essay <http://www.word-power.co.uk/viewPlatform.php?id=610>, part 
of a volume calledUnstated: Writers on Scottish Independence 
<http://www.word-power.co.uk/books/unstated-I9780956628398/> , stated that 
"English settlers are as much a part of Scotland as Asian restaurateurs and 
shopkeepers, or the Italians who brought us fish and chips. The colonists look 
forward to a future back in England through promotion or by retirement."

He said that the difference between "colonists" and "settlers" also "depends 
on how far they understand Scottish culture and want to promote it on the basis 
of understanding it". He added: "I've always defined as a Scot any adult with 
voting rights who lives here."

The author also recounted how he turned down a knighthood. "I was offered a 
knighthood under Mr Brown's administration, but of course I turned it down – 
because there was no money attached."
 