
There was a fascinating moment during the Q+A part of Google's first-quarter 
earnings 
<http://seekingalpha.com/article/1353131-google-s-ceo-discusses-q1-2013-results-earnings-call-transcript?part=single>
 at the end of last week. Here's how it came about, as the chief executive 
Larry Page was being asked about this and that.

Scott Devitt - Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC


Q:...for Larry, could you just discuss the transition in Android management 
and what exactlyAndy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin> 
is going to be doing now that he has a new role? Thank you.

And here's what Page replied. Emphasis added.

Larry Page - Chief Executive Officer


[On] the management change question, I think, as we've already said, we've 
really exceeded crazy ambitious goals we dreamed of forAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>. It's the most used mobile 
operating system in the world and a very big thanks to Andy for that.He really 
decided it was time to hand over the reins and start a new chapter at Google. 
And we actually have an outside â€“ we haven't said what that is and I'm not 
going to make news today on that.

And actually going forward, Sundar [Pichai] is going to lead Android in 
addition to his existing work on Chrome and apps. He has a great talent for 
creating products that are really technically excellent yet easy to use and he 
loves a big bet too. So, we said how that performed I think we had very smooth 
transition and of course excited about the future.

Note that bit in the middle: Rubin is going to start a new chapter at Google. 
AndGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has an outside 
something (or someone?) lined up to get involved. An outside company? 
Executive? Interest? It's something that will "make news".

What's more, it's something that's already quite close to happening, because 
there's this outside interest (executive? company?).

Where do we look for clues? His Google+ page isn't that busy - though perhaps 
you'd expect that a top executive wouldn't spend much time updating a social 
networking page. Themost recent entry 
<https://plus.google.com/112599748506977857728/posts/hRcCi5xgayg> at the time 
of writing is from the Acer/Alibaba row, which dates back to September 2012. So 
no clues there.

But there's his letter to Android partners on leaving his position in charge 
of that, where he said:


I am an entrepreneur at heart and now is the right time for me to start a new 
chapter within Google. I am amazed by what we have accomplished from those 
early days (not so long ago!), and remain passionate about the power of a 
simple idea and a shared goal -- an open source platform freely available to 
everyone -- to transform computing for people everywhere.

Two things we could probably expect from a Rubin-led project: it will be 
open-source, and it will be focussed around the early stages of something that 
could grow very big. Plus it's likely he'll focus on something he's interested 
in.

Don't forget, Rubin has an amazing record in entrepreneurship. Android was a 
company he co-founded before selling it to Google in 2005. Before that, he was 
at Danger - which made the Hiptop, a hugely successful sort-of smartphone. 
Before that, WebTV Networks, an interactive TV-based online service - acquired 
in 1995 by Microsoft. And before that he worked at General Magic, one of the 
proto-companies that has shaped how many of today's smartphones work.

But in his spare time, Rubin is a tinkerer - specifically with robots. Some of 
creations can, apparently, be found at the Tech Museum of Innovation in San 
Jose, California.

So what could it be that's coming up from Rubin? Given Rubin's past, and his 
interest in robots, could Google be about to do something fascinating with 
robots? Perhaps drones? Bear in mind that he's good at spotting the rising 
tide. Drones are a bit corporate; not many people have the need for their own. 
But a robot? It's like the natural follow-on from the self-driving car.

With luck, perhaps we'll know soon enough. 
 