
Were England really superior to Australia throughout much of the pulsating 
2005 Ashes series, as Ricky Ponting suggested on Monday night? In spirit, 
maybe. But cold figures indicate that the series was virtually a dead heat.

The number of runs scored per wicket lost summarises the performance of a team 
fairly accurately in a cricket series, and usually predicts the winner. In the 
2005 Ashes, England scored 31.84 runs per wicket, while Australia scored 31.57. 
These figures are so close that the series result could not be predicted based 
on the fundamental cricketing performance of the two teams. It might have gone 
either way, depending on who held their nerve at the critical moments. 
Statisticians would not have predicted that Shane Warne would drop that 
decisive slip catch from Kevin Pietersen on Monday, but he grassed it anyway.

So the series was a statistical dead heat, but it is a vast improvement on the 
previous eight Ashes series. During these walkovers, England averaged 26.85 
runs per wicket, compared with Australia's 42.09. This lead of more than 15 
runs per wicket, sustained over a decade and a half, is overwhelming, and led 
Graham Gooch to describe the Ashes as "a fart competing with thunder".

This summer, the fart turned into a lion's roar. Compared with the dark era, 
England added almost five runs per wicket to its batting average, and Australia 
lost more than 10 runs from its batting average. This may not sound much, but 
it represents a swing in England's favour amounting to 300 runs over a full 
match.

Suddenly, England could bowl out Australia twice in a Test match on a routine 
basis. They took 89 Australian wickets in 2005, compared with an average of 
only 68 wickets in earlier series.

So what happened? Did the England bowling improve, or the Australian batting 
deteriorate? Probably both. England's pace quartet took their wickets at 27.4 
runs apiece in 2005, about two runs less than their combined career average. 
Meanwhile the top five in the tourists' batting order had a combined batting 
average of 33.3 this year, which is a whopping 16.5 runs less than their career 
batting averages. So the biggest factor in the shift between the two teams 
seems to have been a vast underperformance by the Aussie batting line-up. 
Whether they can come again, given advancing years, seems doubtful.

Andrew Flintoff won the player of the series award and is being freely 
compared to Ian Botham. Tour de force though Flintoff is, statistics suggest 
caution. Warne took 40 wickets in the series at 19.9 runs apiece, and broke the 
record for the most wickets in a five-Test Ashes series. Warne has not just 
done something remarkable, he has done something uniquely remarkable, and has 
had a more sustained impact on the Ashes than any single player except Sir 
Donald Bradman, which is the ultimate compliment a statistician can pay.

After 52 Tests, Flintoff is 90 wickets behind Botham as a bowler, and slightly 
behind him as a batsman at the same stage of his Test career. Majestic as he 
was in 2005, Freddie scored the same number of runs as Botham in his wonder 
year of 1981, but took 10 fewer wickets, and nine fewer catches. No one under 
40 will believe me, but Beefy is still the king.
 