
The last anti-war protest tent opposite the Houses of Parliament can be 
removed, the high court has ruled.

Lifting an injunction that prevented Westminster council from clearing 
Parliament Square of sleeping equipment, the judge, Sir John Thomas, said that 
new bylaws did not interfere with the right to demonstrate.

The injunction had been in place while a veteran peace campaigner, Maria 
Gallastegui, challenged the legality of the bylaws that give the local 
authority the power to remove tents from the road and pavement around the 
square.

Refusing her permission to appeal against a ruling that the bylaws were legal, 
Thomas, who is president of the Queen's bench division of the high court, said: 
"Our view is clear â€“ there is no merit in any of the points that have been 
made."

Gallastegui argued that her case raised issues of general public importance. 
The court also refused her request that the injunction should be maintained 
while she asked the appeal court itself to consider her case. The judge said 
the court "had not the slightest doubt" that the injunction should be lifted 
immediately.

The campaigner, who has been conducting a 24-hour vigil on the east pavement 
of the square since 2006, obtained an injunction against the council in January,
just before police and officials moved in to remove tents <> and other 
equipment from the square under the powers of the newPolice Reform and Social 
Responsibility Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2011/13/contents/enacted>.

MPs and Westminster council have spent more than a decade trying to have peace 
campaigners cleared from the square. The first and best known activist, Brian 
Haw, set up his tent in 2001, remaining there until hisdeath last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jun/20/brian-haw-obituary>. A camp on the 
grass of the square was evicted in 2011 after the Greater London authority, 
which is responsible for the space,won a high court order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/mar/17/court-evicts-brian-haw-parliament-protest-camp>
. But some protesters simply moved their tents on to the adjoining pavement, 
which is owned by Westminster council.

There has been a particularly concerted attempt to clear the square of tents 
ahead of the Queen's diamond jubilee and theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Olympics.

Many members of the public had identified "significant material detriment to 
the area" while tents and sleeping facilities remained, the judge said. 
"Therefore, we consider the balance of convenience is overwhelming and we have 
not the slightest doubt that this is a case where the law should take its 
course.".

Giving Westminster the all-clear to remove her tent, the judge said that only 
"minor harm" would result if Gallastegui eventually won her case in the appeal 
court, when she would be able to set up her tent again. On the other hand, not 
lifting the injunction would prevent laws enacted by parliament from taking 
effect.

The new legislation authorised the local council and police to remove sleeping 
facilities, including tents. They can also remove equipment used for noisy 
protests.

Philippa Roe, the leader of Westminster council, welcomed the high court 
decision, saying judges "completely dismissed every single claim made by the 
protesters". She said: "They have no right to inhabit a public square designed 
for everyone to use. Westminster is not a campsite."

The council said it would talk to Gallastegui before removing her camping 
equipment. If she failed to take the tent away then the police may be called in 
to enforce the bylaw, the council said.
 