
A new law designed to cut the high rate of sex-selective abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/22/observer-editorial-sex-selection-law-amendment>
 in Armenia is inadequate, limiting women’s reproductive choices and putting 
lives at risk, according to women’s rights groups.

The ex-Soviet country, with a population of just under 3 million, has the 
third highest rate of abortion of female foetuses in the world, behindChina and 
Azerbaijan 
<http://www.unfpa.am/sites/default/files/Sex_Imbalance_report_Eng_final-with%20cover-final.pdf>
.

In August, the government outlawed sex-selective terminations in response to 
pressure from the international community and the United Nations Population 
Fund (Unfpa), which warned of an impending demographic crisis because of the 
number of foetuses being aborted due to their gender.

Since the fall of the Soviet Union rates of sex-selection have risen in  
<http://www.unfpa.am/sites/default/files/Sex_Imbalance_report_Eng_final-with%20cover-final.pdf>
Armenia 
<http://www.unfpa.am/sites/default/files/Sex_Imbalance_report_Eng_final-with%20cover-final.pdf>
, meaning that while approximately 105 boys were born for every 100 girls 
(around the natural rate) in 1991, by 2015 the figure had changed to 115 boys 
for every 100 girls.

Under the new law, a woman seeking an abortion must attend a counselling 
session with her doctor and then wait for three days for the procedure. The 
government says this is to allow doctors to pass on information about the 
dangers of abortion.

But local women’s rights activists have criticised the new rules for keeping 
the burden of choice on the woman and warn that, instead of curbing the 
practice, the law could actually limit access to safe reproductive care and 
force women into choosing riskier forms of abortion.

Ani Jilozian at the Women’s Support Centre in the capital, Yerevan, says the 
law is a “band-aid solution” that focuses on reducing sex-selective abortions 
without addressing the causes: poor socio-economic conditions and patriarchal 
values.

“In traditional Armenian families, daughters-in-law move in with their 
husband’s family … [and] the eldest son is the one to care for the parents,” 
says Jilozian. In a country with almost no social security net, this tradition 
means boys remain the favoured offspring.

Soviet legacy

Armenia’s long history of easy access to abortion is one of the legacies of 
the Soviet Union, which was the first state to legalise the procedure in 1921. 
A widespread mistrust of contraception means abortion has remained the primary 
method of birth control.

Armenia’s birthrate has also dropped in the post-Soviet period: at present, 
1.5 children are born per family, compared with 2.5 in the 1980s, according to 
birth registration figurescollected by the UNFPA 
<http://www.unfpa.am/sites/default/files/Sex_Imbalance_report_Eng_final-with%20cover-final.pdf)>
. And if a family plans to have only one or two children, there is more 
pressure to ensure one of them will be a boy, Jilozian explains.

Economic hardship and the arrival by the end of the 1990s 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Highlights%20&%20Features/eca/armenia/missing-girls-report-english.pdf>
 of sonogram technology, which can predict a foetus’s sex , are also said to be 
contributing factors to the rise.

Such is the scale of the problem in Gegharkunik, a region in the east of the 
country, that the Women’s Resource Centre Armenia 
<http://www.epress.am/en/2016/09/26/domestic-violence-natural-part-of-family-life-in-armenias-gegharkunik-province.html>
 (WRCA) has instigated a campaign against gender-based violence, which included 
discussions on sex-selective abortion.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> they spoke to described 
the pressure they were under to produce boys. One said that her first child was 
a daughter, but then she had four abortions before she conceived a son.

Women are going to continue to have sex-selective abortions, but the risk of 
unsafe abortions is a lot higher'

Another woman said she had paid 150,000 drams (£260), the average monthly 
salary inArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, for an illegal 
abortion. The current legal limit for a termination is 12 weeks, after which it 
is only allowed for certain “social” reasons, such as if the woman was raped or 
is a single mother.

Others claimed doctors asked pregnant woman if they wanted to abort their 
female foetus, and for a fee offered to perform the procedure at home.


Jilozian is dubious about whether a law on its own will help women like those 
the WRCA spoke to in Gegharkunik. Without an overhaul of the patriarchal social 
structures “women are going to continue to have sex-selective abortions at the 
same rate, but the risk of having unsafe abortions is a lot higher”, she argues.

Human rights lawyer Gabriel Armas-Cardona is also concerned that the mandatory 
waiting period in the bill is in contravention of human rights concerning 
access to healthcare. “UNFPA Armenia is adamant that something needs to be done 
to the point where they’ll even tolerate policies that violate human rights,” 
he says.

For Lara Aharonian, co-founder of the WRCA, the focus on the abortion 
procedure is misplaced. She believes sex-selective abortion should be seen as 
part of a broader problem with gender inequality in Armenia.

“If you really want to eradicate sex-selective abortion, you go to the core of 
the problem,” she says. “How boys and girls are raised differently, the gender 
roles, breaking gender stereotypes.”
 