
Have you ever been pressurised into buying something you didn't want by a 
highly persuasive salesperson? Perhaps a phone call from someone trying to sell 
you double glazing, a home visit from a sales representative offering to pave 
your drive or a letter inviting you to a timeshare presentation.

If so, be sure not to act in haste because you can't usually change your mind 
once you've signed on the dotted line. The law gives you a cooling off period 
only in limited circumstances, so a snap decision could be costly and 
inconvenient leaving you with something you don't really need.

Concerns about aggressive selling techniques used by some timeshare firms led 
to the introduction of the Timeshare Act 1992 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts1992/Ukpga_19920035_en_1.htm>. Under the 
legislation you have a 14-day cooling off period if you sign a timeshare 
contract in the UK, which means you can cancel the contract at any time within 
that period and get your money back.

Moreover, you must be told of your right to cancel and receive a cancellation 
form before you enter into the deal. If the salesperson doesn't notify you of 
your right to cancel, the cancellation period is extended indefinitely.

If you are duped into buying a timeshare while on holiday you would normally 
get a 10-day cooling off period. But as a general rule, if you are unsure about 
anything it is best not to sign a contract while on holiday - wait until you 
get home so you can seek legal advice.

You should also be wary of huge discounts and bear in mind that promotions 
that are available "today only" are likely to be available every day. You may 
also be offered a prize or gift to persuade you to attend a timeshare 
presentation where you may be placed under a lot of pressure to sign on the 
spot. Unless you've looked into what is on offer and are seriously considering 
buying from that company, don't even attend in the first place.

Also beware of a new product similar to timeshares known as Holiday Clubs. 
They are not covered by the Timeshare Act so you do not have an automatic right 
to a cooling off period. The Office of Fair Trading has warned consumers 
against signing a Holiday Club deal unless they are sure it is exactly what 
they want.

Doorstepper stress
 Doorstep salespeople have a reputation for using high pressure selling 
techniques to persuade people to buy things they don't want and can't afford. 
If you get such a call from someone selling double glazing windows, for 
example, don't sign a contract or part with any money. It's best to take a copy 
of the agreement and study the small print before you proceed.

The  Doorstep Selling Regulations 1987 
<http://www.dti.gov.uk/consumers/buying-selling/Doorstep-selling/FAQs/page29175.html>
 give you the right to a seven day cooling off period if you sign a contract to 
buy goods or services for Â£35 or more after an unsolicited visit to your home 
from a salesperson.

The same rights also apply if the sales visit follows an unsolicited phone 
call from a trader.

Doorstep sellers must inform you of your right to a cooling off period or they 
are committing a criminal offence. You must exercise your right to cancel in 
writing within seven days. If this is sent by post it will take effect on 
posting. Once you've cancelled you are entitled to get back any money you have 
paid, and the cancelled contract is treated as if it was never made.

The government is so concerned about dubious selling tactics that it is 
proposing to provide consumers with a seven day cooling off period if they sign 
agreements at home after receiving a solicited visit from a trader.

These proposals are enshrined in the consumers, estate agents and redress 
bill, which is currently at the committee stage and expected to become law soon.

Don't call, don't write
 In general, telephone cold calling is not illegal so traders can make 
unsolicited calls without breaking any laws. But if you register with the 
Telephone Preference Service <http://www.tpsonline.org.uk> you can prevent 
unsolicited sales calls.

Once you have done this it is unlawful for a trader to contact you without 
your permission. Similarly, if you get a lot of junk mail you avoid much of it 
by registering with the Mailing Preference Service 
<http://www.mpsonline.org.uk/mpsr/>. However, this service applies only to 
personally addressed mail - you may still get mail addressed to the occupier.

When you receive goods you have not ordered they are known as unsolicited 
goods. If a trader demands payment for them they are commiting a criminal 
offence under the Unsolicited Goods and Services Act 1971 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/SI/si2005/20050148.htm>.

You are entitled to keep the goods as your own. If you received the goods 
before November 1 2000, however, you must give notice to the sender to collect 
them within 30 days, or otherwise wait for six months before they become yours 
to keep.
 