
Authors including Malcolm Gladwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell>, Ursula Le Guin, Michael 
Chabon and Ann Patchett are putting their names to a letter attacking Amazon’s 
“abuse of its dominance in the world of books” and calling on the US justice 
department to investigate the retailer’s “power over the book market”.

The letter, which is due to be submitted to the department later this month 
<http://www.authorsunited.net/july/>, is the latest initiative from the group 
of powerful authors calling themselves Authors United, which wasset up in the 
wake of the dispute over terms between the internet shopping site and Hachette 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/08/authors-ad-new-york-times-petition-amazon>
. Douglas Preston, who founded the group, said that signatories were “pouring 
in” for the letter this week, with “many hundreds” putting their name to the 
letter, including Sara Paretsky, Francis Fukuyama, Elizabeth George, Michael 
Lewis, Richard North Patterson, Luc Sante, Stuart Woods and Daniel Handler.

“We are authors with a deep collective experience in this field, and we agree 
with the authorities in economics and law who have asserted that Amazon’s 
dominant position makes it a monopoly as a seller of books and amonopsony 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monopsony> as a buyer of books,” runs the 
letter, going on to claim that “in recent years, Amazon has used its dominance 
in ways that we believe harm the interests of America’s readers, impoverish the 
book industry as a whole, damage the careers of (and generate fear among) many 
authors, and impede the free flow of ideas in our society”.

The authors are calling for the justice department’s antitrust division to 
investigateAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>, suggesting 
that the online retailer “has blocked and curtailed the sale of millions of 
books by thousands of authors” in order to pressure publishers, and has 
“extract[ed] an ever greater share of the total price of a book from 
publishers”, resulting in “publishers dropping some midlist authors and not 
publishing certain riskier books, effectively silencing many voices”.

The letter is backed by missives from the Authors Guild and the American 
Booksellers Association, theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/14/technology/accusing-amazon-of-antitrust-violations-authors-and-booksellers-demand-us-inquiry.html>
 reported. “As with our author colleagues, we are concerned that the 
mega-book-retailer Amazon.com has achieved such considerable market power with 
such questionable business tactics that it is undermining the ecosystem of the 
entire book industry in a way that will be detrimental, especially to midlist 
authors, new authors, and minority voices,” wrote both the president and the 
chief executive of the ABA in a letter to the justice departmentprinted by the 
paper 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/07/13/business/document-american-booksellers-justice-department.html>
.

This latest salvo comes after a series of long-running battles between the 
internet giant and the world’s biggest publishing conglomerates, with the 
retailer accused ofdelaying delivery for high-profile titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/09/publisher-accuses-amazon-delaying-sending-books>
. As negotiations over ebook sales between Amazon and Hachette turned intoa 
public war of words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/09/amazon-hachette-ebooks-battle-public>
,authors stepped into the ring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/04/amazon-hachette-self-published-authors-stephen-king-james-patterson>
, publishing rival petitions in support of both sides.The Hachette dispute was 
resolved last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/13/amazon-hachette-end-dispute-ebooks>
, with the retailer suggesting the deal would be a “great win for readers and 
writers alike” and the publisher claiming it would “benefit Hachette authors 
for years to come”.

Preston told the Guardian that Authors United, whose actions during the 
stand-off includedfunding an ad in the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/08/authors-ad-new-york-times-petition-amazon>
 asking Amazon “to stop harming the livelihood of the authors”, had waited 
until now to put its letter together “because, first, we wanted to take our 
time with the research (which is hard to do because Amazon is a very secretive 
company) and also to give a little breathing room after the dispute was 
settled”.

“We wanted to wait for tempers to cool and not charge back on the field of 
battle, giving the impression were disgruntled authors still angry over the way 
Amazon treated us. The truth is, Amazon’s heavy control and aggressive 
dominance of the publishing world is a much larger issue than the Hachette 
dispute,” said the novelist.

Amazon, which last month saw the EU launch an inquiry into its dominance of 
the ebook market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/11/european-commission-investigate-amazon-ebook-dominance>
, did not respond to a request for comment on Thursday morning.

For the founder of the Alliance of Independent Authors 
<http://allianceindependentauthors.org/>, Orna Ross, the Authors United letter 
ignores Amazon’s leading role in the development of self-publishing.

“Monopolies are never good for any business,” she said. “We encourage our 
members to publish in as many formats as possible, on as many platforms as 
possible. Having said that, I don’t believe the situation as described by the 
Authors Guild is that experienced by all authors. Many of the concerns that are 
expressed in the letter around freedom of expression are actually solved by 
self-publishing.”

Amazon’s introduction of Kindle Direct Publishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/publishing> (KDP) has allowed many authors 
“to reach their audience and allowed others to build successful businesses, new 
genres and wide global readerships,” she continued.

“The Authors Guild doesn’t seem to understand how self-publishing works. Some 
of the figures it is quoting are inaccurate and KDP’s restrictions on pricing 
are actually designed to avoid a race to the bottom, not the opposite as 
implied.”

“Amazon is a business, doing what businesses do,” she said. “We might deplore 
that but we can’t have it both ways. Authors associations should speak out on 
behalf of authors and readers, not publishers.”
 