
One day in 1986, John le Carré interviewed a British spy called Nick Elliott. 
The espionage novelist wanted to know why Elliott and his MI6 colleagues let 
the British spymaster and KGB lackey Kim Philby escape to Moscow and never 
dragged him back to London to be punished for passing on secrets to the 
Soviets. “Nobody wanted him in London, old boy,” Elliott replied. Le Carré – as 
he reports in an afterword toBen Macintyre’s recent book A Spy Among Friends: 
Kim Philby and the Great Betrayal 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/27/books/review/ben-macintyres-a-spy-among-friends.html>
 – wondered why MI6 didn’t bump Philby off. “My dear chap,” retorted Elliott 
disapprovingly. “One of us.”

Quite so. Philby may have been one of the most effective traitors in 
20th-century British history (“I wouldn’t have trusted him with my cat for the 
weekend,” remarked Le Carré,whose career in MI5 and MI6 was ended by Philby’s 
leaks <http://www.channel4.com/news/le-carr-betrayed-by-bad-lot-spy-kim-philby>
, but he was Westminster and Cambridge – and knew, no doubt, what it took for a 
martini to becomme il faut. Even in extremis (Philby being a Russian mole and 
what not), the old boy network worked impeccably. MI6, at its worst, was less 
effective than Rowan Atkinson’s Johnny English or even Barbara Windsor’s Daphne 
Honeybutt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032692215%2F05ad5b3f-3b8d-4acc-8b20-b7e53c7d0d94-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032692215%2F05ad5b3f-3b8d-4acc-8b20-b7e53c7d0d94-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Espionage heritage … Michael Caine as Harry Palmer. Photograph: Rex 
In Kingsman: The Secret Service <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkX8jKeKUEA>, 
out next month, a tasty little herbert called Eggsy from a London sink estate 
is recruited by the impeccably soigné, lah-di-dah spook Harry Hart, played by 
Colin Firth. Hart detects that Eggsy has the right stuff, the true Brit if you 
will, to transcend his oikish upbringing and become One Of Us. Now if Eggsy, 
played by Taron Egerton, can survive the training course in which he is pitted 
against a bunch of stuckup, over-entitled Oxbridge ponces (plus the token bit 
of hottie posh whose snobby froideur melts at our hero’s bit-of-rough charms), 
then he can become a Kingsman. But, you’ll be asking, what is a Kingsman? It’s 
a gentleman spy working for a non-governmental espionage agency run from a 
secret, steampunk-like bunker beneath (naturally enough) a Savile Row tailor.

The Kingsmen are headed by Michael Caine, fitting because Caine has previous 
in British espionage, having played bothHarry Palmer in the 1960s film 
adaptations of Len Deighton’s spy novels 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QesO-BRvUAM>, and Austin Powers’ venerably 
shagadelic dad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NIaiW1XrzxA>. For all the 
explosions and three-figure body count, Kingsman is heritage drama: it knows 
the history of the Brit spy genre back to front; plus it knows how to deploy a 
version of the British class system with an eye to maximising foreign sales,
just like Julian Fellowes did when concocting Gosford Park and Downton Abbey 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/01/05/americas_long_obsession_with_downton_abbey_how_the_show_became_a_satire_of_britishness/>
.

Firth, everyone’s favourite Brit thesp snootyboots, has fun essentially 
playing a 2015 homage toJohn Steed from the Avengers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oz6H8kQYgig>, sans bowler and sans Diana Rigg 
in leatherette catsuit (shame), and shod in sensible Oxfords rather than 
retro-kinky 1960s Chelsea boots. Like Steed (full name: Major the Hon John 
Wickham Gascoyne Beresford Steed MC OM), Hart is not just posh but well-versed 
in explaining things with fast-handed diplomacy to unpleasant Johnny Foreigners 
without loosening his Windsor knot, often deploying that go-to Brit spook 
gadget, the weaponised umbrella.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032961576%2F8c119e4d-90ee-4c43-b773-dcb59e6b34f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032961576%2F8c119e4d-90ee-4c43-b773-dcb59e6b34f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sub-Gap duds … Matt Damon as Jason Bourne. Photograph: Allstar 
This is the Brit spook USP in a crowded marketplace: Bourne and Bauer can take 
out the trash just as effectually as Bond, Steed and Firth, but only sweatily 
and in lamentably sub-Gap duds. The former pair wouldn’t even know how to shoot 
a cuff prior to savouring a fine malt and getting a well-tailored leg over with 
an obliging spy-strumpet from a developing nation (the sexual and racial 
politics of Britain’s most successful genre export don’t bear an instant’s 
scrutiny).

But can Eggsy become One Of Us, the right chap to take down Samuel L Jackson’s 
risibly lisping megalomaniac mash-up of Dr Evil and Mark Zuckerberg? In 
pop-cultural terms, the odds are against him. Steed and Bond went to Eton, 
albeit briefly; Smiley went to a minor public school before becoming an Oxford 
don; even Austin Powers attended boarding school (St Trinian’s? Oh behave!) 
before finding his 1960s mojo in his Union Jack Y-fronts. Yes, Harry Palmer may 
have been working class, but he was sui generis until Eggsy came along. The 
fact that Palmer was a gourmet, and his creator went on to write Len Deighton’s 
Action Cookbook (“The prose reads like Dashiell Hammett channelling 
Brillat-Savarin,” slavered Waitrose Food Illustrated) shows that he was the 
exception that proves the rule: the posh, like the poor but more intolerably, 
are always with us, and quite a lot of them are spies. What school did Eggsy go 
to? Unclear, but the safe money says it didn’t have boaters, tuck shops or an 
old-boy network.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032866499%2F231bf144-4023-4b12-84da-d2f1c65e125c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422032866499%2F231bf144-4023-4b12-84da-d2f1c65e125c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eton boy … Daniel Craig as James Bond. Photograph: Rex 
In fiction, film and TV, the British secret services are the historic preserve 
of posh. The reality is different: Macintyre points out that it was MI5, 
overwhelmingly staffed by ex-coppers, who ensured that Philby sloped off to his 
Kremlin paymasters in 1963, despite the compunctions of his class allies in MI6.

In Anthony Horowitz’s Foyle’s War, Michael Kitchen’s ex-copper and spy is 
effective precisely because he isn’t One Of Us: unclubbable and unbiddable, 
he’s the kind of operator who would have taken Philby down whatever the 
consequences. Horowitz, currently retooling Bond for a new novel, knows what 
the world demands from the British spy: that he must be five parts maverick 
with – at most – a twist of toff. Any more and the cocktail’s unpalatable. 
That’s why, arguably, it’s a mistake to reveal too much of Bond’s back story 
(such as his family’s Scottish ancestral seat, which Javier Bardem spent the 
last reel of Skyfall blowing up), since to detail Bond’s biography is to risk 
alienating his bloke demographic. Only by blurring the extent to which he is 
One Of Us can cinema-going males the world overproject themselves into his Tom 
Ford <http://www.jamesbondlifestyle.com/tags/products-skyfall> suit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkX8jKeKUEA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkX8jKeKUEA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxkX8jKeKUEA&media=>
In Kingsman, if not in real life, the sclerotic British class system can be 
transcended. Eggsy realises that for Firth – part toff Gok Wan, part 21st 
century Henry Higgins – he is Eliza Dolittle with better muscle tone, and 
succumbs to his makeover. The soundtrack accompanies him on his spiritual 
journey from geezer to gent: early on, he goes joyriding through rain-slicked 
mean streets in a nicked motor with Dizzee Rascal’s urban underclass groove 
importunately puffing and blowing in the audience’s collective earhole; later, 
to the dapper strains of Bryan Ferry’s Slave to Love, he becomes the finished 
article, suited, booted and capable of ordering a proper gin martini. “Shaken 
while looking at an unopened bottle of vermouth,” Eggsy commands the barman.

All this is infantile fun, if politically conservative cobblers, since it 
suggests that kids like Eggsy aspire to be posh. Indeed, as thefirst-look 
Guardian review of Kingsman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/30/kingsman-the-secret-service-first-look-review>
 pointed out, the movie “stands in reverence of the English upper classes and 
the seeming ease with which they gracefully solve problems”. That said, the 
genius of Kingsman is that it serves two demographics at once. The film gives 
international audiences what they expect from Britain – a nice bit of posh – 
while also titillating natives with convincing oik detail. Hence the Millwall 
scarf dangling from Eggsy’s mirror; hence the rubbish motor he nicks; hence the 
convincingly charmless boozer with its chairless acres of brawling spaces fit 
for nothing but geezerish punch-up homages to Guy Ritchie films of yore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422033043427%2Ffb8366a9-4a23-49f8-8549-7c424e26a873-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20of%20gentlemen%3A%20Kingsman%20and%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20posh-boy%20spies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fposh-spies-british-class-system-kingsman-the-secret-service-james-bond%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422033043427%2Ffb8366a9-4a23-49f8-8549-7c424e26a873-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Politically conservative cobblers … Taron Egerton, post-makeover, in Kingsman. 
Photograph: Allstar 
Posh sells abroad, in particular to Americans who can’t break out of their 
mindset of what Britain is; the headline on a recentNew York Times non-analysis 
of the British class system 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/sunday-review/british-noses-firmly-in-the-air.html?_r=0>
 went “British Noses, Firmly in the Air”. The French have wine, the Germans 
have cars, we have Colin Firth in Pride and Prejudice breeches or knock-off 
Bond schmutter.

There is a parallel genius in the casting. Taron Egerton is lantern-jawed, 
with Men’s Health muscle definition and fetchingly symmetrical features that 
distinguish him from his frankly troll-like, convincingly English underclass 
coevals. All of this serves his dual narrative arcs as Brit prole transcending 
his class and the kind of deracinated buff maverick hero who beats the other 
guys on a level playing field.

In this, Kingsman is as ingeniously canny a piece of marketing as the reboot 
of the 007 franchise by means of which craggy, divertingly big-boobedDaniel 
Craig <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig> stuck it to foreign 
interlopers in the Brit spies manor – Tom Cruise in Mission: Impossible, Kiefer 
Sutherland in 24, Matt Damon in Bourne – and showed that the ageing franchise 
had the right stuff for a new era. Whether Spectre, the looming new Bond flick, 
can continue the plucky British resistance against the clear and present 
American threat remains to be seen. But, at least with Kingsman, 007 has a new 
ally, one that shows that Britain’s cadres of fictional spies are much more 
effective at defending the realm than the real ones.

• Kingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service> is out on 
29 January.
 