
Lebbeus Woods <http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/>, the cult experimental 
American architect, died on Tuesday in New York, aged 72.

Born in Michigan in 1940, he worked for Eero Saarinen 
<http://www.eerosaarinen.net/> in the 1960s, but became best known for his 
conceptual work, which explored a kind of architecture "that gives us the 
opportunity to experience a type of space we haven't experienced before", 
through a vast body of intricate drawings and models.

Dynamic compositions of splintered surfaces and twisted wiry forms, his 
fantastical scenes depicted alternative worlds, glimpses into a parallel 
universe writhing beneath the earth's crust.

His dystopian visions were often set in disaster stricken cities 
<http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/2011/12/15/war-and-architecture-three-principles/>
 – from Sarajevo to Zagreb, Havana to New York – and often adopted an almost 
medical metaphor, faceted accretions acting as "scabs" over the "wounds" of a 
building damaged by war and natural catastrophe. "Architecture should be judged 
not only by the problems it solves," said Woods, "but by the problems it 
creates."

Beyond inspiring a whole generation of architects, he also lent his talents to 
Hollywood, working briefly as the conceptual architect ofVincent Ward's 
ill-fated Alien III 
<http://vincentwardfilms.com/concepts/alien-3/unrequited-visio/> – abandoned in 
favour of David Fincher's much more successfulAlien 3 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0103644/>, which Woods later described as having 
"unremarkable sets" and "unrelenting grimness."

Woods' only built project was completed this year, the Light Pavilion 
<http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/a-space-of-light-2/> within a 
vast complex of towers in Chengdu by Steven Holl 
<http://www.stevenholl.com/project-detail.php?type=construction&id=98> – who 
explains more about the project below, along with a series of reflections from 
architects and academics, writers and critics who have been inspired by his 
work over the years.
 Detail from "Havana, radically reconstructed", 1994 

I distinctly remember meeting Lebbeus Woods a couple of decades ago at an 
Architecture Forum at the Royal Academy when I was working first-time around at
Architectural Design 
<http://www.architectural-design-magazine.com/view/0/index.html> as one of the 
most junior of assistant editors for Andreas Papadakis. Lebbeus was a very 
charismatic man in his prime. We were publishing a monograph on his work
Anarchitecture: Architecture is a Political Act 
<http://www.amazon.com/Lebbeus-Woods-Anarchitecture-Architecture-Architectural/dp/1854901486>
 (1992), which contains some of his most potent images. Most of the Academy 
staff then were under 25 and Lebbeus was as happy to chat with us, probably 
more so, than with the other dignitaries at the RA.

Looking back at Woods' drawings now contained in that monograph – projects 
such as the Zagreb Free Zone and Berlin Free Zone – the rawness of their 
dystopian vision is no less extraordinary. He seemed to both capture the 
visionary qualities of Deconstruction while anticipating the all-engrossing 
preoccupation with cybernetics. For many decades, his images and his teaching 
have continued to fuel the imagination and aesthetic bite of architects and 
students alike. He will be sadly missed, but I have no doubt that he will 
remain a touchstone as one of the greatest Paper Architects.
Helen Castle <http://www.architectural-design-magazine.com/view/0/index.html>
Editor, Architectural Design

Without Lebbeus, the world of architecture will be immeasurably poorer. He was 
on the side of architecture rather than building, the lifelong student rather 
than the architect. He reminded us that to believe in the existence of 
architecture you need to feel it. Elaborate drawings of found spaces full of 
whirring sticks and lines of energy were genuine attempts to materialise the 
experience of space. Who else could do this? Nobody!
Nigel Coates <http://www.nigelcoates.com/>
Architect and designer

Lebbeus was one of the last of a generation of visionaries who dedicated a 
life in architecture to drawing an alternative world, one important for the 
present and the future. His singular mind and hand will be deeply missed.
Peter Eisenman <http://www.eisenmanarchitects.com/>
Architect and Professor of Architecture at Yale University

Lebbeus was a man of many gifts. He was an incisive, razor-sharp thinker, who 
sought out the flash points of political and social conflict and made them the 
bricks and mortar of his architecture. He was the most talented draughtsman of 
his generation – more than drawings, parallel universes flowed from his pencil. 
But his rarest gift – one that he cultivated throughout his life – was his 
generous, absorbent and humble mind. He didn't just teach; he never stopped 
learning. He was happiest with a crowd of young people around him, deep in 
conversation, every generational barrier cast aside: happiest not because they 
worshipped him as a hero, but because new worlds were unfolding in front of 
him. When we invited him to take part in Postopolis NYC, the first of a series 
of bloggers summits organized with Geoff Manaugh at Storefront gallery, he was 
so excited by the possibilities of the web that when he returned home heset up 
his own blog <http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/>. The conversation that began 
that afternoon in Storefront will continue long after the sad day of his 
passing.
Joseph Grima <http://www.domusweb.it/en/search/author/?filtro=Joseph%20Grima>
Editor, Domus magazine

It's a tremendous loss. Lebbeus was a very close friend and great architect. 
His visionary work explored the fantastic potential and dynamism of space with 
radical proposals and powerful drawings that were extremely influential. His 
Light Pavilion in Chengdu will be testament that our profession has lost a 
great voice.
Zaha Hadid <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>
Architect <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/>
 The Light Pavilion in the Raffles City complex in Chengdu by Steven Holl 
Architects 
I met Lebbeus in February 1977. I arrived at Leb's small loft in TriBeCa to 
find him standing bent over an enormous black and white drawing of a 
Piranese-like urban vision. His cigarette had a long grey ash that was about to 
drop as he greeted me briefly and turned to show me the amazing drawing.

Lebbeus and I began to meet every couple of weeks at a diner that served 
"all-you-can-eat-for-a-dollar" bean soup. Our ongoing philosophical discussions 
led to our sharing reviews in the design studios we were teaching.

In 1977, I began work on a project titled Bronx Gymnasium-Bridge that would 
become the first issue ofPamphlet Architecture 
<http://www.papress.com/other/pamphletarchitecture/index.html>. Lebbeus made 
the third issue with the projectEinstein's Tomb 
<http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/2010/06/09/einstein-tomb-30/>. It was an 
amazing vision for a tomb about Albert Einstein – a strange architecture that 
would travel on a beam of light around the Earth. Today, I imagine that tomb is 
occupied by the spirit of Lebbeus.

The freedom of spirit in architecture that Lebbeus Woods embodied carried a 
rare idealism. Lebbeus had very passionate beliefs and a deep philosophical 
commitment to architecture. His designs were politically charged fields of 
reality that he created.

In 2007, when I first received the commission to realise a 3m sq ft urban 
project in Chengdu, China, I began studies to shape a new public space. The 
building fabric would not strive for iconic objects, but rather a simple 
architecture sliced by sunlight shaped space. "Buildings within buildings" are 
cut into this fabric, sitting in gaps that are 8-10 storeys in the air. I 
invited Leb to do one.

Lebbeus's Pavilion 
<http://lebbeuswoods.wordpress.com/2011/02/15/a-space-of-light-2/>, constructed 
of huge beams of light, can be entered at several levels. Walking on sheets of 
glass suspended by steel rods, the view is infinitely multiplied via the 
polished stainless steel lining the four-storey gap in the building it 
occupies. It is a brilliant and engaging architecture. An experience there, 
especially at night, seems to dissolve the view of the city beyond.

This work merges art and architecture as they have merged in the past and are 
merging in the future. Next week, I will travel to Chengdu, walk into his Light 
Pavilion, stand suspended on steel rods and imagine Lebbeus's tomb has been 
launched – on a beam of light.
Steven Holl <http://www.stevenholl.com/>
Architect and Professor of Architecture at Columbia University
 “War and Architecture 2-2”, 1993, provoked by the war in Bosnia 
Like many people, I was devastated to learn that Lebbeus Woods passed away two 
nights ago, just as the hurricane was moving out of New York City and as his 
very neighbourhood, Lower Manhattan, had temporarily become part of the 
Atlantic seabed, floodwaters pouring into nearby subway tunnels and knocking 
out power to nearly every building – an event seemingly predicted, or 
forewarned, by Lebbeus's own work.

I can't pretend to have been a confidant of his, let alone a colleague, but 
Lebbeus's influence over my own interest in architecture is impossible to 
exaggerate and his kindness and generosity as a friend to me here in New York 
City was a reassuring thing to receive. I say this, of course, while referring 
to someone whose New Year's toast a few years ago to a room full of friends 
gathered down at his loft near the Financial District was that we should all 
have, as he phrased it, a "difficult New Year". That is, we should all look 
forward to, even seek out or engineer, a new year filled with the kinds of 
challenges Lebbeus felt, rightly or not, that we deserved to face, fight, and, 
in all cases, overcome – the genuine and endless difficulty of pursuing our own 
ideas, absurd goals no one else might share or even be interested in.

This was the New Year's wish of a true friend: someone who believes in and 
trusts your capacity to become what you want to be, and someone who will help 
to engineer circumstances in which that transformation might most productively 
occur.

If you were to walk through an architecture school today – and I don't 
recommend it – you'd think that the height of invention was to make your 
building look like a Venus flytrap, or that mathematically efficient triangular 
spaceframes were the answer to everything, every problem of space and 
habitability. But this is like someone very good at choosing fonts in Microsoft 
Word. It doesn't matter what you can do to the words in your document if those 
words don't actually say anything.

Lebbeus will be missed for his formal inventiveness: buildings on stilts, 
massive seawalls, rotatable buildings that look like snowflakes. Deformed 
coasts anti-seismically jewelled with buildings. Tombs for Einstein falling 
through space.

But this would be to miss the motivating absence at the heart of all those 
explorations, which is that we don't yet know what the world is, what the Earth 
is – whether or not there even is a world or an Earth or a universe at all – 
and architecture is one of the arts of discovering an answer to that question. 
Even flat-out fabricating an answer to this, meaning that architecture is more 
mythology than science. But there's nothing wrong with that. There is, in fact, 
everything right with that: it is exactly why architecture will always be more 
heroic than constructing buildings resistant to catastrophic rearrangements of 
the earth, or throwing colossal spans across canyons and mountain gorges, or 
turning a hostile landscape into someone's home.

Architecture is about the lack of stability and how to address it. 
Architecture is about the void and how to cross it. Architecture is about 
inhospitability and how to live within it.

Lebbeus Woods would have had it no other way, and – as students, writers, 
poets, novelists, filmmakers, or mere thinkers – neither should we.
Geoff Manaugh <>
Writer and editor of BLDGBLOG
 Proposal for Einstein's Tomb, 1980 
Exactly four years ago Lebbeus Woods sat at my dining table in Ithaca, New 
York, celebrating his lecture for theArchitecture of Disbelief symposium 
<http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/Oct08/AAPSymposium.html>. It's in a state 
of disbelief that I write from the same spot today.

Lebbeus generously contributed to studios and seminars at Cornell 
Architecture's graduate summer school in Manhattan, where he encouraged a 
conversation about the role of education and the state of the discipline. He 
inspired strong work not by enforcing methodologies, but by encouraging diverse 
responses to a design problem so carefully choreographed and artfully paced 
that students were shocked how far they came in a span of weeks. It was a 
pleasure and privilege to teach with him.

My area of research focuses on scale models. When Lebbeus occasionally worked 
with models, they were fraught with the demands of the drawings that inspired 
them. Shifting from two to three dimensions was never quick or easy; it was a 
mystical experience. His models were dense and delicate, a nightmare for 
archivists and a gift to all who caught a glimpse of them. I see his recent 
work, the Light Pavilion done in collaboration with Christoph A Kumpusch, as a 
superlative model, a drawing in deep space and a fitting coda.

In word and deed, Lebbeus reminded colleagues and students that drawing was 
the highest form and clearest expression of architecture. To watch his hand 
draft was to watch his mind at work. His lines were vectors, lines with 
direction and purpose, lines that danced. In an age of digitally powered 
representation, he powerfully communicated with ink and graphite. Yet he was 
never old school; no one took the future more seriously than Lebbeus Woods. 
Over a glass of Grey Goose and pineapple juice, Lebbeus challenged his friends 
time and again to stay smart, savvy and creatively supple. His humour was dark, 
his voice booming and his eyes always bright.
Mark Morris 
<http://aap.cornell.edu/arch/faculty/faculty-profile.cfm?customel_datapageid_7102=56634>
Professor of Architecture at Cornell University

Around the end of the 1980s Lebbeus Woods was just one of a number of radical 
architects making their name through the production of imaginary projects; 
elaborate drawings and paintings occupying a milieu somewhere between fine art 
and architecture, which allowed many to interrogate the conventions of their 
discipline. Open a book on the experimental architecture of that period and 
Woods' heartfelt and haunting drawings regarding the siege of Sarajevo share 
space with early works from the likes of Daniel Libeskind and Zaha Hadid. But 
unlike so many of that generation who eventually made the career transition 
from avant-garde upstarts to global superstars, Lebbeus Woods never got rich by 
building rubbish. In recent years, his blog was a fascinating, unpretentious 
investigation into the same ideas that had driven his earlier visions: history 
and memory, destruction and healing.
Douglas Murphy <>
Architecture critic

If, like me, you were a student of architecture in the early 1990s, you would 
have almost certainly possessed within your file of inspiration, along with
Italo Calvino's Invisible Cities <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/italocalvino> 
andDouglas Darden's Condemned Building 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Condemned-Building-Darden/dp/0910413630>, a book by 
Lebbeus Woods. I would pore over his drawings for hours, my mind inhabiting 
their post-apocalyptic, post-diluvian – post-human even – spaces. They formed a 
storyboard for an imaginary steampunk film, very rarely depicting any human 
presence, giving the impression that something had happened there – possibly 
something terrible – and it was the readers' challenge to construct their own 
narrative of exactly what. This was a pre-computer rendering world of the 
imagination, Architecture with a capital 'A', a more serious manifestation of 
Archigram, challenging the world we inhabit through the power of the drawing, 
suggesting propositions we dare not imagine ourselves. Woods showed that all 
you needed to be a great architect was a sheet of cartridge paper, a set of 
Faber-Castells or Rotrings and a talent for imagining other worlds. The first 
two were easily purchased from your nearest stationer, but the last remains the 
preserve of the few original unique poetic talents of architecture. Woods was 
without doubt one of the greatest.
Steve Parnell 
<http://www.architecture.com/EducationAndCareers/PrizesScholarshipsandBursaries/RIBAResearchTrusts/2011recipients/SteveParnell.aspx>
Architectural historian
 A drawing of tectonic faults from the San Francisco Bay Project, 1995 
Lebbeus was a larger than life character. Thoughtful curmudgeon, incredible 
visionary and one of the last great draughtsmen. If intrigued, Woods always 
made time to get involved in challenging discourse.

He was the first well-known architect to reach out to architecture for 
humanity. Not only generous with his time and well thought out critique, but a 
quiet optimist always challenging the status quo.
Cameron Sinclair <http://architectureforhumanity.org/>
Co-founder, Architecture for Humanity

Lebbeus Woods was a frequent visitor to the Bartlett School of Architecture in 
the 90s when we were recent graduates beginning our teaching careers. Not only 
were we lucky enough to find a seat at his packed-out lectures but we were also 
fortunate enough to have him crit our own work. His virtuoso drawings and 
exaggerated tectonic aesthetic were hugely influential. We could only dream 
that our architecture should embody such furious passion, where the viewer is 
drawn in by the intensity of line to an immersive complexity of surfaces and 
allusions, a leaping, gravity-defying architecture. His legacy could be seen 
for many years in student preoccupations with parasitic architecture, science 
fiction and scenographic landscapes. His architectural language continues to be 
re-articulated 20 years later.
Mark Smout and Laura Allen <http://www.smoutallen.com/>
Architects and tutors at the Bartlett, UCL

I write this still reeling from the shock of Lebbeus' death, although many of 
us knew our friend was unlikely to be with us for much longer. I have known him 
over 20 years. His encouragement and enjoyment of my work has often been a 
much-needed balm to my own day-to-day creative struggle. Lebbeus was an 
architects' architect, seldom built, a huge inspiration to students and those 
of us who still cling to the idea that architecture can change society. He 
leaves us a lifetime of drawings – drawings of other worlds, worlds haunted 
with benevolent enigmas. He also leaves the best architects in the world 
memories of conversations, thoughtful prompts and happy meetings. Let us not 
ever deny that Lebbeus was and is one of the most talented creators and 
illustrators of architecture ever. He could effortlessly match the greats from 
other centuries such asLedoux 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/334505/Claude-Nicolas-Ledoux>, Boulee
 <http://www.bouleedesigns.com/home/index.asp> and Piranesi 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/pira/hd_pira.htm>. He was a virtuoso, a 
master.

I first saw his work by chance in the mid-80s, a big exhibition (with a 
related book, Origins, still one of my cherished possessions) at the 
Architectural Association in Bedford Square. I was mesmerised by his depictions 
of a world parallel to ours, of frock-coated cybernetists experimenting with 
geometries – at once cosmically phenomenological and just a tad Mad Max, but 
never with evil intent. It changed my life. I'm happy to say I've told that to 
Lebbeus – in front of about 400 people and from the pulpit in the Sage Chapel 
at Cornell. That 2008 visit to Cornell was the last time I saw him, but we kept 
in touch regularly.

During the early 90s Lebbeus was the only visionary architect to use his huge 
talents to try and posit a future for the war-torn cities of Eastern Europe in 
the throes of the Bosnian/Serbian war. He seemed drawn to areas of trauma and 
created architectures that turned the incredible forces of politics, nature and 
human creativity into architecturally benevolent opportunities – his work 
included proposals for Havana and the pre-1989, truncated Berlin.

As he became older, his architecture experimented with the archetypal 
preoccupations of architecture, the angle, the multiple and the mediation of 
sky and land.

To sum up Lebbeus's contribution to architectural discourse and his undeniable 
influence on my work, and that of many of my peers, in the preceding few 
paragraphs is crude in the extreme. Suffice to say, there will be many more 
thoughts on the man who lit up the imagination with images so extraordinary, so 
liberating and so life affirming. And it is this above anything else I will 
remember about Lebbeus – his life-affirming light; his belief in the power of 
architecture and his bluff irritation with those he felt abused it.

Lebbeus Woods – I salute you.
Neil Spiller 
<http://www.gre.ac.uk/schools/arc/rss-assets/news/future-cities/programme-and-abstracts/neil-spiller>
Professor of Architecture at the University of Greenwich
 