
The teams here may not have been playing for the most coveted piece of 
silverware of the season but you would not have guessed it from this pulsating, 
fiercely contested final. In the endNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> defeated Gloucester by 
six points in a riveting match, which left all the players and the wonderfully 
partisan crowd utterly exhausted. So Gloucester must now find Heineken 
qualification from their league performances.

Though flair was not in abundance at Sixways, everything else was in place: 
enterprise, endeavour and no little expertise. Northampton just about deserved 
their victory; they scored three tries to two, which highlighted their more 
ruthless finishing. But the result was in doubt until the end.Gloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>, missing about a dozen 
players, could not have given any more.

One of the loudest cheers came with the appearance of Mike Tindall on the 
touchline, almost as good as a regal visit. Before the game he acted as a 
tackle bag carrier; once it started he was the tee carrier.

The two teams sparred for almost half an hour when penalties were exchanged. 
There may have been spring-like conditions, perfect for the fleet of foot, yet 
at the start the likeliest source of a try, in a ferocious contest, looked to 
be the rolling maul â€“ typically English but the scale of the brute force on 
display was awesome.

Then it all came to life, albeit via one of Gloucester's rolling mauls. There 
was a neat exchange of passes and Akapusi Qera muscled himself over. 
Northampton's response was immediate and came from another Pacific Islander. 
Soane Tonga'uiha found himself three yards from the line, ball in hand with 
only a couple of Gloucester shirts in front of him. There was no stopping him 
from there.

Northampton's second try was spectacular, though Gloucester's Alex Brown knew 
nothing of it. He had just been poleaxed and was being hoisted on to a 
stretcher during a breathtaking passage of play of multiple phases and 
occupying most corners of the pitch, which ended with James Downey racing over 
the line.

Six points down at half-time, Gloucester then rallied with a penalty try after 
a collapsed scrum. Again Northampton responded immediately through a Lee 
Dickson try. Gloucester rallied again. Nicky Robinson thought he had scored but 
the TV official thought otherwise. Gloucester sustained their attacks close to 
the line. A try seemed inevitable when the prop Tonga'uiha, a totemic figure 
throughout for Northampton, suddenly emerged with the ball and an empty pitch 
in front of him.

The Tongan sprinted 70 yards before he was caught and his pass was not quite 
perfect. So Gloucester managed to avoid conceding a fourth try but the pressure 
had been relieved. It was the moment that secured the match.

Jim Mallinder, director of rugby, was jubilant in a Yorkshire sort of way. 
"The Premiership has had some stick recently but there were two teams out there 
who wanted to play rugby. This victory shows how far we have progressed. We are 
going to enjoy ourselves over the next 48 hours and then it's back to 
business," he said. Northampton's internationals were also on hand to join 
those celebrations.

Northampton Geraghty; Reihana, Clarke (Ansbro 75), Downey, Diggin; Myler, 
Dickson; Tonga'uiha, Sharman (Long 62), Mujati, Lawes (Easter 70), Kruger, 
Dowson (capt), Best, Wilson.

Tries Tonga'uiha, Downey, Dickson. Cons Myler 3. Pens Myler 3.

Gloucester Burns (Voyce 63); Simpson-Daniel, Molenaar (Sharples 41), 
Fuimaono-Supilu, Vainikolo; Robinson, Lawson (Lewis 69); Wood, Azam (Dawidiuk 
74), Capdevielle, James, Brown (Satala 37), Buxton (capt), Qera (Hazell 69), 
Eustace.

Tries Qera, penalty try. Cons Robinson. Pens Robinson 4.

Referee Alan Lewis. Attendance 9,511.
 