
The Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> coach, 
Richard Cockerill, described his side's 26-12 LV Cup defeat by Bath last night 
as a "meaningless game". The Tigers, who lead the Aviva Premiership and are in 
the quarter-finals of the Heineken Cup, have not picked up a point in the LV 
Cup this season.

After their defeat at Welford Road, Cockerill said: "It was a meaningless 
game. [Bath] were a little fortunate to win so comfortably. They had a much 
stronger side on paper and the sending-off ruined the game for the spectators. 
I don't like losing but our priority is the league and this tournament is a 
long way down the pecking order."

The sending-off to which Cockerill referred was that of the Leicester hooker 
Rob Hawkins, who was playing against his old club. He was shown a red card for 
using an elbow, having already been sent to the sin-bin for punching.

"Rob is very disappointed," Cockerill said. "The decision was a little harsh 
but it was ill-disciplined. He was perhaps a little fired up against his old 
club."

Bath's coach, Steve Meehan, said: "I'm very happy with the win. It was our 
first here since 2003. Our scrum was excellent and, despite the keen wind, both 
sides were accurate in the lineout. The status of the competition needs to be 
addressed. We are likely not to qualify with 14 points from our group games and 
Newcastle could progress with far less and that shouldn't happen with a 
Heineken Cup spot at stake."

Meehan complimented two of his younger players: "I thought Guy Mercer was very 
energetic on the night in his first game back after six to eight weeks out and 
Nick Scott at full-back performed well, playing his first full 80 minutes for 
the club."
 