
The Bengal tiger used in the Oscar-winning film Life of Pi almost drowned on 
set in an incident subsequently covered up by the US body charged with ensuring 
animal safety in Hollywood,according to a new report 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/feature/>.

An American Humane Association <http://www.americanhumane.org/> (AHA) official 
revealed the near-disaster in an email leaked as part of an extensive Hollywood 
Reporter investigation into the film industry's treatment of animals.

"Last week we almost fucking killed King in the water tank," wrote monitor 
Gina Johnson. "This one take with him went really bad and he got lost trying to 
swim to the side. Damn near drowned." She added: "I think this goes without 
saying but don't mention it to anyone, especially the office! I have downplayed 
the fuck out of it."

Johnson's email raises concerns because the AHA is the organisation charged 
with issuing the coveted "no animals were harmed in the making of this picture" 
stamp that adorns most Hollywood films. The Hollywood Reporter's investigation 
alleges officials are too close to the film industry they are supposed to be 
vetting, and that the label is often unfairly awarded.

According to the report, Life of Pi, which won four Oscars earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/ang-lee-best-director-oscar-life-of-pi>
, was allowed to continue to use the "no animals" credit despite the fact that 
the AHA subsequently became aware of the email, and despite allegations that 
Johnson was engaged in an intimate relationship with one of the film's 
producers. King was used for scenes in Life of Pi where the CGI version of the 
Bengal tiger, which is named Richard Parker, was not deemed suitable.

Twentieth Century Fox, the studio behind Life of Pi, denied that King the 
tiger had come close to death during the production of Ang Lee's 3D 
spectacular. "The tiger, King, was never harmed and did not 'nearly drown' 
during the production," a spokesman told the Hollywood Reporter. "We take 
on-set safety very seriously and take every precaution necessary to ensure that 
no one – animal or human – is harmed during the production of our films."

The AHA is also alleged to have failed in its duty to protect animals on the 
set ofPeter Jackson's Hobbit trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125622/hobbit> in 2012. Animal 
handlers, backed byPeople for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 
<http://www.peta.org.uk/> (Peta), at the time accused Jackson's production 
company of responsibility for the reported deaths of 27 horses, goats, chicken 
and sheep, mainly because, while not being filmed, the creatures were allegedly 
kept at a farm filled with bluffs, sinkholes and other "death traps". The AHA 
said in the wake of the revelations that it only had control of animal safety 
while filming was taking place.

Jackson and his producers rejected the allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/20/the-hobbit-animals-not-mistreated-peter-jackson>
, saying any incidents "were immediately investigated and appropriate action 
taken. This includes hundreds of thousands of dollars that were spent on 
upgrading housing and stable facilities."

The Hollywood Reporter alleged that a number of other incidents on films 
monitored by the association led to the deaths or injuries of animals. 
Documents claimed: a husky dog was repeatedly punched in its diaphragm during 
filming of 2006 Disney adventure movieEight Below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/apr/14/drama.family> after getting into 
a fight with another canine; a chipmunk was killed after being dropped during 
the production of Sarah Jessica Parker comedyFailure to Launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/111502/failure.to.launch>, which was 
released the same year; and two horses died on the set of children's film 
Flicka in 2005. The incidents were all ruled to be accidents – in the case of 
Failure to Launch, the AHA said the incident occurred after filming – and the 
"no animals were harmed" label was not awarded. But the movies were still able 
to use the credit "American Humane Association monitored the animal action".

In an ongoing court case brought by Hollywood production co-ordinator Barbara 
Casey, it is alleged that a horse died during the filming of Steven Spielberg's
War Horse <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142607/war-horse>, but the 
fatality was covered up to avoid embarrassment.

According to the Hollywood Reporter, AHA "distorts its film ratings, downplays 
or fails to publicly acknowledge harmful incidents and sometimes doesn't 
seriously pursue investigations".

In a statement, the association said it did not recognise the report's 
findings. "Regrettably, there have even been some deaths, which upset us 
greatly," the statement read. "But in many of the cases reported, they had 
nothing to do with the animals' treatment on set, or occurred when the animals 
were not under our care."

Referring specifically to Casey's War Horse allegation, the AHA said the horse 
in question died of natural causes "in transit home". It added: "We absolutely 
and categorically deny the sensationalist, misleading and untrue allegations. 
We look forward to vigorously defending ourselves through the proper legal 
channels."

The court hearing is scheduled for March 2014.
 