
When an accident rendered my wife’s beloved 1987 Volvo station wagon 
unsalvageable earlier this year, there was a bright side to the loss: retiring 
the Volvo, our only car, gave us a chance to tackle a troublesome wedge of our 
household carbon footprint.

Our home has rooftop solar panels, which make it possible for us to send more 
clean electricity to the grid than we use, but our stout, tank-like station 
wagon did not sip gas. So, in January, we ditched oil for our own carbon-free 
solar power andCalifornia’s increasingly clean electricity grid 
<http://energy.ca.gov/renewables/tracking_progress/documents/renewable.pdf> and 
signed a three-year lease for an all-electric 2013 Nissan Leaf.

Contrary to persistent, uninformed reports 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/currency/2013/10/why-electric-vehicles-have-stalled.html>
, US sales of electric cars have not stalled: through April,Leaf sales were up 
by 33% <http://pllqt.it/X9p7iR> compared to 2013. As of 23 May, 50,000 Leafs 
had been sold in the US 
<http://green.autoblog.com/2014/05/23/nissan-sold-50000-leafs-in-us-115000-globally/>
 and nearly 115,000 have been sold worldwide. And sales will likely increase: 
Navigant Research projects that US sales of light-duty plug-in electric 
vehicles willexceed 514,000 annually in 2023 <http://pllqt.it/P7tXGh>, up from 
the nearly 100,000 sold in North America in 2013.

So many electric cars have been sold in the San Francisco Bay Area, where I 
live, that cities are scrambling to deploy infrastructure to accommodate them. 
What’s it like to be an EV early adopter? Four months into life with a Leaf, 
here are some notes and lessons that we learned:

Electric cars will work for most people – today: My wife and I consistently 
cover about 85 miles on a fully charged battery. That works for us: we both 
work from home, and our default option is to walk 15 minutes to a nearby 
regional train station. My wife, a city planning commissioner who also sits on 
several non-profit boards, drives about 75 miles each week to and from 
community meetings. For out-of-town trips, we borrow my brother’s Prius.

However, even if one of us held a job requiring a commute equivalent to the 
average American’s daily round-trip commute by car –less than 30 miles 
<http://pllqt.it/eserwk>, according to the US Department of Energy (DOE) – the 
Leaf’s range would be more than sufficient. In fact, unless you’re a “
megacommuter 
<http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/american_community_survey_acs/cb13-41.html>
”, why base the decision to purchase a car on the handful of times each year 
you might need a car with a 250-mile range or more for long trips?

Expect the EV owner’s initiation: In the four months that I've been driving a 
Leaf, I've already discovered that there are several EV pitfalls. There are 
charge hogs who remain tethered to a charging post long after a full charge or, 
worse, squatters who park in an EV-only charging spot anddo not charge. 

I’ve had a charging session inexplicably end minutes after sitting down at a 
nearby cafe when the charging station malfunctioned. I’ve rolled up to a 
station and been unable to withdraw a hopelessly stuck charging nozzle from its 
holster. And I’ve beenICE’d 
<http://www.greencarreports.com/news/1078298_been-iced-gas-cars-parking-in-electric-car-charging-spots-video>
 – blocked from charging by a gas-burning SUV. In the last case, I reported the 
scofflaw to a parking garage attendant and – I won’t lie – smiled when a ticket 
was waiting on the offender’s windshield when I returned to the garage.

More charging stations needed, free public charging won’t last: Backed by 
funding from DOE and the stimulus <http://www.theevproject.com/overview.php>, 
the number of charging stations, installed by companies like Coulomb 
Technologies (now ChargePoint) and ECOtality (later purchased by the Car 
Charging Group), have already spread quickly, especially in first-mover markets 
like California. According to DOE, there are nowsome 8,200 EV charging stations 
and nearly 20,000 charge 
<http://www.afdc.energy.gov/locator/stations/results?utf8=%E2%9C%93&location=&filtered=true&fuel=ELEC&owner=all&payment=all&ev_level1=true&ev_level2=true&ev_dc_fast=true&radius_miles=5>
 outlets in the United States.

Even though a majority of charging is done at home <http://pllqt.it/AgUYQW> or 
at work, more public charging stations are necessary. In my part of the Bay 
Area, competition for available charging outlets is already fierce, and my 
hometown of Concord, population 125,000, has yet to install charging stations 
at any of the customary spots: City Hall, the library or city-owned parking 
garages.

For now, charging at many public stations is free – more than 70% of the 
stations in ChargePoint's network <http://pllqt.it/dD1ALL>, the nation’s 
largest, provide charging at no cost – and without time limits. But, alas, free 
public charging is unlikely to last for long. To recoup the costs for 
electricity, maintenance, and vandalism, Bay Area cities have already started to
roll back this incentive 
<http://www.govtech.com/transportation/Cities-End-Free-Ride-at-Electric-Vehicle-Charging-Stations.html>
. In March, one city, Martinez, began charging $1 per hour and limited sessions 
to four hours. At the end of June, Pleasant Hill plans to charge $0.20 per 
kilowatt-hour (kWh) and limit charging sessions to three hours.

To put this in context, our Leaf has a 6.6 kilowatt (kW) onboard charger. 
Charging it at one of Pleasant Hill’s Level II 240-volt charging ports for 
three hours would cost us $3.60 (18 kilowatt-hours X $0.20/kWh).

Nissan has stepped in to help with the charging situation. In April, it 
introduced a program called EZ-Charge 
<http://nissannews.com/en-US/nissan/usa/releases/nissan-launches-programs-to-make-leaf-charging-free-and-ez>
, which would enable Leaf owners to charge in four networks – AeroVironment, 
Blink Network (operated by Car Charging Group), NRG eVgo and ChargePoint – with 
one access card. Nissan’s “No Charge to Charge” promotion, which launches on 1 
July, will provide two years of free public charging with the purchase or lease 
of a new Nissan Leaf on or after 1 April 2014.

On 20 May, ChargePoint withdrew from EZ-Charge 
<http://www.sfgate.com/business/article/Electric-car-charging-program-hits-speed-bump-5493482.php>
; Nissan says the program will still launch on 1 July as planned. A 
little-known perk also allows Leaf drivers to charge for free at any Nissan 
dealership, provided the charge posts are not being used by dealership cars.

Lease or buy? Betting on better batteries: Every car shopper must grapple with 
whether to lease or buy. In our case, my wife and I decided to lease our Leaf 
because we are confident that innovation will continue to drive down the cost 
of batteries and increase their energy density, extending an EV’s range.

For these reasons, Consumer Reports recommends that EV drivers lease 
<http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/news/2013/06/electric-car-lease-deals-are-the-best-way-to-drive-an-ev/index.htm>
 – for now. By 2017, when our lease is up, we’ll likely be ready to buy. As it 
turns out, our timing could be perfect: Nissan’s Andy Palmer recentlytold 
Automotive News 
<http://www.autonews.com/article/20140507/OEM05/140509845/nissans-next-evs-more-mainstream-better-battery>
 that the automaker plans to use a new battery chemistry that will 
significantly increase the single-charge range of the next-generation Leaf, 
which should roll out in 2017.

The social impact hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/social-impact> is funded by 
Anglo American. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 