
This is the time to reform Bretton Woods 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system>: to recreate a new 
international architecture for global finance. I have read what Jeffrey Sachs 
hashad to say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/globaleconomy-g8> on 
this: I would not disagree with him, and yet there is much to add.

First, we have to recognise that there is considerable regulation of the 
financial services sector in place, much of it introduced over the last few 
years. Perversely, some of those who claim to be most compliant with that 
regulation are in fact some of the most abusive tax havens in the world. There 
is an important lesson to learn from that simple observation: much of the 
regulation we have is applied to the wrong people, in the wrong place, asks the 
wrong questions, and fails to identify the risk that the regulation is meant to 
control. As a result, the most important thing we must do now is undertake a 
very rapid gap analysis of the existing regulatory structure of the world's 
financial system. We must resist the temptation to better regulate what is 
unimportant and instead regulate the difficult things we have so far ignored.

By far the most important issues that will arise relate to tax havens, or 
secrecy jurisdictions as I prefer to call them. These are the international 
financial system's "get out of regulation free card". In the past international 
corporations have faced down regulation by suggesting any attempt to impose it 
is contrary to international competitive pressure, largely promoted by tax 
havens as part of an international regulatory race to the bottom. We have to 
change that. If we do not then there is no prospect of any other regulatory 
reform being successful.

This reform can be done. We must demand that all abusive tax havens place on 
public record details of the beneficial ownership of all companies that operate 
within their domain, put the accounts of all companies on public record, and do 
the same for trusts. And of course we must lead the way by doing this 
ourselves. Then we will have created the information that is needed to operate 
a market on a level playing field. And we must impose sanctions on those 
countries that do not cooperate, which could be simply done by deducting tax at 
source from all payments made to those places that did not put this information 
on record. Barrack Obama is already proposing that in the USA.

Next, we have to ensure that we know which companies are doing what activity 
where. This might sound a simple objective but the current accounting systems 
of the world make it almost impossible to find this out. Consolidated accounts 
are in practice little better than a work of fiction when it comes to finding 
out what happens within a multinational company because all the transactions 
between companies within the group are removed from view in those accounts. It 
is, however, those intra-group transactions that are used to undermine 
regulation, to avoid tax by relocating profit, and to hide assets from 
international regulators who might have reason to know about them.

We do, therefore, urgently need reform of international accounting standards 
so that every multinational company is required to report its transactions on a 
country-by-country basis so that we know where it makes its sales, and how much 
is to genuine third-party customers and how much is intragroup; where it makes 
its profit; where it pays its tax and where it locates its assets. Again, 
without this most basic information no amount of regulation will work because 
we will have no way of locating the trades we are trying to regulate and will 
have no yardstick to measure success.

Finally, in this very short list of additional recommendations, there needs to 
be radical reform of the world's auditing systems. It is very clear that the 
Big Four firms of auditors completely failed to appraise the risk inherent 
within the financial structures of their major audit clients and issue 
appropriate risk warnings â€“ as is their duty. This is unsurprising; they have 
been principal architects of the world's offshore finance system. They all 
operate in all the world's major tax havens. This has created a fundamental 
conflict of interest within their core structure which cannot be addressed 
unless they are forced to split their auditing activities from all their other 
commercial roles. If this is not possible new state labour auditing systems 
have to be created.

So let us move forward with haste, but start from the basic issues that need 
to be addressed if we are to succeed in achieving an effective regulatory 
regime.
 