
Saint Augustine argued over its meaning, while in The Divine Comedy, Dante 
depicted Limbo as the first circle of Hell, and in the world of Marvel Comics, 
there are two Limbos - one, apparently, being "True Limbo", a place outside of 
time ruled by Immortus (as you may recall 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marvel_Comics>, Rom the Spaceknight banished the 
Dire Wraiths there). So what wouldLimbo 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/limbo/094662d8-9798-46a4-abb3-a5f7ebae258c>
 mean for the new production from Strut & Fret, the team behind Cantina, a 
previous hit at the Adelaide fringe festival thatalso played in London 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/may/31/cantina-review> to fans including 
Madonna?

The disappointing answer is that the show provides no answers, other than to 
say it looks like somewhere fun. However anyone might dress it up, this is a 
circus show, with a touch of added burlesque. The multi-talented six-man cast 
hail from the UK, the US, Australia and points inbetween, and hadn't met before 
the run began. (Talking of Catholic theology, I caught up with it on the day 
the Papal conclave began.) Each comes with a peculiar talent: best were 
sword-swallower and fire-eaterHeather Holliday 
<http://www.prettythingsproductions.com/missheatherholliday.html> and 
staggering contortionistJonathan Nosan 
<http://jonathannosan.com/JonathanNosan/Jonathan_Nosan.html>; his first 
appearance, when he bent his body so far in two that you felt sure something 
must pop or snap, solicited squeamish gasps from the audience packed into the 
Paradiso Spiegeltent.
 Heather Holliday breathes fire. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Providing drive to the action was the excellent live band under the direction 
ofSxip Shirley <http://www.sxipshirey.com/>, who mixed beatboxing with 
tub-thumping, tuba-parping rock; without them, the show would have felt more 
formless. Scenes such as the one in which a couple start to undress each other 
only to discover that they're both wearing endless layers of underwear made you 
wonder whether those cooler regions of hell are home to Benny Hill and his bevy 
of lovelies; as it was, much of the evening felt similarly padded out. But the 
energy of the cast never let anything drag for long, and their acrobatic 
exploits would make any arm-chair critic feel a bit of a wimp by comparison.

The purpose-built venue itself deserves applause: half big top, half Weimar 
nightclub, including booth seating. The whole thing is being pulled down and 
rebuilt near the Southbank Centre in London when the show - one of the star 
attractions at the Adelaide fringe -moves to the UK <> for a five-month run 
from May. If it's tweaked and tightened up, Limbo should enjoy its fate.
 