
In turbulent times, we often look to literature for guidance, for inspiration, 
for wisdom. So what can the world of words tell us about Brexit? Very few 
writers have examined the idea of a state seceding from a larger geopolitical 
entity and the consequences thereof. But a glance over the novels that do 
discuss such questions creates an exceptionally esoteric reading list.

The Fixed Period by Anthony Trollope 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/trollope/tsociety/fixed.html> (1882)

 Trollope is often relegated to the second string of 19th-century novelists, 
which is a disservice. It’s not all vicars and wistfulness, as this bizarre 
late novel shows. An antipodean crown colony, Brittanula, has seceded from the 
empire, and one of its new laws is that citizens at the age of 67 are taken to 
“the College” in Necropolis and then euthanised, to spare them the indignities 
of old age. That the author of Barchester Towers was also the precursor of
Logan’s Run <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=USADM5Gk9Gs> is an irony lost on 
many an undergraduate. Written as the memoirs of the forcibly retired 
president, John Neverbend, Trollope insisted it was not a satire, but a 
minatory warning. Trollope died at the age of 67.

 The Napoleon of Notting Hill by GK Chesterton 
<http://www.chesterton.org/lecture-6/> (1904)

 Adam Wayne, the humourless and heroic protagonist of Chesterton’s first 
novel, does not strive for the independence of Notting Hill – although the 
tenor of the book influenced the filmPassport to Pimlico 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Passport_to_Pimlico> – but he does stand up 
against a government that is both ludicrous and demanding; insisting on silly 
pageantry while riding roughshod over rights. Chesterton is that oddest of 
combinations, a Conservative radical, and I am sure he would have been 
delighted to know that Michael Collins, the Irish Republican activist, was 
“fanatically attached” to The Napoleon of Notting Hill.

If Lee Had Not Won the Battle of Gettysburg by Winston Churchill 
<http://www.historynet.com/churchill-imagines-how-the-south-won-the-civil-war.htm>
 (1930)

 Churchill won the Nobel prize for literature in 1953, and this essay amply 
proves he deserved to do so. It is a counterfactual within a counterfactual: 
set in a universe where the south won the civil war, the fictitious author is 
imagining what would have happened if the north had won it instead. The failure 
of the south’s secession in this alternate universe leads to an Anglo-American 
hegemony, the earlier emancipation of slaves, Gladstone and Disraeli swapping 
sides and most European dictators marginalised and never getting their clammy 
palms on power. It also has Kaiser Wilhelm founding the European Union.

 A Song of Ice and Fire by George RR Martin (1991, and ongoing)

 The North might remember – as a Scot I can sympathise – but it was the Iron 
Islands demanding their independence that took me by surprise. While the 
Tyrells, Targaryens and the Lannisters cling on to their power, the breakaway 
realms have been far more insistent on their own destiny. Is it a coincidence 
that the areas of Westeros that want to secede have their own religious 
traditions? Martin may have more than one trick up his sleeve in terms of 
geopolitics. Arya asks: “What’s west of Westeros?” Answer: America.

The Yiddish Policemen’s Union by Michael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/09/fiction.raymondchandler> (2007)

 Again, not a secession per se, but a fictional state in constitutional crisis 
nevertheless. Chabon takes the proposition that Alaska might have been the 
Jewish homeland – an idea seriously considered by Roosevelt’s secretary of the 
interior in 1939 – and more than runs with it. His “frozen chosen” are about to 
be returned to the US; a putative Messiah has been definitely murdered; and a 
deep conspiracy might strike at the heart of a sacred site far from the Alaskan 
shores. There is an eerie weariness about our detective, tramping the dirty 
streets, haunted by the uncertainty of where home is and where it might be.
 