
Now more that ever, it is important for every adult to be able to communicate 
well. That is why I am pleased to have been asked to lead the National 
Institute of Adult Continuing Education's independent inquiry into adult and 
youth literacy in England.

It is 10 years since the last government introduced its Skills for Life 
strategy to tackle high levels of functional illiteracy and innumeracy. Since 
2001, real progress has been made to help millions learn the basic skills they 
need.

The Skills for Life strategy placed particular emphasis on helping adults 
achieve qualifications in order to succeed at work. That is an important 
approach and we have to keep up the pressure to raise skill levels in order to 
make our economy more competitive.

But, to use a golfing analogy, this is very much a one-club approach. For a 
significant number of adults the level of functional literacy is so low that 
they are not ready to study for qualifications. We have to improve their 
motivation and attitudes to learning, especially those who had negative 
experiences at school.

What we need is a more varied system. We need to create pluralism of providers 
by using the voluntary sector effectively – in a way that does not subvert the 
work of professionals.

The bar to achieving functional literacy is being raised all the time. It is 
not just about learning the alphabet, it's about being able to understand a 
ballot paper and fill in a census form.

We cannot feel happy that perhaps 5 million adults do not feel comfortable 
dealing with modern life. That has implications for their ability to work and 
function as citizens, to lead fulfilled and happy lives. We have tended, with 
Skills for Life, to emphasise competitiveness, but it is a moral issue as well.

Lord Boswell of Aynho was the minister responsible for adult learning, 1992-95
 