
Leicester, home to the club whose Premier League triumph this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 was widely compared to fiction (a fairytale, an underdog-has-its-day sunny 
movie), has long been a source of comedy and comic writers. And one of these 
stories even involves a miraculous success for the Foxes …

Richard III by William Shakespeare (1590s) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/richard-iii-18.html>

Richard and the play and the Plantagenets come to an end at Bosworth Field, 
which is why the king’s bones were found 528 years later under a car park in
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leicester>, a dozen miles away. If 
you were especially eager to identify a Leicestershire or Midlands literary 
tradition, you might find in the way Shakespeare (from next-door Warwickshire) 
depicts the battle – a bloody farce rather than the sombre twilight of a 
dynasty, with the blundering and betrayed king eventually losing his horse – an 
anticipation of a distinctive vein of beadily observed comedy.

Lucky Jim by Kingsley Amis (1954) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lucky-jim-3.html>

Leicester was the university brilliantly satirised in Amis’s tale of a hapless 
young don, as the novel was inspired by visiting its assistant librarianPhilip 
Larkin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin>. With better luck, the 
city might have had a hat trick of breakthrough 50s works: Larkin (then mainly 
a novelist) could easily have compiled his first collection while there, rather 
than during his next post in Belfast, and chance and Cupid tookJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne> to Derby instead, where he 
wrote and setLook Back in Anger 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/look-back-in-anger.html>.

Entertaining Mr Sloane by Joe Orton (1964) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/entertaining-mr-sloane-2.html>

The story of a landlady and lodger that began a trio of scintillating black 
comedies, none of them portraying his home town – only the earlyFred and Madge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/19/fred-and-madge-review-joe-orton-hope-theatre-london>
 is set there. The connection was reaffirmed, however, when the 1987 Orton 
biopicPrick Up Your Ears <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093776/> was directed by 
Leicester-bornStephen Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears>, 
who happens also to be the father of the two boys Nina looks after inLove, Nina.

Monty Python’s Flying Circus (BBC2, 1969-74) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jun/22/monty-pythons-greatest-skits-best-sketches-o2-shows>

Leicester’s Graham Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/01/graham-chapman-monty-python-star-and-me>
 wasJohn Cleese <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese>’s writing 
partner on the TV series and films, also starring as Arthur inThe Holy Grail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/oct/16/monty-python-and-the-holy-grail-is-the-film-to-watch-this-week-video-review>
 and Brian inLife of Brian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36114/life-of-brian>. Their sketches 
were known for featuring more verbal humour and confrontations than those of
Terry Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/terryjones> and Michael Palin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-palin>; Chapman inter alia 
decisively reshaped theDead Parrot sketch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vuW6tQ0218> and created the Colonel barking 
“silly!”.

The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13 ¾ by Sue Townsend (1982) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-diary-of-adrian-mole-aged-13-3-4.html>

A junior version of the trapped provincial protagonists of 50s novels, Mole 
grows up in Leicester and Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Unusual as a “Chissit” writer who 
didn’t leave, Townsend was living on the estate where Orton grew up when she 
wroteThe Secret Diary. She produced several more Mole books, often offering a 
starkly different perspective on New Labour from fellow LeicestrianAlastair 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>.

Madame Doubtfire by Anne Fine (1987) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/madame-doubtfire.html>

A near-contemporary of Townsend, the children’s writer (later children’s 
laureate) differed from her in moving away from their shared native city. She 
made her mark with this novel about a father who becomes his own kids’ nanny in 
drag, which became theRobin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams> vehicle Mrs Doubtfire 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0107614/>.

A History of the World in 10½ Chapters by Julian Barnes (1989)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/27/julianbarnes>

Leicester-born Barnes’s fifth book ends with an evocation of heaven, where (as 
the LCFC fan recalled in an interview) “Leicester win the cup – and the England 
manager picks the team en bloc for the World Cup and they beat Brazil 4-1 in 
the final”. Otherwise provincial England is a limited presence in his fiction, 
though his birth there may contribute to his affinity with Normandy’sGustave 
Flaubert <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gustaveflaubert>.

Diaries by Alastair Campbell (three volumes, 2010-12) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/diaries-volume-three.html>

Also a novelist, propagandist and overseer of dossiers, the Pepys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/samuelpepys> of the Blair era spent his 
teenage years and more in Leicester and went to school there. Yet 
bagpipe-playing, Burnley-supporting Campbell seems keener on spinning his other 
roots, not his formative decade in the Midlands. Leicester and its citizens may 
of course be quite happy about this.

Love, Nina by Nina Stibbe (2013) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-nina.html>

A one-sided comic correspondence shaped by Leicestershire, as Stibbe came from 
there to be London Review of Books editorMary-Kay Wilmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/24/marykay-wilmers-interview-nicholas-wroe>
’s nanny in north London in the early 80s. Her letters, offering a wry 
provincial perspective on metropolitan ways, are sent to her London-hating 
sister Vic back home. Stibbe’s local loyalties nearly robbed her of the job and 
us of the book, as Wilmers’s boys initially vetoed her for supporting the 
Foxes. An adaptation byNick Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nickhornby> is on BBC1 later this month.
 