
We’ve asked some of our favorite authors to make us a mixtape. This month’s 
installment is from Alexander Chee, whose new novel,Queen of the Night 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17912498-the-queen-of-the-night> (Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt) comes out this week. It’s a novel about “one woman’s rise 
from pioneer girl to circus rider to courtesan to world-renowned diva in 19th 
Century Paris,” so yes, Chee’s mixtape includes a healthy dose of both Beyoncé 
and The Runaways. Put on your headphones, turn up the volume, and read on.

– The editors at Electric Literature

---

Writing a novel about the Second Empire in France, I was wary of being too 
precious, of being the wide-eyed American who is too romantic about the history 
and the legends. I wanted to strip off the layers of schtick and false 
formality that I felt had covered the era in recent popular entertainments. And 
I wanted to forget the weak cinema courtesans I had seen and to try and imagine 
the women I was sure had existed, had found in my sources – confident, bold, 
hilarious and sexy, these women who began with very few gifts but knew that 
some of those gifts were so very very valuable to others. As long as they 
lasted.

I wanted to forget the weak cinema courtesans I had seen and to try and 
imagine the women I was sure had existed

The novel poses as something of a 19th-century tall tale autobiography – the 
confessions of a celebrity, who knew everyone and went everywhere, that becomes 
a picaresque with a woman in the place where a man usually is.She adopts and 
abandons identities, one after the other, in pursuit of a life where she can 
just live as she wants. Parts of it are true and parts, maybe less true, but it 
seems she believes it all, and the fun is in figuring out what is what or maybe 
the fun is just being along for the ride.

My heroine, Lilliet Berne, arrived fully formed but still was elusive, and the 
music here is some of what I used to get closer to her and to the other 
characters as I wrote the novel.

1. In Da Club <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vvSnSd2-DKY> (aka Sexy Lil’ 
Thug), covered by Beyoncé

For summoning the air of beauty that knows itself, knows what it can make men 
and women do, there’s little better

When you hear this, just forget 50 Cent 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qm8PH4xAss>. This is the version that 
matters. In Beyoncé’s hands – “my hair my nails my diamond rings” – it becomes 
a courtesan’s anthem, proud and loud. And the descant she sings against her own 
voice in the recording is perfect. For summoning the air of beauty that knows 
itself, knows what it can make men and women do, there’s little better.

[ed. note – This track isn’t on Spotify. Just watch the video; you were going 
to anyway.]
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvvSnSd2-DKY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvvSnSd2-DKY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvvSnSd2-DKY&media=>
2. Check On It <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1dUDzBdnmI>, Beyoncé

More of the same as above. This is sort of a call-and-response song with 
Beyoncé’s narrator essentially calling out the men looking at her. La Paiva, 
the famous courtesan who once told a young man to come to her with 40,000 
francs and to set it on fire, and that he could have her “as long as it burns” 
... well, if I were writing some as yet unwritten musical about her life, this 
is what she’d sing to him.


3. Waitin’ For The Night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_aXaBxG1ZzY>, The 
Runaways

There’s a night Lilliet runs away with her best friend Euphrosyne, after they 
think they’ve killed a man, and they stay up all night drunk waiting to leave 
on the train. It starts out in high spirits and ends in their decision to be 
friends no matter what – and to run away together. This is the soundtrack of 
them.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
4. When I’m Small <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28tZ-S1LFok>, Phantogram

Lilliet wears a wig and a disguise when she leaves the theater to escape her 
fans. I can imagine this playing as she walks away unknown, headed off to 
supper with the Verdis.

5. Deceptacon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EU1CDSP7FRk>, Le Tigre

This song, quite simply, just kicks so much ass. During the hardest parts of 
writing this novel, I would put it on and immediately feel like I was brave 
enough to do anything I had to – and the boldest parts of the novel come in 
part from writing while, or after, listening to it. Daring isn’t something you 
just have lying around – you have to bring it.

6. The 212 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3Jv9fNPjgk>, Azealia Banks

This song makes me think of Euphrosyne, Lilliet’s troublemaking best friend – 
laughing in the face of danger, a perfect mix of “seen it all”, profanity and 
hilariousness. And to be honest, I’d love to see Azealia do a cancan. I feel 
sure she’d kill it and then bring it back to life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3Jv9fNPjgk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3Jv9fNPjgk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di3Jv9fNPjgk&media=>
7. Nightcall <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MV_3Dpw-BRY>, Kavinsky

I was on an assignment for Departures magazine, in Shanghai 
<http://www.departures.com/lifestyle/food/shanghai-food-scene>. I had been sent 
to profile the restaurant Ultraviolet, an avant garde French restaurant with 14 
seats and two seatings per night. To get there, you met the driver at a meet 
point and he took your whole party to the secret location. There was a former 
beauty queen in the group with two men – she seemed to be escorting them or 
they her, it wasn’t clear – but she was so beautiful she was like a race apart 
from everyone else. This song was playing as we drove through the Bund, which 
is like this lost arrondissement in Shanghai, and so the song forever has for 
me the night, the idea of not knowing where you’re going, and remember the 
incredible power of the beauty queen, so beautiful it was almost supernatural.

8. Disparate Youth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mIMMZQJ1H6E>, Santigold

I love Santigold <https://www.theguardian.com/music/santogold>, she just gives 
me life. But this song in particular, the sly snare line, the keyboard, the spy 
movie guitar vamps – the light melancholy mixed with deep joy in her voice, and 
that line, “a life worth fighting for” – that’s my main character, pure Lilliet.

I watched the video to cast a spell on myself – and I decided it was the spell 
I wanted to cast over the whole novel

9. Pass This On <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKqzL6tYGjw>, The Knife

There aren’t so many story-songs now in pop that make any sense, but this is 
one, all forbidden desire and not knowing who is seducing who, and the 
keyboards that are like Jamaican tin drums alongside the bass line …Once you 
see the video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKqzL6tYGjw>, you can never 
forget it – I watched it to cast a spell on myself and the spell wakes up again 
each time it plays. And I decided it was part of the spell I wanted to cast 
over the whole novel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqKqzL6tYGjw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqKqzL6tYGjw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqKqzL6tYGjw&media=> 