
Darwin, the main city in Australia’s “top end”, is remarkably cosmopolitan, 
its 135,000-strong population made up of more than 60 nationalities. Eating 
options include authentic Indonesian, Malaysian, Thai, Chinese, Japanese, 
Vietnamese, Indian, Sri Lankan and Bangladeshi food, plus several types of 
fusion cuisine.

The best place to sample this is the twice-weekly Mindil Beach Sunset Market 
<http://www.mindil.com.au/>, 3km north-east of the city centre, with almost 200 
stalls. On Thursday and Sunday evenings during the dry season (end of 
April-October), it seems as if most of Darwin is here. The market is a hive of 
didgeridoo players, yoga demonstrations, tarot-card readers, masseurs and 
vendors selling everything from goat’s milk soap to crocodile-skin handbags.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdarwin-street-stalls-market-asian-food-mindil-beach-sunset-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0766ab4449c8bdea2127438e0215dfc7170ea8f%2F0_284_852_852%2F852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20foodie%20traveller%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20Little%20Asia%3A%20Darwin%E2%80%99s%20spiced-up%20street%20food%20vendors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdarwin-street-stalls-market-asian-food-mindil-beach-sunset-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20foodie%20traveller%20%E2%80%A6%20in%20Little%20Asia%3A%20Darwin%E2%80%99s%20spiced-up%20street%20food%20vendors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fdarwin-street-stalls-market-asian-food-mindil-beach-sunset-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0766ab4449c8bdea2127438e0215dfc7170ea8f%2F0_284_852_852%2F852.jpg>
 A cup of Darwin Laksa Co’s finest 
Asian food dominates. Highlights include Borneo Intersection 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Borneo-intersection/670341029747113>, a stall 
serving Indonesian-Malaysian dishes such as jackfruit curry and tempeh chilli. 
It also serves gourmet sushi, which can feature kangaroo, crocodile and 
barramundi, a local fish. Another great stall is Bangladesh Curry Kitchen, 
which produces a fine okra-and-tomato curry.

First-time visitors, however, should head to the Darwin Laksa Co 
<https://www.facebook.com/DarwinLaksaCo/> for the hot, spicy, coconut-rich soup 
that is served throughout south-east Asia and has become a fixture on menus 
across Darwin in recent years. For $10 (£6), you get a steaming bowl of potent 
yellow-orange broth packed with noodles, sliced chicken, pork, beef or prawns, 
and a spongy cube of tofu. After customising the laksa with ground peanuts, 
crispy-fried onions, chopped coriander and chilli sauce, the only thing left to 
do is to join the locals on the beach for the sunset.


 * Shafik Meghji is the co-author of the Rough Guide to Australia
 