
The former Russian spy Andrei Lugovoi has denounced the British inquiry that 
said he was one of the state-directed murderers of dissidentAlexander Litvinenko
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko>, describing it as 
“nonsense”.

Speaking to the BBC, the former KGB bodyguard and FSB secret service agent 
dismissedthe findings of Sir Robert Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
, chairman of the inquiry that said President Vladimir Putin “probably” 
approved the assassination of Litvinenko in London in 2006.

 Lugovoi said: “I’ve seen the nonsense conclusions of your judge who has 
clearly gone mad. I saw nothing new there. I am very sorry that 10 years on 
nothing new has been presented, only invention, supposition, rumours.

“And the fact that such words as ‘possibly’ and ‘probably’ were used in the 
report means there is no proof, nothing concrete against us.”

Key findings: who killed Alexander Litvinenko, how and why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
Lugovoi and a second man, Dmitry Kovtun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
, are believed to have killed Litvinenko by lacing a pot of tea given to him 
during a meeting at the Millennium hotel in central London with polonium-210, a 
lethal radioactive poison.

Both fled back to Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and did 
not return to Britain to give evidence at the year-long inquiry, which returned 
its findings on Thursday.

Lugovoi said the allegations were “an open lie” that were “linked to 
exclusively political goals” intended to strain relations with the Kremlin.

Litvinenko’s widow, Marina, called for all Russian intelligence agents to be 
thrown out of the UK and for further economic sanctions against Moscow. She 
said it would be unthinkable for the British government to ignore the findings 
of the Owen inquiry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmarina-litvinenko-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453388856522%2FKP_1500556_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marina%20Litvinenko%20on%20inquiry%20report%3A%20'It%20sends%20an%20important%20message'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmarina-litvinenko-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marina%20Litvinenko%20on%20inquiry%20report%3A%20%27It%20sends%20an%20important%20message%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmarina-litvinenko-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453388856522%2FKP_1500556_crop_640x360.jpg>
Marina Litvinenko on inquiry report: ‘It sends an important message’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/21/marina-litvinenko-video> 
In a frank letter to David Cameron, Marina Litvinenko called for a firm 
response. She demanded travel bans and sanctions on at least 12 individuals. 
The list included Putin, Nikolai Patrushev, the FSB’s boss at the time, and 
other Russian state entities. She also intends to sue the Russian government in 
the British courts.

After Litvinenko, more sanctions against Russia would be pointless – and 
hypocritical | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/22/litvinenko-sanctions-russia-putin-russian>
The home secretary, Theresa May, has signalled that the UK government had 
little appetite for imposing punitive measures onRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, although she acknowledged that 
Litvinenko’s murder amounted to a “blatant and unacceptable” breach of 
international law. The probable involvement of Putin’s Kremlin came as no 
surprise, May told the Commons.

She told MPs she would be asking Interpol to issue European arrest warrants 
for Lugovoi and Kovtun but proposed no wider action against the Russian state. 
“This was an act of murder that took place in the streets of London and it was 
state-sponsored,” she said. “The conclusion that the Russian state was probably 
involved in the murder is deeply disturbing.”

However, May added that there was a wider national security interest in 
retaining a guarded engagement with Russia, including working with Russia to 
bring about a peace settlement in Syria. She pointed out that it was impossible 
for Britain to seek to impose a travel ban on a head of state, and said Britain 
had no illusions about the state of Russia.

The government’s response also included a Treasury freeze of Lugovoi and 
Kovtun’s assets. But Litvinenko’s legal team said the gesture was largely 
symbolic; her lawyer Ben Emmerson said it would be “craven” of the prime 
minister not to take further action, after what Emmerson described as an act of 
nuclear state terror on the streets of London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-report-britain-toughening-actions-against-russia-says-cameron-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453401596062%2FKP_1500638_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Litvinenko%20report%3A%20Britain%20toughening%20actions%20against%20Russia%2C%20says%20Cameron%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-report-britain-toughening-actions-against-russia-says-cameron-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Litvinenko%20report%3A%20Britain%20toughening%20actions%20against%20Russia%2C%20says%20Cameron%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-report-britain-toughening-actions-against-russia-says-cameron-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453401596062%2FKP_1500638_crop_640x360.jpg>
Litvinenko report: Britain toughening actions against Russia, says Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/21/litvinenko-report-britain-toughening-actions-against-russia-says-cameron-video>
Cameron, speaking from the World Economic Forum in Davos, said the murder was 
a shocking event but said it was necessary to continue to work with Russia. “Do 
we at some level have to go on having some sort of relationship with them 
because we need a solution to the Syria crisis? Yes, we do but we do it with 
clear eyes and a very cold heart.”

Dmitry Peskov, Putin’s press spokesman, dismissed the inquiry as a 
“quasi-investigation”. He ridiculed the judge’s use of “probably” and called 
his report an example of “subtle British humour”.

Putin has already ruled out any possibility of extradition in blunt terms. In 
2007 the then foreign secretary, David Miliband, expelled four Russian 
diplomats in protest.

The Press Association contributed to this report
 