
Brigadier Abdul (not his real name) is a nationalist. Now retired, his army 
career was spent defending the Bangladeshi homeland against the threat of 
invasion - in reality negligible - by India. When he wasn't helping to aim 
Bangladesh's military firepower against India's big battalions, Brigadier Abdul 
was one of the country's blue-helmeted UN peacekeeping forces, of which 
Bangladeshis are justifiably proud.

But Brigadier Abdul's pride in being Bangladeshi is accompanied by a low 
opinion of most of his compatriots. "This is an uncivilized country", he told 
me over lunch in one of Dhaka's fashionable new coffee houses, "not like 
Britain". He told me the country wouldn't improve unless its people are ruled 
with a "firm hand". Like all soldiers and most of the country's urban middle 
class, the brigadier supports Bangladesh's current army-backed government.

On January 11, a state of emergency 
<http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,501070205-1582121,00.html> 
was declared which temporarily banned politics and suspended freedom of speech. 
Since then, Bangladesh has been ruled by an unelected committee of ex-soldiers 
and bureaucrats, led by an economist who recently worked at the World Bank.

Bangladesh's apolitical middle classes think this technocratic regime is an 
improvement on the corruption and escalating political violence they saw in the 
last years of theBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> 
Nationalist Party-led government which ruled since 2002.

For many like Brigadier Abdul, authoritarian rule is justified by their belief 
in the political immaturity of the country's rural masses. In fact though, 
Bangladesh's largely peasant population are anything but irrational. The 
tragedies of Bangladesh's history have happened because its middle-class rulers 
- not its poor -have indulged in unrealistic political fantasies.

In 1947, the area that is now Bangladesh first achieved independence as the 
eastern wing of Pakistan. For economic reasons, the idea of partitioning India 
was more popular in eastern Bengal than in western Punjab, the region that is 
now Pakistan's heartland.

Partition was a tragedy for many. But the creation of a separate state for 
India's Muslims gave east Bengal's peasants the chance of a decent livelihood, 
and freedom from landlords and capitalists who happened to be Hindus. For 
middle class political leaders though, it offered far more, the chance to 
create a secular heaven on earth.

After 1947, the hopes of east Bengalis were quickly dashed. West Pakistanis 
didn't give their Bengali brothers and sisters a fair share of the nation's 
wealth; they squandered aid sent to relieve famine. Not surprisingly, the 
Bengali architects of Pakistan wanted to go their own way. After electoral 
victory for the pro-autonomy Awami League was followed by near-genocidal 
suppression by the Pakistani state, east Bengal fought awar of liberation 
<http://www.bangla2000.com/bangladesh/war.shtm> to become the independent state 
of Bangladesh in 1971.

After the devastation of war politicians and technocrats of all stripes failed 
to manage expectations. Nationalist politicians fromSheikh Mujibur Rahman 
<http://www.albd.org/autoalbd/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=111&Itemid=44>
, Bangladesh's first prime minister, onwards, spoke about creating the "Golden 
Bengal" (sonar Bangla) spoken about in the country's folklore. Mujib was
assassinated 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_Sheikh_Mujibur_Rahman> in 1975 
after creating hopes that could not be met. The country has been locked in the 
same cycle of hope followed by disappointment since.

As a result, politics hasn't been given a chance to succeed. Real power has 
passed to technocrats, unaccountable NGOs and the army. These unelected forces 
still have a colonial mindset, and think they can govern without direct 
involvement from its people.

In the meantime, electoral politics seems to have become the preserve of the 
corrupt. Many politicians have decided that, because they can't create their 
ideal society, politics is just a game they can play to collect the largest 
amount of loot.

Bangladesh is a nation that can't stop dreaming of a better future. Most 
people's dreams are realistic. Their hopes are expressed well by a poem in 
which a peasant asks: "Let my children live by milk and rice". Most 
Bangladeshis want a job, a decent livelihood, basic schooling for their 
children - not "Golden Bengal".

With 6% economic growth, a growing middle class and the slow eradication of 
extreme poverty there's every chance those aims can be realized soon. But that 
will only happen if the mass of the population is allowed a say in the 
management of their own country in the next few years. The biggest danger is 
that the failure to create utopia, and the growing power of the technocrats, 
continues to prevent milk and rice for all.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 