
The steep main street was eerily deserted, as if the entire town had given up 
on the booktown experiment, turned out the lights, and tiptoed away down the 
valley towards the M4.

Finding your way out of Blaenavon is easy: you could do it just by lying down 
outside Wayne Evan's immaculate butcher's shop and starting to roll.

Finding your way to the town, however, is not at all simple. From the M4 it 
would probably be easier to steer a course towards that rival world heritage 
site, Hadrian's Wall.

To get to Blaenavon, you need to look for the pictogram for the Big Pit mining 
museum, which isn't actually in Blaenavon but is near enough. That itself gets 
complicated halfway up the valley when the winding wheel pictogram gets caught 
in a blizzard of symbols for canal bridges and potteries and picnic tables and 
shire horses. If you don't know where you're going, by the time you finally hit 
a signpost reading Blaenavon, it's already far too late.

But all is not lost. At the head of the valley the market town of Abergavenny 
has a one-way ring road with aspirations to grow up and become the M25's bigger 
brother. From this end you need to look for the sign for the little village 
from which there's a sign for the little village from which there's a steep 
beautiful road over the top of a mountain straight to Blaenavon. Again, by the 
time you actually see a sign for Blaenavon, you're probably heading for the 
Brecon Beacons, in the wrong direction.

Last Saturday, though, it was so simple. Once on the mountain road, I just 
followed the pillar of black smoke from a car burning merrily in the hollow 
beyond the cattle grid at the edge of the town. The arsonists, like everyone 
else, had vanished off the face of the earth, but the reason turned out to be 
not despair, nor alien rapture, but the fact thatWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> was playing in the rugby World Cup. 
Hence, only a few poets remained, roaming the streets in search of prey.

Ioan Pearce was recovering from the resounding success of his debut as a 
performance poet at the Workman's Institute. Valley Verse Blaenafon Style, his 
first book of poetry with all the jokes about beer and rugby shirts and sheep 
which no incomer would risk, has just been published with an 18 cert sticker on 
the cover and a "contains adult material" warning on the back.

Apart from the teenage graffiti merchants, Blaenavon has generally been 
watching the booktown experiment with a wry grin and keeping its own counsel. 
Ioan the newsagent is the first to break cover, with a book launch at a poetry 
and music evening at the Workman's Institute.

"Yankee Doodle came to town

Feel'in kinda lonely,

Silly cowboy left behind

His mobile and his pony.

On descent of Blorenge slope,

Bearing wisdom books and hope,

Yankee Doodle, legs now bandy,

Sweaty brow, resembled Gandhi.

With twisted features, looked deranged,

Six months onward, and he ain't changed.

The yankee with the scary looks,

Scared the councillors, scared the crooks."

One bit of that is an outrageous libel: James Hanna, American instigator of it 
all, far from his nice, old bookshop in steamy New Orleans, is freezing.

The organiser behind the book launch, former miner, poet, and MC Malcolm 
Dinnick, was brooding over the event in Former Lipton's cafe, where he was 
Rhiannon's only customer. Tickets were Â£7, which he concluded was probably a 
bit steep: the next night will probably be a fiver. Nevertheless everyone in 
town seemed to have seen Ioan.

Facing a terrifying audience of literary blow-ins and people he went to school 
with, he was extremely nervous. Friends bought him a relaxing pint. And 
another. And another. Although a large party was about to drive over the frosty 
mountains all the way to Hereford to watch bookshop stalwart David Bishop star 
in Lady Windermere's Fan, Ioan's crash from the stage in mid-verse has 
undoubtedly been the highlight of the winter season so far. Every shop in town 
is stocking his book. If the street was deserted, there was plenty of life 
underground.

In neighbouring houses, on the oldest part of the street, Jonathan-the-clock 
and Pete-the-fiddler - and indeed 
Alan-the-university-librarian-up-the-hill-at-Nappyland - are wrestling with DIY 
problems on a scale which would give Changing Rooms a hissy fit.

Pete and his wife Lizzie bought their house, the old Forgehammer Hotel, as a 
shell. Like Jonathan's, it was ruthlessly stripped of every interesting 
feature. Both have now put in beautiful new front doors, which give wholly 
false impressions of the progress within. Jonathan will soon be opening as a 
clockmaker, Nappyland may be reincarnated as a travel bookshop by Easter. Pete 
and Lizzie's dream of a cafe with a cellar antiques centre still has some way 
to go: a roar of anguish from the underworld indicated that Pete and his 
builder had not solved but worsened the sewage leak.

It says something about the new spirit of Blaenavon that Lizzie stood, hands 
clasped, pink cheeks glowing, huddled with her cats in the one warm room in the 
icy ruin of her house, and said passionately: "This is such a fantastic place 
to live - I always dreamed of living somewhere I could walk out my front door 
and into a poetry reading. I love it."

Or as Ioan put it: 

Booktown called Blaenavon

Interesting indeed

Some of us illeturut

Rest of us can't read.
 