
The death on Sunday of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/20/abdelbaset-al-megrahi-lockerbie-bomber-dies>
, the only person to be convicted of the Lockerbie bombing, removes one running 
sore in relations between London and Washington. There was fury in the US when 
the former Libyan intelligence officer was released on compassionate grounds by 
the Scottish government three years ago after being diagnosed with terminal 
cancer. There was outrage when Megrahi returned to Tripoli to a hero's welcome, 
escorted by Saif al-Islam, and renewed charges that it was all part of another 
dirty piece of British realpolitik with the Gaddafi regime, involving lucrative 
oil and gas deals. There is no room in this anger, for the thought that the 
Scottish legal process could act independently of London or that doctors 
genuinely thought that Megrahi had only months to live.

In reality, the death of the man who pleaded his innocence right up until the 
very end changes little. The horrific crime of Pan Am Flight 103 leaves the 
families of the victims as cruelly divided today as they have always been. 
Some, like Frank Duggan, president of the Victims of Pan Am Flight 103, believe 
Megrahi is an unrepentant murderer who is finally seeing justice (presumably in 
hell). And others, just as bereaved, like Jim Swire, who saw Megrahi in Tripoli 
last year, believe evidence yet to be released will prove his innocence.

It is undoubtedly the case that question marks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/feb/27/lockerbie-relatives-urge-inquiry-evidence>
 linger over the evidence provided to the original trial at Camp Zeist in the 
Netherlands: differences were found in the metal coatings and the circuit board 
of the timer fragment used in the bombing and ones supplied to the Libyans; the 
only person to identify Megrahi, the Maltese shopkeeper Tony Gauci, was offered 
a reward of $2m by the US, changed his story many times and his evidence could 
well be unreliable. If the evidence provided at the trial is correct, Megrahi 
carried out the attack using his own passport, staying in his regular hotel, 
using regular flights to and from Malta, and a timer the Libyans believed was 
made exclusively for them. The court's inference that the bomb was transferred 
from a feeder flight from Frankfurt was also challenged by a security guard at 
Heathrow who revealed a break-in to Pan Am's baggage area 17 hours before the 
bombing. Little of this has been tested in court, because Megrahi dropped his 
appeal just before he was released. Other significant doubts about the 
conviction have been raised by the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission 
(SCCRC), which spent three years studying the evidence. Officially the case 
remains open and the lord advocate Frank Mulholland and the FBI chief Robert 
Mueller travelled recently to Tripoli as an advance party for Scottish 
investigators from the Crown Office and Dumfries and Galloway police. Between 
them, and the Libyans who have suffered as much as anyone from Gaddafi's 
regime, one might assume that the truth about the bombing might finally emerge. 
But that hope could be premature.

First, with local elections in Benghazi and national elections in a month's 
time, the Libyan authorities have other things on their minds and Lockerbie is 
nottop of their list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/20/abdelbaset-al-megrahi-lockerbie-libya>
 of Gaddafi's crimes â€“ the massacre at Abu Salim prison is. Second, there is 
little political incentive for either Britain or the US to go where the 
evidence on this leads them. Far better to let the investigation continue to an 
inconclusive end, in the knowledge that there were few members of the Gaddafi 
regime in on the secret and fewer still will be alive to tell the tale.

There are many reasons for delaying an independent judicial inquiry, not least 
the distant prospect of more criminal trials. But if ever a crime of this 
magnitude warranted an independent review it is this. Even if it is eventually 
found that Megrahi's conviction was safe, it would provide a forum for making 
all the evidence public, including the SCCRC's report, and for putting to rest 
all doubts. Nor is there any comfort to be obtained from the $2.76bnLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> paid to the victims' families. In the 
end Megrahi outlived his leader by seven months, but both may well have taken 
the truth of what happened to their grave.
 