
Relatives of the only man convicted of the Lockerbie bombing are to launch a 
fresh bid to clear his name more than two years after his death.

Six immediate members of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi's family have joined forces 
with a number of British relatives of those who died in the atrocity to seek a 
third appeal against his conviction in the Scottish courts, a press conference 
in Glasgow heard.

On Thursday they lodged an application with the Scottish Criminal Cases Review 
Commission (SCCRC), the body that reviews alleged miscarriages of justice in 
criminal cases and has the power to refer a case back to the high court.

Megrahi was the sole person found guilty of the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 
overScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> on 21 December 1988, in 
which 270 people were killed.

The Libyan abandoned a second appeal against his conviction in 2009 after 
being diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer.

He was later released from jail by the Scottish government on compassionate 
grounds and died protesting his innocence in May 2012.

Solicitor Aamer Anwar said that more than a quarter of a century after the 
atrocity "the truth remains elusive".

Speaking in Glasgow, he said: "The case being lodged this morning seeks to 
overturn the conviction ofAbdelbaset al-Megrahi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi> for murder."
 Dr Jim Swire, left, the father of Flora Swire who died in the Lockerbie 
bombing, with solicitor Aamer Anwar. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
The solicitor said the three volumes of papers which form the basis of the new 
application will be delivered to the SCCRC later .

He has been instructed by 24 British relatives of victims and six immediate 
family members of Megrahi who, for safety reasons, are not being identified.

Over the 25 years since the bombing and Megrahi's subsequent conviction, there 
have been many legal twists and turns in the case which have brought his family 
to this point.

Some of the victims' families believe Megrahi was rightly found guilty, and 
prosecutors at the Crown Office in Scotland insist they do not fear scrutiny of 
the conviction and would rigorously defend it.

But others, including some of the British relatives, argue that the Libyan was 
wrongly put behind bars and that the truth about who murdered their loved ones 
remains elusive.

Megrahi was found guilty of mass murder following a trial at Camp Zeist in the 
Netherlands in 2001 and jailed for life with a minimum term of 27 years. He 
lost his first appeal in 2002.

The following year, he applied to the SCCRC for a review of his conviction. An 
investigation costing Â£1.1m by the body led to a finding in June 2007 of six 
grounds where it believed a miscarriage of justice may have occurred.

This decision opened the door to Megrahi's second appeal against his 
conviction. Although a number of hearings had already been held before senior 
appeal judges, he dropped his appeal two days before being released from prison 
in August 2009.

Despite the guilty verdict and Megrahi's decision to drop the appeal, 
campaigners and families of victims are still dealing with the impact, and a 
number of them have been considering another appeal for some time.

Last month, it emerged that a new application for the conviction to be looked 
at again was soon to be handed to the SCCRC by campaigner Jim Swire, 
representing more than 20 British relatives of bombing victims.

Swire, whose 23-year-old daughter Flora died in the bombing, has long held the 
view that Megrahi was not guilty of the atrocity.

The fact that Megrahi's own family has now chosen to take forward a fresh 
appeal bid could boost its chances of getting back to court.

Swire has previously said Megrahi's family could risk their lives by raising 
the prospect of launching a fresh appeal against conviction.

Swire said he wrote to those families whose addresses he still held and asked 
whether they wished to support the application, with 23 responding positively.

Anwar said: "The number is growing on a daily basis. Each name will be added 
to the application to the SCCRC."

The solicitor said he expected to meet with the board next month and it would 
be several months before the body made a decision on whether it will accept the 
case.
 