
The man convicted of the Lockerbie bombing has been found apparently comatose 
in a palatial villa in north Tripoli.

Abdelbaset al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>
 is slipping in and out of a coma and only being kept alive with oxygen and an 
intravenous drip, according to relatives attending him at the property, which 
they said had been ransacked by looters who plundered all his medicine.

Megrahi, last seen at a televised rally in Tripoli last month alongside 
Muammar Gaddafi, was tracked down by CNN international correspondent Nic 
Robertson."He appears to be a shell of the man that he was, far sicker than he 
appeared before â€¦ at death's door," Robertson said.

Megrahi's son, Khaled, told the broadcaster: "There is no doctor, there is 
nobody to ask and we don't have a phone line to call anybody."

Megrahi was discovered as the Libyan rebels' National Transitional Council 
(NTC) ruled out extraditing him to Britain. The justice minister, Mohammed 
al-Alagi, said: "We will not give any Libyan citizen to the west. Megrahi has 
already been judged once and he will not be judged again. We do not hand over 
Libyan citizens. Gaddafi does."

Megrahi is the only man convicted over the December 1988 bombing of Pan Am 
flight 103, which killed 270 people, mostly Americans, when it exploded over 
the Scottish town of Lockerbie. He was freed on 20 August 2009, after prison 
doctors said he had prostate cancer and probably had only three months to live. 
East Renfrewshire council, which received regular updates on Megrahi's 
condition from the Gaddafi regime, had been trying to locate him after the 
rebels' captured the Libyan capital.

The Scottish government and East Renfrewshire council issued a joint statement 
saying there had been contact through Megrahi's family over the weekend.

They said: "There was no evidence of a breach of his licence conditions, and 
his medical condition is consistent with someone suffering from terminal 
prostate cancer. Speculation about Megrahi in recent days has been unhelpful, 
unnecessary and indeed ill-informed."

"As has always been said, Al Megrahi is dying of a terminal disease, and 
matters regarding his medical condition should really be left there.

"It is in no-one's interest for there to be a running commentary on either Mr 
Al-Megrahi's medical condition or location, and we have no intention of 
providing one.

"Any change in Al-Megrahi's circumstances would be a matter for discussion 
with the National Transitional Council as the legitimate governing authority in
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>."

The NTC's comments on extradition are also an apparent blow to British hopes 
of putting on trial the suspected killer of Yvonne Fletcher, the police officer 
shot dead in 1984 outside the Libyan embassy.Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> Yard has identified a former Libyan 
diplomat as the prime suspect.

The foreign secretary, William Hague, welcomed a pledge by the NTC chairman, 
Mustafa Abdel Jalil, to "co-operate fully" with extradition. But the justice 
minister's comments appear to cast doubt on the possibility.

No one has been prosecuted over the murder of WC Fletcher. But it has emerged 
that a witness saw Abdulmagid Salah Ameri, then a junior diplomat, firing a gun 
from inside the building. Libya has an extradition agreement with the UK, but 
it covers foreign suspects rather than Libyan nationals.
 