
One of the oddest things about Lollapalooza isn't that at times it seems it'd 
be quicker to leave the site and use the restrooms in the hotel across the road 
than it would be to wait in line – which I only did once, for the record. It's 
the fact that armed police officers stroll about the grounds of Grant Park, 
hands casually resting on their guns, evidently well prepared for the 
possibility of serious combat duringCat Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cat-power>'s set later in the evening.

Pistol-packing cops aside, there's been a tonne of UK bands on the bill this 
weekend, but the final day of the festival seems especially loaded with Brits. 
The baby-facedPalma Violets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/17/new-band-palma-violets> open 
their lunchtime set with a tuneful concession to the native culture, jangling 
their way through the Rivieras surf classicCalifornia Sun 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yy57Xdk9u0o>, before ploughing into their own 
endearingly haywire garage racket.

Like Lonnie Donegan, but with a fanbase made up of hotpanted and luminous tank 
top-wearing teens,Jake Bugg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jake-bugg>'s 
trad strumming finally seems to be taking off in the States. Later, a cover of 
Neil Young's Hey Hey, My My, but delivered in a Nottingham accent, shows that 
dabbling in the heavier side of roots rock rather suits him. The Brit reign 
continues apace with blissed out balladry and tipsy tropicalia from London's
Lianne La Havas <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lianne-la-havas>, who 
politely asks the crowd to shake their booties for the title track of her debut 
album Is Your Love Big Enough. Equally well-mannered is Alex Trimble ofTwo Door 
Cinema Club <https://www.theguardian.com/music/two-door-cinema-club>. In a 
sharp suit and brandishing a wine glass, he seems dressed for an Oxbridge May 
Ball, though the band's excessive use of dry ice makes things seem more like a 
fire safety demonstration gone awry. Attracting an audience just as gigantic as 
the chirpy Northern Irish trio, areAlt-J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> with their toothsome electronica, 
which covertly masquerades as studied, folk-rooted indie. Their meaty, 
off-kilter tunes play out in the same time slot asthe Vaccines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-vaccines>' denim-clad riffs and pop 
licks, which fuse together perfectly in Teenage Icon, a song that sees frontman 
Justin Young tossing his bobbed hair so roughly we're worried about whiplash.

Grizzly Bear <https://www.theguardian.com/music/grizzly-bear> and Beach House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/07/new-band-beach-house>'s wafty 
sonic swoons might be stroking the knackered souls of a few final-day 
casualties, but their subdued style isn't the most rowdy of warm-ups for the 
Cure. As the temperature drops for the first time this whole weekend and the 
skies turn a fitting grey, it seems like nature is getting into the spirit of 
things, at least. Making no bones about immediately offering up a run of hits – 
including Pictures of You, Lullaby, Inbetween Days, Just Like Heaven and 
Lovesong – in a magnificent first half-hour of a two-hour show, Robert Smith's 
ultra-expressive face gives us the most passion and raw emotion from any 
performer we've seen over the past three days. In fact, we kind of feel like we 
should be giving him a hug – that is, until we sneak off to check up on Cat 
Power, just in case that gun battle has materialised.

Forget all you've heard about her sometimes shaky performances: tonight the US 
singer-songwriter turns in a blinder of a show, her stunning vocals ramping up 
from honeyed to hypnotic on a devastating Metal Heart. "This is an old song 
from when I was a young lady," she says poetically, by way of introduction. 
We'd try to blame the ammonia smell from the nearby toilets for the fact that 
our eyes begin to prick with tears during the outstanding first 30 seconds of 
the song, but that would be a filthy lie. A droning, free-blues take on I Don't 
Blame You also cuts to the emotional quick, and I leave feeling like I've just 
had a harrowing yet life-affirming heart to heart with an old friend – which, 
it transpires, is actually one of the best ways to finish a festival. Try it 
sometime.
 