
London’s men’s fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-collections-men> week began on 
Friday, but unusually for the four-day event, one of the key talking points is 
an off-schedule womenswear show: John Galliano’s first collection forMaison 
Martin Margiela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/oct/06/john-galliano-joins-martin-margiela-a-second-chance-for-fashions-most-controversial-designer>
, which is being shown on Monday.

There is no official word from Margiela on why the designer is staging such a 
high profile presentation during the London Collections: Men (LC:M) timetable, 
nor why it is showing couture womenswear in London – traditionally the preserve 
of couture week, which takes place later in January, in Paris.

In any case, the show will be the biggest step yet in Galliano’s career 
rehabilitation, coming almost four years after he was sacked from Dior after 
being recordeddelivering an anti-Semitic rant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jun/22/racist-antisemitic-rant-john-galliano-france>
 in a Paris bar. Though the 54-year-old designer made brief returns to the 
limelight after his fall from grace,designing a one-off collection for Oscar de 
la Renta last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/jan/18/john-galliano-return-fashion-oscar-renta>
, his appointment at Margiela marks a more permanent comeback.

Though some have welcomed Galliano’s return – Anna Wintour gave an emotional 
speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/dec/01/british-fashion-awards-2014-erdem-moralioglu-takes-womenswear-prize>
 in his honour at the British Fashion Awards last month – others are less 
enthusiastic.

Wherever they stand, fashion spectators will be curious to see what the 
unlikely combination of Margiela, a brand famous for its anonymity, and 
Galliano, a swaggering rock star of a designer, will look like.

There is plenty to talk about on the official LC:M schedule, too, with the 
booming menswear pound (the men’s fashion market grew by 18% to £12.9bn between 
2008 and 2013, according to Mintel) reflected in a flourishing calendar of 32 
catwalk shows and 37 presentations.

The schedule has been extended to four days, rather than three, with brands 
such as Coach and Aquascutum Men’s showing for the first time. Other names to 
watch include design giants Burberry,Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>, Paul Smith and 
Moschino, as well as critics’ favourites Christopher Raeburn and Craig Green.

LC:M’s opening show, Topman Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/09/london-collections-men-menswear-fashion>
, is always one of the buzziest, and this season didn’t disappoint. With 
influences ranging from the Bay City Rollers to motorcross, it was about 1970s 
glamour and rock’n’roll.

Models wore their hair in Rod Stewart-style mullets while the starry front row 
– Dermot O’Leary, Tinie Tempah, David Gandy,Nick Grimshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nick-grimshaw>, Andrew Scott (a.k.a. 
Sherlock’s Moriarty) and Douglas Booth – tapped their feet to The Osmonds’ 
Crazy Horses.

Clothes were cut close and covered in tartan patches, with stand out pieces 
including double-breasted suits and denim boilersuits. Tight polo necks, worn 
as layers, and smart little denim jackets looked likely to be commercial hits. 
Trousers featured kick flares, their shortened hems showing a hint of ankle.

Most of the outerwear was strokeable and gargantuan: there were over-sized 
shaggy sheepskins in black, navy and brown, a colour scheme that continued into 
fuzzy hooded coats and colourful furs.

Though the Arcadia-owned high street brand is a reliable barometer of what 
real twenty-somethings will want to wear this time next year, Topman creative 
director Gordon Richardson said he thought it would “take a long time” until 
the bulk of men swapped their skinny jeans for flares.

“But the first time we launched skinny jeans at Topman they didn’t take off – 
that took time – and now they are everywhere.” Flares, he believes, will have 
their time too, a process the Topman design team is edging on each season. 
After all, inspiring men to crave the new is the menswear industry’s job.
 