
When I was younger, a visit to London always charged my soul with a sense that 
anything was possible and that all could be overcome through pluck, 
determination and defiance in the face of insurmountable odds. I guess I felt 
that way because I was first introduced toLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> during the second world war.

Back then the city behaved like the capital of a great nation should during a 
time of conflict: with dignity and perseverance. London stood as a beacon of 
hope to all of its inhabitants and citizens of Britain. Both young and old felt 
connected to London’s destiny and that meant everyone believed they were an 
integral part of this dynamic city. Everyone put their shoulder to the wheel to 
help London survive those dark days.

Time has moved on and London in 2016 is not threatened by Hitler’s bombs. But 
other threats do imperil this city’s reputation as a metropolis which can be 
considered both a beacon for excellence and an inclusive home to all its 
residents regardless of wealth, ability or age. London – like the world – has 
become more polarised by wealth and status than it has since the days of my 
boyhood in the late 1920s and 30s. Now London venerates youth and elitism 
rather than the common-sense wisdom that can be acquired through a long life.

Moreover, London has lost its sense of compassion when it comes to those who 
are most vulnerable, especially the old who are considered past their prime and 
perhaps even too costly a burden for a place that houses more millionaires per 
mile than any other city in the world. It is probably why London has become a 
lonely desert for the elderly if they do not belong to the moneyed class of the 
1%.

Austerity has diminished the opportunity of the young and shortened the lives 
of the old

Each time now when I return to London I feel my age – and feel the same 
loneliness that many seniors now endure in cities flung far and wide across 
Britain. Everything just a gets a little harder as you age and London has 
become more difficult for me to navigate. Old age has become like an advancing 
rip tide that separates me from so much of London that once gave me so much 
happiness.

At 93, my legs don’t work as well as they did when I was in my late 80s and 
could still roam across the city via the tube, like a commuter intent on 
travelling to many destinations during the day and returning to my residence at 
night for a drink in a familiar local. Now for long jaunts I must ride in a 
black cab confined to roads blocked like the arteries of a fast food hedonist. 
Sometimes, if I have an assistant, I can move along the pavements to my 
appointments or enjoy a park made splendid by the warmth of the summer sun, in 
a transport wheelchair that trundles against the afternoon crush of pedestrians 
impatient for speed and right of way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Flondon-old-people-no-past-future-elderly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2552c2b1c4a9f6b306f7a93cf59a44df0e9c4c4%2F0_72_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20without%20old%20people%20is%20just%20a%20factory%20floor%2C%20with%20no%20past%20and%20no%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Flondon-old-people-no-past-future-elderly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20without%20old%20people%20is%20just%20a%20factory%20floor%2C%20with%20no%20past%20and%20no%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Flondon-old-people-no-past-future-elderly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2552c2b1c4a9f6b306f7a93cf59a44df0e9c4c4%2F0_72_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Navigating the city in a wheelchair can be difficult on pavements crowded with 
people. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
However, outside of the tourist traps and far away from the haunts of the 
well-to-do, I find pavements broken and roads difficult to cross. Moreover, 
adequate housing for anyone on a fixed income – whether it’s benefits, a flat 
wage or a pension – is in short supply because Boris Johnson’s theory that the 
market will provide, if gently coaxed, has yielded only golden eggs for 
developers.

London is one of the richest cities in the world – where 80 of Britain’s 117 
billionaires live in an opulence that would put Mayan kings to shame – and yet 
every year more than 1,000 people over the age of 65 die due to cold weather 
and improper lodgings. Moreover, the life expectancy for a pensioner can vary 
by close to eight years between London’s richest and poorest borough,according 
to Age UK London 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/london/about-age-uk-london/media-centre/key-stats/>. 

Improving with age? How city design is adapting to older populations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/25/improving-with-age-how-city-design-is-adapting-to-older-populations>
It seems abundantly clear that in London, austerity has diminished the 
opportunity of the young and shortened the lives of the old. Even libraries – 
the life blood of any community – have been savagely cut in many London 
boroughs leaving senior citizens with one less free space to gather, learn and 
socialise. London may be a great city to live in if you are an elderly member 
of the elite. But for everyone else it is a trap where upon retirement you must 
sell your home, if you are lucky enough to own, and move on to greener pastures 
– or if you are a renter with few options and many connections to this city, 
you must remain like the poor of yesteryear, watching a pension that might do 
you well in Halifax only stretched to the third week of the month.

I am always painfully reminded that there is little dignity in old age because 
as the sun begins to set on our lives the body begins to decay. But I am more 
disheartened when I encounter impediments set by business or government against 
the elderly or those with mobility issues. London is sometimes the cruellest of 
cities for the old because in the endless need of its residents to raise brass 
to keep the fires lit, there is no patience for the elderly or those who need 
special attention. Not long ago I visited a pub, near the Wallace Collection, 
where I was told that even though I was sitting in a wheelchair I would have to 
walk up many flights of stairs if I wanted a sandwich because they would not 
bring it to me on either the patio or the ground floor bar.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwe-welcomed-refugees-in-1945-we-cant-abandon-them-today-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20welcomed%20refugees%20in%201945.%20We%20can't%20abandon%20them%20today%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwe-welcomed-refugees-in-1945-we-cant-abandon-them-today-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20welcomed%20refugees%20in%201945.%20We%20can%27t%20abandon%20them%20today%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwe-welcomed-refugees-in-1945-we-cant-abandon-them-today-video&media=>
We welcomed refugees in 1945. We can’t abandon them today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/mar/23/we-welcomed-refugees-in-1945-we-cant-abandon-them-today-video>
Sadly this arrogance of youth and indifference to impecunious old age inhabits 
all facets of London and unless this changes the city will become more hostile 
to seniors who are not rich. We have to remember that old people like me, like 
your parents, grandparents, favourite teachers, first bosses make communities 
more vibrant, more civilised and more alive because we are not only this 
country’s history – we areyour future.


London may become a city shorn of any diversity because extreme wealth will 
drive all those out but the rich and those who serve them. It would be a great 
tragedy if London lost its elderly not through the natural passage of time but 
through the brute ugliness of a one-sided economy. We have to remember that 
London without old people isn’t a city, it’s just a factory floor, a place 
where you work and shop, with no history, no past or future, just an endless 
present tense in pursuit of money.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 