
We didn’t really need a movie based on the HBO show Looking 
<http://www.hbo.com/looking>. When the 30-minute drama was canceled after its 
second season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/26/looking-hbo-cancel-gap-gay-culture>
 last March, what would eventually be the series finally wrapped things up 
rather nicely. Patrick (Jonathan Groff) had made a mess of his 
affair-turned-relationship with his boss Kevin (Russell Tovey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/01/russell-tovey-looking-banished-interview>
) and sat down in the barber chair of his on-again-off-again lover Richie (Raúl 
Castillo) for a cut. “Are you ready?” Richie asked. Patrick said he was just 
before the final credits rolled.

It was the sort of ending that we’ve come to expect thanks to shows like The 
Sopranos concluding in a similarly ambiguous fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/15/sopranos-finale-david-chase-explanation>
. The question and the response were pretty much perfect for the show that was 
often about Patrick and his two best friends, Dom (Murray Bartlett) and Agustín 
(Frankie J Alvarez), trying to figure out whether they were ready for adulthood 
and serious relationships.

Andrew Haigh on Looking: 'Melancholy exists in most people's lives'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/19/andrew-haigh-looking-melancholy-exists-peoples-lives>
By the final episode Patrick wasn’t the only one who was ready to be a 
grownup. Dom finally got out of his co-dependent relationship with Doris 
(Lauren Weedman) and opened his own restaurant – well, a window that serves 
food. Agustín stopped sleeping with rent boys, settled down with a nice man and 
got a real job instead of struggling to be an artist. Sure, no one wanted the 
show to end, especially creator Michael Lannan and directorAndrew Haigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/09/andrew-haigh-interview-45-hours>, 
but we left everyone in a good place.

That’s what makes the Looking movie, a one-time, 84-minute special to wrap up 
the series, so curious. It’s as if Lannan and Haigh had to go out of their way 
to find some drama. The whole movie takes place over the course of a weekend 
when Patrick returns to San Francisco for a wedding after moving back to his 
hometown of Denver. The blanks between him sitting in Ricky’s chair to leaving 
town altogether are never adequately filled in. Not much happens in the movie, 
but nothing really ever happened onLooking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/looking>. Expecting an action-packed 
show in a bit like watching Frozen and being surprised to hear Let It Go.

The movie sees its characters hanging around, celebrating and enjoying each 
other’s company one more time. But the real magic, as always, is in the 
dialogue, the lengthy discussions between the friends about their place in this 
big gay world. Almost invariably this happens over food. If this show wasn’t 
called Looking, it should have been called Heart to Hearts over Chinese Takeout 
Leftovers.

A number of these conversations are poignant and very well observed. Dom and 
Patrick, for instance, lie in bed together and try to figure out if they were 
meant to end up as a couple all along. There’s also a wonderful exchange 
between Patrick and the justice of the peace (the legendaryTyne Daly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/dec/07/cagney-lacey-sharon-gless-tyne-daly>
 from Cagney & Lacey) at the wedding where they discuss what makes marriage 
work and if she can tell if a person is ready when they say their vows.

Looking gets to the heart of issues that no other show on television would 
bother to tackle. It examines what gay relationships mean for a generation of 
men who never thought they’d have the chance to get married. It questions the 
outsider status of gay culture now that it has been embraced by the mainstream. 
It wonders how our lives can be successful when they turn out to be nothing at 
all like we imagined. When Looking is at its best, it justifies the existence 
of this movie, even if we thought we didn’t need one.
 