
The first time I covered Cannes, I became incredibly self-conscious about my 
right shoulder.

Before screenings or at film festival parties, the person with whom I was 
locked in conversation would become fixated on that particular, not overly 
impressive, part of my body. They would politely nod and indulge in inane small 
talk as we sipped rosé, but their gaze, often wistful and filled with 
surprising sadness, would always return to the same spot.

I’d watch as their expression of disappointment turned to desperation, before 
eventually becoming excited relief which coincided with a rushed goodbye. When 
I finally followed one such exit, I learned that beyond my apparently 
entrancing shoulder was a diamond-encrusted treasure trove of more important, 
more impressive and more impeccably dressed figures who could offer something 
other than my tipsy anecdotes about recently watched films.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d79b03bfb7cc95b627fb3b4a4eba31d465c34a6%2F0_10_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Looking%20over%20one's%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Looking%20over%20one%27s%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d79b03bfb7cc95b627fb3b4a4eba31d465c34a6%2F0_10_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Press photographers work on the red carpet at a screening in Cannes 
Photograph: Jean-Paul Pelissier/Reuters 

It’s easy to label such behaviour as vapid but in Cannes, it’s just business. 
Reporting for the Guardian from the festival this year, the situation is 
reliably familiar.

Earlier this week I went to a party held by the Hollywood Foreign Press 
Association, the mysterious organisation that votes for theGolden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes>. A glamorous female actor, 
loyal make-up artist in tow, approached and gave me the “are you worth my 
time?” test, coupled with a cursory check of my yellow, slightly dusty trainers.

She was there to “work”, she explained. Was she in a film? No. But this party, 
like many, was filled with producers and A-listers, getting progressively drunk 
on champagne, who could conceivably provide her with roles – or at least the 
vague promise of such.


I was as useful as roadkill.

While this happens at all film festivals, at Cannes there’s an added level of 
hierarchy. Even within the press contingent, there’s a very strict pecking 
order. When you register, you’re handed a pass that’s colour-coded to match 
your importance – or total worthlessness. If you have a white badge, you’re 
allowed into screenings first; next come pink badges with a dot; then pink 
without a dot; then blue and finally yellow.


 The colour coding gives you an idea of just where you fit into both the 
festival and the world in general. (My badge is pink.) It also gives members of 
staff a heads-up on exactly how snippy they should be to you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1963c93d3fa95cb2d153b92e17d6a414bbd50f15%2F0_0_750_937%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Looking%20over%20one's%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Looking%20over%20one%27s%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1963c93d3fa95cb2d153b92e17d6a414bbd50f15%2F0_0_750_937%2F750.jpg>
 Say cheesy … photographers at Cannes take a fish-eye selfie Photograph: Ming 
Yeung/Getty 
Once inside the screening, you’re unwillingly pitched into the centre of a 
competition to find the nation most unaware of basic cinema etiquette. I’m not 
just talking idle chatter and phone usage: last year, a guy was caught on 
camera cutting his toenails mid-film.

When I first found out, I was disgusted. And then, as thefestival progressed 
and I became less in touch with my sanity, I started to empathise.

There’s something inherently abnormal about spending up to eight hours a day 
in the darkness of a cinema without any hydration (the festival’s strict regime 
means that no liquids can be brought into a screening). As the two-week 
festival progresses, your awareness of seemingly obvious things, such as which 
day of the week it is and whether it is weird to cut your toenails in public, 
becomes foggy.

Cannes audiences are also notoriously over-emphatic when it comes to voicing 
their opinions on films. They love to cheer but they love to boo even more, 
knowing that this petty response will often lead to a story in itself. This 
year, two films –American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
, Andrea Arnold’s divisive drama about reckless teens in America, andPersonal 
Shopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
, a thriller where Kristen Stewart chats to ghosts – were both met with 
childish jeers as the end credits began to roll.

It often feels like there’s little room for half-measures in Cannes. You have 
to either love or hate a film in an instant, tweeting your response as soon as 
you’ve left the cinema – not forgetting a hashtag to ensure maximum retweets.

What makes the frenzy somewhat more palatable is the quality of films on show. 
The 2016 selection has been stronger than in recent years, with personal 
standouts includingLoving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
, a drama about an illegal interracial marriage in the 50s from theTake Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/30/michael-shannon-hard-sleeping-night>
 director Jeff Nichols;The Handmaiden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/the-handmaiden-review-park-chan-wooks-lurid-lesbian-potboiler-simmers-with-sexual-tension>
, a twisty thriller fromOldboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2004/oct/15/2>’s Park Chan-wook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/park-chan-wook> ; and the aforementioned 
American Honey. The latter film helped to enforce another key rule: don’t trust 
the boos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4b9c097b6ae7a0ac3a18fe2a174242ec8f4e92%2F0_0_900_1200%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Looking%20over%20one's%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Looking%20over%20one%27s%20shoulder%3A%20how%20to%20survive%20the%20Cannes%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flooking-over-ones-shoulder-guide-to-cannes-film-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad4b9c097b6ae7a0ac3a18fe2a174242ec8f4e92%2F0_0_900_1200%2F900.jpg>
 Attack of the Killer B-movies – one of the films on offer at the marché 
Photograph: PR 
On the lower level of the Palais des Festivals et des Congrès, the convention 
centre that hosts the festival, beneath the high-profile screenings and behind 
the glitzy premieres, lies themarché. The “market” is the other side of the 
festival, the unfairly maligned underbelly where movies are pitched and deals 
are made.

This year has brought with it some major announcements, such as The Irishman 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/martin-scorsese-robert-de-niro-al-pacino-the-irishman-joe-pesci-i-heard-you-paint-houses-a7037341.html>
, Martin Scorsese’s $50m (£35m) return to the gangster sub-genre, but it’s also 
delivered its usual share of easily ridiculed B-movies. At stall after stall, 
manned by eager staff, companies sell films such asAttack of the Killer Donuts 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4480398/> and Selfie from Hell 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5253246/>. They’re also suspicious that giggling 
journalists like me are there just to take smartphone snaps of the silliest 
titles.

But, while many circulate outside the Palais begging for premiere tickets so 
they can be in the same breathing space asKristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> (a strategy that pays off 
surprisingly often), the marché is a much more accurate representation of what 
Cannes is really all about.

Beyond the glamour, free rosé and my right shoulder, there’s “work” to be done.

 