
In March, after an all-night session, the Senate passed significant changes to 
the way senators are elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/marathon-senate-debate-ends-with-bill-on-voting-changes-passing-36-votes-to-23>
. This legislation required a whole new system for counting Senate ballots and 
it needed to be done fast, with the election less than four months away.

Under the old Senate voting system, most voters didn’t mark their own 
preferences. They put a 1 in a box for the party of their choice and 
preferences flowed according to the registered party’s ticket. Only a small 
number of voters chose their own preferences, voting below the line. These 
votes made up about 3.5% of the total in 2013.

 The 96.5% of ballots that were simply marked with a 1 were easy to count. 
Pile up the votes for each party, count how many votes are in each pile, record 
the total. Below-the-line votes needed to be transported to a central location 
in each state. Each ballot had to be individually entered in a computer 
including a preference for every candidate on the ballot. In 2013 there were 
110 candidates in New South Wales.

Why the rush? In defence of Australia's slow election count
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/11/why-the-rush-in-defence-of-australias-slow-election-count>
All the below-the-line preference data was then combined with the registered 
preferences for above-the-line votes and fed into a computer program that 
distributed the preferences and determined who would be elected.

All that changed with the new voting system. Voters instead mark their own 
preferences above the line by numbering at least six preferences, if they 
follow the ballot paper instructions. All these preferences are unique and need 
to be entered into the system individually.

The new system has also been designed to ensure that it is clear where ballot 
papers are at all times after 1,370 ballot paperswent missing during the 
recount of the 2013 West Australian Senate election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/06/missing-wa-senate-votes-lax-security>
. There are now detailed systems to track where each ballot goes and barcoded 
seals on each box of ballot papers to prevent tampering.

Ballot papers were first counted on election night. They were piled up 
according to the party who received the first preference and this total was 
reported. These ballots are then sealed up and sent to the central office in 
each state.

In a room with a series of large printer-scanners that have been modified to 
take in massive Senate ballot papers, boxes are opened one by one, and if 
everything goes to plan the box is only open for 16 minutes before it is sealed 
up and put back into storage.

The rest of a count takes place on a digital copy of the ballot paper. The 
computer system can detect where there are marks on the ballot and will read 
each handwritten number. There are also humans checking each mark and making 
their own decision about what the ballot says – two people will do this for 
each ballot.

Where the computer and the humans don’t agree a ballot can be referred up to 
supervisors and ultimately to Australian Electoral Commission staff, who make a 
final decision.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWHx4f1lddaQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWHx4f1lddaQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWHx4f1lddaQ&media=>
All of these processes are new. It’s the first time ballot papers are being 
scanned at a federal level and the scale of ballot papers that need to be 
entered is much greater than at past elections.

Using computers to count the votes is not new, however there has been 
controversy over how transparent these computerised processes are.

The AEC’s Easy Count software, which is used to distribute the preferences, is 
private software, not auditable by experts outside of the AEC. Previous 
requests for the code under freedom-of-information laws have beenrejected 
<https://easycount.mjec.net/> and the secrecy of the code has been criticised 
<http://www.9news.com.au/national/2016/06/15/12/47/let-us-test-voting-code-say-academics>
.

 There have also been concerns raised about how difficult it is to check that 
voting data reflects what is actually on the ballot paper.Some have suggested 
<https://theconversation.com/is-the-new-senate-vote-capture-system-as-risky-as-electronic-voting-62436>
 that a random sample of ballots, checked manually against the data recorded in 
the system, would help ensure that the result is accurate.

Once the election is concluded, the AEC does release the full dataset of every 
preference on every ballot, which will be particularly interesting in 
understanding preference flows under the new voting system. This can be used to 
verify that the count has been conducted accurately but it would be useful to 
get this information sooner.

At Australian Capital Territory elections, a report is released each night of 
the count that calculates how preferences would flow, and who would be elected, 
if the count was to stop with those ballots counted so far. Such a system has 
not previously been needed in the Senate, because most votes flowed according 
to pre-registered tickets but it would be much more useful now.

How Lisa Singh and Richard Colbeck used personal appeal against party rankings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/09/labor-lisa-singh-liberal-richard-colbeck-senate-voting-below-the-line-election-tasmania>
If preference data were released during the count this would also make it 
possible to find any possible errors in the data before the result was declared.

Such an approach would also give a lot more transparency about how much 
progress has been made in the Senate count. It is very difficult right now to 
know how many votes have been scanned and how many votes are waiting to be 
counted.

The Senate counting process is impressive but it is a complex system and a bit 
more transparency about the count would help give confidence that the result is 
accurate.
 