
Lord Coe <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-coe> has called on 
anti-doping authorities to "get tough" on coaches, agents and physios, 
insisting that the fight against drug cheats in track and field should not only 
focus on athletes.

The World Anti-Doping Agency has compiled a new code, which could come into 
effect by 2015 if ratified when its foundation board meets in Johannesburg this 
November, stating that an athlete's entourage can also be punished should the 
individual test positive for a banned substance.

Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> has limited powers to punish 
coaches, agents and physios as it operates a policy of strict liability, where 
the athlete is responsible for any illegal substance found in their body, 
whether consumed intentionally or not.

However, the American Tyson Gay, who along with five Jamaican sprinters has 
recently tested positive for a banned substance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/14/tyson-gay-tests-positive-banned-substance>
, claimed he was "let down" after putting his trust in someone else. Asafa 
Powell, one of the Jamaicans implicated and formerly the fastest man in the 
world, has also denied any intent to cheat.

The proposed new Wada code 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wada-ama.org%2FDocuments%2FWorld_Anti-Doping_Program%2FWADP-The-Code%2FCode_Review%2FCode%2520Review%25202015%2FWADC-2015-draft-version-3.0-Overview.pdf&ei=Y_nvUZfRKOmd0wWOiIGgDA&usg=AFQjCNGjGBgBRBotSOD8S5vLx89F3x1nGQ&sig2=DKsoq9HSBQxPQMxOQvUGRg&bvm=bv.49641647,d.d2k&cad=rja>
 includes amendments "to better reach athlete support personnel who are 
involved in doping", and Lord Coe believes athletes' entourages need to come 
under tougher scrutiny.

"Let's get tough with physios, let's get tough with coaches, let's get tough 
with managers and agents because they're all part of this landscape," he said. 
"This isn't just something that we should be entirely focusing on the athlete, 
important as they are and responsible for everything they consume or ingest. It 
is really important this is a fight that we don't lose and it's a fight that we 
can win."

Lord Coe, who was speaking before the Anniversary Games, which begin on Friday 
at the Olympic Stadium in London, also said that the flurry of recent positive 
tests is a sign that more cheats are being caught. "I would rather take the hit 
now and move towards a sport that has credibility and trust, than sit here in 
10 years' time when everybody thinks they're watching American wrestling – they 
know it's fake and frankly they don't care.

"The issues that we're dealing with are not coincidental or random – it is 
because we've stepped up the testing, the technology is better, the testing is 
more intelligent and intuitive and we know who we're actually looking at.

"When you do the right thing, you have to recognise occasionally that is comes 
with a competitive disadvantage and the competitive disadvantage for doing the 
right thing in the last year in track and field has been the reputation, that 
you run the risk of hitting hard when you weed out cheats."

Powell, who tested positive for the banned stimulant oxilofrine at Jamaica's 
national trials in June, has been banned for the world championships in Moscow 
this summer but on Wednesday vowed to come back stronger after his suspension.

"I have never thought about [retiring]," Powell told the Jamaican Gleaner 
<http://jamaica-gleaner.com/gleaner/20130724/lead/lead1.html>. "I was just 
shocked by the news. I have been thinking a lot but never once thought about 
giving up.

"I am still training. I consider this an off year, but I am still working 
hard, training, going to the gym almost every day. There is a world 
championships in two years' time again and then the Olympics. So there is a lot 
to look forward to."

British Athletics on Wednesday extended its broadcasting partnership with the 
BBC, ensuring that athletics events will continue to be shown on terrestrial 
television until 2020. The UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> chief executive, Niels de Vos, 
also outlined the organisation's strategy until 2017, when the world 
championships will be held in London, saying he hopes athletics will win more 
medals at the 2016 Olympics than any other British sport.
 