
In his final few days as transport secretary, Lord Adonis was one of the 
Labour ministers tasked with negotiating with theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> after the general 
election about the prospects of forming a coalition. As a former Lib Dem 
member, a Blairite and a pluralist, he was originally keen to make the idea 
work. Two and a half years later, Adonis is back on the Labour front bench and 
his enthusiasm for coalition politics has declined markedly, as you can see 
from the main points to emerge from our interview.

Summary: the highlights 

• Adonis said he had changed his mind since 2010 about the desirability of 
Labour forming a coalition with the Lib Dems. His view about coalitions 
generally had become "a lot more negative", he said. At the time of the general 
election Adonis would have said that, if Labour had had a small majority, it 
would have been better to have governed with the Lib Dems. But now he thinks it 
would "definitely" be better for Labour to govern on its own. "Let's be clear, 
it's the same Lib Dem party that has failed catastrophically in forging an 
effective coalition with theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> who we would be relying 
upon to form a coalition with us," he said.

• He said Labour was considering plans to set up a quango to take charge of 
making recommendations for big infrastructure projects. The Heathrow third 
runway experience showed that "you cannot do big infrastructure in this country 
unless you've got cross-party agreement". Labour hasasked Sir John Armitt to 
review infrastructure policymaking 
<http://www.nce.co.uk/news/business/armitt-to-lead-labour-infrastructure-review/8636560.article>
, and Adonis revealed the review was looking closely at the Infrastructure 
Australia model.Infrastructure Australia 
<http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/> is an independent standing 
commission set up in 2008 which makes recommendations about big infrastructure 
developments. "It would be quite good to start by trying to promote cross-party 
agreement on big infrastructure, rather than using it as a last resort," Adonis 
said.

• He said the state needed to be more active in industrial policy.

• He said there should be a huge increase in the number of civil servants sent 
to the private sector on secondment. The Department for Business has only three 
senior officials on secondment, he said. "How on earth can you seriously be 
engaged in developing policies to promote industry if you have got no 
experience of it yourself?"

• He accused the government of dragging its feet over High Speed Two (HS2). If 
he had still been transport secretary, the legislation for the project would 
have been published "ages ago", he said.

The interview 

After the general election Adonis dropped out of frontline politics and took a 
job as director of the Institute for Government. He's since returned to 
politics, working on Labour's industrial policy review and shadowingLord 
Deighton, the former Locog chief executive who has been made minister for 
infrastructure delivery 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Deighton,_Baron_Deighton> but who does not 
start work until January.

Adonis, who was recently named by a journalist as one of the 10 most 
interesting politicians in Britain, 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2012/12/03/top-10-most-interesting-politicians/>
 is best known for his work championing academies, but he is also willing to 
take up less glamorous political challenges.In his recent memoir, 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/education-education-education-paperback>
 he recalls telling Gordon Brown that he would like to be transport secretary. 
"No one has ever asked me for transport," Brown replied. Now he seems just as 
enthusiastic about industrial policy. We spoke before the autumn statement, in 
his office in the House of Lords. Here's how it went.

Industrial policy 

Q: In your lecture on Roy Jenkins 
<http://andrewadonis.com/2011/10/25/lecture-on-roy-jenkins-as-a-transformational-minister/>
 you said politicians should only do jobs they are passionate about. ["It is 
remarkable how often cabinet ministers occupy posts in which they evince little 
interest, let alone passion, simply because it's what they were offered."] Is 
industrial policy something you are passionate about?
A: Yes. Where the jobs are going to come from in the future is the biggest 
issue in British politics at the moment and, unless we crack it, we are 
sentencing the next generation to poverty and fractured society. So we have got 
to crack this.

Q: It is not something that you seem to have focused on before. 
A: The things I've done in the past have always been geared to creating much 
more worthwhile opportunities for people. Education is one crucial aspect of 
that. The public services are a crucial aspect of it. You will have no decent 
society unless you have decent infrastructure. I have always, for somebody keen 
on transport, made the case for better transport links as a social argument and 
not just a transport argument. Good transport connections build integrated 
societies. So the challenge of creating more, and better, jobs is just a new 
phase of the big challenge that I've been seeking to address all my political 
life, which is how do we build a prosperous, integrated one-nation society.

Q: What has gone wrong in the past on industry policy? 
A: The state wasn't sufficiently active. Why is it that in this country we 
have no state investment bank? We are one of the very few developed countries 
that does not have a state investment bank. Why? Because we adopted an entirely 
laissez-faire approach that we could leave it to the commercial banks and the 
private sector. That was clearly a mistake. We need to be frank about it. The 
Americans, with theirSmall Business Administration,  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_Business_Administration>they are very 
actively engaged, at federal level and state level.

(In the autumn statement, after the interview was conducted, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> announced a business bank. 
I emailed Adonis about this. He said he was glad Osborne was doing this but "it 
sums up the lack of drive and energy in this government that it won't be fully 
operational until autumn 2014. It will have taken them the whole parliament 
even to get a growth bank in place.")

To give another example, one of the strands of the work I'm looking at is how 
to modernise and improve BIS [the Department for Business] as a department. You 
can't have an active industrial strategy unless you have an active [department].

Reforming the Department for Business 

Q: What's wrong with BIS at the moment? 
A: Let me give you an example at the moment: virtually no secondees. One of 
Michael Heseltine's recommendations[in his report No Stone Unturned In Pursuit 
of Growth – pdf] 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/corporate/docs/n/12-1213-no-stone-unturned-in-pursuit-of-growth.pdf>
 is that there should be really active interchange between the private sector 
and BIS and vice versa in terms of exchanges of people. I put down a whole 
series of questions asking how many secondees from the senior civil service 
there are from the major departments to business. Do you know how many 
secondees the Treasury has? Zero, none at all.

Q: Paul Deighton <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Deighton,_Baron_Deighton> 
is arguably a secondee to the Treasury from business. 
A: Yes, but he's taking three months to arrive. He is not appearing until the 
new year. BIS currently have three senior civil servants on secondment to 
companies in the UK. That's three in a department of more than 3,500 civil 
servants.

Q: And are you saying there should be people coming back the other way? 
A: Yes. There should be lots of them. It should be a key part of the training 
and development of senior civil servants in BIS that they spend a part of their 
time engaged in industry. How on earth can you seriously be engaged in 
developing policies to promote industry if you have got no experience of it 
yourself? Of those three, one of those is on secondment to the BBC. I was not 
aware that was a company. It's three now. Last year, 2011, there was one senior 
civil servant, one, from the entire Department of Business, Innovation and 
Skills on secondment. That, in microcosm, tells you what a huge job of work 
there still is to do to modernise the state machine. There are other 
dimensions, too. We need an infrastructure plan that isn't just a wish list, 
which is essentially what the national infrastructure plan is at the moment.

After the autumn statement I also asked Adonis about Osborne's £5.5bn capital 
package. He said most of this was Osborne "simply restoring some of the capital 
projects which were foolishly cancelled" in 2010.

High Speed Two (HS2)

Q: That's a spending issue, isn't it? 
A: It's not just spending. It's also getting your act together and really 
seriously moving. For example, on one of my favourite schemes, which of course 
is HS2, we are two and a half years since the election – and they are committed 
to this – and there's still no legislation in sight. If I had been transport 
secretary, we would have had a bill ages ago. They have not even started the 
consultation on the route of the high-speed line north of Birmingham. They have 
not published it yet. We are still waiting for the publication of the draft 
route. The work on that was ongoing when I was in the department at the 
election. It took me one year to produce the entire route from Birmingham to
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, to publish it. And they've 
barely changed it in the consultation since. It has taken them two and half 
years, even though the work had started, and they still have not published the 
route north of Birmingham.

Growth and planning 

Q: David Cameron says planning is a big issue in relation to growth. Do you 
think he is on to something with that?
A: He is, but in order to get people to engage in planning you have got to 
have the plans. People always used to say to me, when I went to transport and 
was busy doing the early stages of work on HS2, "you'll have a nightmare in 
terms of the planning, it will never get through". To which my answer was, if 
you have the plans to start with, then you worry about how you actually get 
them through. In most of these areas, the government does not have the plans. 
It's not that they are all being stalled. Where is the great plan for the next 
200,000 houses? I have not seen it.

A lot of the big road schemes that are important, like the A14, which is a 
crucially important east-west route – the reason that's not happening is not 
because it's stuck in the planning system; it's because the government 
cancelled the scheme two years ago. It has now come back two years later in 
George Osborne's second infrastructure plan, where he said he was accelerating, 
but it's come back as a public-private partnership and it's going to be a toll 
road. Now, I was specifically told by the department there's no way you can 
toll an A road. We are a small country. People can get off these roads, and you 
get a massive diversion. They have not yet produced a plan as to how this is 
going to happen. I know what's going to happen. They will spend a year on 
massively expensive consultants who will tell them that it can't be done. This 
is the problem. Because they are so weak as a government, we haven't got the 
plans for the planners to consider.

Growth and judicial review 

Q: What did you feel about Cameron's speech about judicial review 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/speech-to-cbi/>? He said that was a problem 
affecting infrastructure.
A: When I was a minister I was stuck in the courts a lot on judicial review. 
But that wasn't what really holding things back. What was really holding things 
back – and holds things back in terms of government – is the determination of 
the government to get going. Judicial review is just a fact of life. But if you 
show strength, direction and determination, then judicial review becomes 
generally a sideshow.

Third runway at Heathrow 

Q: That takes me on to another project, the third runway at Heathrow. You are 
on the record as being in favour; the Labour party is against. Do you sense the 
party might change its position on that?
A: We strongly support the setting up of the Howard Davies review 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-19484126> because we take the view, 
which I take very strongly, that you are not going to be able to expand airport 
capacity in London without cross-party consensus. I had hoped that there would 
be cross-party consensus behind a third runway at Heathrow before the election. 
David Cameron chose to be entirely opportunist about that. I think he now 
regrets that. George Osborne certainly regrets it. But anyway, that is now 
history. The fact is there isn't a consensus. There is no basis on which to 
move. The mayor is offside, too. So what we've all now agreed to do, both the 
major political parties, is to ask Howard Davies to look at all the options and 
I hope it will be possible to forge a consensus.

Q: There are signs within the Conservative party that it regrets opposing the 
third runway. Are there any signs within Labour that the current leadership is 
starting to change its position?
A: Well, what we've said is that we support the setting up of Howard Davies, 
and we will look at his report very carefully. For Howard to be able to get on 
with his work properly, it is very important that people like me don't say that 
there's only one solution on the table. I want him to be able to look atHeathrow
 <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/heathrow>, but I also want him to look at 
Stansted, Gatwick, the estuary, the whole range of options.

The point I draw from that is that you cannot do big infrastructure in this 
country unless you've got cross-party agreement. And this is a key part of the 
reason for setting up theJohn Armitt review, <> which is a big part of our 
industrial policy strategy as well, to look at how we can get better 
mechanisms, learning from our own failure over Heathrow, the failure to embed
the Infrastructure Planning Commission, 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_Planning_Commission> the big thing 
that we set up that the Tories then abolished, and the experience of the Howard 
Davies review.

Major infrastructure projects 

Q: What do you mean by better mechanisms? The mechanisms of the state, 
commissions and reviews – that architecture is already there.
A: But it's not actually particularly good, unfortunately. We don't have any 
standing commission that makes recommendations on infrastructure.

Q: In the way that the climate change committee does? 
A: We have some in specific areas. But we don't have one across the piste. And 
it's done on a very ad hoc basis at the moment. And it's usually only done, as 
with the Howard Davies commission, after everything else has failed. It would 
be quite good to start by trying to promote cross-party agreement on big 
infrastracture, rather than using it as a last resort.

Q: Is there a model for a standing commission like this abroad? 
A: The Armitt review <> has only just started, but one of the things we are 
looking at isInfrastructure Australia,  
<http://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/about/>which is a standing 
commission of the federal government, which makes recommendations on big 
infrastructure developments. It's independent and not part of the government. 
We are looking very carefully at that. But there are lots of other models we 
are looking at too.

Q: Isn't there a case for saying at the end of the day these are big political 
decisions, and if you go down a route like that, it's just another example of 
the political class contracting out decision making?
A: No. The political class has to take the decisions. But it has to take 
decisions that it thinks are going to stick. To do that, they need to be 
well-founded in evidence and, in the case of infrastructure, there needs to be 
a very great effort to take them on the basis of cross-party agreement because 
that is how they are most likely to stick.

Making Labour policy 

Q: Last year you wrote an article about Labour's time in power, 
<http://www.progressonline.org.uk/2011/11/01/keep-it-going/> and you said: "Our 
only mistake was not to have reformed more, and faster. There are important 
lessons in this for Labour's future, well beyond education." What did you mean 
by that?
A: The key lesson, to my mind, is that you need to come to government with 
worked-out plans. In a lot of the public services, we did not have plans worked 
out. We had no plan for the reform and improvement of secondary education when 
we came to power in 1997. We had a good plan for primary education, but for 
this big issue, which was deplorable standards in a large proportion of 
comprehensive schools, we had no plan to deal with that. When it comes to these 
big areas of industrial policy, skills policy, infrastructure policy, we have 
got to have worked-out plans.

One-nation Labour 

Q: In your book, you talk several times about creating a one-nation society. 
And you published that before Ed Miliband's conference speech.
A: It has always been part of my political creed.

Q: What does it mean? There's an argument that it's rather vague, and that 
it's just branding.
A: It's inclusive politics not exclusive politics. And this is a very 
important message to the Labour party, because a part of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party – because of the tradition 
of being a working class party created by the trade unions – has always seen 
its mission in sectarian terms, as us against them. That has never been my 
politics. My politics has always been to create a progressive alliance across 
the classes and the different parts of the community.

Q: Are you confident that view is strongly supported in the party at the 
moment?
A: It is, yes. It is the dominant view.

Coalition with the Lib Dems 

Q: Can I move on to the coalition? This was an issued raised on the blog I 
posted inviting readers to suggest questions. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2012/nov/27/questions-for-lord-adonis?>
 [SeeSchrödingers Dog.] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19718271> After the 
election, you were pushing for a Labour/Lib Dem coalition. Has what you've seen 
about the way this coalition works changed your mind about the viability of 
coalitions?
A: There are two different aspects to this. It has made me much more negative 
about the idea of coalition.

Q: Why? 
A: Giving huge power to a very small party that is very unclear about what it 
wants to achieve in politics – I'm trying to be diplomatic about the Lib Dems – 
isn't, to my mind, the best way forward. The best way forward would be to have 
a majority Labour government.

Q: If we'd had this conversation two and a half years ago, you would have said 
you wanted a Labour government, but that coalitions can work, because they work 
all over Europe.
A: Well, I'm much more negative about it now. My view is that you can make a 
coalition work. If the electorate don't give a majority to Labour at the next 
election, then it may be that we have to talk to other parties about a 
coalition, although I hope we do get a majority. But what is my view of 
coalition? I think the experience of the last two and a half years has been a 
very, very poor exhibition for the concept of coalition.

Q: Is that because Britain has had a bad experience of coalition because of 
Nick Clegg? Or is that because, as someone who has never lived through 
coalitions, you had a rosy view of what they were like?
A: Let's be clear – it's the same Lib Dem party that has failed 
catastrophically in forging an effective coalition with the Conservatives who 
we would be relying upon to form a coalition with us. Now, it may be that they 
can undergo a Damescene conversion to the cause of effective coalition 
politics. But they haven't done a very good job of it over the last two and a 
half years.

Q: What's your analysis of the problem? Is it the leadership? Is it the party? 
Or is it the fact that the British system militates against coalition, because 
if you are the smaller party you end up having to differentiate yourself, and 
you can only do that by attacking the people you are supposed to be in 
coalition with?
A: It's the weakness and lack of strategic effectiveness of the Lib Dems.

Q: But a coalition, an alliance of minorities, will always have a weak party. 
A: That may be true. My view on coalitions has become a lot more negative. The 
experience of the last two and a half years seems to suggest that. There has 
been very little positive that has happened as a result of the coalition. What 
we have essentially had, let's be clear, is the Tories' economic policy and a 
seriously failed attempt by the Lib Dems to inject some constitutional reform 
into a Tory government. There has been very little that is identifiably liberal 
that has been brought into the mix. If they were going to be in coalition with 
us, I hope it would be our programme that would be dominant. But it's not at 
all clear to me what the Lib Dems would bring to the party. What would they 
bring to the party? A little bit of constitutional reform, but that's probably 
about it at the moment. So there is not a great infusion of ideas and policies 
that they would bring that would make this a better government. On the 
contrary, I think the real danger, which we've seen over the last two and a 
half years, is that you would have constant wrangling and argument about the 
implementation of the government's programme issue by issue without any 
productive result from it.

Q: Would a minority Labour government, or a Labour government with a slender 
majority, be preferable to trying form a coalition?
A: I would certainly prefer a Labour government with a small majority to a 
coalition with the Lib Dems. Definitely. Absolutely definitely.

Q: And I presume you would not have said that two and a half years ago. 
A: No. I would not have said that two and a half years ago. Definitely. 
Because, provided we're united as a party, and I'm confident we will be after 
the next election, that will lead to a much stronger and more coherent 
government better able to serve the British people than us having to cobble 
together, issue by issue, an arrangement with the Lib Dems.

Exams and school standards 

Q: Another question from a reader [dfic1999] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19718395> was about 
the Tomlinson report [the report that came out in 2004 recommending a new 
diploma system]. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2004/oct/18/1419education.furthereducation1?INTCMP=SRCH>
 Do you regret Labour not implementing that?
A: The big problem with Tomlinson is that it involved abolishing the entire 
A-level and GCSE system in one go on a promise that you could replace it with 
something radically better, and I did not think the time was right for it in 
2004. And, actually, I'm not sure the time is right for it in 2012 either. I 
think what you've got to do is build on the strengths of the existing system.

Q: Another reader [24beforemylove] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19711037> asked about 
the Pearson Learning Curve data [showing England coming sixth in a global 
league of school achievement]. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-20498356> 
A: It's great. It's good news.

Q: But I think they were suggesting that if we are sixth in the world, and 
only half schools are academies, maybe the English education system isn't quite 
as bad as some people have made out.
A: It's great that the latest international ranking has us high up. But it's 
very important to understand that the rest of the world is not standing still. 
I know these countries. I have visited most of these Asian countries. I know 
Scandinavia well. They are forging ahead in terms of improving standards. The 
fact that we only have six in 10 of our 16-year-olds getting five GCSEs, 
including English and maths, which I take to be the basic baccalaureate 
standard, is simply not good enough. As a country we have got to nine in 10, so 
that the overwhelming majority of young people are getting to that basic 
baccalaureate standard if we are going to be able to hold our own 
internationally. Every other developed country is forging towards that 90% goal 
and we need to be up there with them.

Michael Gove 

Q: There is clear agreement between Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> and you on academies. Are 
you happy with the way he cites you as one of his heroes? Presumably it doesn't 
do a lot for your standing in the party.
A: I've always taken the view that you should speak for yourself and let other 
people speak for themselves. What's my view? I've been very clear. Where the 
coalition are continuing the last government's policies, and that is 
particularly in replacing underperforming schools with academies, I support it. 
But that does not mean I sign up for his whole agenda.

Q: But overall how do you rate him as an education secretary? 
A: Where he's following my policies I think he's doing very well; where's he's 
not, I think he's doing very badly. For example, the idea that we should invest 
huge amounts of time energy in replacing GCSE with what looks to me to be 
something very similar to the GCSE, I don't understand the argument for that at 
all.

Roy Jenkins biography



Q: What's happened to the biography of Roy Jenkins you were writing? 
A: Unfortunately, the problem with my Roy Jenkins biography, because I could 
not finish it when I was in government, Dame Jennifer Jenkins, Roy's widow, 
decided, quite understandably, that she was going to give the project to 
someone else. John Campbell is doing it. And John will do a brilliant biography 
of Roy. However, I dida big lecture in the Speaker's series 
<http://andrewadonis.com/2011/10/25/lecture-on-roy-jenkins-as-a-transformational-minister/>
 which gives my view on Roy.

Serving in a Labour cabinet



Q: You resigned from the shadow cabinet after the election. Now you're back on 
the front bench. Do you want a cabinet job in a future Labour government?
A: It's far too soon to think about jobs. We've got to put the best possible 
prospectus before the public at the next election if there's going to be a 
Labour government, and I'm an ideas man and a policy man, and I'm working flat 
out to see that we develop a great manifesto. What happens after that is for 
another day.
 