
Have you seen any good films in the last week or two? We'd like to hear about 
what you've been watching, and whether you'd recommend them to others – 
although we wouldn't mind also hearing about the the bad ones you'd suggest 
others avoid.

Here's what our critics had to say about some recent releases – if you've seen 
any of these over the weekend, or something else entirely let us know what you 
thought of it:

Hansel & Gretel: Witch Hunters <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151295>

Peter Bradshaw said: So uncompromisingly rubbish that it is impossible to 
watch it without your rage and despair doubling with every minute that passes. 
You'll feel like making all the Hollywood executives responsible stand up, like 
naughty schoolchildren, while you rage: "Which one of you greenlit this 
unspeakably bad film? We're not going home until someone owns up."Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/28/hansel-gretel-witch-hunters-review>

Stoker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146645/stoker>

Xan Brooks said: A full-blown gothic nightmare, replete with cadavers in the 
freezer and sexual ecstasy in the shower. I'm not convinced it hangs together; 
I'm not even sure it's good. But its wild undulations cast a definite spell.
Read more <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/28/stoker-review>

Arbitrage <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145813/arbitrage>

David Cox said: A swaggering master of the universe has been cooking the books 
at his hedge fund, while playing away from home with a dangerous dame. A fatal 
car crash looks set to lay him low, but he'll stop at nothing to dodge his 
comeuppance. You've seen it all before, but lead Richard Gere drenches the 
proceedings in the old razzle-dazzle.Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/28/arbitrage-review>

The Bay <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149507/bay>

David Cox said: There's much more than revulsion to this sidetrip into genre 
from Rain Man veteran Barry Levinson. The found-footage contrivance is rebooted 
to lay bare the multimedia evidence trail that we now leave behind us.Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/28/the-bay-review>

Safe Haven <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/151431/safe-haven>


Peter Bradshaw said: Nicholas Sparks, the great rom-dram master, is back – his 
novel Safe Haven has been adapted for the screen, directed by Lasse Hallström. 
Even though I have had a grudging respect for Sparks's knack for ingenious 
popular fiction in the past, this latest gushing, smouldering love story is 
just too ridiculously cliched.Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/28/safe-haven-review>
 