
Faster, more efficient forms of transport have transformed all of our lives – 
we can travel more easily than ever before in high-performance cars, trains, 
buses and planes, but this luxurious lifestyle comes at a price. Greenhouse gas 
emissions from transport are growing at a faster rate than in any other sector 
in the UK and account for around a quarter of all our emissions.

The government wants to reduce the impact of travel on the environment by 
promoting a range of policies that include increasing the fuel-efficiency of 
vehicles; encouraging a move towards more environmentally friendly forms of 
transport; and reducing the fossil carbon content of transport fuel. The 
Climate Change Act of 2008 has also established binding emissions targets and 
five-yearly carbon budgets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% 
by 2050.

Andrew Adonis, the transport secretary, says: "Transport accounts for a 
significant amount of our domestic emissions. If we are to safeguard the future 
of transport, then we must also safeguard the environment that it impacts upon 
– I am determined to do that."

To achieve these emissions targets in the transport sector the UK needs to 
focus on developing new low-carbon technologies, and innovation lies at the 
heart of product development. As Robin Francis, research and development 
manager at the Carbon Trust, says: "A great deal of innovative work is being 
done but we need breakthrough technology to reduce emissions." Anything that 
can be done in this area, he says, is significant, "because, as transport 
accounts for such a large proportion of our emissions, even a few percentage 
points in reduction can have a big overall impact."

The Carbon Trust was set up in 2001 in response to the threat of climate 
change and it aims to accelerate the move to a low-carbon economy, by working 
with organisations to reduce carbon emissions and develop commercial low-carbon 
technologies for the future. Most importantly, the Carbon Trust can deliver not 
just expert insight but practical help, funding and support for low-carbon 
innovators.

One of the projects in the field of transport currently being funded by the 
Carbon Trust is a laser ignition system for internal combustion engines, in 
development at the University of Liverpool. Francis describes how it works: 
"This programme is all about improving the efficiency of conventional engines 
by using a laser to ignite fuel instead of a spark plug." The laser ignition 
system gives greater control over the engine and enables it to be run on a much 
more efficient fuel/ air mixture, which will directly cut a car's carbon 
emissions. As Francis says: "The project researchers believe that they will get 
4% improvement over the whole cycle of the engine and this is a very 
significant development."

The Carbon Trust helped facilitate the Ford Motor Company becoming a 
project-partner on the laser ignition system and Ford now wants to explore the 
laser technology. As Francis explains, this is what the Carbon Trust is all 
about. "We don't want to develop technology that sits on the shelf, " he says. 
"We want it to make a big impact in the commercial world. We provide guidance 
on how to get products to market and help commercialise those projects – a very 
important part of what we do is commercial pull-through."

The Carbon Trust also runs an Innovations award scheme to celebrate the best 
low-carbon technologies and provide a platform to accelerate the introduction 
of these technologies to the market. Now in their fourth year, the awards aim 
to recognise key "cleantech champions" – entrepreneurs, engineers, academics, 
companies and other organisations who are delivering the solutions the world 
needs to combat climate change.

One transport company that has benefited from winning a Carbon Trust award is 
the Wright Group, a familyowned, bus-manufacturing company, based in Northern 
Ireland, which has developed the world's first hybrid electric double-decker 
bus. There are now 25 hybrid buses on the streets of London.

Laser innovation: University of Liverpool

Transport accounts for 25% of the UK's carbon emissions so finding new ways of 
making car engines less polluting is vital to meet the UK's carbon reduction 
targets. At the University of Liverpool, researchers are working, together with 
Ford Motor Co., on a new laser ignition system, which couldncut car exhaust 
emissions. Dr Tom Shenton, the lead investigator in the engine control 
engineering on the project, explains: "The basic idea is to replace the spark 
plug in a petrol engine with a laser beam which is focused so the intensity of 
light creates the ignition in the cylinder." By using ultra-fast computing and 
special optics to direct and deliver the laser to the combustion chamber, the 
engine can be run on a more efficient or "leaner" fuel/air mixture, which will 
cut the car's carbon emissions.

The laser system also has the added advantage that it allows the new Gasoline 
Direct Injection engines to control the lean running so you don't have to 
throttle the engine, says Dr Shenton. "The engine normally has to work harder 
to suck air through the throttle, so by not throttling and keeping more air in 
the cylinder you can reduce the fuel consumption of the engine." This 
heightened control also helps overcome the poor cold-start performance of 
engines running on high blends of biofuels.

While the laser ignition system is not yet ready to roll out, backing from the 
Carbon Trust has been essential. Dr Shenton says: "We are a group of 
researchers – we need money to fund our work."

The Carbon Trust's applied research grant scheme has supported 184 projects 
from around 1,800 applications and committed a total of £23m towards research 
worth around £54m. At least 65% of completed projects have, or are in the 
process of generating new patents, making commercial sales or receiving further 
investment into the development of the technology.

While there is no easy solution to climate change, there is great potential. 
As Dr Shenton says: "There is tremendous possibility for small and large 
companies to make a contribution towards reducing our carbon footprint."

Innovation Awards 2009

The Carbon Trust Innovation Awards aim to recognise organisations or 
individuals for the work they are doing in developing innovative technology or 
technological solutions with the potential for significant carbon savings in 
future. More widely, the awards highlight the UK's culture of innovation and 
show the enormous growth areas for jobs and industry.

There are four award categories for technology developers and providers, and 
category three is for transport. This category includes new technologies that 
can reduce carbon emissions for transport, such as renewable biofuels, improved 
road vehicles and hydrogen for road transport. It also includes fuel cell 
technologies, electric/hybrid vehicles, and hydrogen storage devices.

The transport category winner can expect to showcase their product with 
buyers, investors and low-carbon technology providers through the Carbon 
Trust's formal channels and programmes. There is also the opportunity for 
widespread publicity that will help attract new customers and establish 
commercial partnerships. The winner will also receive a specially commissioned 
trophy and framed certificate.

How to enter: log on to carbontrust.co.uk/awards 
<http://www.carbontrust.co.uk/awards> and fill in the form online. It's that 
easy. The closing date for the first stage of entries is 5pm on 9 October. 
Successful entrants will be shortlisted by 16 October and will then need to 
complete a secondstage entry form.

For more details and an entry form, please visit carbontrust.co.uk/awards 
<http://www.carbontrust.co.uk/awards>
 