
The notorious see-through yoga pants which rocked apparel retailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/mar/19/lululemon-sales-threatened-yoga-pants>
 Lululemon last month and cost it up to $17m in revenue seems to have claimed 
another victim as the company announced on Wednesday that its chief product 
officer will step down.

Nearly 20% of the company's stock of high end-pants, which can cost up to 
$100, were pulled from stores in March after the fabric used was deemed too 
transparent. Sheree Waterson, who has worked for the company since 2008 and in 
retail for more than 25 years, will leave the company on April 15, the company
said in a statement 
<http://investor.lululemon.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=754183>.

Separately Lululemon announced that the "unacceptable level of sheerness" 
displayed by the black luon pants was caused by incomplete testing protocols.

Multiple store managers had raised concerns over the fabric quality of the 
pants in early March, and the company decided to pull 17% of its stock from 
shelves because they did not meet their standards. Lululemon has been working 
with the fabric company Eclat since 2004 to manufacture the luon fabric, which 
is made in Vietnam and Taiwan.

Improvements are underway with a new process including "rigorous testing" and 
revised standards for fabric tolerances, stretch and weight.

Early reports from the company warned of flagging sales because of the pants 
shortage. In a March 21 earnings call the company predicted lost revenue 
between $12m and $17m in the first quarter because of the fabric issues. The 
company expects the losses to continue into the first half of 2013,estimating 
lost revenue <http://investor.lululemon.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=750036> 
between $57m and $67m.

After learning about the problem, pants were pulled from shelves, showrooms 
and websites. Customers who purchased the pants after 1 March could return the 
pants for a full refund or an exchange.

"Our stand for differentiation is the quality of our product. We have been 
building capacity in the product organization, and we recognize that continued 
investment in this segment of the business is required to support our future," 
said Lululemon chief executive officer Christine Day. "We are committed to 
continually developing best in class fabrics, and are committed to only putting 
product in our stores that meets our stringent standards."

Lululemon has attracted a cult-like following to its products, including its 
popular yoga pants that can cost between $72 and $98. Prior to the pants issue, 
some investors had raised concerns about the company's revenue as less 
expensive fitness apparel manufactures gain a greater following.
 