
Her role as a diminutive alien with mysterious powers was one of the more 
controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/maz-kanata-star-wars-the-force-awakens-lupita-nyongo>
aspects of space opera blockbuster Star Wars: The Force Awakens. Now 
Oscar-winner Lupita Nyong’o looks set to step into futuristic territory again, 
after entering talks to play a mysterious woman who turns out to be an 
extraterrestrial in the science-fiction thriller Intelligent Life.


Maz Kanata 'used telekinetic powers' in Star Wars: The Force Awakens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/maz-kanata-star-wars-the-force-awakens-lupita-nyongo>
The currently red-hot director of civil rights period drama Selma, Ava 
DuVernay, is being tipped to direct from a screenplay by Jurassic World’s Colin 
Trevorrow and writing partner Derek Connolly,according to the Hollywood Reporter
 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/lupita-nyongo-talks-star-sci-863100>
. The project is being set up at Steven Spielberg’s Amblin Entertainment, with 
Trevorrow and fellow Jurassic World alumnus Frank Marshall also set to produce.

Intelligent Life is based on an earlier project titled The Ambassador, about a 
United Nations department set up to provide first contact in the event of the 
discovery of alien life. The lead character falls in love with an enigmatic 
woman, due to be played by Nyong’o, only to discover that she is an alien.

DuVernay is said to be top of the producers’ wishlist, though Variety reports 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/lupita-nyongyo-sci-fi-thriller-intelligent-life-1201700344/>
 she has not yet been offered the job. The acclaimed film-maker is also 
reported to be circlingDisney’s A Wrinkle in Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/05/frozen-director-jennifer-lee-adapt-wrinkle-in-time-disney>
, a second science-fiction project, this time based on Madeleine L’Engle’s 
classic children’s novel. However, it might prove possible for her to shoot 
both films.

Ava DuVernay backs 'DuVernay test' to monitor racial diversity in Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/01/ava-duvernay-test-racial-diversity-hollywood-selma-director-oscars>
Intelligent Life is said to be similar in tone to Trevorrow’s breakthrough 
film, the indie time-travel comedy Safety Not Guaranteed, though it appears the 
screenwriters have been working to rewrite The Ambassador as a more ambitious 
project, in the wake ofJurassic World’s box-office  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/21/jurassic-world-stomps-to-top-of-2015-global-box-office>
triumph last year. Trevorrow, who will also direct Star Wars: Episode IX, is 
now considered a major Hollywood player, with access to the kind of bountiful 
funding needed for big budget film-making.


Mexican-Kenyan actor Nyong’o entered the public consciousness in 2013 after 
winning the best supporting actress Oscar for her turn as a slave in Steve 
McQueen’s period race drama 12 Years a Slave. As well as Star Wars, she voices 
the female wolf Raksha in Disney’s forthcoming live-action remake of classic 
1967 animated musical The Jungle Book, and will play the mother of a Ugandan 
chess prodigyin the same studio’s true life-inspired The Queen of Katwe 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/01/05/lupita-nyongo-queen-of-katwe-first-look>. 
 