
When the Church of Satan wanted to celebrate their 40th anniversary – and 
06/06/06 – with a ritual in Los Angeles, they calledLustmord 
<http://www.lustmord.com/>. The pioneer of ultra-niche music genre "dark ambient
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6nLKCJdUvk>" hadn't performed live since the 
early 80s, preferring to make his music in the studio, but thought the 
opportunity was too hilarious to turn down.

"Satanists from around the world were flying in for this private event," he 
says. "People have this image of me as dark so I thought I had to do the gig. 
It was Spinal Tap – too funny to say no." So he donned the black robes the 
church made for him (usually he plays in a T-shirt) and played his droning, 
alluring music while the Satanists got on with worshipping the devil.

So is he a Satanist? "I'm a hardcore atheist," replies Lustmord, who turns out 
to be a chatty and genial man in his mid-50s called Brian Williams, and who is 
playing two concerts at theUnsound <http://unsound.pl/en> electronic music 
strand of the Adelaide festival. "I respect people's beliefs although I don't 
like them trying to impose them on me. I was making fun of the Church of Satan 
because how could you not? But they took it really well, nobody was trying to 
convert me – if they had I'd have been really annoyed. But they were fun. I 
guess if you're a Satanist you have to take a joke."

Playing for the Satanists is only one highlight of what Williams says – with 
some understatement - is "an interesting life", lived about as far from the 
mainstream as it's possible to get. As a young man in north Wales, he loved the 
films ofKenneth Anger <http://www.kennethanger.org/> and the sound of Throbbing 
Gristle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/throbbing-gristle>, who showed him 
"that there were interesting things out there, that you can actually do this 
stuff if you're from a small town and that it's OK to be a little bit crazy". 
He befriendedChris and Cosey <http://www.chrisandcosey.com/> from Throbbing 
Gristle, who persuaded him to make his own music, and after 11 years in a 
London squat overlooking the Oval cricket ground, he and his wife Tracy went on 
tour across America with the pair.

After travelling 10,0000 miles they in love with the American west's 
extraordinary terrain and decided to move to California. They've been there for 
the past 19 years, though Williams has retained a soft Welsh accent. Now Tracy 
manages a recording studio run by the son of one ofLeiber and Stoller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/aug/23/jerry-leiber-nickolas-ashford>
 – which has lead to cocktails with Burt Bacharach – and Williams earns a 
living doingsound design for Hollywood films 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0930168/>. " A lot of them were blockbusters, but 
they were also shit," says Williams, who doesn't mince his words. "Like Mighty 
Morphing Power Rangers, Street Fighter – absolute crap. The Saint, that was 
shit ..."

Williams returned to more regular live performance in 2011, when Unsound 
invited him to play. Since then he's performed as part of the festival in New 
York, Montreal and Poland.His Trinity performance, a collaboration with 
Biosphere and MFO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/15/unsound-adelaide-raime-robin-fox>
, was inspired bythe development of the atom bomb in Los Alamos, New Mexico 
<http://www.losalamoshistory.org/manhattan.htm>. "It's an amazing part of the 
world," he says. "It's on a plateau. You drive this road that they made in the 
30s to get up there and it's like a hand with fingers sticking out – each 
finger has a different lab. You can go there but it's not easy –White Sands 
<http://www.wsmr.army.mil/Pages/Home.aspx> is a functioning missile range. They 
let people in the Nevada test site two weekends a year. You can't take cameras. 
It's right next toArea 51 <http://natgeotv.com.au/tv/area-51s-secrets/> where 
they test stealth technology – state of the art aircraft - so it's a 
super-secure secret site. In some of the areas they literally shoot on sight."

There are other dangers, too. "In between the labs there are ravines. In one 
there's the first nuclear reactor ever made and and in others radioactive waste 
was just thrown down in the 40s when they didn't know any better. Someone gave 
us aGeiger counter <http://www.geigercounters.com/>. You measure the background 
radiation and if it's 47 or something it should be OK. So you calibrate it to 
47 and if you go above that by a set amount you should get the hell out of the 
area. The background radiation is usually 22. In this area it was 101. So we 
got back in the car and took a different road."

Trinity aims to convey Williams's feelings about the way the bomb changed the 
world - "even now there are these things pointing at us which is interesting." 
The films in the show were mainly taken from American government archives on 
the project. Saturday's show will explore even more sombre sonic terrain, 
though Williams says he's amused by the "dark ambient" label. "My own music – I 
don't feel obliged to describe it," he says. "'Dark' used to annoy me because I 
don't think of it as dark – I'm not a dark person and it's much deeper than 
dark. But I have a philosopher friend and she was saying that she liked how I'm 
embracing the darkness from a psychological and a sociological point of view. 
My work isn't who I am, it's what I do, but there's a reason it is like it is – 
because it's me.

"I started doing it because the sounds I wanted to hear didn't exist," he 
concludes. "I like to take people somewhere that only exists when the music is 
on, so I take you there and bring you back out when the music ends."
 