
April's murder is a tragedy not just for her family but for the town of 
Machynlleth. This is a proud, historic place that, as the site of Owain 
Glyndwr's 15th-century parliament, can fairly claim to be the ancient capital of
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

More recently it has become a magnet for arty and eco-friendly types seeking a 
refuge in peaceful mid-Wales.

Visit Machynlleth and surrounding villages in the Dyfi valley eight months 
after April vanished and you still see plenty of the pink ribbons that the 
five-year-old's parents asked people to wear in solidarity. Some are old and 
ragged, others are clearly fresh. Some posters for the missing child hang in 
shop, cafe and front-room windows.

Michael Williams, a councillor, neighbour of the Jones family and vice-chair 
of the governors at April's school, said: "This is a strong community but there 
is no doubt that the town has changed forever. That is inevitable when you are 
faced with an event of such magnitude.

"But we have taken strength from the dignity and bravery of April's parents. 
The town will move on. That is what we have to do, and we have to do that for 
the sake of all the children in the Dyfi valley, including April's brothers and 
sisters. But that doesn't mean we will forget April or her family. She will 
live in our hearts and minds forever."

The Rev Kathleen Rogers, the vicar at St Peter's church, said she felt the 
community was "back to square one" after hearing of the horrors that emerged 
during the trial. "The town is very subdued, very sad. But we have been there 
before and we will come back again."

In the aftermath of April's disappearance it was noticeable that fewer parents 
were allowing children to play out alone. "Parents were more aware, more edgy," 
Rogers said.

But the passage of time, and the advent of spring, seems to have prompted the 
children to venture back out. "I was out the other evening and the children 
were playing and laughing," said Rogers.

Gareth Jones, who has been mayor of Machynlleth over these difficult months, 
said the case had shown up the worst of humanity in the crime against April, 
but also the best in the "calmness, dignity and strength" the town had shown.

He took time to praise the people of Ceinws, the village three miles from 
Machynlleth where Bridger lived and where April may well have died.

"They are a peaceful village of a couple of hundred people who have had to 
hear the terrible things that happened up the road there. They don't deserve 
that."

Jones pointed out that while Bridger had lived in mid-Wales for 20 years or 
more, he "wasn't from here". However, Jones was also quick to point out that 
his children, at least three of whom live in Machynlleth, were "born and bred" 
in the area.

"We regard them and Bridger's ex-partners as being part of our town and we 
will support them as much as we can."

Superintendent Ian John, who led the appeals for information about April in 
the early days after her disappearance, said the town had come out of the 
tragedy with huge credit â€“ both over how people had gone out en masse to look 
for April, and in the way they supported the professional searchers and the 
girl's family in the weeks and months that followed.

At one point they had to ask people to stop giving donations of food because 
they had too much.

"They are a resilient bunch," said John. "It's easy to be happy-go-lucky when 
things are going well. When things go badly that's when you judge the strength 
of individuals and communities. They have come out of it very well. Machynlleth 
will get over this."

John has spent a lot of time on patrol at Bryn-Y-Gog. "Kids are out there 
playing. There is a normality there which is touching. The last thing you want 
is for people to retreat into their houses and be afraid to go out."
 