Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBO1WwOQowlg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBO1WwOQowlg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBO1WwOQowlg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BO1WwOQowlg>

If you've seen 2010's Machete – or, for that matter, any Robert Rodríguez 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001675/> film that doesn't either feature 
precocious children or talking robot dogs – you'll have a pretty good idea of 
what this year's Machete Kills will be about. It's a deliberately bad
Grindhouse-style <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grindhouse> exploitation movie 
in whichDanny Trejo <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001803/> clomps around Mexico 
killing people with a knife in a multitude of extravagant ways.

And that, more or less, is what happens in the Machete Kills trailer. People 
are stabbed and electrocuted and blown up and shot at with reckless abandon, 
all while Trejo trots out a nice line of wisecracks that all use the word 
"Machete" as a subjective personal pronoun. But there's another story going on 
here. It's the story of all guest stars who make an appearance inMachete Kills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/machete-kills>, and that's the story I'm 
going to tell now.

Machete guest star No 1 
 Machete Kills trailer 1 
Charlie Sheen: This is an example of Rodríguez as rehabilitator. Remember when 
Charlie Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlie-sheen> went a bit 
weird and moved two girls into his house and kept saying "winning" and gave off 
the impression that he was constantly under the influence of some sort of 
substance? He's playing the president now, albeit a shot-drinking president who 
shares his bed with three women.

Machete guest star No 2 
 Machete Kills trailer 2 
Jessica Alba: This is Rodríguez as ringmaster, bringing back his favourite 
actors into his new projects. You'll remember Alba from his previous films like 
Machete, Sin City and Spy Kids: All the Time in the World 4D. And here she is 
now.

Machete guest star No 3 
 Machete Kills trailer 3 
Michelle Rodríguez: This is Rodríguez as man who brings people who were in the 
previous Machete film back for the Machete sequel. Michelle Rodríguez is back, 
playing the same character and wearing the same eyepatch.

Machete guest star No 4 
 Machete Kills trailer 4 

Mel Gibson: Rodriguez as rehabilitator again. Mel Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson> has a similar history to Charlie 
Sheen except, instead of being entertainingly weird, Gibson variously outed 
himself as being drunk, antisemitic and frighteningly aggressive towards women. 
But here's Rodríguez giving him valuable work again. Not because hiring 
luckless and unpopular actors is a) cheap and b) an easy way to drum up 
publicity for the film. No, it's because he cares.

Machete guest star No 5 
 Machete Kills trailer 5 

Amber Heard: Rodriguez as, I dunno, man who hires Amber Heard for stuff. Look, 
Amber Heard is in Machete Kills. That's about it.

Machete guest star No 6
 Machete Kills trailer 6 

Sofía Vergara: Rodriguez who, given that Vergara appears only so that she can 
fire bullets out of her bra, relatively shameless Austin Powers copyist.

Machete guest star No 7
 Machete Kills trailer 7 

Antonio Banderas: Rodríguez as whatever I said about Jessica Alba earlier, but 
aboutAntonio Banderas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antonio-banderas>.

Machete guest star No 8
 Machete Kills trailer 8 

Cuba Gooding, Jr: So this appears to be the pattern: if you're a male actor 
who has fallen on hard times, either through bad filmmaking choices or any 
number of personal issues – or you're an attractive woman – there's a good 
chance that Robert Rodríguez will give you a small part in his film, just to be 
kitschy.

Machete guest star No 9
 Machete Kills trailer 9 

Lady Gaga: See above

Machete guest star No 10 
 Machete Kills trailer 10 

Whoever just got shot into the side of this exploding helicopter. They blew up 
before I had a chance to identify them but, given the rest of the Machete Kills 
guest stars, it's probably either Vanessa Hudgens or OJ Simpson.
 