
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has made a landmark 
change to its 15-year-old desktop and laptop operating system. OS X has become 
macOS Sierra.

The change was announced on stage in San Francisco’s Bill Graham Civic 
Auditorium by Apple’s Craig Federighi, ditching the naming scheme devised under 
the watch of founderSteve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> on his return to the company 
in 1997.

The OS X nomenclature had reached OS X 10.11 with El Capitan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/29/os-x-el-capitan-review-apple-laptop-desktop-operating-system>
, but Apple’s next version will be simply named macOS Sierra, bringing it in 
line with the naming convention for its mobile and tablet operating system iOS.

Apart from a name change, Apple has overhauled iTunes and Apple music, while 
macOS will finally gain full Siri integration, after Apple’s voice assistant 
was first introduced on iOSwith the iPhone 4S in October 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/04/iphone-4s-launched-apple-tim-cook>
.

Siri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/12/siri-real-voices-apple-ios-assistant-jon-briggs-susan-bennett-karen-jacobsen>
 will be tied into macOS’s notification centre and answer questions, perform 
actions such as advanced file searches and control devices as it can through an 
iPhone or iPad.

The digital assistant will scan through users’ messages, calendars and other 
personal information to identify events, travel plans and other pertinent 
information displaying it in a manner similar to Google’s Now.

Apple isn’t the first to bake a voice assistant into a computer. Microsoft’s 
Cortana came built into Windows 10, performing similar personal information 
juggling as Siri, while Google’s Now voice assistant has been available through 
Google.com or Chromebooks for years.

MacOS will also gain enhanced Continuity and iCloud drive support - Apple’s 
system that allows apps on iOS to link directly to the Mac versions using 
iCloud so that users can start something on one device and continue it on 
another.

The biggest change will be a proximity-based system called Auto Unlock that 
allows users to unlock their Mac computers using an Apple Watch, without having 
to enter in their password. Google’s Chromebooks have a similar system using an 
Android phone.

An update to iCloud Drive will also share files stored on the desktop across 
Macs and iOS devices, while a new feature called Optimised Storage will remove 
unnecessary files from computers after they’ve been backed up which should free 
up space on existing Macs.

Apple also introduced Apple Pay for the web that allows users to authenticate 
payments on their Mac via their iPhone or Apple Watch.

Developers will be able to download a prerelease version of macOS today, with 
a public beta in July before a full release to consumers in September.

 * Apple WWDC keynote: key points at a glance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-wwdc-keynote-key-points-at-a-glance>

 * iOS 10: bigger emojis, better Siri and facial recognition coming to your 
iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3> 