
What a peculiar world the Portuguese artists João Maria Gusmão and Pedro Paiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/feb/06/exhibitions-previews-the-guide>
 inhabit. Populated by birds, fish and animals, cyclists, smokers and 
donkey-riders, it is a place of abstractions and illusions, the everyday and 
the impossible.

Bristling with ideas, snatches of reality, optical tricks and enigmatic 
moments, this magical, mesmerising exhibition is alive with the whirring hum of 
an orchestra of 16mm film projectors. Images spill across the walls in room 
after room. I don’t recognise the galleries at Camden Arts Centre, and very 
often I have no idea what I am looking at, or why.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F92565394&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F92565394> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F92565394&media=>
Part of an international touring exhibition that changes from venue to venue, 
Papagaio <http://www.camdenartscentre.org/whats-on/view/jmgpp> (Portuguese for 
parrot) is both a compendium of films and an immersive installation that takes 
us from the artists’ studio to Lisbon zoo, from a voodoo ceremony in the Gulf 
of Guinea to outer space – or at least a photographic version of it.

They can make a drama out of nothing, and art out of anything

A white stone raises its long hair, as if by some strange electromagnetic 
force. Do boulders have hair? It looks like a weird creature haunting a 
cluttered corridor. Is it terrified, defending itself, lonely? Look. It’s doing 
it again. In another film, a live cowfish sits on a plate, squirting water from 
its mouth and slithering around. Three suns set over the sea and three eggs 
(eggs are a recurrent motif) fry in a pan. Maybe it’s the same egg, 
superimposed on itself. A nearby closeup shows a man at the barbershop having a 
bald spot shaved into his scalp. But as soon as you detect a theme, it’s gone.

Lit by the multiple projections of 19 silent films, many running concurrently, 
the spaces of Camden Arts Centre have been plunged into cinema darkness. Some 
films are short and very simple. A baker makes croissants, flipping each 
triangle of dough and rolling it around in mid-air. I am amazed by his skill, 
as he flicks the dough towards the camera like a lizard’s tongue. How much 
sculpture there is in the baker’s craft.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fpapagaio-mad-magical-mesmerising-gusmao-and-paiva-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423058527287%2F0bc30c3c-6cbf-416b-8703-8e69bcfc16bc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%2C%20magical%20and%20mesmerising%3A%20Gusm%C3%A3o%20%2B%20Paiva's%20labyrinth%20of%20silent%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fpapagaio-mad-magical-mesmerising-gusmao-and-paiva-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%2C%20magical%20and%20mesmerising%3A%20Gusm%C3%A3o%20%2B%20Paiva%27s%20labyrinth%20of%20silent%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fpapagaio-mad-magical-mesmerising-gusmao-and-paiva-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423058527287%2F0bc30c3c-6cbf-416b-8703-8e69bcfc16bc-1020x612.jpeg>
 Heat Ray, 2010, by Gusmão + Paiva Photograph: pr 
A blind man eats a papaya, screwing up his face at the texture and taste. The 
man looks likeGoya’s Saturn 
<https://www.museodelprado.es/en/the-collection/online-gallery/on-line-gallery/obra/saturn-devouring-one-of-his-sons/>
, devouring one of his children. This is a somehow terrifying scene. Sometimes 
staged, or shot on the hoof, Gusmão + Paiva’s films are mostly only a few 
minutes long, yet time stretches as we watch. They are slower than reality. 
This slowing down, and the use of high-definition film, gives everything the 
artists do a sense of expectation and gravity. What will happen next?

Often, not much. A turtle’s head emerges from under its shell, giving us its 
round, shining eye. A man rides a donkey across a town square in Kenya, seen 
from a high, distant vantage point. The camera looks through a car’s windscreen 
on a rainy day; the windscreen wipers move with metronomic slowness as the car 
turns a corner. The end. This last little vignette is called A Day Without 
Filming: somehow, the artists just couldn’t resist. They can make a drama out 
of nothing and art out of anything. The voodoo ceremony, at 42 minutes, is much 
too long. It takes eons. Sometimes, the artists film the drinking and dancing, 
and people rolling around in the dust in trance-like fits, and sometimes 
participants hold the camera themselves, jerking it around, swooping wildly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F99819471&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F99819471> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F99819471&media=>
The show opens with a space devoted to a short film of a gorgeous pet macaw, 
who occasionally takes flight in an explosion of colour, and sometimes hides 
out of sight. There’s a metaphor here somewhere. In another gallery, the 
projectors point this way and that from a clever arrangement of plinths and 
little seats. As soon as you focus on one work, another catches your eye and 
you have to move.

At their best, Gusmão + Paiva return us to that sense of wonder that 
spectators of early film must have felt as they watched the world unfold before 
them in the dark. Seeing a shadow play of bicycle wheels turning on the wall, I 
realise it isn’t a film, but a projection from acamera obscura 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camera_obscura>. Squinting through several bright 
lenses set into a false wall, I could see the wheels and moving lights in the 
hidden space beyond. I’m reminded of Duchamp, who liked to keep his arrangement 
of abicycle wheel and a stool 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=81631> in his studio for 
the pleasure of watching the wheel idly turn.
 Motion of Astronomical Bodies by Gusmão + Paiva at Camden Arts Centre, 
London. Photograph: Agostino Osio/HangarBicocca 
A second camera obscura throws the image of a room, and a view into what seems 
to be a moonlit garden, on to the gallery wall. The light shifts as we watch, 
like the passing of time. This is magical, understated, and oddly spellbinding. 
Even when you know how the illusion is achieved (looking back through the holes 
in the gallery wall, to the inverted model beyond) it retains an air of 
strangeness.
 Camera obscura display by Gusmão + Paiva. Photograph: Agostino 
Osio/HangarBicocca 
What does it all mean? Part of me doesn’t want to know. The book Teoria 
Extraterrestre 
<http://www.moussepublishing.com/products-page/product/joao-maria-gusmao-pedro-paiva-teoria-extraterrestre-duplicate/>
, which accompanies the exhibition (it’s much more than your bog-standard 
catalogue) is full of little stories, anecdotes, jokes, quotations from 
philosophers, and imaginary conversations. Here isWalter Benjamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/07/walter-benjamin-critical-life-howard-eiland-michael-w-jennings-review>
, from his famous essay on being out of his head in Marseille, ordering oysters 
while stoned on hashish. And here is an imaginary conversation between a wine 
taster and the blind man who ate the papaya. Spoof philosophies, real 
quotations, cod science and bits of arcane text accompany numerous commentaries 
on the works. It’s a labyrinth. I’m sureBorges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/10/jorgeluisborges> is in here 
somewhere, and now and again thegreat Portuguese writer Fernando Pessoa  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/22/book-disquiet-fernando-pessoa-lezard>
makes an appearance.

The more I try to make sense of Gusmão + Paiva, the more I balk at 
explanation. At some point, my inner critic leaves. What a relief. I stand 
gawping for hours. When I eventually leave, too, and cross the traffic on the 
hectic Finchley Road, the world is unhinged.

 * João Maria Gusmão + Pedro Paiva – Papagaio 
<http://www.camdenartscentre.org/whats-on/view/jmgpp> is at Camden Arts Centre, 
London NW3 until 29 March  