
The return of Mad Men for its final series on Sky may be given a simultaneous 
broadcast in the UK and US in the same way thatGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> will be simulcast 
when its fourth season begins next week.

Sky's director of entertainment channels, Stuart Murphy, said he wanted to do 
something special to launch the final run of Mad Men, which returns toSky 
Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic> on 16 April. The 
show's seventh series, it will be split into two, concluding next year.

Game of Thrones will return at 2am on 6 April in the UK, exactly the same time 
as it is shown onHBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> in the US, 9pm 
eastern time. It will then be shown again in the UK in its usual 9pm slot.

Sky has previously simulcast episodes of 24 with the US, as well as the finale 
ofLost <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/lost>.

Murphy told the Advertising Week Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising-week-europe> conference in 
London on Tuesday: "We were thinking about Game of Thrones, which we're going 
to simulcast, and we're thinking about that [with Mad Men].

"We might simulcast, it but I don't want to overplay that. I'm thinking how we 
do a special thing. I would quite like to find something playful we could do."

Murphy described its new homegrown drama, Arctic Circle thriller Fortitude, 
starring Stanley Tucci and Sofie Grabol, as the biggest gamble of his Sky 
career.

He said its budget was bigger than the annual programme spend on Sky's 
dedicated arts channels, Sky Arts 1 andSky Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-arts> 2 combined.

Murphy recalled how a former BSkyB chairman, James Murdoch, had told him that 
Sky was a technology company which only needed three big breakout hits a year.

"We have just taken a really big risk with Fortitude. Sky Atlantic has to be 
world class, and world class is by definition in pretty short supply," said 
Murphy.

"You fight hard to get the world's best and push them to perform brilliantly, 
and that in itself is hard."

Murphy, a former controller of BBC3, said Fortitude had to stand toe-to-toe 
with the best of HBO, the US cable channel whose shows are also shown on Sky 
Atlantic, which he said were "never about the romp, or the surface. There's 
always a story beneath it".

He said Sky could not afford to play it safe with mid-budget homegrown 
commissions in order to get noticed.

"We can't occupy the dangerous middle ground either," he said. "We have to go 
enormous or not at all. We learned that early on, we did some very small bets. 
We shouldn't go there. We have to go huge."

He said moderate hits were more annoying than huge flops.

"We can have failures, oddly we are encouraged to have spectacular failures. 
Obviously you don't want to have them, but if you are going to play in that 
game you have to have pretty tough skin and back the creatives."

Murphy said the best creativity came from "kind environments", but he said "I 
have never seen creativity be calm. There's usually beer involved, fast and 
noisy and often rubbish, but never calm."

He added: "If you believe in creativity and talent, you have got to take a 
leap of faith. The times I have screwed up and my team has screwed up is when 
we have been prescriptive. Why hire a genius if you are just going to get stuck 
in and do the job for them?"

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 