
A red taffeta ballgown skirt worn with a grey T-shirt declaring “Hillary” in 
beading on the front and “2016” on the back might not be your typical catwalk 
combination, but at a fundraiser forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> in Manhattan on Tuesday, 
the worlds of fashion and politics came together – for one night anyway.

The Made for History fashion show and rooftop party at the Spring Studios 
event space in Tribeca were co-hosted by Vogue editor Anna Wintour and 
Clinton’s closest aide Huma Abedin, who has been in the spotlight recently after
announcing a split with her husband Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
 following his latest sexting scandal last week.

Young female Clinton workers greeted guests wearing the Made for History 
merchandise, whichcan be bought on the Democratic presidential candidate’s 
website <https://shop.hillaryclinton.com/collections/made-for-history> and 
ranges in price from around $25 for a bandana by Thakoon to a $60 special 
edition new Marc Jacobs T-shirt and a $75 canvas pouch by Brett Heyman. All 
proceeds go straight to the Clinton campaign, and 85% of purchases so far have 
come from first-time donors, according to Wintour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a036c47bcab757bcb015193eb10ccb2d380d83%2F0_22_722_903%2F722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20for%20History%3A%20Anna%20Wintour%20hosts%20fashion%20fundraiser%20for%20Hillary%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20for%20History%3A%20Anna%20Wintour%20hosts%20fashion%20fundraiser%20for%20Hillary%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a036c47bcab757bcb015193eb10ccb2d380d83%2F0_22_722_903%2F722.jpg>
 Outfit by Georgina Chapman, designer of Marchesa, for the Made for History 
fundraiser. Photograph: Amber Jamieson for the Guardian 
“The collection is both stylish and distinctive, and unlike the Republican 
candidate’s unspeakably hideous ties, our collection is made in America by 
union workers,” announced the Vogue editor, to laughter and applause at the 
reference to Donald Trump.

Both Wintour and Abedin were dressed in a print of the individual US states by 
Jason Wu, designer of both of Michelle Obama’s inauguration gowns.


Clinton herself did not attend, but her daughter Chelsea was there. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a5deecc4234a04545023b4d4ccf51aa2ee4ca35%2F0_145_962_577%2F962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Made%20for%20History%3A%20Anna%20Wintour%20hosts%20fashion%20fundraiser%20for%20Hillary%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Made%20for%20History%3A%20Anna%20Wintour%20hosts%20fashion%20fundraiser%20for%20Hillary%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhillary-clinton-fashion-show-fundraiser-anna-wintour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a5deecc4234a04545023b4d4ccf51aa2ee4ca35%2F0_145_962_577%2F962.jpg>
 Made for History event in Tribeca. Photograph: Amber Jamieson for the Guardian 
“I didn’t know I could care any more about politics and who’s running for 
political office until I became a mother and found that I could,” Chelsea 
Clinton said. “That surprised me because I grew up spending a lot of times at 
events like this – not quite like this, not quite as glamorous and maybe with 
not quite such a spectacular view,” she added, beckoning to the huge 
floor-to-ceiling windows of the Tribeca venue, showing the Manhattan skyline at 
sunset.

The fashion show including four black ballerinas strutting the catwalk en 
pointe in Diane Von Furstenberg T-shirts, a dozen skateboarders high-fiving 
each other while skating around the room, and Joseph Altuzarra’s glamorous 
models strutting the catwalk with French bulldogs on a leash.
 