
As a 17-year-old I had to walk 15 miles on the magic day to join the sea of 
humanity aroundParliament House 
<http://aplapindia2005.nic.in/Parliament%20estate.htm> and listen to Jawaharlal 
Nehru <http://www.india-today.com/itoday/millennium/100people/nehru.html>'s 
magnificent "tryst-with-destiny"speech 
<http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1947nehru1.html>. It accentuated my 
bursting excitement and high hopes, indeed dreams, about India's future 
greatness and glory. Six decades on, a few of those expectations have been 
realised, not fully but substantially, to borrow Nehru's words used in a 
different context. But many other dreams have been reduced to debris.

Despite sharp twists and turns in its fate, rising India has at last caught 
the world's attention. There is general agreement that, along with China, India 
will soon be a superpower. More importantly, all through the 60 years, except 
during the 19 months ofIndira Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/india/story/0,,1191905,00.html>'s Emergency 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Emergency_%281975%E2%80%931977%29> in the 
mid-70s, this country has remained a lively democracy, which surely has many 
flaws; yet compares favourably with what American democracy was in 1836. Even 
more creditable in this era of rising religious fundamentalism is that, despite 
undoubted setbacks, India has, by and large, stuck to secularism, inclusiveness 
and tolerance.

The driving force behind India's rise is the economic upswing since the 
liberalisation and globalisation of its controlled economy in the early 90s. 
The present 9% annual increase inGDP 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gross_domestic_product> is thrice the Hindu rate 
of growth of yesteryears. Yet it is a measure of gross iniquities that about 
two-fifths of Indians still go to sleep on hungry stomachs.

The list of shattered dreams is long. The first to collapse the conviction, 
rather than dream, that with the departure of the British,Hindu-Muslim killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/india/story/0,,1635973,00.html> would cease. 
Worse, belying hopes that independent India would root out corruption this 
scourge has become rampant, indeed a galloping cancer without cure. My 
generation did not expect dowry to survive either. Sadly, it has also become 
pervasive and irremediable. Brides bringing inadequate dowry are sometimes 
burnt to death. From this obviously flows the evil that is bleakly called "
female foeticide <https://www.theguardian.com/india/story/0,,2136618,00.html>", 
the horrifying murder of the girl child before birth.

Mahatma Gandhi 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/gandhi_mohandas.shtml>, the 
father of the nation, wanted caste to be abolished instantly. The reverse has 
happened.Caste <https://www.theguardian.com/india/story/0,,1505974,00.html> 
today has become the most potent political force. Since populist politicians 
woo the "backward vote bank 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/pradipta_chaudhury/2007/06/an_ancient_form_of_discrimination.html>
" by reserving more and more jobs for so-called backward castes, caste 
conflicts are rife. Another appalling failure of the Indian state is that free 
and compulsory primary education has not been enforced. Millions of children 
who ought to be in school are forced to do menial work.

In my younger days, the middle class had a sense of guilt about the pitiable 
plight of the poor and the downtrodden. This has virtually disappeared. The 
conscience of the Indian rich is dead. Nothing could be more stark than the 
complete disconnect between the 250 million Indians enjoying lifestyles 
comparable to those in Manhattan or Mayfair and the wretched 400 million 
condemned to living in dehumanising poverty.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 