
Sir Ara Darzi's healthcare for London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
plan, published today, argues that despite pockets of excellence the capital's 
NHS health provision is essentially second-rate. There are stark inequalities 
in health outcomes across the capital, and the quality and safety of care is 
"not always as good as it could and should be", the report says. It adds that 
productivity is low, costs are high, hospital resources are under-utilised and 
GP services are patchy.

His 10 year vision says the NHS needs to change if it is to meet the rising 
expectations of Londoners, improve the health of an expanding, and increasingly 
diverse population, and provide value for money "Continuing with the old ways 
of doing things will not only be ineffective, it is also likely to be 
unaffordable," the report says.

Instead it suggests:
· New models of provision are needed, to bring patient care out of hospital 
and closer to home. It proposes the creation of five to 10 "polyclinics", 
community-based facilities which include GP services, minor surgery and a wide 
range of other services previously located in district general hospitals, such 
as diagnostics and outpatient consulting rooms, by April 2009;

· district general hospitals would be downgraded as patient care is shifted 
either into polyclinics, elective surgery centres or, for more complex cases, 
an elite group of major acute hospitals and specialist centres;

· Darzi, who was appointed a health minister by Gordon Brown, says that no 
hospitals would close if the report's recommendations were implemented. But it 
is clear that there would be major changes for many of them. He argues that 
London NHS's huge and ageing property portfolio - comprising nearly 100 
hospitals and hundreds of smaller sites which together cost £700m a year to 
service - must be rationalised;

· the report does not name which of the capital's 32 acute hospitals will 
survive as prestigious major acute hospitals, but suggests there will be a mix 
of inner and outer London sites, comprising those which can demonstrate the 
best clinical outcomes and easiest access for patients;

· there should be major changes in the way London's 206,000 doctors, nurses 
and other NHS staff are deployed , the report says. They are currently not used 
in the most effective way, and many staff must in future not be employed by a 
single trust or GP surgery but in ways that allow them to work in - and move 
easily between - hospital and community settings;

· the report accepts that many staff will fear change, and proposes the 
creation of "clinical champions" who can make the case for change to staff and 
the public. It admits the public may be concerned by change but argues that 
they ill be persuaded once they see better and more accessible and 
patient-friendly services in place;

· the report sets out frameworks for action in seven key areas: maternity and 
newborn care, health promotion, mental health, acute care, planned care, long 
term conditions and end-of-life care;

· It outlines five principles underpinning change: services should be focused 
on individual patients' needs and choices, and patients should feel in control 
of their care; routine healthcare should take place as close to the patient's 
home as possible, while more complex care should be centralised in specialised 
units to ensure high standards; there must be better communication between the 
community and hospital branches of the NHS, and between health and social care 
services, to prevent patients "falling between the gaps" in provision; 
preventing people falling ill in the first place should be integral to 
everything the NHS does; change should focus on tackling health inequalites in 
the capital, and new facilities should be located in areas of greatest health 
need.
 