
On Friday night in Los Angeles, I sat next to my father inside Dodger Stadium. 
My dad, Mike Lengel, is a 75-year-old lifelong fan of the Dodgers, who grew up 
in New York city watching Jackie Robinson, Pee Wee Reese, Duke Snider and the 
team of his childhood play in Brooklyn: until that night, he had never been 
been to LA or visited Dodger Stadium, where the team landed after leaving in 
1957.

José Fernández: a smiling star whose death leaves baseball bereft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/25/jose-fernandez-death-miami-marlins-baseball>
For nearly 60 years there was always an excuse not to travel the 2,778 miles 
between the site of old Ebbets Field in Flatbush to Chavez Ravine 
<https://goo.gl/maps/voWzYxf2mVB2>, but with baseball’s longest and most 
cherished broadcasting career coming to a close, we finally made the family 
trip west for Vin Scully’s tribute night.

To me at least, it seems impossible to measure the importance of the 
88-year-old Scully, but you could try this: perhaps no other baseball 
personality, on or off the field, has enjoyed such wide ranging impact or 
universal love and admiration. And so those fortunate enough to listen to 
Scully at any point during the roughly 9,000 games he called will feel a 
stinging void in their lives after his final game on Sunday in San Francisco.

Technology had brought my father the last few years of Scully to late east 
coast nights, and now we were in Los Angeles as our own personal tribute to 
Scully and to hear him address the crowd.

“It’s not fair, you made me cry once tonight,” said Scully to the crowd.

Fans in the stands were crying with him. We cried because we were part of an 
audience of baseball fans that helped his own dreams come true. Because we were 
losing the comfort of his storytelling. Because after 67 beautiful seasons, 
there were no more tomorrows for baseball’s familiar voice. Because he was
leaving our parents to whom he brought joy 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/la-sp-dodgers-love-letters-to-vin-scully-roundup-20160928-snap-htmlstory.html>
, and because our children would never share the same experiences.

And then, 48 hours later, my father and were failing to reconcile the news 
that José Fernández was killed in an early morning boating accident, and the 
contrast could not have been more stark.

Fernández’ death was the opposite of Scully’s departure. The baseball world 
cried because he was just 24. Because he fought so hard to get here from Cuba. 
Because, unlike Scully, he’ll never get to take his potential to the next level 
or live out his dream to completion. Because he will never be a father to his 
daughter. Because he left so many behind that loved him. And because he was a 
beautiful player who played a game many fans wished they could.

It was all too early to think about of course, but baseball fans might have 
one day travelled to watch the great José Fernández pitch in his final season. 
To give their tributes to a player that meant the world to them, and to witness 
a pitcher who impacted their lives in some way, shape or form. Fernández would 
have also been able to say goodbye, on his own terms, just as Scully wished my 
father and I well, from the booth up into the grandstand.

Now, tragically, Fernández has moved permanently into our baseball memories, 
and all too soon.

The have nots

After nearly six months and 2,430 games, the start of the all-consuming battle 
for a World Series title is just days away. Before we thrust ourselves into who 
will become the 112th champion, here’s a look at who we know won’t be playing 
for a ring this October.

New York Yankees
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a15e72a6d18fce5edb53e802da896f09c6e646e%2F0_29_3192_1916%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a15e72a6d18fce5edb53e802da896f09c6e646e%2F0_29_3192_1916%2F3192.jpg>
 A-Rod Who? Gary Sanchez set a record as the fastest player to 20 home runs 
while helping the Yankees stay competitive while rebuilding. Photograph: Adam 
Hunger/USA Today Sports 
The Yankees handbook says every season without a title is a disappointment: if 
they should be eliminated from contention, and they’re hanging on by a thread, 
this may be the best-tasting bitter pill in baseball history. New York’s aging 
ballclub, defined by Alex Rodriguez and Mark Teixeira type, suddenly became 
youthful and promising. A-Rod was ushered out, while prospects were promoted 
and acquired after shipping away the likes of Aroldis Chapman, Andrew Miller 
and Carlos Beltran. Then the Yanks somehow managed to hang in the playoff race, 
with great thanks to Gary Sanchez’ historic home run streak. Their young roster 
will likely suffer its share of growing pains, but if prodigious winning should 
return, the summer of ‘16 will be recalled as a key transition point.

Tampa Bay Rays
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f6d035d76868f0525d476e33019785aedcda09e%2F0_56_2225_1335%2F2225.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f6d035d76868f0525d476e33019785aedcda09e%2F0_56_2225_1335%2F2225.jpg>
 Chris Archer didn’t measure up to his breakout season of a year ago in 2016. 
Photograph: Kim Klement/USA Today Sports 
Tampa Bay, seemingly forever pitching rich and hitting poor, were fourth in 
the AL in home runs, led by Evan Longoria and Brad Miller, who combined for 63. 
Unfortunately, they had issues scoring in other ways, and the Rays fired their 
hitting coach Derek Shelton in September. Tampa had the third best rotation ERA 
in the AL, but Chris Archer let down. Alex Cobb didn’t pitch until early this 
month and the bullpen was among the worst in the league. They suffered through 
a 3-26 stretch, and will end 2016 with their worst record since they lost the 
“Devil Rays” moniker nine years ago.

Kansas City Royals
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F640de978c910c559018c01835309dd86c3c1b2fd%2F0_44_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F640de978c910c559018c01835309dd86c3c1b2fd%2F0_44_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
 Injuries poured cold water on the Kansas City Royals title defense. 
Photograph: Charlie Riedel/AP 
The champs lost Mike Moustakas, Lorenzo Cain and Alex Gordon to injuries for 
chunks, and their contact-based offense crashed out, falling to 14th in the 
league. While starter Danny Duffy was superb, the big-picture formula of 
mediocre starting pitching bridging to a blistering bullpen didn’t pan out this 
time around. They ranked 12th in ERA, just as they did last season. Except this 
in 2016, that translated to a quarter run more per game. With a thin offense, 
wins were elusive, Ned Yost seemed less genius, and the champs surrendered 
their crown.


Chicago White Sox
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677c7ec1e04e672007528a017255b9d6e90c5af6%2F0_95_3434_2061%2F3434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677c7ec1e04e672007528a017255b9d6e90c5af6%2F0_95_3434_2061%2F3434.jpg>
 Chris Sale doesn’t seem too cut up about wearing this alternate White Sox 
jersey, does he? Photograph: David Banks/USA Today Sports 
They look pretty good early on, until they didn’t. From 9 May on, the 23-10 
start, the six-game lead, the lights-out bullpen, the surprising starting 
pitching from Mat Latos and the improvement of Avisail Garcia all went away. 
They released Latos, picked up James Shields, whose ERA is approaching seven, 
watched Todd Frazier either strike out or hit a home run, and marveled at the 
tailoring skills of Chris Sale, who provided their most memorable moment of 
2016 by far.


Minnesota Twins
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F616e87785af72647b8461e01b4c7fe6a4bbac4b0%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F616e87785af72647b8461e01b4c7fe6a4bbac4b0%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Babe, I mean, Brian Dozier stunned fans by setting a single season record for 
home runs by a second baseman in 2016. Photograph: Rick Osentoski/USA Today 
Sports 
Their 33-58 first-half mark was the second worst in franchise history. That’s 
the kind of start that gets your GM fired, which is what happened in July when 
Terry Ryan got the axe and all the good of their surprise 2015 season was 
evaporated by May. The Twins lost over 100 games while starting 11 pitchers 
this season: just one, Ervin Santana, had an ERA of below five. Too bad, 
because, overall, the offense was a tick better than last season, even if some 
of their younger players, Byron Buxton and Eddie Rosario didn’t capitalize on 
their playing time and Miguel Sano struck out over 170 times. Brian Dozier is 
the bright spot, cracking 42 home runs in a season where second baseman 
out-slugged outfielders for the first time in history.


Houston Astros
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaccc8738a3a9a41b75518d112bf289216ae568f%2F0_32_3433_2060%2F3433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaccc8738a3a9a41b75518d112bf289216ae568f%2F0_32_3433_2060%2F3433.jpg>
 The Houston Astros hit a wall while playing the Texas Rangers this season. 
Photograph: Bob Levey/Getty Images 
Like the Yankees, the Astros are on the cusp of elimination. Should they not 
come up with what would be nothing short of a miracle, Houston can look at 
their play against the Texas Rangers as one of the main reasons why they’ve 
failed to make the playoffs for a second straight season. Their AL West rivals 
to the west whipped them in 15 out of 19 contests all season long. Yes, you can 
also blame the poor play of the outfielders: Colby Rasmus struggled and Carlos 
Gomez stunk it up while Jake Marisnick and Preston Tucker failed to pick up the 
slack. And Dallas Keuchel did fail to approach the production of his 2015 Cy 
Young season. But really, all Jose Altuve and company really needed was a few 
more measly wins against Texas and they would be in the thick of it heading 
into the final weekend.

Los Angeles Angels
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0601f79dfddfc6c2f0a4113d024d6452f16f0947%2F0_92_2124_1275%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0601f79dfddfc6c2f0a4113d024d6452f16f0947%2F0_92_2124_1275%2F2124.jpg>
 The Los Angeles Angels continue to slide despite the presence of the best 
player in the world in Mike Trout on their roster. Photograph: Gary A. 
Vasquez/USA Today Sports 
Bad seasons are piling up for Mike Scioscia and his Angeles of Los Anaheim 
Angels: since 2009, they’ve visited the post-season just once. Is it time for 
Scioscia to move on after 17 seasons? Quite possibly, but when your rotation is 
so banged up that you need to test-drive Tim Lincecum mid-season, it becomes 
harder to blame the manager. Garrett Richards, Andrew Heaney Tyler Skaggs and 
Matt Shoemaker all missed time, while CJ Wilson, who was supposed to return 
from surgery, woulnd up undergoing another surgery. It’s messy, and it may be 
that way for awhile. Meanwhile Mike Trout, the best player on the planet, rots 
in the orange groves.


Oakland Athletics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d9d10162e03e67495982b6ab0589bf05ca451bb%2F0_113_3056_1834%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d9d10162e03e67495982b6ab0589bf05ca451bb%2F0_113_3056_1834%2F3056.jpg>
 This didn’t happen much in Oakland this season Photograph: Neville E. 
Guard/USA Today Sports 
Billy Beane’s A’s have lost a lot of games since going all in on the 2014 
season and dealing away reigning AL MVP Josh Donaldson. Like so many other 
rotations across baseball, injuries caused significant issues and only Rich 
Hill was able to combine health and quality. As with most Beane teams there is 
a developing core: this season starter Sean Manea, third baseman Matt Chapman 
and shortstop Franklin Barreto have emerged to show promise, while Jharel 
Cotton, one of three prospects acquired in Hill’s eventual move to the Dodgers, 
has looked good in a handful of starts. Yes, the A’s slumped in 2016, but 
there’s always tomorrow in Oakland.


Arizona Diamondbacks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F381642e16a4d137bb2c8bc293dcf5ef3ae302c9f%2F0_56_2206_1323%2F2206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F381642e16a4d137bb2c8bc293dcf5ef3ae302c9f%2F0_56_2206_1323%2F2206.jpg>
 No team looked worse while losing in 2016 than the Arizona Diamondbacks. 
Photograph: Brad Mills/USA Today Sports 
Arizona looked as bad as their deep grey uniforms during a 2016 season that 
blew up early. Winter acquisitions Zack Greinke and Shelby Miller, dealt for 
No1 pick Dansby Swanson from Atlanta, were shelled regularly before Miller was 
sent to the minors. Prior to their roasting, star outfielder AJ Pollack 
suffered an injury in spring training that would keep him out until September. 
So really, it was all over before it began. Tony La Russa recently fired senior 
VP of baseball operations De Jon Watson, and La Russa and GM Dave Stewartcould 
be next 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/disappointing-diamondbacks-fire-vp-tony-121116925.html>
. Bright spots were with the bats: as always, Paul Goldschmidt was superb, 
while Jean Segura, Jake Lamb and young Brandon Drury, whose crazy September OPS 
of over 1.000, brought some measure of solace to Chase Field.


San Diego Padres
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4496a2e9140aef927c8dbec91d3292350f40a1%2F0_273_3244_1948%2F3244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4496a2e9140aef927c8dbec91d3292350f40a1%2F0_273_3244_1948%2F3244.jpg>
 It was that kind of season in San Diego. Photograph: Chris Carlson/AP 
There was the good AJ Preller: turning a breakout season from Drew Pomeranz, 
and solid performances from Fernando Rodney, Matt Kemp and Melvin Upton into 
strong prospects, moves that could ultimately become a successful reversal of 
the failures that followed their aggressive off-season of 2014-15. The bad AJ 
Preller got caught withholding medical information during in his dealings with 
the Boston Red Sox in the Pomeranz deal: the controversial GM got a wrist slap 
30-day suspension, the Pads got a stain on their season. In between, minor 
league afterthoughts Ryan Schimpf, a second baseman, and reliever Ryan Buchter 
become legitimate big league players, while rule 5 pick Luis Pedromo showed 
promise as a starter despite never pitching above Single-A ball.


Colorado Rockies
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb190fd80be4299e1437b6d92921a920d6acde1%2F0_110_4221_2533%2F4221.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cb190fd80be4299e1437b6d92921a920d6acde1%2F0_110_4221_2533%2F4221.jpg>
 Nolan Arenado was Superman in 2016 but the Colorado Rockies failed to turn the 
corner. Photograph: Danny Moloshok/AP 
The Rockies rode a 14-5 hot streak ride out of the All-Star break and into 
wild card contention. Then they lost 10 of 12 games and that was that. Still, 
2016 seemed positive, even if Coors Field always makes winning difficult. They 
actually pitched reasonably well, away from home of course, posting the sixth 
best road ERA in the NL. At home? Well, at least Arizona finished with a worse 
team ERA. Offensively, DJ LeMaheiu will win the batting title, Nolan Arenado is 
an MVP candidate and rookie Trevor Story surprised all by homering in seven 
times of his first eight games. The two Tyler’s, Chatwood and Anderson pitched 
well despite their environment and the Rockies were competitive and fun, more 
than their fans bargained for this season.


Atlanta Braves
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8df74e3cfc40e983468f884d2131779446e45cd%2F0_165_4938_2963%2F4938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8df74e3cfc40e983468f884d2131779446e45cd%2F0_165_4938_2963%2F4938.jpg>
 Matt Kemp proved he could be a centerpiece in the Atlanta Braves 2017 lineup 
after being acquired from San Diego. Photograph: Brett Davis/USA Today Sports 
By the time the season was done, Atlanta didn’t look like a 90-loss team, 
finishing with a flash, torturing the Mets and compiling a 16-9 mark down the 
stretch. That was mostly thanks to a lineup featuring a formidable one through 
five lineup that includes former No1 pick Dansby Swanson who was fleeced from 
Arizona and proved he was ready for the bigs and h hot Freddie Freeman on a 
30-ga,e hitting streak. The mid-season acquisition of Matt Kemp also worked out 
well with the vet posting strong numbers and defense in left field. The bullpen 
has a handful of elite arms while the Braves GM John Coppolella says they’ll 
have $50m to upgrade the team, including the rotation, which is led by Julio 
Teheran. With few starters available, look for Atlanta to take on salary via 
trades as they gear up for opening day in their new Cobb County ballpark.


Philadelphia Phillies
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ecf7ec7d2ecba98b9cf73da856652896de1e22a%2F0_124_2030_1218%2F2030.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ecf7ec7d2ecba98b9cf73da856652896de1e22a%2F0_124_2030_1218%2F2030.jpg>
 The Philadelphia Phillies saw their luck run out by June. Photograph: Mitchell 
Leff/Getty Images 
Pete Mackanin’s Phillies couldn’t have had lower expectations coming off a 
99-loss season, but by 18 May they were 4-0 in extra innings, had won 11 games 
by scoring three runs or less, were 15-3 in one-run games and were just a half 
game out of first place in the NL East, all despite being 14th in NL runs 
scored. Their lucky streak would soon end and the sort of losing that a 
rebuilding franchise can expect took over. There are signs that the growing 
pains of a youthful starting rotation group – Vince Velasquez, Aaron Nola and 
Jared Eickhoff – will eventually yield a steady core. When prospects including 
JP Crawford, Mickey Moniak, Nick Williams, Roman Quinn are ready to join the 
likes of current Phills Maikel Franco and Odubel Herrera, Philly could 
potentially become one of the more complete offensive clubs in the NL,could 
being the key word. It won’t happen next season, or perhaps the season after 
that, but at least a blueprint is in place: all that’s needed is plenty of 
patience.

Miami Marlins
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2824f6a919811eb188911c1c3d503730f26a8686%2F0_83_2552_1532%2F2552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2824f6a919811eb188911c1c3d503730f26a8686%2F0_83_2552_1532%2F2552.jpg>
 Tragedy struck Major League Baseball when JJosé Fernández was killed in a 
boating accident on Sunday morin Photograph: Jasen Vinlove/USA Today Sports 
The 2016 will always be remembered for the tragedy surrounding the death of 
José Fernández. His loss continues to overwhelm Miami and the baseball world as 
we struggle to understand how a young person can be gone, just like that, long 
before his time is up. The frustrations of an organization struggling to 
compete for a post-season spot matter little at the moment, and so any mention 
of their on-field issues are for another time.

Pittsburgh Pirates
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2033e5f67dd7159042fffd989f9641032ef19fc6%2F0_154_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2033e5f67dd7159042fffd989f9641032ef19fc6%2F0_154_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 The Pittsburgh Pirates waved goodbye to the playoffs in 2016. Photograph: Doug 
Pensinger/Getty Images 
It took 20 long years for the Pirates to find a place into the playoffs: the 
question now is, how long will it take for the Buccos to get back to the 
post-season? Holes require filling in the starting rotation: in 2016, fairy 
dust flew off Francisco Liriano, Jonathan Niese flopped, Gerrit Cole managed 
just 21 starts and JA Happ put up ace like numbers, for the Blue Jays. 
Offensively, Andrew McCutchen declined for the second straight year, but 
Starling Marte, Gregory Polanco, Jung Ho Kang provided enough offense, and 
really, a half-decent rotation would’ve been enough to get them to a fourth 
consecutive playoff appearance, considering the competition. Instead, Bucs fans 
are left wondering if their two tough wild card game losses will remain the 
legacy of this era.

Milwaukee Brewers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9125dd4af2d1c0b2e3ede5a109dd90ab370a77c2%2F0_101_4145_2487%2F4145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9125dd4af2d1c0b2e3ede5a109dd90ab370a77c2%2F0_101_4145_2487%2F4145.jpg>
 Will Ryan Braun be a Milwaukee Brewer when 2017 opens? Photograph: Dennis 
Wierzbicki/USA Today Sports 
The Brewers continued to sell during their rebuild, dumping catcher Jonathan 
Lucroy, relievers Jeremy Jefress and Will Smith for promising prospects 
including catcher Andrew Susac. Ryan Braun, one of the last vets on the roster, 
nearly wound up in Los Angeles before a deal for Yasiel Puig fell through. 
Milwaukee won more games than they did a season ago and rather amazingly, drew 
over 2.3m fans in 2016. Shortstop Jonathan Villar is flirting with a historic 
tally of 20 homers and 60 stolen bases, while utility-man Hernan Perez became a 
bona fide regular, Zach Davies showed signs of breaking out and Keon Broxton 
was an athletic and productive contributor. Still, any turnaround is distant 
and Miller Park will continue to be a safe place for Cubs fans in 2017.

Cincinnati Reds
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6adb3bcb1150e47894a28a74646b549b4534f683%2F0_85_2536_1522%2F2536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20overcome%20by%20emotion%20during%20its%20final%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fmajor-league-baseball-emotion-vin-scully-jose-fernandez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6adb3bcb1150e47894a28a74646b549b4534f683%2F0_85_2536_1522%2F2536.jpg>
 The Cincinnati Reds 2016 season was, at times, hard to watch. Photograph: 
Jamie Sabau/Getty Images 
Just when you thought that a 6.25 April ERA amongst Reds relievers was rock 
bottom, along came May where the bullpen topped seven. And while injuries 
continued to derail catcher Devin Mesoraco, and Homer Bailey bombed after 
returning in July, there was Anthony DeSclafani emerging to post a sub-3.50 
ERA, Joey Votto approaching a .400 post all-star break batting average, Adam 
Duvall breaking out with over 30 homers and the emergence of 22-year-old 
shortstop Jose Peraza. Still, despite a decent set of prospects seasoning in 
the minors, competing in a division with Chicago, the Cardinals and Pirates 
should bring more misery in 2017.
 