
Years ago there was an advertisement on Australian television for the fizzy 
drink Dr Pepper which featured the Statue of Liberty uprooting itself from the 
Hudson and striding across the ocean floor before emerging between the Sydney 
Opera House and Harbour Bridge.


As water ran down the Torch of Enlightenment we cut to two blokes holding cans 
of Dr Pepper and looking up at the statue. One asks, “Waddya reckon?” His mate 
takes a sip and replies: “Yeah – you could get used to it.”

It was a cracking ad, and had Dr Pepper not tasted worse than cough syrup for 
Komodo Dragons it might have caught on like other American institutions – 
Coca-Cola, say, or I Dream of Jeannie.

We are wandering up to the mighty, storied Sydney Cricket Ground on a balmy 
autumn evening in Sydney Town, the sky several gorgeous if foreboding shades of 
purple and mauve, with the odd angry shot of blood orange. Bats – specifically 
the local grey-headed flying fox – flap through the skies, heading off to do 
what bats do, while 38,000 people converge on the latest American thing to 
arrive in Australia, namely the American thing – Major League Baseball, and the 
ball-game between the LA Dodgers andArizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks>.

Soon enough, we’re in … and it’s another world. Brilliant white lights bathe 
the ground in golden faux daytime. Where once checker-board green grass 
dominated the field, now there’s crushed terracotta baseball dirt, a “warning 
track”, bases, dugouts, and other basebally stuff. The players wander out and 
line up on the, um, lines. There is high-fiving. Players’ names are read out, 
then those of the third-base coach, and other ancillary dudes. Hard to seeSteve 
Rixon <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Rixon> getting a shout-out before a 
Test match, but there you go. It’s a thing. “Clayton … Kershaw,” announces the 
announcer, and there are cheers. He’s the pitcher, an important man.He will 
earn $215m in the next seven years 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2002097-new-mlb-season-new-mega-contract-same-old-clayton-kershaw-dominance>
, you couldn’t buy New Zealand with that, but you could own most of Queenstown.

And so to a full-strength beer – the kind that raises a man’s mood – from a 
long yet moving queue. On field, a mascot creature, possibly an Ewok, is 
pinging balls into the crowd, having fun. The Qantas quasi-virgins are here in 
their gleaming white tunics and larynxes of the lord.
 Baseball at the SCG contained excitement, top players and lots of hot dogs. 
Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
Then we’re up into the media box, high in the MA Noble Stand, where we find 
the United Nations of baseball. There’s American, Japanese, Korean, Latin 
American, British and Australian media. Los Angeles radio broadcasts in Spanish 
and English. Local journos are doing their best while Americans say stuff like, 
“This guy stinks”. And it’s all a little different. Example? You can buy tacos, 
hot dogs, Miller beer. American and Australian flags flutter atop the Members 
Stand. There are anthems.Marcia Hines 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcia_Hines>, the diva, rips off a cracking Star 
Spangled Banner. Australia Fair is Advanced by Emma Birdsall, and Australians 
actually get into it.Sydney Swans champion Adam Goodes wanders out to throw the 
ceremonial pitch 
<http://www.sydneyswans.com.au/video/2014-03-22/swanstv-goodes-first-pitch>. He 
shines the baseball on his groin, smiles like he’s doing something naughty. 
That’s why he’s Australian of The Year, right there.

The Diamondbacks trot out into this gorgeous green field of dreams. 
Outfielders languidly hurl white rocks at each other, flat and hard. These 
aren’t parabolas but bullets shot flat over 50 metres. The arms on these 
people! A hairy man warms up on the pitcher’s mound. It's Wade Miley. He’ll be 
throwing the first one to Yasiel Puig, a 23-year-old from Cienfuegos in Cuba. 
And … strike. If that wasn’t a fastball it was a very-bloody-rapid one. The 
fans, 90% Aussies, are right into this. There’s little parochialism. The ground 
looks magnificent with a diamond, a truly big, beautiful thing. The SCG always 
scrubs up well. But this, this is something else.

Wade Miley flings one past a batter and the batter doesn’t have a crack, and 
the umpire does one of those brilliant double-fisting moves to signify:you’re 
outta here. You know the one, like he’s violently double-pumping a 
motor-mower’s ripcord.Seeya! And tell your story walkin’, Bubba. It is gold. 
We’ve seen this stuff on the television before, each year we might tune in to 
the World Series, get to know Wade Boggs or Kirby Puckett. We've heard of Derek 
Jeter and Dave Nilsson, the Australian who comes to mind when you think Major 
League Baseball. But actually seeing the umpire do a Leslie Nielsen move from 
Naked Gun, actually seeing it live and sweaty at the SCG? It is very cool.

Some time early in the game – top of the second? Bottom of the fourth? It 
matters not – a Dodgers batter smashes the verybejeezus out of one. The ball 
soars into the clear black night while the man in the outfield goes 
back-back-back, all the way to the fence, which he climbs, as people the other 
side of it drop their beers and prepare to catch the ball, excited like Santa’s 
bringing them a present. As the ball crashes into the bottom of the fence our 
outfielder is stranded on top, glove out, like Spiderman stuck up a tree.

You get an idea of the speed of the pitches and the friction of bat on ball 
when foul balls fly high and wide on to the roofs of the various giant 
grandstands. The sound of the ball on bat is a thick meatythock, a magnificent, 
meaty sound which sends the white ball shooting into the black of the night. 
And you think, hot dang, or something like it.

Middle of the fifth, whenever, some time, groundstaff come out with wiper 
things which they drag behind themselves, across the dirt to smooth it out. 
Dance Cam comes on the big screen and a kid does his best to get jiggy, ripping 
off dance moves. It’s possibly a setup – a kid who can dance funny appears at 
this very moment in time? – though he gets as big a cheer as Goodes. Wade 
Miley’s still going. How long before the manager comes out to tell him he’s no 
longer required? Maybe not long. Because … homer! A home run! Smashed over 
right-field by a big dude with a beard, the ball slicing in a powerful manner 
towards an upright yellow fence thing and into the crowd on the correct side of 
the law.That sucka is outta here. 

Down we go to a spot directly behind the umpire/catcher, and several rows of 
people who’ve paid $850 for a seat – they should not be trusted with money. 
It's a world-class event and very interesting, but you wouldn’t pay $850. You 
can fly to Thailand for $850. I once bought a car for $850. It was a crap car, 
granted. But you wouldn’t pay $850 for a seat here with money you found on the 
body of a long-dead pimp.

Thock! A hot whack near third base sees a man leap into the air and take a 
speccie, one-handed, one-gloved leaping super-catch.What a catch. They call the 
bit around third base “hot corner” because right-handed batters can crack it 
flat like slingshot alley. It's the hot spot, and no argument.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP4hfrextOqM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP4hfrextOqM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP4hfrextOqM&media=>
And, here we are, the fabled seventh-inning stretch. And here’s that song, 
Take Me Out To the Ball Game.On the big screen some football men from Sydney 
Swans, Sydney Roosters and New South Wales Waratahs sing the song and mug for 
the crowd <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P4hfrextOqM>, and it’s pretty good, 
without being more entertaining than Cirque Du Soleil in the nude.Thock! A 
massive foul ball, on to the roof of the Bradman Stand. The ball almost rolls 
back off the roof, eliciting one of the biggest cheers of the evening. There 
follows applause: the Dodgers pitcher is going off. There’s a new one. Seven 
people stand on the mound, waiting for him.

The new man is … Christ, look at this bloke, it’s Ned Kelly morphed with Hulk 
Hogan 
<http://brightcove01.brightcove.com/22/275353188001/201303/2855/275353188001_2199765283001_vs-51323a9ce4b0b4f57367fc03-1206954747001.jpg?pubId=275353188001>
. His name’s Brian Wilson. He should be lifting barrels of beer off a truck, 
not throwing speed balls on the SCG. But that he can do, Big Ned, his pitches 
are hot white rocks from a cannon. The Diamondbacks also change their pitcher. 
New one is Brad Ziegler, a Richie Cunningham-looking fellow with a whippy, 
side-arm, slinging, almost-underarm pitching style. The magic of Google tells 
us he’s a “side-armer” or “side-winder”, and a man not to be trusted, though I 
made that up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmajor-league-baseball-in-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F23%2F1395615037877%2Fdc417cd2-638a-4244-ac23-59b5d8000a4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20League%20Baseball%20in%20Sydney%3A%20hairy%20giants%2C%20meaty%20thocks%20and%20Miller%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmajor-league-baseball-in-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20League%20Baseball%20in%20Sydney%3A%20hairy%20giants%2C%20meaty%20thocks%20and%20Miller%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmajor-league-baseball-in-sydney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F23%2F1395615037877%2Fdc417cd2-638a-4244-ac23-59b5d8000a4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Dodgers' very own Ned Kelly, Brian Wilson, in action. Photograph: Saeed 
Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
If you can’t trust Richie Cunningham it is The End of Times for humanity. The 
score is 3-1 Dodgers. The D-Backs have a multi-man confab on the mound. They 
replace their pitcher with JJ Putz. Old Richie side-winder didn’t get much of a 
go. Long way to fly for not a dozen chucks. But then he can console himself by 
rolling in his money given that he – a relief pitcher, mind, not even Main Guy 
– will earn $4.5m in 2014, the GDP of Tasmania.

The Dodgers are going to cruise home here, the first win of roughly 35,000 
they’ll need to win a pennant or World Series, or something. Now another, 
pitcher, Kenley Jansen, is hurling missiles at the Diamondbacks, who swing 
forlornly. Wow. Big Kenley’s throwing super-hot rocks, trying to crush life 
from this petering contest. He’s a “closer”. It’s what they do. Then he gives 
up a walk. The game-tying run comes into bat in the form of … someone, a man. 
The accordian gets a workout:Let’s go Arizona Diamondbacks. Let’s go. Crowd 
getting a little jiggy … might we see something extraordinary? No. We do not. 
Big Kenley stands atop the Diamondbacks' throats with a series of piss-fast 
hot-rocks, and after two hours and 49 minutes the game peters out, as baseball 
games do, and we finish Dodgers of Los Angeles 3, Diamondbacks of Arizona 1.

But! Major League Baseball? Lend us an ear: Come back. Please. For like our 
Lady Liberty and unlike Dr Pepper’s foul demon juice, Australians could easily 
get used to watching this at the Sydney Cricket Ground, and in consistently 
super numbers. Make it happen, money.
 