
The MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> season is upon us, with 2,430 
games to enjoy (and that doesn’t even include the playoffs). The Guardian 
explores questions that the upcoming marathon campaign will answer:


NATIONAL LEAGUE

Can the Dodgers dominate?

A bazillion dollar payroll 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAD/2013-payroll-salaries.shtml> and a 
cup full of fancy talent guarantees you nothing in baseball - if you don’t 
believe that take a look at the Dodgers SoCal(led) “rivals”, the supposedly 
stacked Los Anaheim of Angels Angeles, who bottomed out yet again in 2013. 
Injuries, combined with the pressure of expectations, did in those wearing the 
famed Blue early last season, that is untilYasiel Puig swooped in last June 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2013/jun/02/sports/la-sp-dn-dodgers-call-up-yasiel-puig-20130602>
,touched us all 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2013/7/1/4483166/yasiel-puig-dodgers-joe-dimaggio-hit-record>
 and led a revival that wasclose to unprecedented. 
<http://mlb.si.com/2013/08/12/los-angeles-dodgers-wild-card-era/> So, Don 
Mattingly, fresh offsigning a new managerial contract 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/10258959/don-mattingly-receive-contract-extension-los-angeles-dodgers>
, knows full well that none of that entitlement will get theDodgers back to the 
National League Championship Series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/18/la-dodgers-st-louis-cardinals-live>
 or beyond, and that’s a good thing.

Despite all the resources of the Dodgers, which now include a television 
network 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2014/03/18/the-dodgers-on-pay-tv-only-is-the-culmination-of-walter-omalleys-dream/>
, they are not completely whole. OutfielderMatt Kemp’s 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-zack-greinke-carl-crawford-matt-kemp-action-20140317,0,4470727.story>
 long-term health continues to be a question mark, third baseman Juan Uribe was 
brought back to be “eh”, and losing the steadyMark Ellis to the St Louis 
Cardinals 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10141234/2b-mark-ellis-signs-st-louis-cardinals>
 in free-agency leaves something of a hole at second base. There are questions 
surrounding the back-end of the starting rotation as well. Dan Haren put up 
some of the worst stats of his career in Washington last season, the enigmatic 
Josh Beckett certainly can’t be counted on, andChad Billingsley could be back 
from his Tommy John surgery in May 
<http://lasordaslair.com/2014/03/17/good-news-chad-billingsley/> - his 
effectiveness TBD. Still, these are very much first world problems. The Dodgers 
front three include reigning NL Cy Young Award winnerClayton Kershaw 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/kershcl01.shtml> (now locked up 
until 2020to the tune of $215m 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/10298436/clayton-kershaw-los-angeles-dodgers-agree-seven-year-deal-worth-215-million>
), Zack Greinke, and Hyun-Jin Ryu, and just about anyone would sign up for that.

One of the key questions surrounding the Dodgers' season is whether or not 
Yasiel Puig can put together a full season of stats resembling his 2013 ledger, 
.319/.534/.925, numbers he landed on after a September slump brought him back 
into a place where other human beings live. The player that legendary Dodgers 
broadcaster Vin Scully calls the“Wild Horse” 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/yasiel-puig-question-can-the-dodgers-wild-horse-be-tamed?ymd=20140226&content_id=68340718&vkey=news_mlb>
 is still very raw and certainly has his issues with discipline, both on and 
off the field. Heshowed up heavier 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/mlb-big-league-stew/yasiel-puig-reports-camp-26-pounds-heavier-final-001745787--mlb.html>
 to camp this Spring, fresh off his arrest formoseying down a Florida highway 
at 110 miles-per-hour 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/10206639/yasiel-puig-los-angeles-dodgers-arrested-being-clocked-110-mph>
. That’s right about the speed he plays at, which is exactly why we all love 
watching him on the diamond. Still, you can easily imagine pitchers continuing 
to figure Puig out, with him starting off the season hitting .119, as easily as 
you could see him hitting .319. The matters of discipline don't seem to be 
going away, as based on a few Puig-related incidents down in Sydney where LA 
won their two opening games vs Arizona. What seems more certain is that Puig 
will factor in with whether or not the Dodgers challenge for a World Series 
title come October.

Will the NL Central rule the roost, again?
 The Pittsburgh Pirates succeeded beyond their fans wildest imagination in 
2013. Photograph: Justin K. Aller/Getty Images 
The last time three National League Central Division teams won 90 or more 
games in the same season 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/leagues/NL/2013.shtml> and made the playoffs 
was, well, never. Yes, it may be hard to believe, but in 2013, it was arguably 
the best division in baseball, a big change from its usual low-rent district 
status where the Cardinals generally flex their organizational muscle, winning 
nearly half of the first 19 titles. Can it happen again? It’s tough to imagine 
all three teams reaching the post-season two years on the trot, but let’s take 
a closer look at the triumvirate of clubs that gave the Central a boost last 
season.

There were signs that the Buccos would finish over .500 for the first time in 
20 years, 
<http://www.baseballnation.com/2013/9/10/4714282/pirates-winning-season-locusts>
 but 94 wins? No. Their pitching, particularly during first half of the season, 
was lights out - Jeff Locke, A.J. Burnett, now playing across the state in 
Philadelphia, and Francisco Liriano, the premier pick up of the season, 
carrying the club. Andrew McCutchen became an MVP 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/11/14/andrew-mccutchen-wins-nl-mvp/3544923/>
, Pedro Alvarez hit 36 homers, and their bullpen, known as“The Shark Tank” 
<http://www.wtae.com/sports/mlb-pirates/Pirates-pitcher-Mark-Melancon-explains-origin-of-Shark-Tank/21373070>
, exceeded all expectations thanks to closer Jason Grilli and eighth inning man 
Mark Melancon. Is it going to happen again? It’s possible, but starters Wandy 
Rodriguez and newcomerEdinson Volquez 
<http://www.rantsports.com/mlb/2014/02/18/pittsburgh-pirates-2014-spring-training-profile-edinson-volquez/>
 will have to be better than serviceable, and equally as important, they need 
to stay healthy. Thebiggest pitching question mark has to be Liriano 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24447733/ra-dickey-and-francisco-liriano-named-opening-day-starters>
, because if he can come even close to matching his 2013 output, the Pirates 
should be in a position to match their last season performance - but that’s a 
big ask from a hurler whose ERA could potentially be in the fives or the twos. 
If the pitching doesn’t come through, the offense will have to be more than 
middle of the road, which it was last season.

Last season ended badly for Cincinnati, a first round playoff ouster. Then 
managerDusty Baker was canned 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/reds/2013/10/04/dusty-baker-fired-cincinnati-reds-manager/2921277/>
 in favor of pitching coach Bryan Price, outfielderShin Soo-Choo 
<http://rangersblog.dallasnews.com/2013/12/texas-rangers-sign-shin-soo-choo-to-130-million-deal-quick-reaction.html/>
 took off for a big bag of cash in Texas, and rotation stalwart Bronson Arroyo 
fled to Arizona. Not much came in, but expectations aren’t tempered in Cincy - 
they’re still seen as winners by the locals, who expect.They can pitch 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/headlines/2014/03/bozo-the-clowns-grandson-is-pitching-for-the-reds/>
, both in the starting rotation, which has been special over the last two 
seasons, and in the bullpen, one which will have to deal with the unfortunate 
and freakish loss of Aroldis Chapman, who broke facial bones after being hit by 
a screeching come backer. It was a horrifying moment for those who witnessed it 
- the Cuban is fortunate to be out for just two months. Despite this recent 
relief issue, really, how far the Reds can go depends on their bats. Billy 
Hamilton is the would-be catalyst of that potential offensive success, and 
while we’re all dazzled by hisswiping of 155 minor-league bases 2012 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ck0cq1Rqip0>, how that blinding speed 
manifests itself on a big league level is what we need to discover. If you 
listen to Joey Votto, Hamilton becomes a MVP candidateif he learns to draw 
walks. 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2014/03/21/joey-votto-thinks-billy-hamilton-could-be-an-mvp-candidate-if-he-learns-to-draw-walks/>
 Losing Soo-Choo is a huge blow - his penchant for on-base percentage is a big 
reason why their offense bounced back in 2013. That piece is gone, and I really 
don’t know how it will be replaced -Votto 
<http://thebiglead.com/2012/06/06/joey-votto-has-only-hit-one-pulled-foul-ball-into-the-stands-in-his-career/>
 and Jay Bruce need help, and it had better come from Hamilton.

Meanwhile, St Louis does what St Louis does - keep their ship steady and 
slowly remake their roster. They bring in a super reliable Mark Ellis from LA 
to compete for the second base job with Kolten Wong, have the courage to trade 
local product and 2011 World Series heroDavid Freese to Anaheim 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10019135/los-angeles-angels-trade-peter-bourjos-st-louis-cardinals-david-freese>
 in exchange for defense in center field in the form of Peter Bourjos, put 
Allen Craig in right field to replace Carlos Beltran, which gives big Matt 
Adams gets a shot at playing first base full time. They also signed Jhonny 
Peralta, giving them more (artificial?) muscle at shortstop, spellingpoor old 
Pete Kozma 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/10/24/pete-kozma-game-1-world-series-two-errors/3176243/>
. They have depth everywhere, with super-outfield prospectOscar Tavares 
expected to emerge 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1995541-oscar-taveras-needs-to-find-motivation-in-minor-league-assignment>
 at some point to shake the outfield tree yet again. Their rotation and bullpen 
is virtually the same, with Jason Motte still out of the picture with injury. 
Steadies Matt Holliday and Yadier Molina are still around, set to do their 
thing. This team is run so well I don’t even have a profound enough adjective 
to describe it - basically, they never make a mistake. When will they make a 
mistake?

Can the Braves fight off injuries, the Nats and the Phills?
 Dan Uggla doesn’t have to jump through hoops for the Atlanta Braves to 
compete, but playing average baseball would help. Photograph: Scott 
Cunningham/Getty Images 
Atlanta surged to an NL Eastern Division title in 2013, mostly thanks to a 
filthy bullpen, 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/anthony-castrovince-atlanta-braves-have-best-bullpen-in-major-league-baseball?ymd=20140206&content_id=67494326&vkey=news_mlb>
 an above-average starting rotation and an offense that ranked in the top third 
in the Senior Circuit. Then theywent out early in the playoffs, as usual 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/postseason/2013_NLDS2.shtml>, but that’s par 
for the course. Regardless, they overcame the disappointing Washington 
Nationals, and any lingering affects of theirSeptember collapse of 2011 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/876307-atlanta-braves-and-the-greatest-collapse-in-the-history-of-baseball-sort-of>
, and deserve a decent amount of credit. Can they do it again? Well, there’s a 
bit to overcome. First of all, theylost free-agent catcher Brian McCann to the 
cash of the New York Yankees 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/yankees-catcher-brian-mccann-relishes-first-reunion-with-braves?ymd=20140316&content_id=69441320&vkey=news_mlb>
, and that’s a large void to fill straight away -Evan Gattis, whose story is 
even better than some of the numbers he put up early on last season 
<http://blogs.ajc.com/atlanta-braves-blog/2012/02/29/braves-slugger-gattis-has-a-story-man-does-he-ever/>
 will have a crack at replacing him. Starting pitcher Kris Medlen, who won 15 
games while putting up a 3.11 ERA last year, isout after right elbow surgery 
<http://www.talkingchop.com/2014/3/12/5502500/kris-medlen-emotionally-discusses-injury>
, a huge blow, as is the news thatBrandon Beachy 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10622961/kris-medlen-brandon-beachy-atlanta-braves-see-dr-james-andrews>
, who who emerged in 2012 before also being done in by injury, won’t be back 
anytime soon. Tim Hudson, a rotation stalwart for years, is now in San 
Francisco. The team recently opened up the coffers to the tune of$14m for Ervin 
Santana 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/fantasy/baseball/2014/03/12/ervin-santana-atlanta-braves/6330839/>
 to try and plug holes. They should be commended for not giving up on 2014, 
because they can certainly compete again this year, providing that third 
baseman Chris Johnson’s breakout 2013 was no fluke, second basemanDan Uggla 
<http://www.ajc.com/news/sports/positive-signs-for-braves-uggla/nfFZJ/> and 
outfielderB.J. Upton can recover 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/braves-center-fielder-b-j-upton-eyeing-return-to-form-visits-with-rays-family?ymd=20140314&content_id=69334260&vkey=news_mlb>
 from absolutely dismal seasons, and first baseman Freddie Freeman can continue 
to lead the way. There’s a lot of upside in Atlanta, who will be leaving Turner 
Field for thewealthier Cobb County 
<http://westcobb.patch.com/groups/politics-and-elections/p/cobb-citizens-to-speak-out-tuesday-against-braves-stadium>
 after the 2016 season.

Pursuing the Braves are the the Nationals, who overachieved in 2012, winning 
an NL East title, before wilting under the “World Series or Bust 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2013/09/11/davey-johnson-walks-back-world-series-or-bust/>
” moniker placed upon them by their now retired manager Davey Johnson in 2013. 
They busted alright, relying on a 32-16 stretch from early August to dig them 
out from a miserable season thatsaw the hitting coach fired 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/mlb/news/20130722/rick-eckstein-fired-washington-nationals-hitting-coach.ap/>
 and the team generally fail to live up to expectations. They did manage to get 
within four games of a playoff spot down the stretch, but the hole they dug was 
simply too deep. It certainly didn’t help thatBryce Harper missed over 40 games 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2014/1/25/5344686/bryce-harper-injury-nationals-spring-training-knee-surgery>
, outfielder Denard Span struggled to get on base, second basemanDanny Espinosa 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2014/03/05/matt-williams-unconcerned-with-danny-espinosas-slow-start/>
 battled injury and didn’t hit when he was on the field and that first baseman 
Adam LaRoche took a step back offensively, all while the vaunted pitching staff 
slipped from first in NL earned run average to sixth. Also annoying was the 
year-long criticism the organization had to endure for their shutting down 
Stephen Strasburg down the stretch in 2012, which some believe cost the Nats a 
shot at a World Series title.New manager Matt Williams 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2014/03/13/matt-williamss-contract-terms/>
 will benefit from a reset as they attempt to reassert themselves in the NL 
East. GM Mike Rizzo traded for Doug Fister to bolster that starting rotation 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10070572/washington-nationals-acquire-doug-fister-trade-detroit-tigers>
 which is among the best in baseball, but generally speaking, this team is very 
close to the one which took the field at the start of 2013. Soon we’ll discover 
if the 2012 team played over their heads or if last year was simply an 
aberration.
 Phillies manager Ryne Sandberg enters his first full season as Philadelphia 
manager in 2014. Photograph: Tommy Gilligan/USA Today Sports 
Meanwhile, Philadelphia, a franchise that won five consecutive NL East titles 
from 2007 until 2011, are bidding to get back in the game. Generally seen to be 
an over-the-hill gang, manager Ryan Sandberg’s biggest issue,besides the 
mounting communication problems with veteran shortstop Jimmy Rollins, 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10606491/the-dynamics-jimmy-rollins-ryne-sandberg>
 will be the health of his core players. Second baseman Chase Utley made a 
successful comeback from injury last season, re-emerging as an all-star calibre 
player, while first baseman Ryan Howard continued to battle injury. His ability 
to play a full season and be worth something resembling the $25m he’ll receive 
this season is anobvious key to Philadelphia’s success 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/someone-phillies-win-2014-comeback-player-award-154500605--mlb.html>
. Outfielder Domonic Brown emerged as a cornerstone last season, and Ben Revere 
showed promise if not pop in his bat - still, they spent$16m on two years on 
Marlon Byrd <http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24223641>, and $15m 
on a season of former Pirates pitcherA.J. Burnett 
<http://www.nj.com/phillies/index.ssf/2014/02/aj_burnett_will_wear_roy_halladays_no_34_for_phillies_receives_limited_no_trade_clause.html>
, so we know the Phillies brass think they can win, but it’s going to take an 
awful lot of breaks, even with the likes ofCliff Lee in the starting rotation. 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10623292/cliff-lee-start-philadelphia-phillies-opener-texas-rangers>

Will there be a Giant return to greatness?

After winning two titles in three seasons, the San Francisco Giants hit the 
skids in 2013, finishing third in the NL West, 10 games under .500. The chief 
offenders lay in the pitching staff where their ERA fell from fifth best to 
third from bottom, in one, mighty thud of a season.Matt Cain became the latest 
Giants All-Star pitcher to slide 
<http://www.beyondtheboxscore.com/2014/2/17/5415632/matt-cain-no-reason-to-worry>
,joining Barry Zito 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/players/playerpage/174962/barry-zito>, who 
started the trend, and Tim Lincecum, whose 4.37 ERA was rewarded with a 
two-year $35m deal,a curious decision from the front office. 
<http://mlb.si.com/2013/10/22/giants-tim-lincecum-contract-extension/> The 
Giants bats are the same, still led by catcher Buster Posey, second baseman 
Marco Scutaro, and of course, Kung Fu Panda, who plays third and is also known 
as Pablo Sandoval. They also invested heavily in Hunter Pence, who also rather 
curiously was provided with a large deal,some $90m over five seasons 
<http://mlb.si.com/2013/09/29/analyzing-giants-hunter-pence-contract-extension/>
. Can they win again? Well, it’s an even numbered year, which bodes well - they 
won it all in 2010 and 2012. They are also rather deep in the starting 
rotation, with young Madison Bumgarner leading the way, providing Cain and 
Lincecum bounce back, and that newly acquired Tim Hudson recovers from that 
gruesome ankle injury he suffered last season. Offensively they’re never going 
to be the 1927 Yankees, and so the song remains the same in San Francisco, if 
they get the pitching leads the way, they’ll be just enough offense to win.

Is patience running out in (parts of) Chicago and New York?
 If the Cubs keep on losing, there’ll be even more seats available at 
Chicago’s Wrigley Field. Photograph: Jim Young/Reuters 
Cubs fans are used to waiting, but even their patience is being tested. It’s 
been over 100 years since a World Series winning team played on the North Side 
of Chicago, but that generally hasn’t stopped their fans from visiting Wrigley 
Field. Playing inside a living, breathing baseball museum helps, but it seems, 
only so much.Fans fed up with the Cubs losing ways walked with their feet 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/chicago/cubs/post/_/id/20159/attendance-in-2013-lowest-in-last-15-years>
 in 2013, a year that brought nearly 100 losses. The Cubs drew 2,642,682 fans, 
which represents their lowest mark in 15 seasons.President Theo Epstein 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/baseball/cubs/ct-theo-epstein-happy-with-progress-spt-0317-20140317,0,1803310.story>
 has promised to bring a sustainable era of winning to Wrigley, but their 
small-market like formula takes time, especially when no promising free-agents 
are brought in. Meanwhile, there’s a core of first baseman Anthony Rizzo, 
shortstop Starlin Castro and outfield Nate Schierholtz, who just have to get 
better if there’s to be any offensive improvement. The promising Junior Lake, 
who arrived in the Alfonso Soriano deal last season will have a full year in 
the outfield. The pitching is all about all-star starter Travis Wood and Jeff 
Samardzija, who is traded almost every week. It’s not about this year, or next 
year in Chicago - deep breaths.

Meanwhile, in New York, Mets attendance is also expected to take a hit as the 
team gets set for another season during which a .500 record would represent the 
high-water mark. Fans have dropped by more than12,000 per game since the new 
Queens ballpark was put up in Flushing 
<http://www.baseball-almanac.com/teams/metsattn.shtml>, and that number doesn’t 
look like rising now that ownership and GM Sandy Alderson and company have 
pushed the 2014 deadline to compete for a playoff berth yet another year. There 
was no formal announcement stating such a course, but it became obvious once 
franchise cornerstone Matt Harvey underwent Tommy John surgery, meaning he 
would be out for the season (he says he’ll be back in August 
<http://www.nj.com/mets/index.ssf/2014/03/matt_harvey_hopes_to_pitch_for_mets_in_august_and_to_rehab_in_new_york.html>
). Yes, Curtis Granderson was signed to a large deal 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/10089565/new-york-mets-curtis-granderson-agree-4-years-60-million>
, Chris Young was also signed to play in the outfield andBartolo Colon was 
acquired 
<http://www.newsday.com/sports/baseball/mets/mets-marvel-at-bartolo-colon-s-skills-as-a-pitcher-and-a-fielder-despite-his-size-1.7405009>
 to help fill Harvey’s rotation spot, but Nelson Cruz wasn’t, and neither was 
Stephen Drew. So the team missed out on a chance to excite their fan base in 
preparation of the promise that could be around the corner, seemingly convinced 
that thesmall-market model <https://medium.com/meet-the-mets/6714027a044e> 
works best in the Big Apple. Still, it must be said that the darkest era in 
Mets history could be on the verge of coming to a close, mostly thanks to 
pitching prospects such as Harvey, Zack Wheeler, Noah Syndergaard and Rafael 
Montero. Mets fans will be watching, likely from afar, whether any progress is 
made in 2014 leading up to what simply has to be a marquee re-launch a year 
from now.

AMERICAN LEAGUE

Can Boston repeat?
 Koji Uehara and David Ross of the Boston Red Sox celebrate winning the 2013 
World Series at Fenway Park. Photograph: Rob Carr/Getty Images 
Anytime a team wins a title in sports, one of the next questions is: “Can they 
do it again?” It seems quite greedy really, especially for these Red Sox who 
won a World Series Championship a seasonafter losing 93 games. 
<http://www.boston.com/sports/2012/10/03/red-sox-lose-regular-season-finale-yankees/Khou58k0HMA1QW2vTLt69K/story.html>
 It was a remarkable run from a noteworthy group for whom absolutely everything 
worked out one year after everything didn’t. Now Boston are winners of three 
titles in ten seasons, which is enough to make Cubs fans daydream about what’s 
possible. Now, the encore. Yes, the Sox lost Ellsbury, a stinger considering 
where he’ll be hanging his navy hat, andshortstop Stephen Drew 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24487707/should-the-tigers-sign-stephen-drew>
 is likely Red Sox history, but there’s certainly no reason to fold the tent, 
quite the contrary. Providing David Ortiz, who had his contract extended 
through 2015 recently, can continue to be aninspiration to those approaching 
middle age 
<http://rotochamp.com/baseball/Player.aspx?PlayerType=Hitter&MLBAMID=120074>, 
and Jackie Bradley Jr., Daniel Nava, Xander Bogaerts and Will Middlebrooks make 
legitimate contributions over the long haul, there’s no reason why the Sox 
can’t be in a similar position this time around. The pitching talent isn’t much 
cause for concern, maybe you worry a bit about Jake Peavy, but really, the team 
looks very similar to the 2013 version, and just imagine if Grady Sizemore 
works out in center field...now that’s greedy.

How about that chasing AL East pack, the Orioles, Rays and Blue Jays? Well, 
Toronto weredestroyed by injuries 
<http://www.thestar.com/sports/bluejays/2013/09/20/colby_rasmus_injured_as_blue_jays_fall_to_al_eastclinching_red_sox.html>
 in 2013, following an offseason where ownership shelled out for talent in a 
bid to supplement what was already in-house - to say it didn’t work out is a 
bit like sayingthe sun comes up in the east 
<http://starchild.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/StarChild/questions/question14.html>. The 
Jays flirted with 90 losses when they were supposed to eclipse 90 wins and 
compete for a division title. Their failure to win with those players acquired 
in the post 2012blockbuster deal 
<http://www.mlbtraderumors.com/2012/11/blue-jays-marlins-complete-blockbuster-trade.html>
 that brought Jose Reyes, Mark Buehrle, Josh Johnson and Emilio Bonifacio to 
Ontario from Miami, makes it seem like the Marlins actually knew what they were 
doing when they broke up their core after one losing season. Now the Jays are 
going to take virtually the same team and try, try again. Should Jose Reyes and 
the rest of the lineup stay intact, and the starters, including the 
disappointing former Cy Young Award winnerR.A. Dickey 
<http://www.thestar.com/sports/bluejays/2014/03/17/blue_jays_april_rotation_revolves_around_knuckleball_of_ra_dickey_griffin.html>
, bounce back,there’s a chance the Jays will too 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2014/02/25/agent-scott-boras-wants-to-see-blue-jays-win>
 - but unfortunately for them, they’re in the wrong division.

Baseball is a better place when the Baltimore Orioles are winning. It’s one of 
the best baseball towns in America, and theenergy that a winner in B’more brings
 <http://nypost.com/2012/10/07/baltimore-loves-its-os-again/> to the circuit 
seems to extend beyond Camden Yards. That said, their emergence over the 
previous two years has been an awful lot of fun to watch - less so was their 
offseason. They didpick up Nelson Cruz late 
<http://mlb.si.com/2014/02/22/baltimore-orioles-sign-nelson-cruz/>, a 
potentially solid acquisition who should be able to put up relatively large 
numbers thanks to the tiny park's friendly confines. Their acquisition of 
starting pitcherUbaldo Jimenez however, 
<http://mlb.si.com/2014/02/17/ubaldo-jimenez-baltimore-orioles-contract/> well, 
that’s a wild one. Jimenez has managed to take hisblinding 2010 first half 
performance 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20100417&content_id=9375368&fext=.jsp&c_id=col>
 for the Colorado Rockies and turn it into a boat load of cash, showed signs of 
being that sort of player again in Cleveland last season, just in time for free 
agency and a new contract, one worth $50m over four years - whoa! It’s worth 
noting that in addition to the rake of cash handed over, they also gave up a 
valuable draft pick. The Baltimore Sun wrote“Signing Ubaldo Jimenez shows the 
Orioles are willing to make a move” 
<http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2014-02-17/sports/bal-signing-ubaldo-jimenez-shows-the-orioles-are-willing-to-make-a-move-20140217_1_chris-tillman-kevin-gausman-orioles-rotation>
 and that’s true I suppose. If he comes through it would be a boost, obviously, 
but his history makes you wince. Moving on, any lineup with Cruz, Manny Machado
(once healthy) 
<http://www.camdenchat.com/2013/10/10/4825962/manny-machado-knee-injury-orioles-surgery-rehab>
, Adam Jones,Matt Wieters 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702303546204579435173115885890?mg=reno64-wsj&url=http%3A%2F%2Fonline.wsj.com%2Farticle%2FSB10001424052702303546204579435173115885890.html>
, J.J. Hardy and of course, Chris Davis, can hit the long ball, which they did 
a lot better in 2013 than they did in getting on base. A bit of patience 
wouldn’t hurt, but they will likely rely on home runs again in 2014. Really, 
with the O’s, it comes down to the starters, and they are middle of the road at 
best. That’s fine if the bullpen holds up and the runs come, which would put 
the O’s right in the mix once more.

The small-market, low payroll Tampa Bay Rays have made the playoffs on four 
occasions over the previous six seasons, which is probably one of the greatest 
achievements in North American professional sports. Last year they made the 
postseason despiteleaking 69 more runs than the season prior, 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/TBD/> a campaign that did not yield a 
playoff berth - they also scored just three more runs than the year before. 
That must mean they caught a few breaks along the way, a fact that their
pythagorean win total of 87 indicates clearly 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/TBR/2013.shtml>. The odds of their 
getting that lucky again are low, and so their vaunted pitching staff will have 
to reset back to default for them to reach the postseason again in 2014. 
Unhelpful is the lingering distraction of whether or not totrade David Price 
before he becomes a free agent in 2016. 
<http://www.draysbay.com/2014/1/31/5364312/rays-david-price-trade-deadline-mlb-rumors>
 His departure does seem inevitable, but when will Rays Executive VP and GM 
Andrew Friedman pull the trigger? The longer they wait, naturally, the less 
they will get in return, but for now, he remains a Ray, looks incredible, and 
is in a starting rotation with Alex Cobb andMatt Moore 
<http://www.rantsports.com/fantasy/2014/02/18/fantasy-baseball-2014-what-to-make-of-matt-moore/>
 whileJeremy Hellickson 
<http://www.draysbay.com/2014/3/4/5443196/season-preview-2014-jeremy-hellickson-injury-timetable-officially-june-1>
 bids to return from surgery in a few months time. The bullpen was remade again 
this offseason, withAussie closer Grant Balfour 
<http://deadspin.com/grant-balfour-has-a-big-ass-truck-1526171842> returning to 
the Sun Coast for another stint. Their bats are once again projected to be 
somewhere between the middle towards the back end of the AL, with Evan Longoria 
set to lead the way as usual whileWil Myers 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/myerswi01.shtml> seeks to continue 
his development. Another solid season fromJames Loney 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/l/loneyja01.shtml> at first base 
would be welcomed, but once again, this team is all about pitching and defense, 
which will need to be well above average as the Rays bid to get back to the 
playoffs.

Then of course, there’s that team in the Bronx...

How will it end for Derek Jeter?
 Derek Jeter will be the last of the Yankees “Core Four” players to retire. 
Photograph: Ray Stubblebine/Reuters 
The Yankees Captain is calling it quits after 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/12/derek-jeter-retire-major-league-baseball-2014-season>
, and New York seem set to try and send him out a winner. The Steinbrenner’s 
and other Bombers brass were bidding to keep the season payroll under the$189m 
threshold for sometime 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/new-york/yankees/post/_/id/68560/so-about-that-189-million>
, a move that would have lessened Major League Baseball’s luxury tax blow. 
However, with the Pinstripes missing out on the playoffs and television ratings 
and attendance in decline, there was quite a bit of pressure on the 
organization to go on one of theirpatented shopping sprees, 
<http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Daily/Issues/2014/01/23/Franchises/Yankees.aspx>
 and so they did. They signed All-StarBrian McCann from Atlanta to catch 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24270862>, opened the coffers for 
outfieldersJacoby Ellsbury 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2014/03/red_sox_manager_john_farrell_surprised_by_jacoby_ellsburys_quick_decision_to_sign_with_yankees.html>
 andCarlos Beltran 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/carlos-beltran-dons-yankees-pinstripes-in-news-conference?ymd=20131219&content_id=66081602&vkey=news_mlb>
, and last, but certainly not least, went out and bought pitcherMasahiro Tanaka 
from NPB’s Rakuten 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2014/03/masahiro_tanaka_appears_slated_to_be_yankees_fourth_starter.html>
 to help shore up their starting rotation. That’s $458m laid out right there, 
and that doesn’t even include the $2m they’ll pay for Brian Roberts’ services 
this season. So, out with the luxury tax break, in with the expectations, even 
higher with Jeter on his way out. They’ll be a season of celebrations to mark 
the departure of the shortstop who has put up some of the best right handed 
numbers in some time, but how will it end? In Fenway Park at the end of 
September? Or somewhere else in October? That’s tough to say because despite 
their lavish spending there are still question marks, including the ability of 
svelte C.C. Sabathia 
<http://img.bleacherreport.net/img/images/photos/002/714/638/153638430_Fotor_Collage_crop_north_crop_north.jpg?w=759&h=506&q=75>
 to pitch like C.C. Sabathia, the health of Mark Teixeira, the issue of 
production at third basewith Alex Rodriguez on his MLB sponsored hiatus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/17/alex-rodriguez-accepted-wont-play-baseball-this-year>
, plus, with Mariano Rivera retired, we wonder howDavid Robertson will work out 
as closer. 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/blogs/baseballinsider/2014/02/forget-about-whether-david-robertson-can-replace-mariano-rivera-in-the-9th-f>
 So, in a tight AL East, and a American League that’s super competitive 
generally, nothing is for certain. Any teams that reach the postseason out of 
this division will have certainly earned it.

Can the Tigers get over the hump?
 Miguel Cabrera celebrates his two-run home run with Prince Fielder against 
the Oakland Athletics during Game Five of the 2013 ALDS. Photograph: Thearon W. 
Henderson/Getty Images 
When you have the best hitter on the planet on your team 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/11/14/miguel-cabrera-wins-al-mvp-award/3543015/>
, along withone of the best pitchers 
<http://wapc.mlb.com/cutfour/2014/02/19/67950706/justin-verlander-birthday-which-pitch-is-best>
 on the planet on your team, really, you’d like to take advantage of that 
fortune and win a World Series title. With Miguel Cabrera and Justin Verlander 
on the roster, so far, that’s a goal that’s gone unreached - three AL Central 
Division titles in three years have lacked that big finish, and so GM David 
Dombrowski went to work on shaking things up a bit this offseason in his bid to 
change the end result. Prince Fielder, who did his best detached athlete 
impersonation by uttering“it’s over bro” 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2013/10/20/prince-fielder-its-over-bro/> 
after being eliminated by the Red Sox in the AL Championship Series,was shipped 
out of town 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10008050/detroit-tigers-agree-trade-prince-fielder-texas-rangers-ian-kinsler>
, along with $30m in exchange for Rangers’ Ian Kinsler, who had his own issues 
and a hefty contract down in Texas. If you believe that Fielder is in decline, 
and that’s certainly a distinct possibility, then it’s a wise move to shed that 
contract, even if Kinsler doesn’t provide the lineup protection of the former 
Tigers first baseman. Cabrera, fresh off a second consecutive MVP season, will 
move from first base to third as a weakened Tigers lineup relies a little more 
on Verlander, seeking to bend back after a “down” year, and the rotation to 
keep opposition run totals down. Drew Smyly will move into the five following a 
somewhat odd shedding of Doug Fister for a bag of peanuts and some bubble gum. 
<http://detroit.cbslocal.com/2013/12/03/tigers-gm-dave-dombrowski-explains-why-he-dealt-doug-fister/>
 Rookie managerBrad Ausmus 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9922289/detroit-tigers-hire-brad-ausmus-replace-jim-leyland-manager>
 takes over forJim Leyland 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9DHA2dJ7uQ&noredirect=1brad%20ausmus%20hired>
, while the team also gets a new closer - Joe Nathan, also brought over from 
Texas. Are the Tigers better? Well, that’s tough to say - I think there’s a 
hope that a change in chemistry on the ballclub may propel Detroit, but talent 
wise, they’re probably a little worse off than last season, and losing starting 
shortstop anddefensive wizard Jose Iglesias for four to six months 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/10638691/detroit-tigers-shortstop-jose-iglesias-4-6-months-leg-fractures>
 thanks to stress fractures in both legs will not help. For now, the jury’s out.
 Will the Cleveland Indians find a way to become less boring in 2014? 
Photograph: Adam Hunger/Reuters 
Who will give the Tigers a run for their money in the AL Central? Well, that 
would be the Kansas City Royals and the Cleveland Indians. The Tribe put a bit 
of a scare into Detroit last season, with Terry Francona’s competent yet 
extremely boring group outperforming expectations handily. The Indians were a 
streaky group that snuck into the playoffs only to beousted by the Rays in the 
Wild Card round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/02/mlb-playoffs-tampa-bay-rays-vs-cleveland-indians-live>
. A rebuilt offense led bystalwarts Jason Kipnis 
<http://itspronouncedlajaway.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/Kipnis-Crave.jpg> 
and Carlos Santana had just enough to make up for a middle of the road pitching 
staff anchored by Justin Masterson. Surprises included the re-emergence of 
Ubaldo Jimenez as a viable starter and Scott Kazmir’s inning eating 
contributions after being out of the game for some time - both are gone, as is 
the closer, Chris Perez,who Indians fans won’t miss at all 
<http://www.letsgotribe.com/2013-in-review/2013/10/21/4861286/cleveland-indians-2013-in-review-chris-perezs-very-very-boring-season>
. John Axford, who enjoyed a mini-resurrection in St Louis will finish games 
for Cleveland in 2014. In short, the Tribe made the most of an average roster 
last season, with full credit going to Francona. I can’t believe he’ll be able 
to pull that trick again.

Meanwhile, Kansas City have something of a chance to improve on what was a 
giant leap forward in 2013. Ervin Santana is in Atlanta, meaning the rotation 
is thinner and with relieverLuke Hochevar is out with Tommy John surgery 
<http://www.rantsports.com/mlb/2014/03/19/luke-hochevars-career-continues-to-frustrate-kansas-city-royals-fans/>
, that’s not a great start. Still, how can you not be optimistic in Kansas City 
considering they are coming off a season in whichthey won 86 games 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/23967224/royals-gm-dayton-moore-i-feel-like-weve-won-the-world-series>
, their most in a decade? KC have staff aceJames Shields for one more season 
<http://www.kansascity.com/2014/03/04/4864878/no-contract-extension-in-sight.html>
 before he leaves for the big bucks, and a rake of young talent on the verge of 
propelling the franchise into legitimate contenders...they hope. That youthful 
lineup of Eric Hosmer, Billy Butler and Salvador Perez should benefit from new 
additionsNorichika Aoki 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24349879/brewers-trade-of-nori-aoki-to-royals-for-lhp-will-smith>
 and Omar Infante. What they really need to take this thing to the next level 
is a power bat to emerge - if that can happen then Detroit could have company 
in the race for the central flag.


What impact will Robinson Cano have in Seattle?

We all know that Robinson Cano is one of the best hitters in the game - now 
he’s adding General Manager to his skill set. It didn’t take long for Cano to 
startchirping about how the Mariners needed a right-handed bat in their lineup 
<http://tracking.si.com/2014/03/03/robinson-cano-mariners-need-an-extra-bat/> 
for it to become more formidable and balanced. He’s not wrong of course, but if 
you’re in Mariners management, that’s not really what you want to hear shortly 
after breaking the bank to tempt the second baseman west from New York.Cano 
will make $240m over a 10-year period 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2013/12/mariners-will-regret-robinson-cano-10-year-240-million-contract/>
 with the Mariners, a franchise that was obviously looking to make a splash 
after 12 seasons of postseason-free baseball. Odds are his presence won’t do 
much to change that, at least this time out. It was a strange purchase 
considering that Cano is not the kind of player thatputs a wild amount of 
fannies in the seats 
<http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com/Daily/Issues/2013/12/09/Franchises/Cano.aspx>
 - he’s just not a marquee draw, for whatever reason, despite his tremendous 
talents. No, the Mariners are something of an oddball franchise right now, so 
mixed up that former managerEric Wedge actually turned down a contract extension
 
<http://blog.seattlepi.com/baseball/2013/09/27/mariners-manager-eric-wedge-says-he-wont-return-in-2014/>
, which lead to the hiring of new manager Lloyd McClendon. They did alsoacquire 
Fernando Rodney to close and solidify the bullpen 
<http://www.mlbtraderumors.com/2014/02/mariners-to-sign-fernando-rodney.html>, 
and bring inLogan Morrison from Miami 
<http://seattletimes.com/html/larrystone/2022986676_stone25xml.html> to 
possibly DH andCorey Hart to play the outfield 
<http://seattle.mariners.mlb.com/news/article/sea/longtime-brewer-corey-hart-enters-mariners-outfield-mix?ymd=20140219&content_id=67958468&vkey=news_sea>
 - so they’ll score more runs than the previous season, which would mark an 
improvement in run scoring for a sixth consecutive year, and thatis progress I 
suppose. King Felix Hernandez is the ace of the pitching staff, butHisashi 
Iwakuma 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/sea/seattle-mariners-hisashi-iwakuma-finishes-third-in-al-cy-young-award-vote?ymd=20131113&content_id=63899640>
, who surprised all in 2013, will start the season on the DL with finger 
issues. Generally speaking, the rotation is thin. If it all comes together, 
maybe they finish third, but in all probability they’ll land in fourth place, 
again, which they could have done without Cano.

Who is the best in the AL West?
 Oakland Athletics players perform yoga stretches, because that’s a very 
Oakland A’s thing to do. Photograph: Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP 
It’s crowded out west, especially if you believe the Angels can finally get 
their act together and meet expectations. It’s hard to believe thatthe Oakland 
A’s are out to make it three straight division titles 
<http://oakland.athletics.mlb.com/news/article/oak/oakland-as-enter-spring-training-eyeing-third-straight-al-west-title?ymd=20140210&content_id=67482966>
, but they are, and that’s just another feather in the cap of their GM Billy 
Beane, who has beenuniversally lauded 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/sweetspot/post/_/id/40634/with-another-division-title-beane-is-best-gm>
 for his small market miracle. This year he’ll have to get the job done without 
innings eater Jarrod Parker,who is out for the season after his second Tommy 
John surgery 
<http://blog.sfgate.com/athletics/2014/03/17/as-jarrod-parker-to-miss-season-tommy-john-surgery-again/>
. That means a group that missed just 15 starts in all of 2013 is without two 
of its stalwarts, the other being Bartolo Colon, who signed with the Mets - 
that’s 387.1 innings out of the rotation.Scott Kazmir is in 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/rebound-season-nets-pitcher-scott-kazmir-two-year-deal-with-oakland-as?ymd=20131202&content_id=64331334&vkey=news_mlb>
, coming over from Cleveland, but his injury history suggests he may not be 
able to carry such a load. Complicating matters is thatA.J. Griffin is also out 
with elbow issues for over a month 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/03/17/jarrod-parker-out-for-2014-season-with-tommy-john-elbow-surgery-aj-griffin-out-several-weeks/6533895/>
. Bob Melvin’s A’s will have to weather this early storm and lean on their 
offense to be in a position to fight for a playoff spot later. That’s possible 
becausethey scored the third most runs in the AL 
<http://www.athleticsnation.com/2014/2/6/5379054/a-better-cheaper-offense> last 
season, and that group, featuring Coco Crisp, Josh Donaldson, Brandon Moss and 
Yoenis Cespedes return in tact.

Their rivals down in Texas have added a major power threat in Prince Fielder, 
should he bounce back from a sub-par 2013 of course, that in addition to
Shin-Soo Choo 
<http://rangersblog.dallasnews.com/2013/12/texas-rangers-sign-shin-soo-choo-to-130-million-deal-quick-reaction.html/>
, who joins the Rangers outfield. With Kinsler out of the picture, Jurickson 
Profar was supposed to get his shot to play second base every day and hit in a 
lineup that is now without the departed Nelson Cruz. Now that the Dutch 
super-prospect will miss the first half of 2014 with a torn muscle in his right 
shoulder, that plan is shelved with Texas' best laid plans take a hit. Ahealthy 
Neftali Feliz 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24426144/healthy-neftali-feliz-a-decent-bet-for-comeback-player-of-the-year>
 takes over the closer duties from Joe Nathan in Ron Washington’s pitching 
staff, one that was wrecked by injuries in 2013,something that has to change 
this time out. 
<http://www.dallasnews.com/sports/texas-rangers/headlines/20140220-matt-harrison-injury-could-have-ripple-effects-to-rangers-entire-pitching-staff.ece>
 Ace Yu Darvish leads a talented and deep group that mostly needs to stay on 
the field to be successful. Even without Profar in the lineup early on, there’s 
no reason why these revamped Rangers can’t compete for a division title, but we 
said the same thing for the previous two seasons.

As for the troubled Angels, this has got to be the last chance for skipper 
Mike Scioscia to keep his seat in the dugout 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2013/10/8/4818544/mike-scioscia-jerry-dipoto-angels-fire-coaches>
, where he’s managed since 2000. LA suffered through two tumultuous regular 
seasons after spending the previous two off-seasons drawing up the two worst 
contracts in baseball history. Josh Hamilton and Albert Pujols have a combined 
12 years and $318m remaining on their deals, offered up with the idea that 
their presence would ultimately result in one or two titles during their tenure.
So far, so awful 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/angels-receiving-little-return-on-365-million-investment-in-pujols-and-hamilton-2013-5>
, and really, their ability to play up to their name recognition will have a 
tremendous amount to do with success or failure of this team. Pujols and 
Hamilton do have help -Mike Trout, who could be the very best in the game, 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/angels-receiving-little-return-on-365-million-investment-in-pujols-and-hamilton-2013-5>
 for one, and now there’sthe ancient Raul Ibanez 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2013/12/27/raul-ibanezs-deal-with-the-angels-finalized/>
 and his remarkable 29 home runs in the lineup in a bid to boost output. David 
Freese was also brought in with the idea that a change of scenery would 
potentially help him live up to all that early promise. Pitching depth is a 
major issue for this team, and that’s because their staff posted the 11th 
ranked ERA in the AL last season. C.J. Wilson and Jered Weaver are steady, but 
after that it’s hit or miss. GM Jerry DiPoto traded Mark Trumbo to Arizona for 
Tyler Skaggs and Hector Santiago in a three-team deal, while Garrett Richards
makes out the five-man rotation, one that reads somewhat thin. 
<http://msn.foxsports.com/mlb/story/angels-have-big-bats-and-fresh-energy-but-do-they-have-enough-pitching-031714>
 The bullpen was a sour point in 2013, but Sean Bennett’s return plus the 
addition of Joe Smith 
<http://halosdaily.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/JoeSmith.jpg> means there’s a 
chance of improvement. The Angels followed six playoff appearances in eight 
seasons with four blanks, the last two being colossal flops. As a result, 
they’ve lost the benefit of the doubt, from both the baseball community and 
their fans. Only a playoff berth will reverse that.
 