
Malaysia's prime minister has dissolved parliament to call for national 
elections that are expected to take place later in April.

The polls will be fiercely contested between Prime Minister Najib Razak's 
long-ruling National Front coalition and opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim's 
three-party alliance.

Najib said in a nationally televised address he had obtained royal consent 
from Malaysia's constitutional monarch to dissolve parliament immediately.

The country's election commission is expected to meet within a week to set a 
polling date. Voting must be held within two months but is widely expected by 
the end of April.

Najib urged Malaysians in his 15-minute speech to give the National Front a 
strong mandate so that it can work to improve "the fate of our children and 
grandchildren".

The National Front's current five-year mandate had been scheduled to end on 30 
April. At stake are 222 seats in parliament and control of 12 Malaysian states. 
The National Front won the 2008 elections with less than a two-thirds 
parliamentary majority, its poorest results in more than five decades of 
uninterrupted rule since independence from Britain in 1957.

Najib was marking exactly four years as prime minister on Wednesday. He 
succeeded Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, who was pressured to step down after being 
blamed for weak leadership that contributed to the National Front's electoral 
setback.

Anwar's opposition alliance wrested control of several states in 2008 by 
pledging to curb long-entrenched problems including corruption and racial 
discrimination.

Najib has intensified efforts to win back support over the past year with 
measures such as channelling more funds to the poor and abolishing security 
laws that were widely considered repressive.

Most analysts believe Najib's coalition will still have the upper hand because 
of its support in predominantly rural constituencies that hold the key to a 
large number of parliament's seats.
 