
1993: Anwar Ibrahim <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, then 
46, becomes deputy prime minister under the premier Mahathir Mohamad. The two 
have a very close working relationship and Anwar is considered by many to be 
the heir apparent.

1998: Despite being named Asian of the year by Newsweek, Anwar is sacked after 
falling out with Mahathir over calls for reform and an end to cronyism. He is 
soon charged with counts of corruption and sodomy (a charge levelled at him by 
his family's former driver), but denounces both as false and politically 
motivated.

1999: Anwar is sentenced to six years in prison for corruption.

2000: He is sentenced to nine years in prison for sodomy.

2004: Anwar is released from jail after Malaysia's top court overturns his 
sodomy conviction and sentence.

March 2008: Anwar leads an opposition coalition to a landslide victory in a 
general election, wresting one-third of parliament's seats and five states from 
the incumbent National Front coalition, which has ruledMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> for 50 years.

April 2008: A ban against Anwar holding public office, related to his 
corruption conviction, expires.

June 2008: Anwar's former aide, 23-year-old Saiful Bukhari Azlan, files a 
police report accusing him of sodomy in a Kuala Lumpur condo. Anwar denies the 
charges.

31 July 2008: Anwar's wife resigns her parliamentary seat in Penang, her 
husband's home state, to allow Anwar to contest the byelection.

7 August 2008: Anwar is charged with sodomy.

26 August 2008: Anwar wins a landslide victory in the Penang byelection, is 
sworn into parliament and declared leader of the opposition.

1 February 2010: Anwar's second sodomy trial begins.

9 July 2011: Anwar is injured at a rally calling for clean and fair elections 
after police fire water cannon and teargas at protesters.

10 July 2011: Anwar warns PM Najib Razak's government that a "hibiscus 
revolution" may soon occur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/malaysia-leader-reform-elections-revolution>
 unless protesters' demands for electoral reform and an "end to dirty politics" 
are met.

22 August 2011: In a statement to the high court in Kuala Lumpur, Anwar calls 
the sodomy charge against him "a vile and desperate attempt at character 
assassination".

3-8 January 2012: Anwar embarks on a national tour, rallying support before 
the court verdict.

9 January 2012: Anwar is acquitted of sodomy charges.
 