

Malaysian police have raided the HQ of a state-controlled investment fund at 
the centre of a major corruption scandal engulfing the country’s embattled 
prime minister, Najib Razak.

Razak is facing mounting calls to resign after a Wall Street Journal report 
last week about debt-laden state fund 1Malaysia Development Bhd 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/briefly/2015/07/03/najib-razak-and-the-malaysia-1mdb-controversy-at-a-glance/>
 (1MDB) alleged that nearly $700m (£456m) went into his bank accounts.

It was the first time Najib has been directly implicated in the investigation 
into1MDB <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1mdb>, which is weighed down by an 
estimated $11bn of debt. The prime minister launched the fund in 2009 and still 
chairs its advisory board.

Critics led by the country’s former leader Mahathir Mohamad, who still wields 
much influence, have called for an explanation amid claims of financial 
mismanagement and murky overseas deals at 1MDB.

Malaysian taskforce investigates allegations $700m paid to PM Najib
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/06/malaysian-task-force-investigates-allegations-700m-paid-to-pm-najib>
The fund confirmed the raid and said it had provided officials “with a number 
of documents and materials to aid with the investigations currently taking 
place”. Najib reiterated that there was a political plot against him, writing 
on his blog: “I would like to stress again that I have never taken 1MDB’s funds 
for personal use.

“The Wall Street Journal’s accusation is made with malicious intent and 
supported by certain quarters in the country with the purpose of forcing me to 
resign as prime minister and Umno [party] president.”

However, Najib, who took office in 2009 and is the son of a former premier, 
faces increasing pressure with his failure to issue an outright denial. 1MDB 
has previously denied any wrongdoing.


The source of the money was not clear, the WSJ said, adding that the bulk of 
the funds were transferred from a company registered in the British Virgin 
Islands through the Singapore branch of a Swiss private bank in 2013, before a 
tight national election race.

The Barisan Nasional coalition of parties, led by Najib, went on to win the 
2013 polls but lost the popular vote for the first time to the opposition 
alliance – headed byAnwar Ibrahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-ibrahim>, who is currently serving a 
five-year prison term after being convicted of sodomy.

The WSJ has published some of the documents online to show the alleged money 
trail. The Guardian was not able to independently verify the documents.

A taskforce investigating the matter has frozen six bank accounts suspected to 
be involved in the case, while Singapore’s central bank said it was cooperating 
with Malaysian authorities over the inquiry.

Writing on his blog on Tuesday, Mahathir accused Najib – his one-time protege 
– for “shaming” the nation, while the veteran opposition politician Lim Kit 
Siang saidMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> “cannot afford 
to have a prime minister who has been stripped of all credibility”.

 * This article was amended on 8 July 2015. The original headline said the 
prime minister’s office had been raided. This was wrong and has been corrected  