
It does not take a cynic to question the timing of Anwar Ibrahim's sodomy 
trial, the second that Malaysia's opposition leader has had to endure.

Human rights groups raised serious concerns about the trial even before it 
started. Amnesty Internationalechoed Anwar's accusation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/07/malaysia.religion> that the 
sodomy charges were politically motivated, as well as questioning the 
possibility of a fair trial. According to Amnesty, the prosecution's refusal to 
deliver evidence to the defence at the pre-trial stageinfringed international 
standards and Malaysian law 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/malaysia-opposition-leader-anwar-faces-039show-trial039-20100129>
.

It said the failure of Malaysia's federal court to uphold the prosecution's 
obligation to provide access to evidence that may help exonerate him set a 
dangerous precedent for criminal cases and was a "recipe for unfair trials".

The lurid coverage by government-controlled media has reinforced suspicions 
among Anwar's supporters that the cards are stacked against their man. The 
Malay language UtusanMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> 
newspaper last week showed the 24-year-old male aide who says Anwar had sex 
with him, gesturing towards a bed. The same paper used language that was struck 
out of court proceedings after objections by Anwar's lawyers to a headline that 
read "Not willing to be sodomised again", implying that Anwar had sex with the 
man more than once.

The trial was suspended temporarily today as Anwar sought to remove the 
presiding judge because he took no action following last week's media coverage. 
The move, however, is unlikely to succeed and the "show" will go on.

For Anwar this is like deja vu all over again, to use the words of baseball 
legend Yogi Berra. Anwar was found guilty of sodomy with his wife's driver in 
2000 in what was widely considered a show trial. Amid widespread international 
pressure by figures such as Gordon Brown and Al Gore, the supreme court in 2004 
overturned the conviction, and Anwar was released.

After several years in the west as a campaigner against corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/10/malaysia2> – he strongly 
criticised Britain's decision to halt a major corruption investigation into 
BAE, its biggest arms company – Anwar returned to Malaysia, where he has 
harried the government ever since. He welded the disparate opposition parties 
into a united front that made huge inroadsin parliamentary elections in March 
2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/mar/16/malaysiasoppositionreborn>
, dramatically redrawing the political landscape. The governing coalition led 
by the United Malays National Organisation (Umno) – Malaysia's largest 
political party and the dominant force in the country's politics since 
independence from Britain in 1957 – saw its two-thirds majority evaporate. By 
contrast, the opposition parties saw their seats in the 222-member parliament 
jump to 82 from 19.

The big opposition gains rattled the government. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi was 
eased out as prime ministerto make way for Najib Razak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/09/najib-razak-malaysia-prime-minister-cabinet>
, who promised an ambitious reform programme.

Anwar's political comeback has hit some bumps along the way. His prediction 
that his coalition would take power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/16/malaysia> in September 2008 by 
persuading MPs from the government coalition smacked of hubris and the takeover 
failed to materialise. But it seemed only a question of time before the 
opposition would break Umno's 50-year political monopoly.

Then came new charges, when Saiful Bukhari Azlan accused Anwar of sodomising 
him, a charge that carries a prison sentence of 20 years in Malaysia, even 
between consenting adults. Anwar, who is married with six children, has already 
pleaded not guilty to the charge.

The timing of the trial is politically convenient for the government, forcing 
Anwar to concentrate on his trial in the high court and blunting his political 
momentum. The trial is taking place against a backdrop of political uncertainty 
in Malaysia, with Umno's system of racial preferences increasingly under strain.

Anwar offers a different vision for Malaysia, wanting to wean the country away 
from a policy of positive discrimination that for the past 30 years has ensured 
Malays dominate the country's politics, but which has been criticised for 
encouraging corruption and cronyism. As Malays form a majority, Anwar's 
strategy is risky, but it appeals to the country's substantial ethnic Chinese 
and Indian voters who have largely deserted the multi-ethnic governing 
coalition.

The government has tried to tar Anwar as "traitor" to his race in the sort of 
rhetoric that is anathema to the former deputy prime minister. A strong 
proponent of a dialogue rather than a clash of civilisations, Anwarrecently 
defended the use of the word "Allah" 
<http://anwaribrahimblog.com/2010/01/26/muslims-have-no-monopoly-over-allah/comment-page-1/>
 by Malaysia's Christian community, an issue that hasinflamed tensions between 
the country's Muslims and Christians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/08/malaysia-churches-firebomb-attack>
. The op-ed article in the Wall Street Journal reflects Anwar's worldview of 
tolerance and inclusivity at a time when religious sentiments in Malaysia are 
becomingincreasingly brittle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/oct/21/religion-islam>.

Much hangs on this trial. Should Anwar be discredited, the government may feel 
more confident of holding on to power in elections that must be held by 2013. 
But there are risks for Umno as well. Malaysia's international image could be 
damaged as foreign investors question the country rule of law – Malaysia saw 
the third-biggest outflow of portfolio investment of any emerging market in 
2009. As for rising tension between Malaysia's different communities, it would 
be a cruel irony for Malaysia if the politician who seems the most capable of 
calming these tensions is sidelined.
 