
Paris climate talks: Bishop hails 'historic' day as nearly 200 countries sign 
deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment>
Malcolm Turnbull has lifted the ban imposed by Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/12/abbott-government-extends-ban-on-renewable-energy-to-solar-panels>
 on wind investment by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) before it 
was officially enacted, even though it remains Coalition policy to abolish the 
green bank.

A spokeswoman for the prime minister said the new CEFC investment mandate – 
issued by the environment minister, Greg Hunt, and the finance minister, 
Mathias Cormann – reflected “the Turnbull government’s strong support for 
renewables and innovation”.


“The mandate puts the CEFC’s focus on new and emerging renewables 
technologies, rather than supporting well-established technologies that are 
financially viable without government support,” the spokeswoman said.


In the wake of the new mandate and the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment>
, various stakeholders in the renewable sector were optimistic that the CEFC 
decision could reboot the government’s relationship with the clean energy 
industry.

The new mandate says: “As part of its investment activities in clean energy 
technologies, the corporation must include a focus on supporting emerging and 
innovative renewable technologies and energy efficiency, such as large scale 
solar, storage associated with large and small scale solar, offshore wind 
technologies, and energy efficient technologies for cities and the built 
environment.”


Kane Thornton, chief executive of the Clean Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Council, welcomed the new 
mandate.

“We have now got a government in step with the rest of the world and looking 
to undo some of the things that were done,” Thornton said.


Coalition bans government's clean energy bank from financing wind power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/coalition-bans-clean-energy-finance-corporation-wind-power-investment>
“There was a very clear signal from Paris that the whole world is going 
renewable as quickly and fast as they can. We saw every one from massive global 
businesses down to thousands of local council making decisions to favour 
renewables so the shift is on.

“We had a tough time under Prime Minister Abbott and clearly there has been a 
shift of sentiment under Turnbull which is very welcome. Australia’s role in 
Paris was material and it is a signal they are now serious about climate action 
and renewables.”

But Senate crossbencher, John Madigan – one of the senators who negotiated for 
the creation of a wind farm commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/09/windfarm-commissioner-appointed-with-strong-credentials-in-renewables>
 – said he was disappointed that Turnbull had given the “green light” to the 
wind industry.


“We have just come out of windfarm inquiry and made some recommendations to 
government,” Madigan said.


“There are still question marks around industry, pertaining to compliance and 
now he’s given them the green light. There seems to be one set of rules for 
complying with permits and another set of rules for others.”


Paris climate deal might just be enough to start turning the tide on global 
warming | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-gives-even-a-cynic-grounds-for-optimism>
A spokeswoman for the prime minister said the mandate “honours commitments 
made to crossbenchers during negotiations to secure passage of changes to the 
renewable energy target”.


The CEFC lends to clean energy projects on commercial terms and has so far 
lent $1.4bn, which will reduce emissions by 4.2m tonnes annually and also 
achieve a positive return on the commonwealth’s investments.


Andrew Bray, from the Australian Wind Alliance, called on the government to 
set stronger renewables policies to restore confidence in the industry.

He said while wind was “definitely a mature technology”, strong policy and 
financial innovation was needed to attract investors back to the marketplace.

“Renewable energy investment is still recovering from the Abbott government’s 
attacks on wind power but the CEFC has shown that it can break apart these 
investment deadlocks,” Bray said.

“If the government is seriously committed to delivering a 23% RET by 2020 it 
needs the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to be investing in wind power. Wind 
energy is the cheapest source of large-scale renewable energy but the market 
needs stronger signals from the Australian government to ensure that investment 
confidence is restored.”

When the Coalition came to government in 2013, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> pledged to abolish the 
CEFC but his plans were blocked by the Senate.


In July this year, the Coalition issued a ban on government-backed wind 
investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/12/coalition-bans-clean-energy-finance-corporation-wind-power-investment>
when then treasurer Joe Hockey and finance minister Mathias Cormann wrote to 
the CEFC to end investment in new wind projects.


“It is our policy to abolish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation because we 
think that if the projects stack up economically, there’s no reason why they 
can’t be supported in the usual way,” Abbott said in July.

“But while the CEFC exists, what we believe it should be doing is investing in 
new and emerging technologies – certainly not existing windfarms.”

The Hockey-Cormann letter bypassed Hunt and caused consternation within the 
CEFC as to how such an order could be enacted within the corporation’s 
guidelines, leading to months of negotiations.

It is understood the CEFC never officially received a formal ministerial 
directive on wind investment before the leadership change. In October, Turnbull 
added to the uncertainty by saying the need for the CEFC was an“open question” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/20/malcolm-turnbull-refuses-to-back-clean-energy-finance-corporation>
.

A spokeswoman for the CEFC said the organisation was “looking forward to the 
new mandate”.

“Our role is to catalyse new investment into the clean energy sector and we 
think it has enormous benefits to Australia in the transition to a low carbon 
economy,” the spokeswoman said.


Last week, the CEFC committed $67m to Australia’s third-largest wind farm 
<http://www.cleanenergyfinancecorp.com.au/media/releases-and-announcements/files/cefc-finance-contributes-to-ararat-wind-farm-development.aspx>
 project in Ararat, which is expected to produce enough power for 120,000 homes.


Greens unveil push for 90% target for renewable energy by 2030
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/22/greens-unveil-push-for-90-target-for-renewable-energy-by-2030>
Greens senator Larissa Waters welcomed the new mandate by the Turnbull 
government but said if the government was serious about renewable energy, it 
would commit not to abolish the CEFC and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency 
(Arena) which provides grants for energy projects.


“Malcolm Turnbull has kept Tony Abbott’s desire to abolish the Clean Energy 
Finance Corporation and the renewable energy agency and Australia has no 
credibility when it talks about clean energy, innovation, research and 
development when it still has those bodies on the chopping block,” Waters said.

“So one very small but significant action that Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> could take if he 
wanted to show he wasn’t Tony Abbott was to take those agencies off the 
chopping block and allow them to invest in and develop the wonderful clean 
energy potential that Australia has in spades.”

Labor’s environment spokesman, Mark Butler, said Turnbull needed to join the 
rest of the world and set Australia up to take advantage of future jobs and 
investment opportunities.

“It’s all well and good for Greg Hunt to write a different letter to the Clean 
Energy Finance Corporation but there is still legislation in parliament to 
abolish it entirely,” Butler said.

“Either Greg Hunt and Malcolm Turnbull are going to join with the enormous 
opportunities in the future, which lie in renewable energy and clean energy or 
they are going to continue with Tony Abbott’s rightwing reactionary policies to 
abolish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, to abolish the renewable energy 
agency and to withdraw support entirely from renewable energy beyond 2020.”
 