
Senior international lawyers defending jailed ex-president Mohamed Nasheed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-nasheed> have accused authorities in 
theMaldives <https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> of spying on them in a 
breach of client confidentiality.

Washington-based Jared Genser told reporters that the room where he and 
co-counselAmal Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> met 
with Nasheed at the high-security Maafushi prison had been bugged.

He said contents of their privileged conversations had leaked to the 
government and come back to them through an unnamed source who had spoken with 
Nasheed’s wife, who is currently in London.

“This was information she [Nasheed’s wife] was very surprised to hear. And it 
could have only come from the sensitive conversation we were having with 
Nasheed,” the local Haveeru news website quoted Genser as saying on Thursday.

He also accused prison guards of filming a meeting between Nasheed and his 
lawyers.

Four prison guards insisted on staying in the room where Nasheed met with his 
legal team on Wednesday despite repeated requests for privacy, the private
Maldives <https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> Independent reported.

It also quoted a spokesman for the Maldives correctional service denying that 
they bugged the conversation between Nasheed and his lawyers.

Clooney attended a court hearing on Wednesday on whether a bizarre appeal by 
the prosecutor general against Nasheed’s conviction should be allowed or not. A 
decision is to be announced by the court later.

The charge against Nasheed relates to the ordering of the arrest of an 
allegedly corrupt judge when he was still president in 2012.

Release Mohamed Nasheed – an innocent man and the Maldives’ great hope | Amal 
Clooney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/30/release-mohamed-nasheed-maldives-president-conviction>
Clooney is part of Nasheed’s international legal team and is visiting the 
archipelago with Genser to press for his immediate release after the UN said 
his trial earlier this year was seriously flawed.

Faced with mounting international criticism, Maldivian authorities tried to 
distance themselves from the controversial judgment, saying that the state will 
take the unusual step of appealing against his conviction.

Clooney on Monday described the human rights situation in the Indian Ocean 
archipelago as “deteriorating day by day”. On Wednesday, she had a one-hour 
meeting with the Maldivian attorney general, Mohamed Anil, but neither side 
released contents of their talks.

Nasheed was the country’s first democratically elected leader who ruled from 
2008 to February 2012 when he was forced to resign following a mutiny by police 
and troops.

Nasheed’s 13-year prison sentence was commuted to house arrest in July, but 
last month police took him back to prison in a surprise move that drew fresh 
criticism from the UN and the US.

The political fallout has damaged the island’s reputation as a honeymoon 
paradise, and brought crowds of protesters on to the streets of Male.

Clooney was named in April as part of Nasheed’s international legal team along 
with Genser – who has previously represented Myanmar’s Aung San Suu Kyi – and 
Ben Emmerson, a judge on war crimes in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
 