
The winner

Two years in the making, Disney's big-budget bet on Angelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie>, first-time director Robert 
Stromberg and the enduring appeal of classic fairytales has ended in satisfied 
relief for all parties. The epic production period – shooting began in June 
2012, with seasoned director John Lee Hancock (The Blind Side) coming on board 
to assist Stromberg with eight days of reshoots in October 2013 – and a 
rumoured $180m (£107m) cost meant the studio was under intense pressure to 
deliver a hit. The UK Disney operation certainly delivered its end of the deal, 
with an opening here of £6.59m, including Wednesday/Thursday previews of £2.77m.

Including previews, that represents only the fifth best opening of 2014, behind
X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, The Amazing 
Spider-Man 2, The Lego Movie and Bad Neighbours. Just going by Friday-to-Sunday 
tallies, Maleficent's debut places seventh for 2014 so far.

Obvious box-office comparisons for Maleficent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent> are Snow White and the Huntsman, 
which began with a very similar £3.59m (and no previews) exactly two years ago, 
and Mirror Mirror, a commercially weaker performer that kicked off two months 
earlier with £2.39m including £1.25m in previews. Although not based on an 
equivalently classic fairytale, Disney's Oz the Great and Powerful might also 
be an apt comparison: it began in March 2013 with £3.71m, and no previews.

Stromberg previously served as production designer on Avatar, Alice in 
Wonderland and Oz the Great and Powerful. Maleficent opened in the US at the 
weekend with $70m and internationally (ie outside the US) with $106m, for a 
$176m global total. China and Japan are yet to open.

In the UK, Disney took no chances with its film, opting not to show it to 
critics until the Sunday before release, despite being classified by the BBFC 
on 8 May, and embargoing reviews until the day the film arrived in cinemas. As 
it turns out, critical appraisals were on balance positive, with a 56/100 score 
at Metacritic. IMDb users currently rate the film at 7.5/10.

The runner-up

Despite robust competition from Maleficent and two other major studio releases 
(see below), X-Men: Days of Future Past posted what in the circumstances might 
be considered a decent hold, falling 53% with £3.52m. More significantly, the 
week as a whole (which coincided with the school half-term break) saw the X-Men 
film add a hefty £10m, for an 11-day tally of £19.47m. That's ahead of the 
lifetime totals of X-Men (£14.98m), The Last Stand (£19.22m), reboot First 
Class (£15.03m) as well as spinoffs Origins: Wolverine (£16.38m) and The 
Wolverine (£13.70m) – it's exceeded for the franchise only by X-Men 2's final 
tally of £20.66m.

But there's clearly plenty of gas in the tank for Days of Future Past – 
especially since World Cup football means that there are no more action 
blockbusters arriving for the whole month of June. A final UK gross that's £10m 
ahead of recent X-Men/Wolverine efforts looks likely.

Cruise control

Twenty-eight years after Top Gun catapulted Tom Cruise to the forefront of 
box-office performers, the 51-year-old A-lister has put in a solid if 
unspectacular performance with The Edge of Tomorrow, from director Doug Liman. 
Delivering an opening weekend of £1.89m, the number compares with £4.96m 
including previews of £1.60m for Cruise's last effort Oblivion. That Joseph 
Kosinski-helmed sci-fi flick faced significantly less competition on its date, 
whereas The Edge of Tomorrow faced off against both Maleficent and Seth 
MacFarlane'sA Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west>, as well as 
strong holdover title Days of Future Past.

With a healthy 64/100 score at Metacritic and an 8.1/10 IMDb user rating, 
Warners will be hoping that Edge can post solid holds in the coming weeks, 
pushing the film to a healthy total overall.

The comedy alternative

A comedy western starring Seth MacFarlane – unproven as an on-screen star – 
and Charlize Theron was by no means a sure thing. On the other hand, MacFarlane 
is riding plenty of audience affection for his last film Ted, which grossed 
over £30m in the UK.

The result: A Million Ways to Die in the West has landed here with a so-so 
£1.24m, delivering a screen average of £2,668. For comparison, Ted opened with 
a stonking £9.33m including £3.40m in previews. Excluding previews, A Million 
Ways is so far running at 21% of the level of Ted's success.

Distributor Universal faced competition from its own comedy Bad Neighbours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bad-neighbours>, still performing strongly in 
its fourth week of release (and having grossed an impressive £15.19m to date). 
From Friday, the comedy market gets even more crowded with the arrival of 22 
Jump Street, so MacFarlane's film will certainly have a fight on its hands.

The robust comedy activity meanwhile spelled bad news for Adam Sandler/Drew 
Barrymore starrerBlended <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blended>, which 
slides a troubling 67% from its weak opening, and has now reached a poor £1.78m 
after 10 days.

The art-house market

The only film in the top 10 courting specialised audiences is Ken Loach's 
Cannes competitor Jimmy's Hall, which grossed £132,000 from 94 screens 
including £4,300 in previews. That's a somewhat disappointing start for the 
film, since Ireland (which is included in UK box-office reports) might have 
been expected to deliver more than that sum alone. Loach's biggest hit to date, 
by a wide margin, is The Wind That Shakes the Barley, with £3.81m, boosted by 
over £2.5m grossed at Irish cinemas. Barley opened in the UK/Ireland in June 
2006 with £391,000 from 105 sites, nearly three times theJimmy's Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jimmys-hall> number. Loach's last film The 
Angels' Share debuted with £256,000 from 73 cinemas, boosted by strong takings 
in Scotland, where it was positioned as a mainstream comedy.

Reviews for Jimmy's Hall were mostly respectful, but were evidently not 
received by audiences as conferring must-see status on the film. The same might 
be said for Roman Polanski'sVenus in Fur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venus-in-fur>, which grossed an unspectacular 
£13,800 from 11 cinemas, and Hany Abu-Assad's Omar, which managed £8,300 from 
the same number of venues. The well-regarded Omar competed in Un Certain Regard 
in Cannes last year, winning the Special Jury Prize, and went on to be 
Oscar-nominated in the Foreign Language category. Opening the same weekend as 
films by Loach and Polanski, the film is clearly struggling to be heard above 
the din.

The future

Thanks to the arrival of three big studio releases, takings are a healthy 30% 
up on the equivalent weekend from 2013, when fresh activity was relatively 
minor, and holdover titles The Hangover Part III and Fast & Furious 6 led the 
market. Thanks to the football, June looks exceptionally quiet for new 
releases, especially after the competition begins on 12 June. The studios have 
got one more weekend before audience attention skitters to Brazil, however, and 
Sony has grabbed the date (this Friday) for comedy sequel 22 Jump Street. 
Alternatives includeGrace of Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/grace-of-monaco>, fresh from its Cannes 
mauling, and acclaimed US indie Fruitvale Station. Cinema owners will of course 
be hoping for an early exit for England in the competition.

Top 10 films 30 May – 1 June

1. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, £6,590,071 from 
486 sites (New)

2. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, £3,518,389 from 
554 sites. Total: £19,473,504

3. The Edge of Tomorrow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-edge-of-tomorrow>
, £1,886,096 from 439 sites (New)

4. A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west>, £1,240,465 
from 465 sites (New)

5. Godzilla <https://www.theguardian.com/film/godzilla>, £982,401 from 453 
sites. Total: £15,491,394

6. Bad Neighbours <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bad-neighbours>, £555,308 
from 348 sites. Total: £15,191,022

7. Postman Pat <https://www.theguardian.com/film/postman-pat-the-movie>, 
£479,867 from 514 sites. Total: £2,395,592

8. Blended <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blended>, £227,467 from 309 
sites. Total: £1,775,901

9. Rio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rio-2>, £214,096 from 351 sites. 
Total: £14,839,650

10. Jimmy's Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jimmys-hall>, £131,703 from 
94 sites (New)

Other openers

Venus in Fur <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155226/venus-in-fur>, 
£13,797 from 11 sites

Manam, £11,055 from 2 sites

47 to 84, £8,398 from 10 sites

Omar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/omar>, £8,294 from 11 sites

Heaven is for Real <https://www.theguardian.com/film/heaven-is-for-real>, 
£7,762 from 68 sites

A Farewell to Arms, £5,019 from 2 sites

Downhill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/downhill>, £4,983 from 6 sites

Miss and the Doctors, £1,527 from 2 sites

Battle Company: Korengal, £161 from 1 site

Thanks to Rentrak
 