
On Saturday night at the Broadhurst Theatre 
<http://www.newyorkcitytheatre.com/theaters/broadhursttheater/theater.php> on 
Broadway, the curtain will come down on Mamma Mia!, the Abba musical that has 
been playing for 14 years, which makes it the eighth-longest Broadway show of 
all.I’ve played one of the dads, Harry Bright 
<http://www.broadway.com/buzz/174360/how-could-we-resist-them-alan-campbell-paul-deboy-more-begin-performances-in-mamma-mia/>
, for a little under two of those years.

That makes me a bit of what Harry’s fellow Brits might call a 
Johnny-come-lately, but it’s an honor to help close the show nonetheless. In 
fact, I also played Harry for two years out on tour, donning spandex across 
North America and even as far as Alaska. That’s close to the last four years of 
my life, singingAbba <https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba> every night. 
Thank you for the music, indeed.

It’s the spandex that most people talk about when they talk about Mamma Mia!, 
of course, although it only appears in the final scene of the show. I remember 
when the joy of being in the show first really hit me. I was on stage, platform 
boots on, singing and watching the crowd have a ball. I turned to Alison Ewing, 
who will be playing Tanya one last time on Saturday night, and I said: “We get 
to be rock stars for five minutes!”

The crowd, of course, gets two and a half hours of it, and I think that has 
been one of the keys to the massive success of the show, around the world as 
well as on the Great White Way. It’s a simple proposition: it just brings joy.

It’s appropriate we’re closing this weekend. In New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 14 years ago, Mamma Mia! was the 
first big show to open after 9/11. I think the city and the country just needed 
an escape. Thanks to the brilliance and sheer hard work of our producer, Judy 
Craymer, one was offered. The hits kept on coming, Abba Gold on stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmamma-mia-broadway-closing-abba-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f9d31a8c0ed6d4b16e726792f02d5a75cb13c9%2F0_0_800_1199%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mamma%20Mia%2C%20here%20we%20go%20again%3A%20one%20last%20night%20for%20Broadway's%20most%20joyous%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmamma-mia-broadway-closing-abba-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mamma%20Mia%2C%20here%20we%20go%20again%3A%20one%20last%20night%20for%20Broadway%27s%20most%20joyous%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmamma-mia-broadway-closing-abba-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f9d31a8c0ed6d4b16e726792f02d5a75cb13c9%2F0_0_800_1199%2F800.jpg>
 A last leap for Harry Headbanger… after signing the map of Greece, like 
everyone who worked with Mamma Mia! on Broadway Photograph: Ron Glow 
I’ll always insist, however, that the show does have some hidden depths. For 
example, my character, Harry Bright gets to say a line of Shakespeare. It’s 
appropriate – he’s a Brit andColin Firth played him in the film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7fCndFDjYhU>. (I play the part having been 
born and raised in Baltimore, a situation I’d probably find more daunting if I 
hadn’t trained at Rada and always had an affinity for all things British.)

Not many notice the Shakespeare. It’s from Julius Caesar and Harry says it 
when the three dads see Donna, the mom, for the first time. It is: “Age cannot 
wither her.”

Nor shall it. I think Mamma Mia! has been an important show in the history of 
women in theatre. Judy Craymer produced it, Catherine Johnson wrote it and 
Phyllida Lloyd directed it. It’s about four women, a mother and daughter and 
the mother’s two closest friends. Harry and the dads are important only as 
devices, which is a theatrical situation women have known for centuries.

That said, it’s been a joy to have been one of the 28 men who have played a dad
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/09/11/theater/mamma-mia-closing.html?_r=0>
 on Broadway. I initially auditioned to play Bill because Martha Banta, who’s 
now the show’s director, wasn’t sure I could sing. But she knew me from doing 
The 39 Steps in St Louis – I played Richard Hannay, another Brit – and she 
called me back for Harry. And after that, I played him for four years.

After Saturday night, I won’t be playing him. It’s going to seem a little 
strange, because even when you’re in a show, even on days off, as an actor you 
find yourself preparing. Honestly, singing Abba every night is hard work.

Every morning, you get up and test your voice and your body, because they’re 
the only tools you have. Our cat might think something’s up when, eventually, I 
stop singing Abba songs and doing Abba moves while making cups of coffee.

A vacation might help with the transition. Soon after the final curtain falls, 
after what should be a truly heroic after-party, attended by as many all-time 
cast members as can make it, my partner Dawn and I will take our first proper 
break in a year. We’re going to London, in time for the Rugby World Cup, then 
on to the Scottish islands to rest.

But when I’m back in New York, my gaze will switch back towards Broadway. 
Mamma Mia! was my debut, and I certainly hope to return. Maybe in the revival, 
the next time New York needs a shot of pure joy.

Paul DeBoy is an actor whose credits include Broadway, extensive regional 
theatre, numerous Law & Orders and John Waters’s last film. He lives in New 
York City with his partner, Dawn, and their Siamese, Gracie.
 