
A man has been crushed to death by a tree that fell on his car on a highway 
near Wollongong in windy weather as south-eastern Australia was hit by an 
intense low-pressure system.

The man was travelling on the Princes Motorway near the Picton Road overpass 
just after 9.15am on Wednesday when the tree fell and crashed on to the cab of 
his ute, trapping him, police said.

The man died while paramedics were treating him at the scene. Police confirmed 
they have identified the man but won’t release details until later in the day.

A State Emergency Service (SES) spokesman said winds had reached up to 100km/h 
around the Illawarra region, with crews attending numerous jobs about felled 
trees and fallen branches.

A motorist driving behind the ute on Wednesday witnessed the event.
“I saw out of the corner of my eye the tree starting to fall down, then it 
just fell straight on top of the [ute],” Robert Tindalltold the Illawarra 
Mercury 
<http://www.illawarramercury.com.au/story/4027523/it-was-like-slow-motion-then-bang-falling-tree-kills-ute-driver/?cs=298>
. “It was like it happened in slow motion, then bang.”

Much of southern New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>, including Sydney, 
felt the bite after a cold front overnight caused gales of up to 90km/h 
churning across the state, bringing snow to many areas, including the 
Australian Capital Territory.

“A deep, complex low-pressure system south-east of Tasmania is directing 
vigorous westerly winds across the south-east of the state,” theBureau of 
Meteorology <http://www.bom.gov.au/> said on Wednesday morning.

Plunging temperatures, high winds and snow leave Australia's eastern states 
shivering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/freezing-temperatures-wind-snow-eastern-states>
The bureau put out a severe weather warning for damaging winds averaging 
50-60km/h across the Sydney metropolitan area, with peak gusts exceeding 90km/h.

Blizzards were possible for the Snowy Mountains above 1,700m, the bureau said.

Overnight 70cm of fresh snow fell at the Thredbo ski resort, while Canberra, 
Oberon and Mount Victoria also got light dustings.

The wind chill reduced temperatures to what felt like -1c at Observatory Hill 
in Sydney.

The SES received more than 120 calls for help from Sydney, Illawarra and the 
Southern Highlands as winds brought down trees and power lines.

Coastal authorities warned swimmers and rock fishermen of “deceptively 
powerful” surf conditions stretching up the coastline from Ulladulla to Tweed 
Heads, with a long swell period to intensify through Wednesday and Thursday.

The NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service recommended that people consider 
postponing country travel, while police urged motorists to delay travelling 
through Jindabyne in the state’s alpine region, as local roads remained 
treacherous with ice and snow.

Winds were expected to ease by Wednesday evening, but low temperatures were 
likely to linger until the weekend.
 