
Shopping in Manchester's Arndale centre <http://www.manchesterarndale.com/> 
will never be quite the same after a visit to a current exhibition in the city 
which explores the spooky 'Arndale Void'.

Next time you pass Topshop 
<http://www.manchesterarndale.com/store_profile.aspx?id=134>, pause to 
contemplate the fact that 30ft below it is an enormous hole which was almost 
certainly dug to be part of a swanky Manchester tube system.

Not just that, but the city fathers in the post-war Enthusiast period also had 
plans for quadruple ring-roads – thinkMancunian Way 
<http://www.ciht.org.uk/motorway/a57mancunian.htm> four times over – and a 
heliport for intra-urban hops on top of Victoria station.
 The Arndale Void; sad relic of the marvellous idea. Photograph: Courtesy of 
Charlotte Martin, Manchester Arndale 
Their dreams and destinations are on show at a small but fascinating display 
calledInfra_MANC at the CUBE and RIBA Hub 
<http://www.e-architect.co.uk/manchester/cube_gallery_exhibition.htm> which 
follows intrepid research by Dr Martin Dodge of Manchester university and 
Richard Brook from theManchester School of Architecture <http://www.msa.ac.uk/>
. As well as filleting archives for all manner of unrealised joys, they tracked 
down the Arndale Void by puzzling over detailed subterranean maps inWhere's 
Wally <http://http://findwally.co.uk/> fashion.

The hole duly turned out to exist, albeit closed to the public, even for use 
as one of Manchester's many imaginative nightclubs. It was almost certainly 
designed to link the Arndale to a proposed Picc-Vic tube line connecting 
Piccadilly and Victoria via a 2.3 miles route under various city centre 
landmarks.

The plan was dissed – boo, hiss – by a Conservative government making public 
spending cuts after almost two decades of preparation and the vaulting of all 
other planning hurdles. In 1972 the city council was given Parliamentary powers 
to start building in September 1973 with completion targeted for five years 
later.
 Artists' impression of the new world beneath the city's streets. A train 
glides in to the station, bottom right. Photograph: David Fricker, courtesy of 
Darnton EGS 
There would have been three new stations, at the central library, Whitworth 
Street and the junction of Market and Cross Streets – the latter linked to the 
Void. Moving pavements were envisaged as well as escalators, connecting the 
system with Piccadilly Gardens, Oxford Road station and St Peter's Square.

It would have cost £9,271,300 at January 1973 prices (£86m at today's) to 
build the twin 18ft tunnels for trains running every two-and-a-half minutes in 
the central zone and every ten outside. But the timing was tragic, as Richard 
Brook explains:


The infrastructure grant application (hence Infra_MANC) was turned down in 
August 1973 byJohn Peyton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/nov/27/guardianobituaries.obituaries>, 
then the minister for transport industries. 

Everyone on the job received a copy of Peyton's letter refusing to provide the 
finance. It was a devastating blow to some who had spent 10 years of their life 
on the scheme.

Peyton cited announcements of £500 million reduction in public expenditure by 
Chancellor of the ExchequerAnthony Barber 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2005/dec/20/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
saying, 'there is no room for a project as costly as Picc-Vic before 1975 at 
the earliest'.

With hindsight we can see it was unlucky for the Picc-Vic scheme to be caught 
amidst this political and economic restructuring and seemingly without a 
powerful figurehead to champion its cause.

It was also a time of near-chaos politically, with Edward Heath's government 
heading for its calamitous clash with the miners which resulted in power 
rationing and the three-day week. Dr Dodge mourns the way that a byproduct of 
this was the death of Manchester's dream:

The city has long desired to have an underground railway crossing its centre 
and perhaps the earliest plan was put forward in 1839. The Picc-Vic would have 
formed the centrepiece of a new electrified railway network for the region.

Our research has unearthed new engineering plans and architectural drawings 
that reveal howManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> just 
missed out on having its own mini tube system. When we came across the space 
beneath the Arndale - by consulting old plans and a process of elimination we 
became certain that it was the location of the Picc-Vic station.

There is also a properly, dimly-lit spooks side to the story because of the 
presence of the then secretGuardian Underground Telephone Exchange  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2004/mar/30/simonjeffery>in six miles of nuclear 
bomb-resistant tunnels below Chinatown. This was not a system for contacting 
people such as myself (which can be frustrating, I know) but a civil defence 
operation whose possible links to the tube cancellation resisted the two 
researchers. Brook says:

We investigated the rumours, only to discover that the project team did know 
the location of the GUTE, but were forced to sign the Official Secrets Act in 
197l.

Perhaps the coalition could make amends for Scrooges Peyton and Barber by 
freeing them from this restriction. Credit where it's due, though. In last 
April's budget the Chancellor George Osborneannounced a new Picc-Vic 
<http://menmedia.co.uk/manchestereveningnews/news/s/1413410_george_osborne_confirms_85m_piccadilly__victoria_rail_link_in_budget>
, albeit one above ground in the fresh air.

Infra_MANC is on until 17 March from 12 to 5.300pm at CUBE Gallery and the 
RIBA Hub <http://www.cube.org.uk/exhibitiondetails/inframanc/77>, 113-115 
Portland Street, Manchester, M1 6DW.
 