 Manchester international festival. Illustration: jimmyturrell@heartagency.com 
<mailto:JimmyTurrell@heartagency.com>  Alex Poots Photograph: Jonny Donovan 
Welcome from Alex Poots, the outgoing artistic director of the Manchester 
international festival

It’s the 10th anniversary of the first Mif event this year. What’s been key 
across all our shows over the last decade is the focus on the artist: we go on 
a journey with them, nurturing long-term relationships and supporting them in 
their best, most ambitious work. It’s an organic, evolutionary process that has 
been a complete joy to be part of.

It seems to me that a lot of the divisions in the arts are human-made; that 
sense of “where there are no walls, we might not need to construct them” feels 
very resonant to this festival. Our first weekend features Interdependence, a 
day of conversations that focus on acts of synthesis in the arts; you’ll hear 
many of our artists contributing. Our new ballet, Tree of Codes, is a brilliant 
example of this kind of creative process – it’s adapted fromJonathan Safran 
Foer’s book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/18/tree-codes-safran-foer-review>, 
itself an adaptation which is now being transformed into a contemporary ballet 
by Wayne McGregor, Olafur Eliasson and Jamie xx. This show needs that range of 
artists and abilities to be fully realised.

It’s my last Mif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/13/national-theatre-wales-director-manchester-festival-mcgrath>
, but I haven’t yet had time to feel sad. I will be watching the next decade 
with interest. There’s a real appetite to make Britain fairer in terms of 
regional empowerment. The idea that Manchester might be allowed, in some way, 
to determine its own destiny is extremely exciting. If we’ve had a part in 
articulating that need, that’s something we’re proud of. To date, this has been 
the best 10 years of my professional life. Our aim was always to create 
something lasting, with enough roots to keep growing and blossoming.


Manchester international festival <http://www.mif.co.uk/> is the world’s first 
festival of original, new work and special events and takes place biennially, 
in Manchester, UK. The Guardian is its media partner.

Wonder.land

Down the rabbit hole: Moira Buffini on adapting Alice in Wonderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/wonderland-manchester-international-festival-mif-alice-lewis-carroll-moira-buffini>
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland reimagined as a musical for the digital age 
by Handbagged and Tamara Drewe writerMoira Buffini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/buffini>, directed by the National theatre’s 
Rufus Norris, and with new music from Damon Albarn, who previously contributed 
to the operaMonkey: Journey to the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jun/29/classicalmusicandopera.manchesterfestival2007>
 at Mif 2009 andDr Dee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/10/dr-dee-an-english-opera-review> 
at Mif 2011.


• Palace theatre <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/wonder.land>, 29 June-12 July, 
£19.25 - £46.25, concs £5 off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower 
wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Read our interview with writer Moira Buffini on the enduring power of 
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/30/wonderland-manchester-international-festival-mif-alice-lewis-carroll-moira-buffini>

• Read our interview with visual designer Lysander Ashton of 59 Productions on 
seeing Alice with fresh eyes 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/culture/2015/apr/30/lysander-ashton-59-productions-alice-in-wonderland-musical-manchester-international-festival-mif>


High Tea in Wonderland


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430817904946%2F0b1a1932-a40e-4e9c-bfd2-b68529558216-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430817904946%2F0b1a1932-a40e-4e9c-bfd2-b68529558216-2060x1236.jpeg>
 High Tea in Wonderland … watch out for those cakes Photograph: PR 
Chef Mary-Ellen McTague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mary-ellen-mctague>, of Great British Menu 
fame and now of the Aumbry restaurant in Prestwich, creates a Caroll-esque 
dining experience behind the scenes of Manchester Museum. Don’t worry: it won’t 
make you shrink.


Manchester Museum <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/high-tea-in-wonderland>, 5-19 
July, £30, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 
844 871 7654

FlexN Manchester

A new creative collaboration between Reggie Gray’s Brooklyn flexing crew and 
local Manchester dancers.


Old Granada Studios <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/flexn-manchester>, 11-18 July, 
£12. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Q&A: Reggie Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/24/reggie-gray-flexn-manchester-international-festival-mif>


The Crocodile
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430490781626%2Fa624dbc2-ae55-444f-9b6a-388096c5fcda-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430490781626%2Fa624dbc2-ae55-444f-9b6a-388096c5fcda-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tom Basden will be playing Dostoevsky for laughs at the festival. Photograph: 
Graeme Robertson 
The Wrong Mans star and standup Tom Basden’s comic adaptation of Fyodor 
Dostoevsky’s toothsome short story, in which a man is swallowed by a reptile on 
a trip to the zoo – but kinda likes it.

Pavilion theatre <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/the-crocodile>, 14-18 July, £20, 
concs £5 off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 
0844 871 7654

• Making it snappy: Tom Basden on how you make Dostoevsky funny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/29/keeping-it-snappy-tom-basden-dostoevsky-mif-manchester-international-festival>

The Invisible Dot Cabaret

Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> from Tom Basden and 
colleagues from the London venue/management company/smart comedy goldmine, 
including James Acaster, Natasia Demetriou & Ellie White, Sheeps, Liam Williams 
and more.


Pavilion theatre <http://www.theinvisibledot.com/>, 9-17 July, £15, concs £5 
off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 
7654

Adam Buxton and Friends

Video analysis and comedy digressions from everyone’s favourite YouTube 
obsessive, with a little help from his comedic pals.


Pavilion theatre <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/adam-buxton-and-friends>, 3-5 
July, £17, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 
0844 871 7654

Performance Capture

An art piece and work-in-process by video art star Ed Atkins in which Mif 
artists and staff will be motion-captured into one computer-generated avatar.


Manchester Art Gallery <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/ed-atkins>, 4-19 July, 
free. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Q&A: Ed Atkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/23/ed-atkins-performance-capture-manchester-international-festival-mif>

The Immortal/Requiem

A new oratorio by former BBC young composer of the year Mark Simpson, inspired 
by John Gray’s book on the history of humanity’s quest to escape death,The 
Immortalization Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/29/healthmindandbody-history>. 
Performed alongside Mozart’s Requiem.

The Bridgewater Hall <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/the-immortal>, 4 July, 
£16-£36, concs £5 off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. 
Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Q&A: Mark Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/30/mark-simpson-immortal-requiem-manchester-international-festival-mif>

Richter/Pärt

Connecting the odd couple: Gerhard Richter and Arvo Pärt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/gerhard-richter-arvo-part-odd-couple-manchester-international-festival-mif>
A new series of paintings by Gerhard Richter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gerhard-richter>, Birkenau, plus his 
Doppelgrau, are presented alongside a performance of a new Arvo Pärt 
composition, Drei Hirtenkinder aus Fátima, by Estonian choir Vox Clamantis. 
Each work is inspired by the other artist.

The Whitworth art gallery <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/richter-part>, 
University of Manchester, 9-19 July (Vox Clamantis performances 9-11 July), 
free. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Connecting the odd couple: Skye Sherwin on Richter and Pärt’s criss-crossing 
careers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/30/gerhard-richter-arvo-part-odd-couple-manchester-international-festival-mif>

Arvo Pärt

A programme demonstrating the breadth and spirituality of Pärt’s music, 
co-curated by Mif, Manchester Camerata director Gábor Takács-Nagy, and the 
composer himself.

The Bridgewater Hall <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/arvo-part>, 12 July, £16-36, 
£12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

FKA Twigs: Soundtrack 7
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238745257%2F623b61dd-6961-4ebb-9356-54efccdaed91-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430238745257%2F623b61dd-6961-4ebb-9356-54efccdaed91-2060x1236.jpeg>
 FKA Twigs will be demonstrating her directorial skills. Photograph: Dominick 
Sheldon 
Twigs has established herself as not only one of the UK’s most exciting young 
musicians, but also an intriguing and challenging performer in her videos. At 
Mif, she and her collaborators will create seven new short films in front of 
you.


Old Granada Studios <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/fka-twigs>, 9-15 July, free, 
ticket required. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Girl from the video: FKA Twigs’ music clips analysed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/24/fka-twigs-soundtrack-7-videos-manchester-international-festival-mif>

Tree of Codes

A new ballet based on the cut-up novel by Jonathan Safran Foer (itself based 
on Polish writer Bruno Schulz’s The Street of Crocodiles), with choreography by
Wayne McGregor <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wayne-mcgregor> of the Royal 
Ballet and Random Dance, with visual concept by artist Olafur Eliasson and 
music by Jamie xx.


Opera House <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/tree-of-codes>, 2-10 July, 
15.25-£46.25, concs £5 off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower 
wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Q&A: Wayne McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/24/wayne-mcgregor-tree-of-codes-manchester-international-festival-mif>


Björk
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239235241%2Ffecf8d36-ce47-487f-853c-467d907141bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239235241%2Ffecf8d36-ce47-487f-853c-467d907141bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Björk will be baring her heart for the UK live debut of her latest album 
Vulnicura. 
The debut UK live performance of her new album Vulnicura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/bjork-vulnicura-review-breakup-album>
, an emotionally intense record that documents her breakup with artist Matthew 
Barney.

Castlefield Arena <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/bjork>, 5 July, £45, £12 for 
Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Bjork’s stage fashions through the years – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2015/may/01/bjorks-stage-fashions-through-the-years-in-pictures>

A Manchester Walking Tour: Radicals, Pioneers and Rabbit Holes

Explore the themes of the festival through the history and fabric of 
Manchester itself, with stories of local eccentrics, radicals and 
industrialists, related by long-serving tour guide John Schofield,.

Albert memorial, Festival Square 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/event/a-manchester-walking-tour>, 3-19 July, £10. Box 
office: 0844 871 7654

• Read our interview with tour guide Jonathan Schofield here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/24/jonathan-schofield-walking-tour-manchester-international-festival-mif>

The Skriker
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239424505%2F3784bcc6-f5f1-46fa-9474-0745f98ebf94-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239424505%2F3784bcc6-f5f1-46fa-9474-0745f98ebf94-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Maxine Peake will star in a new adapation of Caryl Churchill’s play The 
Skriker. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/Guardian 
A new adaptation of Caryl Churchill’s play by Maxine Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maxine-peake> and Sarah Franckom.

Royal Exchange theatre <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/the-skriker>, 1-18 July 
(continues until 1 August), £15-45, concs £5 off, £12 for Greater Manchester 
residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Q&A: Maxine Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/27/maxine-peak-the-skriker-manchester-international-festival-mif>


The Tale of Mr Tumble

Justin Fletcher tells the life story of his beloved character.


Opera House <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/the-tale-of-mr-tumble>, 11-19 July, 
£18.25-£26.25, concs £5 off, children £13.25, under 18 months free, £12 for 
Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Who on earth is Mr Tumble? A phenomenon explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/29/tale-of-mr-tumble-manchester-international-festival-mif>


Neck of the Woods
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239914397%2F849f5682-199d-4718-95a3-54fb4da4f1a6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20international%20festival%202015%3A%20your%20guide%20to%20every%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmay%2F16%2Fmanchester-international-festival-mif-lineup-programme-events-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F28%2F1430239914397%2F849f5682-199d-4718-95a3-54fb4da4f1a6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Charlotte Rampling: all the better to scare you with. Photograph: Olycom 
SPA/REX Shutterstock 
Charlotte Rampling <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling>, 
artist Douglas Gordon and pianist Hélène Grimaud create a portrait of the wolf, 
with help from Sacred Sounds Women’s Choir.

HOME <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/neck-of-the-woods>, 10-18 July, £35, £12 for 
Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Sweet harmony: how Sacred Sounds Women’s Choir sing for tolerance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/sacred-sounds-womens-choir-manchester-international-festival-mif>

Interdependence

Interdependence: can you teach creativity? Plus other big questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/interdepence-manchester-international-festival-mif-guardian-membership-live>
A two-day cultural-conversational event hosted by Guardian Live and Mif 
addressing the big questions about our creative future.


Old Granada Studios <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/interdependence>, 4-5 July, 
cost £5 per day. Box office: 0844 871 7654

• Interdependence: the big questions … and the people with the answers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/interdepence-manchester-international-festival-mif-guardian-membership-live>

10 x 10

Celebrating 10 years in Manchester for both Mif and clubbing maestros 
Warehouse Project, featuring Four Tet, Tyondai Braxton, Carl Craig and many 
more.

Mayfield Depot <http://www.mif.co.uk/event/10x10>, 17-18 July, £25, concs £5 
off, £12 for Greater Manchester residents on a lower wage. Box office: 0844 871 
7654
 