
Pensioners in marginal Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> electorates will be 
among the hardest hit by changes to their payments in the new year, with those 
facing cuts in Sarah Henderson’s seat of Corangamite and Ann Sudmalis’s seat of 
Gilmore set to lose a total of more than $13m a year.

The effect of the cuts to some pensioners’ payments from 1 January is revealed 
in a new Australian Council of Trade Unions analysis of answers to questions on 
notice by the social services minister,Christian Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christian-porter>, late last year.

The government has been on the defensive over the pension changes, with 
Malcolm Turnbull answeringa union robocall blitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/coalition-defends-pension-changes-after-union-robocall-blitz>
 with a recording of his own reassuring pensioners the “vast majority” will be 
unaffected.

Under the changes, passed with Greens support in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/16/part-pension-changes-secure-passage-after-coalition-agrees-deal-with-greens>
, singles with savings and assets of more than $547,000 (excluding the family 
home)will lose the aged pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/02/pension-changes-coalition-warned-of-red-hot-anger-election>
, while couples with savings and assets of $823,000 will lose the pension.

The changes will push 91,000 people off the pension and reduce the payment for 
236,000 but 171,500 will get a $30 a week boost to their pension. The human 
services minister, Alan Tudge, told Radio National on Thursday more than 90% of 
pensioners would be better off or no worse off and only pensioners with “high 
assets above and beyond their family home” would receive a cut.

‘Mediscare’ report says robocalls to voters should state who authorised them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/mediscare-report-says-robocalls-to-voters-should-state-who-authorised-them>
The answers provided by Porter show that 3,490 pensioners will receive cuts in 
Henderson’s southern Victorian seat of Corangamite 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/cora/>, losing $150 a 
fortnight on average each.

In Sudmalis’s highly marginal seat of Gilmore 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/gilm/>, on the New 
South Wales south coast, 3,480 pensioners face cuts averaging $144 a fortnight.

In both electorates the gross total of pension cuts is more than $13m. 
However, the answers do not show the distribution of the pensioners the 
government says will be better off under the changes.

Other Coalition-held electorates in which pensioners face losses totalling 
more than $10m a year include Chris Crewther’souter Melbourne seat of Dunkley 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/dunk/>, the NSW north 
coast seat of Page 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/page/>, held by the 
Nationals’ Kevin Hogan, and Lucy Wicks’s seat ofRobertson 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/robe/>, on the NSW 
central coast.

The Queensland electorates of Peter Dutton (Dickson 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/dick/>) and George 
Christensen (Dawson 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/guide/daws/>) are both 
significantly affected, with more than 2,000 pensioners in each set to lose all 
or part of their pension.

The secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Dave Oliver, said the 
data showed the government “is cutting pensioners to the bone over the 
Christmas break”.

The ACTU has launched robocalls from a woman, “Leanne”, about her father 
receiving a letter from the government saying that Turnbull is “cutting the 
pension”, which the governmentsays falsely implies everyone’s pension will be 
cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/coalition-defends-pension-changes-after-union-robocall-blitz>
.


“Hello, I’m Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> and I want to set 
the record straight about recent changes to pensions,” the prime minister says 
in his response message. “The vast majority of pensioners are unaffected. Tens 
of thousands of pensioners with modest assets are better off.

“Pensions will continue to go up twice a year and the family home remains 
exempt from the assets test. Our older Australians should be respected, not 
deliberately frightened for political gain.”

As the trickledown juggernaut rolls on, it's time to rejuvenate the middle 
class | Wayne Swan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/as-the-trickledown-juggernaut-rolls-on-its-time-to-rejuvenate-the-middle-class>
Oliver said it was “farcical” that the government had labelled anonymous union 
robocalls “despicable”,even comparing the tactic to a “coward’s punch” 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjts4vIyvfQAhUQNbwKHTWxDi8QFggZMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.smh.com.au%2Ffederal-politics%2Fpolitical-news%2Fthe-cowards-punch-of-australian-politics-ministers-livid-over-robocaller-leanne-20161215-gtbp06.html&usg=AFQjCNHyO1Mz2MeBrzWLrfmMotoNLd6WRg&sig2=LeLHtaICiB5nmyAmSMGjoQ&bvm=bv.142059868,d.dGc>
, then recorded its own robocall.

On Friday, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> labelled Turnbull 
“the nation’s No 1 crybaby” over the pension controversy and said he was 
“completely wrong” to claim people weren’t affected.

“I’ve got a Christmas tip for Malcolm Turnbull – if you don’t want people to 
complain about your pension cuts, don’t cut the pension,” he said.

Asked if he condemned the ACTU’s robocalls, Shorten replied: “I am not going 
to condemn people telling other Australians what’s going on.

“The fact of the matter is if a robocall is such a bad idea from the unions, 
why is Malcolm Turnbull doing it? You can’t say it is bad when one person does 
it and then do it yourself.”

Shorten said Turnbull should “stop complaining about the messenger and start 
dealing with the message” – the fact that 330,000 people would lose all or part 
of their pension from 1 January.
 