
Only recently, filmgoers had been invited to believe in Margaret Thatcher as 
post-feminist victim-heroine, an image which bemused those who remembered the 
PM in her pomp. In Phyllida Lloyd's 2011 filmThe Iron Lady 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>, she had become a 
lonely and confused old dear, whose flashes of grandeur and hauteur at 
political soirées were the more poignant for being so fleeting. The leader once 
reviled by the liberal classes now had the ultimate distinction of being 
impersonated — with eerie accuracy — by Meryl Streep. Andrea Riseborough's 
"underdog" portrayal of young Margaret's battle for a parliamentary seat was 
similarly sympathetic in the 2008 TV movie The Long Walk to Finchley. That 
weirdly Mandela-ish title! Maybe a new generation of women performers will have 
a sideline in "doing" Maggie in numberless transatlantic TV co-productions the 
way males of a certain age "do" Winston Churchill.

These were late bursts of interest, jaunty trips to the summit of an extinct 
volcano. They were emollient, gallantly revisonist gestures to a political 
figure who no longer had the power to be divisive. Margaret Thatcher's own 
relationship to cinema was however more complex and more interesting. She could 
not have shaken things up so rudely had she been the softer figure portrayed 
there.

Four years ago, I contributed to a roundup in this paper's Review section 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/apr/11/thatcher-and-the-arts> on the 
subject of Thatcher in the arts, noting her utter lack of interest in the film 
industry, and her utter, paradoxical adoration of the old movie trouper Ronald 
Reagan, whose politics and sense of self were steeped in Hollywood mythology. 
Margaret Thatcher couldn't care less about the British film industry. In 1985, 
her government abolished the Eady levy which for 35 years had redistributed a 
percentage of box-office receipts back to domestic production, and further 
removed the tax break — an unkind cut from a government which was supposedly 
"instinctive" about cutting taxes. Her icy indifference was the order of the 
day, until John Major's new Lottery created a new pot of public cash, and the 
Blair administration decided that using it to boost British film was the "Cool 
Britannia" thing to do. But the emphasis was on creating an apolitical 
commercial industry, not a subsidised cultural powerbase for leftists. It meant 
imitating and liaising with Americans. And so in a way Margaret Thatcher did 
create something which long after her time became a cliche and a buzzword: a 
legacy.

At the time, in the 1980s themselves, Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> inspired a oppositional 
genre: films of the resistance. After the torpor of the 1970s, British film was 
waking up. It had something to be angry about. Public bodies like British 
Screen and the British Film Institute supported directors like Ken Loach, Derek 
Jarman, Mike Leigh and Peter Greenaway, whose The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and 
Her Lover was, arguably, a scathing political satire on greed and complacency.

Yet it was Margaret Thatcher's government which created television's Channel 
Four, whose film production arm gave usThe Draughtsman's Contract 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36333/draughtsman.s.contract> and Stephen 
Frears'sMy Beautiful Laundrette 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83399/my-beautiful-laundrette>. Later, 
this would morph into Film4, a powerful body which would much later create 
Danny Boyle's Oscar-winningSlumdog Millionaire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126911/slumdog-millionaire>.

Thatcherite influence can be spotted in the most surprising films. Hugh 
Hudson'sChariots of Fire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36331/chariots-of-fire> (1981), with its 
vision of Jewish and Scottish outsiders battling to be recognised, and 
struggling to break into a stuffy establishment does look very Maggie-ish in 
retrospect — although everyone involved would be horrified at the thought. 
Richard Eyre'sThe Ploughman's Lunch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/124690/ploughman-s-lunch> shows a media 
professional cutting and trimming his views to accommodate the new political 
reality of Thatcher's Britain in the 1980s: this, among the "Thatcherite" films 
of the era, was perhaps the shrewdest in imagining the corporate future.

I also think the final scene of Bruce Robinson's Withnail & I 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95779> (1986) in which Paul McCann's 
Marwood character has to cut his hair to get a job is a premonition of the 
Thatcherite-80s world in which Britons would have to smarten themselves up for 
the job market. Frears's My Beautiful Laundrette (1985) is at least partly 
about commercial and entrepreneurial adventures. It is about the service 
industry. It is a very Thatcher-era film, and film itself is the ultimate 
service industry.

Perhaps the ultimate post-Thatcher film institution is Working Title, the 
staggeringly successful production company in regular partnership with the 
mighty American company Universal, which gave us the Richard Curtis romantic 
comedies so often were anchored to a transatlantic love affair. (That said, 
Hugh Grant's Prime Minister inLove, Actually 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96863/love.actually> has a most 
un-Maggie-ish swipe at the Americans. Thatcher would have hated it.)

As for the social realist genre, that still flourishes today. Ken Loach and 
Mike Leigh are making some of their very best work, and there are other great 
new directors such as Lynne Ramsay and Andrea Arnold. But some detect a 
post-Thatcherite context to these films: a sense that the political sting has 
been removed. In the 1960s, people believed that documentary realism could 
change the law, like Cathy Come Home. Now a movie likeRed Road 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112338/red.road>, however stunningly 
acted and filmed, and however shrewd and compassionate, is effectively regarded 
as a superb artistic object, entire of itself, but unlikely ever to have a 
direct impact on the world it describes. And this, sadly, is another legacy of 
Margaret Thatcher.

Thatcher is a ghostly presence at the movie feast: indifferent and faintly 
hostile to it as both industry and art-form.Richard Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-attenborough> recalls almost 
converting her to the film lobby with his bubbling enthusiasm. "Why on earth 
didn't you come and see me before, Sir Richard?" she asked thoughtfully, after 
he had addressed a Downing Street seminar on the subject. "Because you never 
asked me, darling!" he replied. British film survived Margaret Thatcher the way 
Britain did: partly battered, partly obliterated, partly energised. What 
British film needs is not another Thatcher, but politicians who can show an 
actual interest — or at least politicians whose neglect is benign.
 