
Marianne Faithfull has recruited a team of established composers for her new 
album, Give My Love to London. While Faithfull has penned most of the lyrics, 
the music featured on her forthcoming album was in part written by the likes of
Nick Cave <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Before_the_Poison>, Anna Calvi, Roger 
Waters, Pat Leonard, Tom McRae and Steve Earle.

Released in September 2014, this will be the 67-year-old singer, actress and 
fashion icon's 21st album. It follows 2011'sHorses and High Heels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/23/marianne-faithfull-interview>
, which featured appearances on guitar from Lou Reed, Dr John and MC5's Wayne 
Kramer.

Produced by Rob Ellis and Dimitri Tikovoi (who take on drums and bass, 
respectively), and mixed by Flood, her band includes Portishead's Adrian Utley 
on guitars, Ed Harcourt on keyboard, along with Warren Ellis and Jim Sclavunos 
fromNick Cave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> and the Bad Seeds.

Following the release of the album, Faithfull will embark on a 12-month world 
tour to celebrate her 50-year career. She released her first album, Come My Way 
in 1965, a year after she was discovered byRolling Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones> manager Andrew Loog Oldham.


"I was at a launch party and Andrew came up [to me] and said: 'I'm going to 
make you a star.' He really did,"Faithfull told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jan/10/marianne-faithfull-decadent-mick-jagger>
 last year. "I thought he was incredible, funny. He gave me the first ever 
Jagger-Richards composition to sing for my first record. What a way to start."

This week, fashion designer Hedi Slimane announced that Faithfull will be the 
new face ofSaint Laurent Music Project 
<http://www.ysl.com/corporate/en/saint-laurent-music-project/>. Other musicians 
who have appeared in the ad campaign for the fashion house include Courtney 
Love, Chuck Berry, Kim Gordon, Marilyn Manson and Christopher Owens.

In October, Rizzoli is publishing the book Marianne Faithfull: A Life on Record
 <http://www.rizzoliusa.com/book.php?isbn=9780847843596>, which will include 
photos of the musician taken by Helmut Newton, David Bailey and Bruce Weber, 
and edited by Faithfull.
 