
Marina Abramović has already planned her own funeral, which will incorporate 
her final performance work, live music, a colourful dress code and plenty of 
black comedy.

In a keynote speech in Sydney during her 12-day residency 
<http://kaldorartprojects.org.au/projects/marina-abramovic> for Kaldor Public 
Art Projects, Abramović – in good health at 67 – read out her manifesto, 
concluding that “an artist should die consciously without fear” and that “the 
funeral is the artist’s last piece before leaving”.

Revealing her own funeral scenario (“You should think about everything”), she 
said an artist must give instructions “so everything is done the way he wants”.

“I want to have three Marinas,” she said when an audience member pushed her 
for details. “Of course, one is real and two fake because you can’t have three 
bodies. But I want these three Marinas buried in the three cities which I’ve 
lived [in] the longest, which is Belgrade, Amsterdam and New York.” Nobody 
would know where the real body was interred, she added.

Abramović was motivated to plan her service after attending the funeral of her 
friend, the author Susan Sontag, at Père Lachaise cemetery, Paris, in 2004.


“It was the saddest funeral I’ve been to in my life and she is one of the 
greatest human beings I have ever met. She was full of life, curious and just 
an incredible writer,” said Abramović. “I went back to New York and went 
straight to the lawyer and said my funeral is going to be like this. And then I 
made an entire script.”

Marina Abramović: 'The planet is dying. We have to be warriors'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/18/marina-abramovic-the-planet-is-dying-we-have-to-be-warriors>
Mourners would be made to dress in the artist’s trademark black “like a 
cockroach”, she joked, before revealing she would actually insist on bright 
colours, “even” pink.

“I want Antony [Hegarty] of Antony and the Johnsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonyandthejohnsons>, who is a great singer 
and friend of mine ... to sing I Did It My Way. He never said yes but I think 
he will be so sad that I die he will probably do it.”

Hegarty and Abramović starred opposite each other in Robert Wilson’s show The 
Life and Death of Marina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jul/10/life-death-marina-abramovic-review>
, at the 2011 Manchester international festival, and Abramović was in the 
audience ofHegarty’s recent show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/17/antony-hegarty-condemns-genocide-of-indigenous-peoples-in-australia-and-us>
 at Dark Mofo festival in Hobart after launching her exhibition, Private 
Archaeology, at Mona.

Her funeral plans echo a recent interview in Tasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/18/marina-abramovic-the-planet-is-dying-we-have-to-be-warriors>
 where she talked about the three parts of her personality: “The one Marina is 
very heroic. I just go for it. I don’t care how much pain inside. Then we have 
second Marina – very different, very spiritual, very emotional ... And then 
there is third one who really like bullshit.”

In Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> she spoke of the 
genesis of her art, the time she spent with Indigenous communities in the 
Western Australian desert, and her plans for the as-yet-unbuilt Marina 
Abramović institute in Hudson, New York – her “legacy” – where she will teach 
mindfulness exercises to the public.

The institute will include a “blood bank”, a collection of blood samples from 
250 of the most inspirational artists, philosophers, scientists and people from 
indigenous cultures, which will once a year be re-energised by a Brazilian 
shaman. The project was as yet “unrealised”, Abramović said.

“Now I have this long career of 45 years, I never look back,” she told the 
Sydney audience. “I only look in the future because when I look back, I think I 
should be dead by now.”
 