
Anticipation is already high for Peter Brook’s return to Britain next month 
with a new piece of theatre based onhis canonical version of the Mahabharata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/29/peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield>
. Brook, now 90, is regularly feted as the most influential director alive; his 
fleeting trips to the UK have taken on the aspect of arevered elder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/19/peter-brook-theatre-director-at-90>
 paying a visit to the waiting faithful.

Peter Brook to rekindle the magic of the Mahabharata
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/13/peter-brook-battlefield-young-vic-theatre-mahabharata>
Yet alongside Brook’s name on the posters for Battlefield is another, not 
often noticed: that ofMarie-Hélène Estienne 
<http://www.kennedy-center.org/artist/A108853>. Trusted lieutenant, enforcer, 
co-writer, co-creator: however Estienne is described, she has been at Brook’s 
side for the last 40 years. For the past 20, he has barely made work without 
her. Yet she remains anenigma 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/culture/2015/03/18/stage/unsung-creator-casts-light-casting-gift-heaven/#.Vl1WbISBtp8>
, and in hundreds of articles about Brookshe barely merits a mention 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/7aa89596-efea-11e3-9b4c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3syNcQExV]>
. Calling her unsung doesn’t quite do it: she might be the most famous 
theatremaker no one has ever heard of.

We meet in Paris at the Bouffes du Nord <http://www.bouffesdunord.com/en>, the 
former music hall hemmed in by sari shops and Turkish grocery stores a few 
streets from the Gare du Nord. When I enter the cramped conference room 
backstage, Estienne is waiting: hair in a sharp pixie crop, a clear, forthright 
gaze. She is charming and happy to talk, but there are many things to do today. 
As I fiddle with the recorder, she checks her watch.

Battlefield is a reunion in more ways than one: the Mahabharata was one of the 
earliest shows Estienne was fully involved in creating. She looks amused as she 
recalls being dispatched to India in the early 80s, on a quixotic Brookian 
quest to see as many different dramatisations of the epic as possible. “Peter 
gave me this list of places to go. I saw so many different forms of it – 
absolutely amazing. Kathakali, men playing women,Theyyam 
<https://www.keralatourism.org/artforms/theyyam-ritual/1> from Kerala …” What 
was her job? “To observe. Then Peter would come and see, and we would discuss 
with the performers. It was very naive, really.”

Anyone expecting a retread of the Mahabharata, which opened in the 
awe-inspiring setting of a limestone quarry outside Avignon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/1985/jul/16/peter-brook-mahabharata-theatre>
(complete with artificial lake) in 1985, is in for a shock. Whereas the earlier 
incarnation attempted to encompass the sprawling span of the Sanskrit epic, 
replaying over 11 hours the multiplying dynastic rivalries and origin myths 
that make up one of the founding texts of Hinduism, Battlefield is a work of 
rapt, hushed minimalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54580dc3d1fa72aff9b485d3f762efc61a13c3f4%2F0_609_3075_1846%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54580dc3d1fa72aff9b485d3f762efc61a13c3f4%2F0_609_3075_1846%2F3075.jpg>
 Jared McNeill, Ery Nzaramba and Carole Karemera in rehearsal for Battlefield. 
Photograph: PR Image 
It begins just after the tumultuous war scenes that occupy the central portion 
of the text, and offers a series of parable-like fragments focusing on the 
prince,Yudhishthira 
<http://www.mythfolklore.net/india/encyclopedia/yudhishthira.htm>, whose forces 
have exterminated millions, including many of his own kin, and for whom victory 
– as Brook and Estienne describe it – “has the bitter taste of defeat”. Just 
four actors and a musician, Toshi Tsuchitori, are on stage. Though it has taken 
the best part of two years to create, the whole thing lasts not much longer 
than an hour. There is no artificial lake.

“If it was just a revival, it wouldn’t mean anything. We made a film [for TV, 
in 1989 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EENh1hxkD6E>] and that was enough,” 
she says crisply. “I don’t believe in doing the same thing; it would be less 
good, I think –rechauffée – cooked again, you know?”

We meet weeks before the attacks on Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, but the play’s sense of a world 
trying to make sense of catastrophic violence feels eerily topical; its 
quietness feels less like peace than the numbed silence that follows an 
explosion. “This is why we wanted to return. One can think of anything: Syria, 
[the attempted coups in] Burkina Faso. The Mahabharata thinks about so much of 
this.”

If not quite on a par with the vexations of Yudhishthira, Estienne’s own life 
story is arresting. Born in 1944, she married the critic Charles Estienne, a 
major figure on the Parisian art scene, in 1960. He was 52, she was 16. Six 
years later, Charles died suddenly; grief-stricken and desperately in need of a 
job, Estienne was taken in by his former paper, the Nouvel Observateur. “They 
were very nice. I was on the culture desk; eventually they asked me to be a 
theatre critic.”

One of the people she met was Brook, who had recently decamped to Paris to set 
up themultinational troupe 
<http://www.bouffesdunord.com/en/about-us/peter-brook> that became known as the 
International Centre for Theatre Research. In 1974, he invited her to cast 
Shakespeare’s Timon of Athens. She laughs. “I said, ‘How do I do casting?’ I 
had no idea. But he realised I have a talent for it. I keep people inside my 
head; Peter forgets them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F858b0ea920ca5f2f6ab11492c5d50341c004a34c%2F0_167_4192_2516%2F4192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F858b0ea920ca5f2f6ab11492c5d50341c004a34c%2F0_167_4192_2516%2F4192.jpg>
 Peter Brook directing Mahabharata in the Bouffes du Nord, 1987. Photograph: 
Julio Donoso/Sygma/Corbis 
Soon afterwards, Brook, working with another close collaborator, the writer 
Jean-Claude Carrière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/28/jean-claude-carriere-fame-screenwriter>
, began to contemplate the idea of putting the Mahabharata on stage for western 
audiences. What followed was nearly a decade of intermittent travel, research, 
tentative workshops, yet more travel. “Toshi went for nearly two years to 
India, learned so many instruments. He spent a year in Chennai learning one – 
he could get no sound out of it for six months, nothing.” The only way the 
company could afford to underwrite such herculean artistic experimentalism was 
by touring a production of Bizet’s potboiler, Carmen. Estienne smiles wryly. 
“You do what you have to do.”

Though many who experienced the Mahabharata professed themselves dazzled – a 
gushing New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1985/08/25/arts/peter-brook-transforms-an-indian-epic-for-the-stage.html?pagewanted=all>
 spoke of “wonderment and awe” – those with connections to India itself were 
unimpressed. Some accused Brook and his team of naked neocolonialism by 
appropriating a sacred text with only the scantiest knowledge of its history 
and context; theKolkata-based critic Rustom Bharucha called the spectacle 
“orientalist” <http://www.jstor.org/stable/4378860?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>
, dismissing it as a “contrived and overblown fairytale”.

Estienne shrugs. “Some people argued, but there were not many. It’s normal.” 
Did they listen to the criticisms? “For Peter, the bad review is the most 
interesting. He takes a good argument very seriously, and I learned to do the 
same.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da539c64eacbd4f0c99406cb4e4e8797e5abbff%2F0_0_3196_3196%2F3196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marie-H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Estienne%3A%20the%20powerhouse%20behind%20Peter%20Brook&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fmarie-helene-estienne-peter-brook-mahabharata-battlefield-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da539c64eacbd4f0c99406cb4e4e8797e5abbff%2F0_0_3196_3196%2F3196.jpg>
 Marie-Helene Estienne and Peter Brook last year. Photograph: Bertrand 
Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
All the while Estienne herself was observing and training – initially as a 
fixer and assistant, later as a valued collaborator. She worked as a dramaturg 
on Brook’s various expeditions into Hamlet in the late 1990s, and co-authored 
two shows,L’Homme Qui 
<http://fresques.ina.fr/en-scenes/impression/fiche-media/Scenes00030/l-homme-qui-de-peter-brook-au-tnp-de-villeurbanne.html>
 and Je Suis un Phénomène, as well as adapting texts such asCan Themba’s short 
story The Suit 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-reviews/9287854/The-Suit-Young-Vic-review.html>
 and translating Athol Fugard, John Kani and Winston Ntshona’s apartheid-era 
satire Sizwe Banzi is Dead.

Their most recent projects have been billed as co-creations, with Brook and 
Estienne sharing directing and writing credits. I’m intrigued by how they work. 
She clasps her hands tightly together. “I can’t explain more than this. One is 
doing this, the other is doing that. I respect him hugely, of course, so I am 
not imposing anything. He is so clever, and has a gift for everything, the 
musicians, the actors. Often you are just helping. Sometimes a little more.”

Still centre stage at 90: Peter Brook, human earthquake of modern theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/19/peter-brook-theatre-director-at-90>
Do they ever disagree? There is a brisk pause. “Not much. Sometimes, and then 
it’s terrible for the people in front of us! We only disagree on little things 
– should this carpet be red or yellow, or the costumes.” She tosses her head. 
“Peter doesn’t evenlook at the costumes. It’s OK – he’s looking for something 
else.” Would she ever direct without him? This time the pause is longer. “Not 
for the moment. I can’t. We are too close.”

Brook, she insists, is very much working: “The actors get very tired, but not 
him.” But one senses the subject is on everyone’s minds. Back in July, Brook’s 
wife, the actorNatasha Parry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/26/natasha-parry>, died at the age 
of 84; her death has left a large absence in the tight-knit company. “All of us 
loved her, so we had a lot of sorrow – but we carry her with us, I hope.”

We find ourselves talking about Battlefield again: how it dwells on 
renunciation and reconciliation, its quizzical approach to the question of 
what, if anything, lies beyond. Estienne’s voice is quiet but firm. “The 
Mahabharata is not afraid of death – it tells you to see it differently. That 
is what we try to give to people, that calmness.” For the first time since we 
began talking, she sits quite still. “It doesn’t mean you don’t have sorrow. 
But there is something higher.”

• Battlefield is at the Young Vic 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/battlefield>, London, 3–27 February, then 
touring internationally.
 