
Retailers came under renewed pressure as investor awaited the outcome of the 
latest US Federal Reserve meeting, due later.

Marks & Spencer is leading the FTSE 100 fallers, down 15.5p at 436.8p, after 
downbeat comments from UBS and a price target cut from HSBC. There was also 
talk that its non-food sales were £30m below budget last week. UBS said in a 
note on the sector:
 The clothing retailers look to have pressed the panic button this year as 
subdued real disposable income, weak footfall and warmer October weather have 
held back full price sales. We think that reported like for like sales may hold 
up but the margin investment will be greater than originally expected with the 
economics of selling more volumes at a lower price not working in the 
retailers' favour.

We cut our forecasts for Marks & Spencer (2014 pretax profit cut by 3% and 
2015 by 8%) andDebenhams (2014 11% and 2015 10%) on lower gross margins. Marks 
price target falls to 475p [from 530p] and we move to neutral [from buy]. For 
Debenhams the share price reflects the majority of our concerns but we lower 
our target price [from 125p] to 100p. 
HSBC was still positive on Marks, with an overweight rating but cut its target 
from 550p to 530p. It said:
 [Marks is] moving in the right direction with the right strategy for the long 
term…but wider sector pressure to prevail short term. 
On Debenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> it said higher 
promotional spending would hurt first quarter like-for-like sales, and gross 
margin, and cut its 2014 to 2016 pretax profit forecasts by 10% to 6%, saying 
there was reduced scope for buybacks.

Debenhams, which on Tuesday asked for cuts from suppliers, is down 0.65p at 
81.35p.

Supermarkets are again under pressure following news the big four were losing 
market share to discounters.J Sainsbury is 2.2p lower at 90.20p, Tesco is down 
3.7p at 320.80p andMorrisons is off 1.7p at 255p. Deutsche Bank said:
 The Big 4 [Wal Mart-owned Asda is the fourth] have entered a period of 
structurally lower growth, due to a high level of consolidation and increased 
competition. We maintain our sell rating on Morrisons (target price 250p), our 
hold rating on Sainsbury's (target price 410p) and our buy rating on Tesco 
(target price 386p)

Elsewhere United Utilities is 10p lower at 658p after the shares went 
ex-dividend, whilePetrofac has fallen another 8p to £11.02 and Amec 14p to 
£10.34 following Tuesday's warning from oil services specialist CGG.

But Rexam has risen 7.9p to 496p after a positive note on the packaging sector 
from Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

British Gas owner Centrica has climbed 4.8p to 327.9p after it said it would 
sell its Texas gas-fired power stations to Blackstone for £420m and return the 
proceeds to shareholders.

Ahead of the Fed meeting, where investors are hoping the central bank will 
decide not to trim its $85bn a month bond buying programme, theFTSE 100 has 
risen 19.49 points to 6505.68.
 