
It’s been a horrible year for Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
 andthe world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/what-a-2016-of-a-year-never-again>
, but that hasn’t stopped Mark Zuckerberg from sending a saccharine digital 
Christmas (sorry, non-denominational holiday season) card, in the form of a 
two-minute video, showcasing his perfect life.

Soundtracked by plinky-plonky music, Zuck presents a simple AI called “Jarvis” 
(named after Iron Man’s butler) that he’s spent about 100 hours this year 
programming. Jarvis, who is voiced in the video by Morgan Freeman, is the 
virtual assistant theFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
CEO set out to build as a personal challenge that would help him understand the 
state of artificial intelligence.

2016: the year Facebook became the bad guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
As we sweep through Zuckerberg’s enormous, minimalist home, we witness Jarvis 
provide calendar briefings, entertain Zuck’s daughter Max in Mandarin, identify 
and let people into his home, control the lights and play music. There are 
smiles and tickles and popcorn interspersed with on-brand messaging about 
Messenger bots, internet drones and conference calls. It’s a two-minute, 
unsolicited humblebrag with a hammy script and a stilted, dead-eyed delivery 
that makes you question whether Mark or Jarvis is the robot. (At one point he 
eats an unbuttered piece of toast straight from the toaster. What kind of human 
does this?)

In releasing this video, Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> has become Jenny from 
high school who sends professionally shot holiday cards featuring her husband 
Chip and their two adorable children all wearing Santa hats and holding large 
carved oak letters that spell out “blessed”.

Inside, there’s a round-robin newsletter: “Chloe is showing a real affinity 
for ballet (more good toes than naughty toes!) while Tucker is reading well 
above grade level – who knew eight-year-olds would enjoy Dostoevsky?!” By 
meticulously choreographing a pastiche of domestic bliss and quirky invention, 
Zuck’s “people” appear to be trying to shift the attention away from 2016’s 
tribulations.

Mark Zuckerberg has become Jenny from high school who sends professionally 
shot holiday cards featuring her husband Chip

This is Zuckerberg the tinkerer and family man, not the guy accused of 
building algorithms thatplayed a role in the US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
. Unfortunately, the performance is as wooden as Jenny’s letters.

Then there are the jokes, which we should probably call “fake jokes”. They 
look like jokes and are delivered like jokes, but they are devoid of real joke 
content. The Guardian understands that some of these so-called “jokes” were 
produced byentrepreneurial Macedonian teenagers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/facebook-clickbait-political-news-sites-us-election-trump>
. At one point Mark asks Jarvis to “play us some good Nickelback songs” and 
Jarvis responds: “I’m sorry, Mark, I’m afraid I can’t do that.” Ooh, we think, 
a 2001: A Space Odyssey reference. Perhaps Jarvis has turned evil? But no, 
Jarvis waits a beat before telling Mark that their are no goodNickelback songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2016/nov/30/haranguing-chad-how-nickelback-became-pops-ultimate-punchline>
 – a punchline that’sabout as edgy as a satsuma 
<http://words-and-coffee.tumblr.com/post/148825070073/wescratchweclaw-im-a-crazy-man-im-a>
.

“In case it’s not clear, this is meant to be a fun summary and not a live 
demo,” said Zuckerberg in a comment immediately after posting the video – a 
clarification that was simultaneously helpful for those who failed to spot the 
“fun” while siphoning off any remaining dregs of fun for those who did.

If we were to suggest a personal challenge for 2017, it would be to refrain 
from making any more “fun” videos.
 