
Former BBC director general Mark Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson> has warned that giving the 
National Audit Office greater access to the corporation's finances could 
undermine its independence.

Thompson, BBC director general for eight years until September 2012 and now 
chief executive of theNew York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> Company, said a balance had 
to be struck between protecting the corporation's independence from government 
and the need for it to be accountable to licence fee payers and politicians for 
the way its £3.6bn a year in public funding is spent.

"I still believe passionately in a very strong and independent BBC," said 
Thompson, speaking to MediaGuardian at theAdvertising Week conference 
<http://www.advertisingweek.com/> in New York on Tuesday.

"I think that it is important that the BBC is held to account, of course it 
is, it is important the public get a chance to see what is going on inside the 
organisation, when there are problems and projects that don't work that gets 
looked into properly. [However] I never want it to get it to a point where 
accountability means that the independence of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> – which the public really, really care 
about – is undermined," he added.

"I'm afraid this is one of those rather British things where a balance needs 
to be struck. There is a tension [and] … striking a balance is a fairly 
technical question. My own view is that in my years as director general I 
thought the balance was struck pretty well."

Thompson also questioned whether BBC Trust chairman Lord Patten's call at the 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/22/halve-numbers-bbc-managers-lord-patten>
 for the number of senior corporation managers to be cut by half by 2015 was a 
new initiative.

"[We] announced the target of getting [BBC senior managers] to 1% of total 
workforce in 2011, that is a restatement," he said.

Thompson, who earlier this month publicly disagreed with Patten and other 
former BBC colleagues about who knew what and when about controversial 
executive severance payments, said he had nothing to add to his comments to MPs 
at the Commons public accounts committee hearing.

He declined to comment on whether he would return to face another round of 
questioning from MPs, this time on the Commons culture, media and sport select 
committee. "I've received no invitations and I've got nothing more to say," he 
said.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@guardian.co.uk or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 