
The upcoming Marvel superhero epic Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/15/marvel-captain-america-civil-war-doctor-strange>
 looks set to feature multiple members of the original Avengers ensemble. But 
one comic-book titan who won’t be choosing sides is Mark Ruffalo’s Bruce 
Banner, AKA the Hulk.

Spoiler alert: the not-so-jolly green giant was seen heading off to unknown 
territory in a “quinjet <http://marvel.wikia.com/wiki/Quinjet>” aircraft, which 
in the comics have space-straddling capabilities, at the end of this year’s 
Avengers: Age of Ultron. Ruffalotold BadTaste.it 
<http://www.badtaste.it/2015/09/03/venezia-72-mark-ruffalo-rivela-che-hulk-non-sara-in-captain-america-civil-war/141347/>
 he would not be back in time for the events of Civil War.

“The reason is too great to be revealed in this movie,” he said, in comments 
translated from the original Italian by Comingsoon.net 
<http://www.comingsoon.net/movies/news/478701-mark-ruffalo-reveals-the-hulk-was-in-captain-america-civil-war-but-marvel-is-saving-him#/slide/1>
. “I was in the script, but then they removed my character. They don’t want to 
reveal where is he and why. I don’t even know if Hulk will be back soon.”

Marvel unveils Captain America: Civil War trailer and Doctor Strange art
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/15/marvel-captain-america-civil-war-doctor-strange>
Hulk’s Ultron departure explicitly recalls the beginning of the famous Planet 
Hulk comic-book arc <http://www.comicvine.com/planet-hulk/4045-41213/>, in 
which the monstrous creature is banished to space by a council of superheroes 
known as the Illuminati, after they decide he cannot be controlled. But Marvel 
Studios boss Kevin Feigehas previously ruled out 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2014/07/21/no-planet-hulk-movie-planned-says-kevin-feige>
 adapting that storyline.

Ruffalo is likely to return for the next Avengers movies, Infinity War Part I 
and Part II in 2018 and 2019 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/avengers-infinity-war-part-1-2-will-may-2018-may-2019/>
, and might also turn up in other Marvel films – thoughGuardians of the Galaxy 
director James Gunn has said 
<http://moviepilot.com/posts/2015/07/06/no-hulk-in-guardians-of-the-galaxy-2-james-gunn-answers-fan-questions-3361676?lt_source=external,manual>
 he is not set to include the Hulk in the team of cosmic misfits led by Chris 
Pratt’s Star Lord any time soon.

Concept artwork for Captain America: Civil War 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/captain-america-civil-war-concept-art-hawkeye-black-widow-1201579801/>
 last week revealed that Winter Soldier, Falcon, Agent 13, Hawkeye and Ant-Man 
will be joining the team led by Chris Evans’ patriotic superhero, while Black 
Widow, War Machine, Vision and Black Panther are on the side of Robert Downey 
Jr’s Iron Man. The new instalment, loosely adapted from the comic book Civil 
War, centres on a split in the superhero ranks after Earth’s governments decide 
to impose official oversight on the Avengers. The Russo brothers’ film is due 
in cinemas next April, with a US release in May.
 