
Defeat for the Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> in Vienna on Saturday 
would not be fatal in a group that appears destined to go down to the final set 
of games, but it would still represent a considerable blow, not least because 
Austria are stacked with problems of their own.

Martin O’Neill’s side have accrued a very respectable seven points from the 
first available nine without performing especially well. However, the bluntness 
in attack that pervaded the slender wins over Georgia and Moldova last month is 
unlikely to be good enough against anAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> team who are still smarting from 
their dismal European Championship and struggling to recapture the 
pre-tournament form that led to many hailing them as dark horses to win that 
title in France.

For O’Neill, the biggest concern against a team they have not beaten since 
1963 is the absence of a reliable goalscorer in his squad. The first-choice 
striker Shane Long, who is hardly prolific, is injured along with Newcastle’s 
Daryl Murphy, and the secondary options are not inspiring much confidence. 
Jonathan Walters may be put up front, with Adam Rooney, Kevin Doyle and David 
McGoldrick held in reserve. In saying that, the Austria manager, Marcel Koller, 
shares a similar problem – he is over-reliant on the 33-year-old Marc Janko to 
lead the line, though Walters’ Stoke team-mate Marko Arnautovic has proven a 
menace from the wing.

Roy Keane hits out at Koeman over Everton and Republic of Ireland row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/roy-keane-hits-out-ronald-koeman-everton-republic-of-ireland-james-mccarthy>
Despite those shortcomings in attack, O’Neill is adamant his side will be 
going out to win against hosts who are bordering on desperation having lost to 
Serbia and drawn with Wales last month. “I don’t actually know how you play for 
a draw,” O’Neill said. “I don’t know how a manager can plan for one. Our 
attitude is to go out on the front foot, try and be positive and try and go for 
it.”

Elsewhere O’Neill has had to deal with the absences of his first-choice left 
back Stephen Ward and Everton’s James McCarthy, who isstuck between a rock 
called Ronald Koeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/everton-ronald-koeman-james-mccarthy-withdraw-ireland>
 anda hard place called Roy Keane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/roy-keane-hits-out-ronald-koeman-everton-republic-of-ireland-james-mccarthy>
, due to a club v country row about the oft-injured midfielder.

McCarthy’s team-mate for both, Séamus Coleman, tried to play down the 
disagreement on Friday – “I’m not interested in making headlines out of it” – 
but O’Neill, bizarrely, muttered something about calling Donald Trump and 
“commiserations to Hillary [Clinton]” when asked if he would contact Koeman to 
discuss the situation.

On a brighter note, the addition of two Dundalk players, following their third 
League of Ireland title in a row and impressive run in the Europa League, has 
been roundly welcomed, and while Andy Boyle, a centre-half, is unlikely to 
appear, the chances of the exciting winger Daryl Horgan debuting from the bench 
are fair.

James McCarthy out of Republic of Ireland’s trip to Austria due to injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/republic-of-ireland-austria-james-mccarthy-everton>
West Bromwich Albion’s James McClean may have trained in the past two days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/john-oshea-james-mcclean-republic-of-ireland-austria>
 but he is not 100% fit following a back injury and, depending on the 
scoreline, Horgan may be a good option.

He could even come up against Austria’s star player David Alaba. The Bayern 
Munich player remains weighed down by unrealistic expectations and there have 
been whispers that Marcel Koller may make the odd move of switching his only 
first-rate player from central midfield to the left side of a leaky defence.

That would be good news for Ireland, who were sucker-punched in both Vienna 
and Dublin by Alaba when the teams met in qualifying for the last World Cup.

Koller, who celebrated his 56th birthday on Friday with a “nice breakfast”, 
has whittled off the usual cliches about Ireland being tough and his team 
needing “the right mentality” to succeed, but did admit he hopes to capitalise 
on the visitors’ list of absentees under forecasted heavy snow. “They have 
improved and got better,” he added. “On the other hand, three or four players 
are missing and most of them are regulars.”
 