
Marvel's universe expanded into TV last year with Avengers spin-off Agents of 
SHIELD <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agents-of-shield>, and they've 
now added Agent Carter, a series featuring the character from the Captain 
America movies played by British actor Hayley Atwell.

The series began life as a short film bundled with the Iron Man 3 DVD, where 
Carter, doing menial desk work after her partner Steve Rogers (AKA Captain 
America) has been frozen in Arctic ice, receives a call that tells her she is 
to co-head the new SHIELD organisation. The 1946-set series will now expand the 
story, as Carter balances the drudgery of her desk job with secret missions, 
amid the grief of losing Rogers.

According to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/abc-picks-up-marvels-agent-700880>, 
the show will be a "bridge" between season breaks in Agents of SHIELD, with 
their storylines eventually intertwined. Agents of SHIELD itself has been 
renewed for a second season.

Agent Carter will air on the US network ABC, but Marvel also has a partnership 
with Netflix to create yet more spin-offs. Beginning with Daredevil (whose film 
adaptation with Ben Affleck is one of the lesser-loved entries in the Marvel 
canon), four series will air on the network, with Jessica Jones, Iron Fist and 
Luke Cage all following. "The epic will unfold over multiple years of original 
programming, taking Netflix members deep into the gritty world of heroes and 
villains of Hell's Kitchen, New York," wrote Marvelin a statement 
<http://marvel.com/news/tv/2013/11/7/21476/disneys_marvel_and_netflix_join_forces_to_develop_historic_four_series_epic_plus_a_mini-series_event>
.

The company's overall strategy extends way beyond that though – studio 
president Kevin Feigerecently said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/04/marvel-movie-masterplan-2028-president-kevin-feigle-comic-book>
 they have a masterplan reaching to 2028, with a pool of 8,000 comic book 
characters to choose from.

Atwell, meanwhile, will also soon appear as Cinderella's mother in a new 
version of the classic fairytale directed by Kenneth Branagh, and is currently 
filming Testament of Youth, a BBC Films adaptation of Vera Brittain's 
devastating first world war memoir which also stars Alicia Vikander, Dominic 
West and Emily Watson.
 