
1: Precision

Accuracy from the tee is underrated and has become more necessary over the 
years but with approach shots it is absolutely essential.

“If you’re off with your tee shots, then you’re going to have a really long 
day,” saysthe 2013 champion, Adam Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/15/adam-scott-angel-cabrera-masters>
. “But if you’re off with your iron play from the fairway, you’re going to have 
a long day on the greens putting from 40ft and not giving yourself a lot of 
chances.

“There are great opportunities at this course but if the mistakes are made in 
the wrong areas, there’s a disaster waiting to happen on every shot.”

2: Patience

You cannot force anything around Augusta National. Rather, it is a case of 
taking opportunities when they arrive. And they will only arrive with a calm 
mindset.

The Forgotten Story of … the 1966 Masters | Scott Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/06/forgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray>
“You’ve always got to be patient when you’re playing major championships and 
at Augusta in particular,”Henrik Stenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/henrik-stenson> says. “It’s just that the 
margins for error are so small. I think the patience is even more necessary if 
you end up in trouble. You want to try to minimise it, make a bogey. Double 
bogeys are always hard to make up for in majors.

“And also, if you don’t get on a good run, you’ve just got to stay patient 
because you will have a good run at some point if you’re going to have anything 
to do with the final outcome.”

3: Pressure

With the greatest will in the world, not many children grow up harbouring a 
dream of winning the US PGA Championship. The iconic status of the Masters, 
even the Green Jacket itself, places an inevitable mental burden on those who 
find themselves in contention.

Jason Day has spoken of wanting the Masters too much, to his detriment. Sandy 
Lyle, who won in 1988 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2013/apr/04/sandy-lyle-victory-1988-masters>
, adds: “Trying to win any major is stomach-churning. I had a two-shot lead at 
the turn here and I am thinking: ‘Here we go, it’s all over in the next 
two-and-a-half hours.’

“It’s being like in a waiting room at the dentist. Your stomach is turning 
over at the thought of knowing you are going to have a painful experience. 
That’s about as a good way I can explain it.”

4: Putting

Augusta’s greens are notoriously quick and sloping. As Rory McIlroy puts it: 
“Sometimes you have 5ft left and would be happy with a two-putt.”

The Joy of Six: The Masters | Scott Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/apr/01/joy-of-six-the-masters> 
Being blunt, it is impossible to win without putting well over four rounds. 
When you putt brilliantly,as shown by Jordan Spieth last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/13/jordan-spieth-masters-augusta-victory-rory-mciilroy>
, there is scope for low scoring.

“On Masters week, there is a progression with the greens,” says the 2007 
champion, Zach Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/apr/09/golf.masters2007>. “The roll-out 
becomes more and more. It may not be drastic but there is a couple of feet 
difference on roll-out of putts. Every year when I get here, my focus is on 
work on the greens; as it should be.”

5: Par fives

Holes 2, 8, 13 and 15 historically play as the easiest on Masters week. Taking 
advantage of the chances as presented here can define a player’s position.

“There are no longer any holes outside of the par fives that are easy birdies, 
other than the 3rd,”Phil Mickelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-mickelson> says. “The par fours now are 
so long and tough, that you’re coming in with mid and long irons more often 
than short irons. We used to hit a lot of wedges in here and now we don’t.

“That’s why the par fives are such a critical element; they give you momentum 
and opportunities. They’re the only ones that you’re going to have easy putts 
for birdies. You’re going to have to make a lot of 20- to 40-footers to make 
birdies on the other holes. So you have to play them smart and effective to be 
able to shoot under par here.”
 