
‘Yeah, we had a lot of small, silicone penises flying around the office at the 
time, ending up in weird places,” says animator Dan Driscoll. “There were long 
discussions about how well-endowed he should be. This one’s too long, this 
one’s too short. We made multiple sizes.” Driscoll is talking aboutAnomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
, his forthcoming animated movie written and co-directed by Charlie Kaufman. As 
you probably guessed already, it’s not a family show. In addition to 
unprecedented levels of anatomical correctness, there’s also a trip to an adult 
store and a protracted, believably awkward sex scene – all of which kept the
miniature-penis-crafting department busy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/22/anomalisa-charlie-kaufman-interview-stop-motion-animation-video>
. The fact that Anomalisa features stop-motion puppets rather than real actors 
doesn’t prevent it from being a sincere, profound, ultimately moving study of 
human relations. At the same time, it’s a strong contender for this year’s best 
animation Oscar, jostling incongruously with family movies like Inside Out and 
Minions.

Charlie Kaufman on weirdness, failure and his new puppet noir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/15/charlie-kaufman-anomalisa-film-interview>
Few people would have put money on old-fashioned stop-motion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_motion> animation surviving this far into 
the digital age. Compared to modern computer animation, it’s like writing your 
emails in needlepoint. But stop-motion has not just prevailed, it has moved 
into new territories. Once associated with children’s entertainment, it has 
somehow found a new lease of life among “grown-up” film-makers – be they 
live-action auteurs, or animators dealing in darker, child-unfriendlier 
content. Anomalisa ticks both boxes, and it’s the tip of an iceberg that’s 
still growing. Wes Anderson, for example, translated his corduroy-suited 
sensibility into stop-motion for 2009’s Fantastic Mr Fox. It worked so well 
that he’s makinganother one 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/wes-andersons-next-movie-is-a-stop-motion-animated-film-about-dogs-may-also-do-an-anthology-movie-20151009>
, reportedly about a pack of dogs. In addition, we’ve had a steady stream of 
horror-tinged stop-motion works like Tim Burton’s Corpse Bride and 
Frankenweenie, and Laika studios’Coraline <http://www.coraline.com>, Paranorman 
and Boxtrolls. There’s more of that to come too: later this year we’ll have
Laika’s <http://www.laika.com> Kubo and the Two Strings 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S1F8VJZgrk>, an ancient Japanese fantasia 
with a voice cast including Charlize Theron, Ralph Fiennes and Matthew 
McConaughey. Coraline directorHenry Selick 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/henry-selick-key-and-peele-developing-animated-feature-1201632089/>
, meanwhile, is working on a new stop-motion comedy with comics Key and Peele. 
Horror maestro Guillermo del Toro isalso developing 
<http://screenrant.com/guillermo-del-toro-pinocchio-not-postponed/> a 
stop-motion version of Pinocchio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ba498b21199262768301e79934f0ad4c0da44f%2F0_53_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77ba498b21199262768301e79934f0ad4c0da44f%2F0_53_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 On the set of the animated stop-motion film, Anomalisa, by Paramount Pictures. 
Photograph: PR 
Explanations for stop-motion’s unexpected stay of execution vary. Could it be 
that its hand-made aesthetic chimes with our craft-loving times? Or that CG 
animation has become overly associated with slick family movies? Stop-motion is 
often cheaper to make than CG but it’s by no means easier. It’s a labour of 
love, eked out one frame at a time. It invariably involves the crafting of 
intricate miniature characters, props and landscapes from scratch, moving 
puppets and cameras fractionally between each take, then running them together 
to create the illusion of movement. In a good week, Anomalisa’s team produced 
10 seconds of footage,says Driscoll 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HGhefy_nG8>, the film’s animation supervisor. 
Dealing with real-world characters and settings makes it even more complex. 
“The hard part for us was figuring out how to make these puppets move in a 
human, naturalistic way,” he says. “How do we give these puppets life without 
making them look like strange automatons that people can’t relate to?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d0375abab80767dd0e3b4149e0324bf7e88532%2F7_218_3639_2183%2F3639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d0375abab80767dd0e3b4149e0324bf7e88532%2F7_218_3639_2183%2F3639.jpg>
 Pinocchio by Guillermo Del Toro. Photograph: Handout 
Extensive research and testing was necessary, Driscoll explains: videotaping 
human actors to study movements, recording facial expressions, animating minute 
movements such as breaths and blinks and sighs. The simplest gesture, such as 
the twiddling of the stem of a martini glass, can represent a technical 
challenge. But Anomalisa’s use of stop-motion is entirely in keeping with its 
story. The lead character, Michael (voiced by David Thewlis), cannot 
distinguish individual faces or voices – until he meets a stranger named Lisa 
(Jennifer Jason Leigh), hence his attraction to her. Apart from these two 
characters, every other puppet in the movie has the same face and the same 
voice – even Michael’s wife and child. This generic every-face was created by 
blending portraits of 40 of Driscoll’s co-workers into one using Photoshop, 
whereas Michael and Lisa were modelled on real people. All of this would 
technically be possible in live-action –there was a similar scene in Kaufman’s 
Being John Malkovich <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6Fuxkinhug> – but it 
would be no less challenging.

Even more difficult to translate into live-action would be Michael and Lisa’s 
protracted sex scene. Team America set quite a benchmark for extreme puppet 
sex, but “we were very adamant that this would not be a comedy,” says Driscoll. 
“We don’t want people to laugh except where you’re supposed to laugh. It was a 
painstaking process to create how this would be a very tender and real and 
loving moment between these two people.” The scene took four months to make, 
working out how the characters would look, how they would crawl across a bed, 
rigging points in the mattress to make it look like their bodies had weight. If 
they were real actors, the scene would be distracting, if not excruciating – 
ironically it works better in animation.

Driscoll is no stranger to the world of R-rated animation. “Most of my career 
has been spent working on stuff I won’t let my children watch,” he says. Before 
Anomalisa, Driscoll was animating adult-oriented fare for Cartoon Network’s 
Adult Swim division, suchRobot Chicken 
<http://www.adultswim.com/videos/robot-chicken/>, the long-running, 
pop-satirising sketch show that has generated many spin-offs, including three 
Star Wars parodies and a whole sub-genre of cult stop-motion adult comedy. 
“Part of the appeal is you can do whatever you like,” says Driscoll, but it’s 
also about the medium itself. “The texture of stop-motion lends itself to 
making the gross factor that much more intense and palpable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52946197516066a62cca8f302fee4071329fb34e%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52946197516066a62cca8f302fee4071329fb34e%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Tim Burton working on Frankenweenie. Photograph: Allstar/DISNEY 
Stop-motion has always lent itself to the dark side. Most animators seek to 
avoid the“uncanny valley” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley> – that 
zone where characters take on a creepiness as a result of being almost human, 
but not quite – but very often, stop-motion exploits this eerie aspect. 
Compounded by the medium’s relative cheapness, and creative freedom, it has 
always appealed to loners, eccentrics and subversive. The first acknowledged 
master of the form, Polish-Russian pioneerLadislas Starevich 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ladislas_Starevich>, began by animating dead 
beetles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vIC0Sb6pLvI> – when he couldn’t get 
live ones to perform. His surreal, slightly macabre insect stories amazed early 
cinema viewers in the 1910s. Some even thought he must have trained the insects 
to perform. Eastern European animators carried the baton for much of the 20th 
century:Jiri Trnka <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS4Th36zN_g>, Walerian 
Borowczyk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-gnRyU15oJI>, Jiri Barta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rk6aZD1u9TQ> and best-known of all, Jan 
Svankmajer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, who made his name with a 
memorably haunting interpretation of Alice in Wonderland. And even as Aardman 
revived commercial stop-motion in the UK, practitioners of the dark arts have 
thrived here, such as the Brothers Quay (who are American but UK-based), 
bolexbrothers, and Robert Morgan (whose Bafta-nominated shortBobby Yeah 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=thxuug3Fyhs> is not for the faint-hearted).

Stop-motion’s transition to the grown-up mainstream is primarily down to two 
people: Tim Burton and Henry Selick. Burton, your textbook film-geek loner, had 
been playing around with stop-motion since he was a kid. In 1982, while working 
as an animator for Disney, he produced his calling-card short filmVincent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/oct/14/2>, a black-and-white stop-motion 
revelling in the retro-horror tropes he would go on to make his name with. And 
having made his name, Burton had the clout, in 1991, to makeThe Nightmare 
Before Christmas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wr6N_hZyBCk>, Hollywood’s 
first feature-length stop-motion movie and a cult Halloween perennial. Burton 
wrote and produced it, but hired Selick 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Selick>, his former Disney colleague, to 
direct it.

“At the time, Disney didn’t have high hopes for the movie,” says Selick. “It 
was done for a low budget and was a means to get Tim back to Disney after his 
huge successes with Batman and Beetlejuice. In fact, they were afraid it might 
tarnish their good name, so it was originally released under their alternate 
banner, Touchstone Pictures. It was only after many years of ever-growing 
success as a cult classic (and hundreds of millions of dollars made in 
merchandizing) that they finally called it a Disney film.”

The two have returned to the medium regularly ever since: Burton produced 
Selick’s Roald Dahl adaptation James and the Giant Peach, then went on to 
direct his own supernatural stop-motionsCorpse Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/oct/14/2> and Frankenweenie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/07/tim-burton-frankenweenie-interview>
. Selick struggled with live-action/animation hybrid Monkeybone but bounced 
back with his best-known work, Coraline – the first feature of Oregon-based 
Laika studios, who have turned Halloween-friendly stop-motion into an ongoing, 
big-budget concern. Selick also brought Wes Anderson round to stop-motion. He 
provided the imaginary sea creatures for Anderson’s The Life Aquatic and was in 
line to direct Fantastic Mr Fox before leaving to make Coraline. Anderson 
reluctantly stepped in himself, and clearly developed a taste for it.


“Stop-motion can bring anything to life, including dead-looking things and 
broken things,” Selick says. “There’s something about its twitchy motion that, 
combined with the right design and lighting, can really raise the hairs on 
one’s neck. I believe the final form of the Other Mother in my film Coraline 
can stand beside any of the most frightening live-action villains seen on 
screen.”

You could say stop-motion appeals to a certain type of live-action director. 
Anderson, Burton, Guillermo del Toro – these are film-makers who’ve pride 
themselves on their visual signatures. Each has a distinctive, highly 
controlled aesthetic, achieved through obsessive attention to design details – 
costume, set dressing, colour, graphics. Their live-action films are often 
half-way to animation already. Kaufman, too, has often addressed issues of 
control, either of people (Being John Malkovich, Confessions of a Dangerous 
Mind) or complete environments (Synecdoche, New York).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa547a93038e472e18da33674a1dd4db3987c5ccc%2F0_0_2624_1576%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa547a93038e472e18da33674a1dd4db3987c5ccc%2F0_0_2624_1576%2F2624.jpg>
 Kubo and the Two Strings. Photograph: UNIVERSAL 
Could it be that animation also gives these film-makers the omnipotence they 
seek? Anderson found stop-motion just as unpredictable as live-action. “With an 
animated film, you can’t predict accidents and surprises,” he said in 2009. “As 
carefully as you prepare the shot and all the details, frame by frame, every 
animator comes up with a different interpretation … You never quite know what 
it’s going to be.” Then again, whenTim Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/timburton> was asked why he was remaking 
Frankenweenie, his tale of a boy who reanimates his beloved pet dog, which he 
had filmed as a live-action short 30 years previously, he replied, “because I 
want to get a better performance out of the dog”.

“I think it’s the love of the physicality of the medium,” says Peter Saunders, 
ofMackinnon and Saunders <http://www.mackinnonandsaunders.com>, which has made 
the puppets for many of these movies, including Fantastic Mr Fox, Corpse Bride 
and Frankenweenie. They are also developing the characters for Del Toro’s 
Pinocchio, which promises to be a darker, scarier interpretation of the story, 
closer to Collodi’s original. “Tim doesn’t particularly like using green screen 
in his movies; he’d far rather build a set because there’s a tactile reality to 
it. He loves the tangibility of stop-frame animation, bringing inanimate 
objects to life. With Guillermo it’s not dissimilar; he comes from a special 
effects background.”

Saunders is as surprised as anyone by the grown-up direction his profession 
has taken. His Manchester-based company started out making children’s TV 
characters, such as Bob the Builder and Postman Pat. But they also helped out 
with Paul Berry’s spooky Oscar-animated shortThe Sandman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UjgHbRrnjhU> in 1991. That caught Tim Burton’s 
attention and the rest is history. “It’s been par for the course over recent 
years that we go from “cute fluffy bunny”-type preschool programmes to films 
about dead widows and the like,” Saunders observes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef6826cf3d0e3b58294982ddfecf268a7f011f64%2F0_0_5284_3171%2F5284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Masters%20of%20puppets%3A%20Charlie%20Kaufman%20and%20the%20subversive%20allure%20of%20stop-motion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsubversive-allure-stop-motion-anomalisa-tim-burton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef6826cf3d0e3b58294982ddfecf268a7f011f64%2F0_0_5284_3171%2F5284.jpg>
 On the set of the animated stop-motion film, Anomalisa, by Paramount Pictures. 
Photograph: PR 
Despite its old-school traditions, stop-motion has moved on since the days of 
Starewicz and Svankmajer. Mackinnon and Saunders’ puppets are extremely 
complex. Beneath their silicone skins, their metal skulls are fitted with 
innumerable joints and devices “like miniature animatronics”, thus enabling a 
broad range of facial expressions. Computers also play a part: the faces of the 
characters inAnomalisa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> and Laika’s 
animations are now 3D-printed from computer renderings, rather than crafted 
from scratch by hand. That way, a character can have a new bespoke face for 
each frame or a face can be printed off several times for several dolls, so 
that animators can work on different scenes simultaneously. Miniature costumes 
are often laser-cut and camera rigs computer-controlled. Some stop-motion 
movies incorporate CGI backgrounds and effects. It’s a medium that’s still 
evolving.

Talk of a stop-motion “renaissance” is met with scepticism by veterans of the 
trade, when the stakes are so high, the investment so great and the competition 
so fierce. “With CG films nowadays, they’re only going to get better, stronger, 
bigger but hopefully there’ll always be a place for stop-motion,” says Peter 
Saunders, “it would be like living in a world where there’s nothing but oil 
paintings. There’s room in animation for many different types of film-making, 
just as there are many different mediums of painting. We’re another means of 
creating films which is equally valid.”

At the same time, despite the frustrations, stop-motion has a unique appeal, 
says Henry Selick: “All high-calibre animation requires a large skill-set and 
infinite patience. What sets stop-motion apart is that it’s the closest to 
live-action in terms of real sets, lights, props, hair, wardrobe, etc. In 
stop-motion, every scene that’s animated is an actual performance by the 
animator through the puppet, recorded one frame at a time, and you’re pretty 
much stuck with the final result. Funny thing, this is one of the aspects about 
stop-motion I love the most, this high-wire act of total commitment that gives 
the animation a vitality not found in the other types.”

 * Anomalisa is released in the UK on 11 March and in Australia on 4 February.
 