
Crystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> have 
completed the signing of the former Arsenal and Milan defensive midfielder 
Mathieu Flamini on a contract until the end of the season.

The 32-year-old Frenchman had been a free agent after being released by the 
Gunners in the summer after playing 246 times over two spells, including 24 
times last season. During his seven seasonswith the club he helped Arsène 
Wenger’s men win three FA Cups and reach the 2006 Champions League final.

Real winners and losers of the transfer window are obscured by headline 
figures | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/01/real-winners-losers-transfer-window-paul-pogba-david-luiz-premier-league>
Sandwiched between that were five years in Serie A with Milan, where he won 
the 2011scudetto. His career, though, started with hometown club, Marseille, 
where as a 20-year-old he started the 2004 Uefa Cup final before Arsenal 
snapped him up a few months later. He has also won three caps for France.

As he had been without a club and thus able to move outside of the transfer 
window, Flamini has been included in the Eagles’ 25-man Premier League squad, 
and will wear the No4 shirt.

The Palace manager, Alan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew>, said: “I thought it was 
important to get another midfield player. His playing ability will help us but 
also his leadership qualities and his ability of how to win games in a passing 
style. I am delighted that we have secured a player of his stature.”

Speaking about his return to the Premier League 
<http://www.cpfc.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/f-3295646.aspx#zhgrCFu8A8GscCOB.99>
, Flamini said: “Crystal Palace is a very ambitious club with great players and 
I am looking forward to being part of that squad. It is a very interesting 
challenge for me and I am very excited to be here. I have had chance to discuss 
the move here with Alan Pardew and he really helped me make my decision.”

Palace, who have one point from their opening three league games, visit 
Middlesbrough on Saturday.
 