
“Some people walk a very straight path,” says Matthew Xia. “They study 
English, go to Oxford, assist on plays for a few years and that makes them a 
theatre director. Frankly, I can’t think of anything worse.”


Xia’s path to his current position as associate artistic director at the Royal 
Exchange in Manchester has been anything but straight: he skipped university 
for a career as a hip-hop composer, illusionist, journalist and, under the 
persona ofDJ Excalibah <http://rapnews.co.uk/?p=601>, the presenter of an 
influential Radio 1Xtra show that gave early exposure to artists including 
Estelle, Professor Green and Roots Manuva.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faab70ef7f535910abe1c5d810a1d72cfe1a7f485%2F284_229_1305_1959%2F1305.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matthew%20Xia%3A%20why%20I%20want%20to%20keep%20fairytales%20real&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matthew%20Xia%3A%20why%20I%20want%20to%20keep%20fairytales%20real&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faab70ef7f535910abe1c5d810a1d72cfe1a7f485%2F284_229_1305_1959%2F1305.jpg>
 Amy Ellen Richardson (the Baker’s Wife) in rehearsals for Into The Woods. 
Photograph: Jonathan Keenan 
“Somebody once described my career as schizophrenic,” Xia says. “I take 
exception to that: firstly because it’s a very ill-informed use of the term 
schizophrenia, but also because I believe my work is all connected. Whether 
it’s directing a play or doing a DJ set, it all comes from the same source.”

Brought up in east London, Xia, 33, is a tall, rangy figure wearing a bright 
emerald sweater and a natty pair of correspondent shoes, which he slips off in 
the rehearsal room. “It’s not an affectation,” he insists, “they just make too 
much noise while I’m sprinting round the edges.” At present he’s engaged in a 
new production of Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine’s fairytale remixInto the 
Woods <http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/whats-on-and-tickets/into-the-woods>. 
This enchanted melting pot of Grimm tales, Charles Perrault flights of fancy 
and Freudian interpretation appeals to his DJ’s instinct for eloquent 
juxtaposition. But Xia is equally determined to keep it real.

When I was seven there was a witch who lived across the road. How did we know? 
She never gave us our balls back

“My take on it is that it has to be here and now,” he insists. “I’m not 
interested in some magical, mythic otherwhere. It’s not where I live. It’s not 
where the audience lives. When I think of the woods, I’m thinking of somewhere 
likeAlderley Edge <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alderley_Edge> – a place 
slightly separate from the metropolis but close enough that anyone might go for 
a ramble.”

Is he suggesting that witches and giants live on the outskirts of Manchester? 
“No, but you have to ask yourself, who are the characters in this piece? What 
do they represent? When I was seven there was a witch who lived across the 
road. How did we know? Because she had an overgrown hedge, she kept herself to 
herself and she never gave us our balls back – which made her strange and 
mysterious and we were frightened of her.”

Xia has some experience of the world of magic – or illusion, at least. Before 
he became a theatre director, or a DJ, he had ambitions to be a magician. “My 
roots as a performer come from my grandfather, who used to do sleight of hand, 
producing pennies from my ear and stuff. Later I became interested in the 
psychological side of magic – mind-reading, mentalism and hypnosis.” It led him 
to promote a series of magic events-cum-club nights at a cabaret bar in Bethnal 
Green. ‘We put on some ofDynamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/27/dynamo-magician-next-trick-live-tour-interview>
’s first gigs there. It was called Mystic Rhythms. The tag line was, 
‘Psychedelic beats with psychological entertainment.’”

At the same time, Xia was involved in youth theatre at Stratford East, which 
led to a small part in a film directed by Armado Iannucci entitledTube Tales 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0176250/>. “I used the money from that to buy my 
first set of turntables, dropped out of sixth form and did a deal with my mum. 
I asked her to give me two years to become a superstar DJ, otherwise I’d go 
back to college.”

He was as good as his word. A stint on a south London pirate station – where 
he gave exposure to a schoolfriend named Ben who had begun calling himselfPlan B
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/plan-b> – led to DJ Excalibah being snapped 
up for the launch of Radio 1Xtra in 2002.

Sizwe Banzi Is Dead – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/16/sizwe-banzi-is-dead-review> 
Xia still does club nights when he can (he was behind the decks at the opening 
ceremony of the 2012 Paralympic Games). But the balance shifted in 2013 when he 
won the Genesis future director’s award for a production of Athol Fugard’s 
apartheid drama, Sizwe Banzi Is Dead at the Young Vic.

The run sold out, though the production’s chief innovation was Xia’s 
provocative decision to segregate the audience along racial lines. “Those were 
the conditions in which Fugard wrote the play,” he says, “and I felt it had to 
be the most immediate way to experience it.”

So it’s no surprise that his Into the Woods sounds as far removed as possible 
from the strangely unthreatening, CGI-softened glade that appeared inthe Disney 
movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/08/into-the-woods-review-fairytale-musical-tastefully-retooled>
 last year. “I think the Disney version completely sucked the soul out of what 
Sondheim and Lapine had written,” says Xia. “It’s because they’re scared. 
Scared of confronting a young audience with complex ideas.”

Xia believes that the experience of recently becoming a father has sharpened 
his awareness of the more disturbing aspects of the piece. “You can’t explain 
away the fact that the woods are loaded with psychosexual undercurrents,” he 
says. “The wolf is a sinister, predatory figure. And so are the princes – how 
is Rapunzel spotted by her paramour? Because he’s a birdwatcher who stalks 
round the forest with a shotgun and a pair of binoculars.”

He is due to return to the Young Vic in the new year to direct a revival Joe 
Penhall’sBlue/Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2000/apr/15/theatre.artsfeatures>, another 
play with issues of ethnocentricity and imperialism at its core. “It’s a play 
which shows two paternalistic, white psychiatrists treating a young, black 
patient as if he were an African country,” says Xia. “The diagnosis he is given 
– ‘borderline neurotic and psychotic’ – is as arbitrary as the lines on a 
colonial map.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c7fdd7522322191515f7ca70d114b127e9b504%2F540_288_1147_1722%2F1147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matthew%20Xia%3A%20why%20I%20want%20to%20keep%20fairytales%20real&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matthew%20Xia%3A%20why%20I%20want%20to%20keep%20fairytales%20real&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmatthew-xia-why-i-want-to-keep-fairytales-real%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c7fdd7522322191515f7ca70d114b127e9b504%2F540_288_1147_1722%2F1147.jpg>
 Cameron Blakely plays the Narrator in Into the Woods. Photograph: Jonathan 
Keenan 
When Xia made a research visit to the Maudsley psychiatric hospital in south 
London he spoke to members of staff who regard Penhall as “a kind of 
soothsayer” for identifying the crisis in mental health care that has 
progressively worsened over the 15 years since the play was written. “The issue 
at stake is not whether a person has mental health problems,” says Xia, “it’s 
whether you can live with them or not. Because the moment you fall into a 
system of being analysed and diagnosed they will findeverything wrong with you. 
I’m pretty certain that, if I was sectioned, they’d find all sorts of problems.”

Such as? Xia thinks for a moment: “Well, anxiety, narcissism and self-doubt 
for a start. All the things that drive people to become creative artists, I 
suppose. But I hope it’s also what enables me to become a better director.

“My background may seem unorthodox, but there’s a fantastic passage in Bill 
Brewster and Frank Broughton’s bookLast Night a DJ Saved My Life 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/b/brewster-dj.html>. They trace the DJ’s 
role back to shamanic ritual and griot storytellers. The DJ is defined as 
‘someone who shapes the atmosphere over the course of an evening’. I can’t 
think of a better description of theatre directing than that.”

• Into the Woods is at the Royal Exchange 
<http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/whats-on-and-tickets/into-the-woods>, 
Manchester, 4 December to 16 January. Box office: 0161-833 9833. Blue/Orange is 
atthe Young Vic <http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/blue-orange>, London, 12 May 
to 18 June 2016.
 