
Rarely does Am√©lie Mauresmo play a tournament without some part of her body 
covered in strapping and this year's Australian Open is no exception. This time 
it is an adductor strain of the left thigh.

"It's just a little tight and I wear the tape to prevent it getting worse," 
she said after defeating Russia's Evgenia Linetskaya 6-2, 6-4 to set up a 
quarter-final againstSerena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>, a repeat of their 
Wimbledon semi-final which was the best women's match seen on Centre Court last 
year.

"I play tennis for these kind of big matches," said Mauresmo who, if she won 
the title next Saturday, would delight an enormous number of people who 
recognise her exceptional talents and remain thoroughly frustrated that she has 
never won one of the world's major titles.

A year ago, on the morning of her quarter-final against Colombia's Fabiola 
Zuluaga, Mauresmo left the practice court in tears after pulling out with a 
back problem. Not for the first time there were many who wondered just how bad 
the injury was or whether it was psychosomatic.

Such thoughts were neither malicious nor unfounded, for the French woman, who 
reached her one and only grand slam final here in 1999 when she lost to Martina 
Hingis, has suffered most terribly with nerves since making the transition from 
being the world's top junior to the professional ranks.

The French shake their heads whenever another injury occurs and ponder what is 
going on in the head of their leading player.

She has spent four of the last five years in the top 10 and is currently 
ranked No2, having briefly risen to the pinnacle last September, the first 
Frenchwoman to achieve the No1 singles ranking; no Frenchman has done it either.

Off court she is charming, urbane and highly intelligent; on the court she 
eschews the groans, screams and general histrionics of some of her more 
prominent opponents and accepts both victory and defeat in a thoroughly 
gracious manner.

In the last three years Mauresmo has reached six quarter-finals and three 
semi-finals at the four majors, yet has always been unable to repeat the push 
through into a final which she achieved here as a 19-year-old. "I had the 
feeling here last year that it was going to happen again," she said yesterday. 
"Who knows, maybe it will be this time."

Serena Williams, who defeated the Russian Nadia Petrova 6-1, 3-6, 6-3, was far 
from convincing and once again appears overweight and less than 100% fit. Had 
Petrova not made a desperately poor start, and then lost her nerve in the 
deciding set, Williams might not have made it into the second week.

She was breathing heavily after winning the first set and then became upset 
with a baseline judge, a sure sign that she was under pressure. The days when 
she could blast opponents off the court appear to be over; now, there are any 
number of opponents who can trade blows and are neither intimidated nor 
overwhelmed.

Williams has a psychological hold on Mauresmo, although their last two 
meetings have been extremely close. Much may depend on whether the French 
player has the nerve to get to the net and volley, for she knows this could 
give her the crucial edge.

The other quarter-final in the bottom half of the draw will be an all-Russian 
match between Maria Sharapova, Wimbledon champion, and Svetlana Kuznetsova, the 
US Open winner, with both of them treading new ground in this competition.

Kuznetsova, who beat another Russian Vera Douchevina - they are everywhere - 
in the fourth round, did her best to tone down all talk of animosity between 
Sharapova, who has lived in the United States since she was nine, and the rest. 
It was not altogether convincing. "She is different, you know. But we are all 
fine with her." But would she be welcome in the Russian Federation Cup team? 
"It's not my decision," said Kuznetsova, playing the deadest of dead bats.

Sharapova, whose on-court wails appear to have increased every other day as 
the tournament has progressed, defeated the Italian veteran Silvia Farina Elia 
- who had previously beaten Great Britain's Elena Baltacha - although not 
without dropping the first set.

"I just told myself to keep fighting," said the 17-year-old, as if somebody 
might have failed to notice. The Siberian-born Sharapova is a fight- ing 
machine through and through, displaying an intensity that borders on the 
pathological.

Indeed all the Russians have exceptional competitiveness, which has driven so 
many of them to the highest level. Ultimately one of them seems likely to 
become dominant, with this quarter-final between Sharapova and Kuznetsova, 
arguably the two best, possibly being of great significance for the long term.
 