
Today at a ceremony in Stocklholm, Swedish hitmaker Max Martin 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/blank-space-what-kind-of-genius-is-max-martin>
 will receive the prestigiousPolar Music prize <http://www.polarmusicprize.org/>
 for his services to music. Announcing him as this year’s recipient (alongside 
Italian opera singerCecilia Bartoli <http://ceciliabartolionline.com/>), the 
organisers said: “In the last 20 years, no composer in the world has written 
melodies as sustainable or as widespread as those of Max Martin.”

Awarded by the actual King of Sweden, Carl XVI Gustaf, the gong cements 
Martin’s position as pop’s pre-eminent songwriter and producer. Over the last 
20 years Martin has helped launch the careers ofBritney Spears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britneyspears>, Robyn, N’Sync, Katy Perry 
and the Backstreet Boys, as well as reshaping the fortunes of the likes of 
Pink, the Weeknd, Ariana Grande, Kelly Clarkson and Taylor Swift. Basically, 
most of the grade-A hit singles you hear on a loop on the radio carry Martin’s 
usually unfaltering Midas touch.

John Seabrook on The Song Machine: 'There's a dark side to pop'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/04/john-seabrook-song-machine-review-pop-music>
To celebrate Martin’s award, I’ve decided to create a website, Maxopedia 
<https://maxopedia.co/>, in which I’ll write about all 64 (and counting) of his 
US Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles (22 of which reached No 1). From Robyn’s 
1997 single Do You Know (What It Takes) through to Pink’s Just Like Fire, which 
hit the top 10 last week, all of pop’s glorious and not so glorious moments 
(there’s a really terrible Glee song in there) will be covered in geeky detail.

To show off that geekiness, here are 64 facts about 64-time US top 10 singles 
creator Max Martin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHBXPoJhnHQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHBXPoJhnHQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHBXPoJhnHQ&media=>
 * Max Martin’s real name isn’t Max Martin at all, it’s the less interesting, 
Martin Karl Sandberg. Sandberg was born in Stenhamra, a suburb of Stockholm, in 
1974. 
 * As a child he took full advantage of Sweden’s free music tuition, learning 
that staple of modern pop the French horn. 
 * In 1985 he formed short-lived glam rock also-rans It’s Alive. He was so 
confident about the band’s future success that he dropped out of school. 
 * Started going by the name Matin White around that same time, though no 
one’s quite sure why. 
 * It’s Alive were once the in-house rock band at a disco in Cyprus. 
 * In 1991 they released their self-titled debut via the brilliantly named 
Megarock records. The album was then given away free with UK magazineMetal 
Forces <http://www.metalforcesmagazine.com/>. 
 * Second album Earthquake Visions was released on Swedish pop producer Denniz 
PoP <http://www.allmusic.com/artist/denniz-pop-mn0000208541>’s Cheiron Studios 
label. The album’s key track was Pretend I’m God,the video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64znOMEwvWk> to which features a lank-haired 
Sandberg/White literally pretending to be God. 
 * It’s Alive sadly split up in 1995. 
 * White/Sandberg was kept on at Cheiron Studios 
<http://www.cheironmusicgroup.com/cheiron-studios.html> – a Swedish hit factory 
whose aim was to write and produce for British and American acts – by PoP, who 
was impressed by his hitherto secret love of big pop melodies. 
 * Rechristened Max Martin by PoP, aka Dag Krister “Dagge” Volle, because 
Martin Sandberg “wasn’t exactly a disco name”. 
 * The first single to feature “Max Martin” on the production credits was 
1995’sRight Type Of Mood by Herbie Crichlow <https://vimeo.com/33762095>. PoP 
hadn’t actually told Sandberg he was now Max Martin, however, leading to some 
confusion when the single was released. 
 * Once declined an offer from the actual Michael Jackson to fly to Los 
Angeles to rework a tiny bit of a song by his nephews’ group3T 
<http://www.3t.com/> for their album Brotherhood. 
 * Shortly after making the decision outlined above, he realised that turning 
down the opportunity of being in a studio with the actual Michael Jackson was 
foolish and made the trip. In an interview with Swedish Public Radio, Martin 
remembers hearing Jackson’s first vocal take: “That’s when I lost my mind and 
started laughing; you know, like the hysterical kind of laughter at funerals 
when people can’t help themselves.” 
 * While in America laughing at Michael Jackson, PoP and Martin received a 
call asking if they’d like to submit some songs for a new American boyband 
called the Backstreet Boys. 
 * Co-produced by Martin, the Backstreet Boys’ debut single, We Got It Goin’ On
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHBXPoJhnHQ>, peaked at No 69 in America. 
 * Martin’s first US top 10 single was achieved in February 1997 with fellow 
SwedeRobyn’s Do You Know (What It Takes) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6kH3BQeqRc>. It got to No 7. 
 * Later that year the Backstreet Boys made their debut in the US top 10 with 
the equally parenthesis-heavy Martin co-production,Quit Playing Games (With My 
Heart) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ug88HO2mg44>. 
 * Is partly responsible for the existence of UK lad band and facial hair 
experimentalists Five, co-writing and co-producing their debut singleSlam Dunk 
(Da Funk) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZUZx-8--0c> in 1997. 
 * Worked on four more songs on Five’s debut album, 5ive, including US-only 
single,It’s the Things You Do <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9MTF_oGzFQ>. 
 *  “I was scared of him” was Britney Spears’s lasting memory of her first 
encounter with Martin in 1997. 
 * Britney’s debut single, … Baby One More Time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C-u5WLJ9Yk4>, was based on a demo Martin had 
written called Hit Me Baby (One More Time). 
 * The first port of call for the demo was TLC, who rejected the song due to 
its odd turn of phrase. “I was like, I like the song but do I think it’s a 
hit?” recalled T-Boz. “Do I think it’s TLC? … Was I going to say ‘hit me baby 
one more time’? Hell no!” 
 * Robyn also rejected the song. 
 * The version sent to Britney’s label Jive didn’t have finished lyrics in the 
verses and was missing a bridge. Luckily they still knew it was amazing. 
 * Jive decided to change the title from Hit Me Baby (One More Time) to … Baby 
One More Time due to fears people might think it was about domestic violence or 
S&M. 
 * … Baby One More Time is in the top 50 biggest-selling songs of all time, 
having shifted over 10m copies worldwide. 
 * The song has been covered by everyone from Travis 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=acULghgYUg0> to Glee to Tove Styrke to Ed 
Sheeran <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WFapUOfotuM> to the Dresden Dolls to 
the X Factor UK’s JLS (deemed “lame” by Simon Cowell) to Tori Amos to Bowling 
For Soup tothe actors from Harmony Korine’s Spring Breakers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bJjotBEpXcI>. 
 * Martin has written three songs for choreography-shy Irish balladeers 
Westlife. 
 * He’s also worked with Gary Barlow, but we all make mistakes. 
 * I Want It That Way <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4fndeDfaWCg> by the 
Backstreet Boys is a stone-cold pop classic but, like a number of Martin 
creations around that time, makes very little actual sense. 
 * Around the time the Backstreet Boys’ success was starting to tail off 
slightly, Martin started working with their oddly permed replacements, ’N Sync. 
He’d co-write their only US No 1, It’s Gonna Be Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQMlWwIXg3M>. 
 * Number of US No 1 singles Martin wrote for the Backstreet Boys? Zero. 
 * Martin has been crowned ASCAP’s Songwriter of the Year nine times; 1999, 
2000, 2001, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015 and 2016. 
 * Between 2001 and 2004, as R&B started to dominate pop music, Martin worked 
on precisely zero US top 10 singles. 
 * During this fallow period he worked with Swedish heavy metal band Pain, 
Celine Dion, Def Leppard and 
former-US-boy-band-member-that-isn’t-Justin-Timberlake Nick Carter. 
 * His return to the Billboard top 10 came with Kelly Clarkson’s Since U Been 
Gone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7UrFYvl5TE> at the end of 2004. 
 * Clarkson wasn’t really a fan of it at first. “It didn’t have any lyrics and 
the melody really wasn’t finalised […] the track was done on a computer, there 
was no band on it,”she told the Hollywood Reporter. 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/idol-worship/kelly-clarkson-slams-clive-davis-422397>
 “My record label was freaking out about it and I was, like, why?” 
 * Since U Been Gone was inspired by Martin hearing Maps by Yeah Yeah Yeahs. 
He was so incensed with the fact that the song didn’t fully explode into its 
chorus that he decided to write one that did. 
 * The song also marked the start of his collaborations with Dr Luke. Together 
they have worked on 27 US top 10 singles for pop stars ranging from the sublime 
(Katy Perry) to the ridiculous (Jessie J, Taio Cruz). 
 * Pink’s U + Ur Hand is about masturbation. 
 * It took 16 engineers to record Leona Lewis’s version of Avril Lavigne’s Max 
Martin co-penned ballad, I Will Be <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8q6f4CvINE>
. 
 * In 2015, Macy Gray claimed Katy Perry’s 2008 US No 1 single, I Kissed a 
Girl,was initially intended for her 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OU9iR92aLtk>. 
 * Following an incredibly successful few years, in 2008 Martin launched a 
rock band calledCarolina Liar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5IqCfxgKZd8>. No 
one really cared. 
 * Carolina Liar’s Beautiful People was repurposed as a duet on Cher Lloyd’s 
debut album, Sticks + Stones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6b7zW85QULo>. 
 * Perhaps feeling a bit guilty, various members of Carolina Liar have 
co-writing credits on some of the more recent Max songs, including Ariana 
Grande’s hits Dangerous Woman andLove Me Harder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5qU7p7yOY8>. 
 * Martin started another fruitful hit-making collaboration in 2008, this time 
with Shellback, aka Karl Schuster. Like Martin, he used to be part of Sweden’s 
metal scene before realising pop was just better really.

 * Their first US chart-topper was Pink’s So What 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FJfFZqTlWrQ>. 
 * Keen to keep his run of unlikely UK pop collaborations going, he co-wrote 
Unbreakable Heart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hAb_tM-aF2U> on the 
Sugababes’ completely ignored Catfights and Spotlights album. 
 * Continuing a trend, Kelly Clarkson also didn’t really like her 2009’s US 
chart-topperMy Life Would Suck Without You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cRM70Jw7F4M>, taking out lyrical references to 
marijuana from the original demo. 
 * The lyrics to Britney Spears’s 3 uses folk trio Peter, Paul and Mary 
<http://www.peterpaulandmary.com/> as a metaphor for a threesome. 
 * Adam Lambert’s only US top 10 single (so far), Whataya Want From Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X1Fqn9du7xo>, was originally meant for Pink. 
She’d later release her own version of it on her greatest hits album. 
 * A Martin co-write made its way on to X Factor UK 2005 winner Shayne Ward’s 
third album, Obsession. 
 * In 2010, Martin was responsible for seven US top 10 singles, including 
three number 1s (California Gurls <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F57P9C4SAW4> 
andTeenage Dream  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=98WtmW-lfeE>by Katy Perry, 
and Pink’sRaise Your Glass <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=570tFRoRR0A>). 
 * 2010’s collaboration with Robyn on Time Machine was the first time the pair 
had worked together in 15 years. 
 * In 2011, Martin was responsible for eight US top 10 singles, but only one 
No 1 in the shape of Britney’s dubstep-botheringHold it Against Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Edv8Onsrgg>. 
 * A year later Max and Shellback helped Taylor Swift convince the world that 
a talented young white woman could make it in the world of pop, co-writing and 
co-producing the three big singles from that year’sRed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/21/taylor-swift-red-review> album. 
 * Carly Rae Jepsen has worked with Max Martin only once so far, on 2012’s 
Tonight I’m Getting Over You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBOE1aUNZVo>. The 
song peaked at No 90. 
 * Martin has been involved with eight of Katy Perry’s nine US No 1 singles so 
far. The last one was 2013’sDark Horse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0KSOMA3QBU0>, which was apparently inspired by 
emo-for-beginners classic, The Craft. 
 * Is partly responsible for the Weeknd seeing the error of his ways and 
becoming a proper superstar rather than a just a blog-friendly whinger banging 
on about drugged-up sex and how much money he has. The song they created 
together,Can’t Feel My Face <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KEI4qSrkPAs>, 
peaked at No 1 last year. 
 * Taylor Swift’s proper pop album, 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/24/taylor-swift-1989-review> – 
executive-produced by Martin and Shellback – is her biggest-selling album so 
far having shifted over 9m copies worldwide. 
 * Martin didn’t win his first Grammy award until 2015. He’s since gone on to 
win three in total, from 17 nominations. 
 * Adele had never heard of Martin and had to Google him before they worked 
together on last year’s 25 album. 
 * In 2016 he reunited with Justin Timberlake (finally!) to create Can’t Stop 
The Feeling! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ru0K8uYEZWw>, which went on to 
become Max’s 22nd Billboard Hot 100 No 1 single. 
 * Martin is third on the list of songwriters with the most US number 1 
singles (22), behind John Lennon (26) and Paul McCartney (32). Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dru0K8uYEZWw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dru0K8uYEZWw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dru0K8uYEZWw&media=> 