
The firm that took over from Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> 
in the implementation of fitness-to-work tests is performing worse in key areas 
as costs continue to spiral, a report by the official auditors has disclosed.

Maximus took over the contract in March to carry out medical assessments of 
claimants for employment and support allowance (ESA), the replacement for 
incapacity benefits.


The National Audit Office (NAO) found that the number of completed assessments 
are still below target despite an expected doubling of the cost to the taxpayer 
of the contracts for disability benefit assessments to £579m a year in 2016/17 
compared with 2014/15.

Auditors said that nearly one in 10 of the reports on disability benefit 
claimants have been rejected as below standard by the government. This compares 
with around one in 25 before Atos left its contract.

DWP told woman she was not ill enough for benefit on day she died
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/07/dwp-told-dawn-amos-not-ill-enough-for-benefit-day-she-died>
The average time to process ESA claims has been cut from 29 to 23 weeks but 
there remained a backlog of 280,000 in August. The provider is not on track to 
complete the number expected this year and has missed assessment report quality 
targets, the NAO said.

Debbie Abrahams, the shadow minister for disabled people, said the report 
exposed a “shambles”.

“Too many disabled people have been badly let down by these assessments and 
this research shows that it’s not only been costly for those who’ve been 
mistreated, but all taxpayers,” she said.

“It’s yet another example of incompetence from the DWP [Department of Work and 
Pensions], and a thorough overhaul of the system is desperately needed.”

Atos left its contract early following mounting evidence that hundreds of 
thousands of vulnerable people have been wrongly judged to be fit for work and 
ineligible for government support.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae6d71fb4d56b24917b0aecd4b9dde0f9893d4d%2F0_0_3336_2004%2F3336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maximus%20miss%20fitness-to-work%20test%20targets%20despite%20spiralling%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maximus%20miss%20fitness-to-work%20test%20targets%20despite%20spiralling%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ae6d71fb4d56b24917b0aecd4b9dde0f9893d4d%2F0_0_3336_2004%2F3336.jpg>
 Activists dress as clowns to protest against US firm Maximus. Photograph: 
Peter Marshall/Demotix/Corbis 
It was replaced in March by US firm Maximus, with the DWP seeking to improve 
the system by requiring more face-to-face assessments and setting tough targets.


At the end of June, just weeks after Maximus began its assessments, the DWP 
was forced to launch “an improvement plan”, the report said.

Auditors found that Maximus’s subsidiary CHDA was around 20,000 assessments 
short of its targets for face-to-face assessments in August, while the number 
of paper-based assessments for the same month was around 11,000 short.

Difficulties finding hundreds more qualified medical staff and rising salaries 
have helped pushed the average cost of each assessment up by 65% from £115 to 
£190 – meaning a total cost of £595m for the 3.4m assessments required by 
2018/19.

The estimated cost of hiring and training staff has increased from £26,000 to 
£44,000 for a London-based nurse over the year to 2015, the report said.

Despite this increase in money, Maximus has struggled to maintain staff, 
auditors said.

These problems experienced by Maximus this year have forced the DWP to rapidly 
downgrade their own targets for the overall volume of assessments.


At the start of the year, the DWP and Maximus hoped for 1m assessments; by 
June, this had been changed to 980,000. In September, this target was 
downgraded again to 911,000. Auditors said this would be cut again before the 
financial year ends in March.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e52fe51e4f4e6ea0ee900b87057a51e1bd5f56%2F884_241_3974_2384%2F3974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maximus%20miss%20fitness-to-work%20test%20targets%20despite%20spiralling%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maximus%20miss%20fitness-to-work%20test%20targets%20despite%20spiralling%20costs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fmaximus-miss-fitness-to-work-test-targets-despite-spiralling-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53e52fe51e4f4e6ea0ee900b87057a51e1bd5f56%2F884_241_3974_2384%2F3974.jpg>
 Meg Hillier, chair of the public accounts committee, has been critical of the 
DWP. Photograph: Jonathan Goldberg/Rex 
ESA targets are seven weeks from assessment to receiving a benefit. In August, 
this figure was revised to 23 weeks for each claimant, the report said.


Auditors criticised the way that DWP officials failed to pass on information 
to Maximus which could have improved their targets during the bidding process.

Maximus assumed that they would retain 95% of staff after one month. In 
practice, only half of those recruited were still in post after this time, 
auditors said.

CHDA told the NAO that the DWP did not challenge their assumptions despite 
being aware that only 70% of staff completed their training with previous 
providers.

Auditors said that despite almost doubling the size of its performance 
management team to 80 officials, the DWP “continues to struggle with setting 
targets and requirements with clear evidence” and failed properly to test 
bidders’ claims over staff recruitment and training.

“Recent performance shows the department has not tackled – and may even have 
exacerbated – some of these problems when setting up recent contracts,” it 
concluded.

After hated Atos quits, will Maximus make work assessments less arduous?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/18/after-hated-atos-quits-will-maximus-make-work-assessments-less-arduous>
Meg Hillier, the chair of the public accounts committee, said: “The 
department’s approach has been unclear, its targets untested and consistently 
missed and future delivery is under threat. With the annual cost of assessments 
now expected to rise to a staggering £579 million in 2016-17, taxpayers have 
been left to foot the bill.”

A spokesperson from the Maximus’ subsidiary, CHDA, said: “We have already 
significantly reduced the backlog of assessments that we inherited.

 “We have also increased the number of healthcare professionals we employ and 
have already implemented new recruitment and retention plans in order to 
deliver high-quality assessments that are timely and fair. The investment and 
increase in staff is to support the higher proportion of face to face 
assessments we now carry out, as well as to meet the requirements of the 
contract going forward.

“We are confident about the future and remain fully committed to delivering a 
high quality service and an improved customer journey.”

A DWP spokesman said: “We welcome the NAO’s recognition that we have made 
significant progress to improve contracted-out health and disability 
assessments.

“We are determined to support more people into work and provide individuals 
who can’t with the correct support that they need – the effective assessment of 
people’s abilities is key to this.


“To ensure that support is targeted correctly and that we achieve value for 
money, we operate a strict competitive contract tendering process and factor 
all costs into departmental spending plans. This also ensures that the quality 
of the assessments for claimants improves at the same time.”

• This article was amended on 12 January 2015 to clarify a statement that the 
cost of fitness-for-work tests had doubled. The NAO report said that spending 
on contracts for disability benefit assessments was expected to double in 
2016/17 compared with 2014/15, in part because of an increase in the number of 
assessments.
 