
In America, CD-Rs are causing a resurgence in creativity. They enable 
musicians to take charge of their creative process and establish their own 
cottage industries. Not only are CD-Rs economical, but they allow for immediate 
release and increased accessibility. They also have the cool factor right now.

CD-R culture is fascinating and within this new environment one name stands 
out â€“Ariel Pink <http://www.myspace.com/arielpink>. Inspired by R Stevie Moore 
<http://www.myspace.com/thersteviemoore>'s own DIY-release plan, Pink started 
recording songs in 2002 and had already amassed a vast discography (literally 
hundreds of songs) by the timeAnimal Collective 
<http://www.myspace.com/animalcollectivetheband> cherry-picked his albums 
Doldrums, Worn Copy and House Arrest as official "releases" for theirPaw Tracks 
<http://www.paw-tracks.com/> label.

Pink has now indoctrinated himself fully with his band Haunted Graffiti. Their 
self-titled seven-inch released on Mexican Summer displays his incredible pop 
moves. Recorded in the "traditional" way, it shows an artist unafraid to move 
from the 70s FM pop sounds of I Can't Hear My Eyes through to the post-punk 
Family Fodder grooves of Evolution's a Lie.

Haunted Graffiti are currently on tour and selling another seven-inch entitled 
Flashback, which I've had on repeat ever since I got hold of it. A four-song 
set, it completes Ariel Pink's pop fantasies with a full band behind him. 
Flashback is a heavy-metal number, Rama Ya is old-school punk rock and 
Reminiscences is electro boogie, while Phantasthma is pure Prefab Sprout. All 
these genres covered in the space of a seven-inch!

Pink's early reliance on the independent CD-R process has caused cultural 
ripples and inspired newcomers likeKurt Vile 
<http://www.myspace.com/kurtvileofphilly>. Vile, like Pink, has released many 
lo-fi CD-Rs and found himself in the media spotlight with Constant Hitmaker and 
God is Saying This to You, both collections of songs from his self-released 
back catalogue. Vile's aesthetic recalls that of early Ariel Pink as his sound 
is bathed in echo and feedback, but nothing distracts from the strength of the 
songs. Like Pink, he has moved on from the lo-fi culture of previous outings 
and with new band the Violators has unleashed a psychedelic rock beast on the 
Hunchback EP (it sounds like Ride ingesting steroids with MC5).

The strong output of both artists provides a compelling case for CD-R culture. 
However, the process is still under intense debate with many critics vehemently 
opposed to the accessible nature of the format and the impact of internet 
culture on music. They dismiss the concept of "artist as label" and hold CD-R 
culture as another example of the internet dumbing down contemporary music. 
They espouse the need for "proper" record labels to filter their artists' 
immense output. I beg to differ. Music-by-artist is always more interesting 
than music-by-major-label-committee. Music is a democracy. Why wait to be 
signed? If someone is listening, then it's likely the rest of the world could 
be listening.

As demonstrated with Pink and Vile, a new concept of demo-as-aesthetic-choice 
is on the rise. Their boldness in releasing their demo work as an "official" 
product has freed-up other artists who now see this as a legitimate move.
 