
England will not have Glenn McGrath to push them around any more in this 
series. Given the fight they put up on the final day of the fourth Test, Nasser 
Hussain and his team will be encouraged to believe they can avert the whitewash 
after the fast bowler pulled out of Australia's squad for Thursday's fifth Test 
in Sydney.

McGrath strained his left side on the fourth day here at the MCG and was 
unable to take the field after tea. The Western Australia paceman Brad Williams 
has been drafted into the squad as cover.

Australia's physiotherapist Errol Alcott said: "Glenn has suffered a left-side 
strain to his 'grunt' muscle. It is a soft-tissue injury and we are confident 
it will resolve over the short term but I felt it was prudent for him to miss 
this next Test match." McGrath said: "I guess it's a question of looking at the 
bigger picture as I did something similar in 1992, played on with it and was 
eventually sidelined for three or four months." For once England gained some 
honour in defeat. They lost by five wickets but Andy Caddick and Steve Harmison 
bowled their socks off on the final morning and had Aus tralia reeling before 
stumbling over the line shortly before lunch yesterday.

"Lose an early wicket in chasing a low total and you start to doubt yourself a 
little in the dressing room," said Australia's captain Steve Waugh. "Then lose 
a couple more and all of a sudden it's game on." The pace, confidence and skill 
with which Australia play generally preclude a fifth day, when pitches begin to 
misbehave. "Any side is vulnerable under pressure," Waugh added. The trick for 
England, then, is putting them under it.

Matthew Hayden had fallen pulling, Ricky Ponting blazed and made 30 before he 
and Damien Martyn were caught behind in one over from Harmison, and when Waugh 
gloved Caddick to second slip and Justin Langer, after 92 minutes, was 
leg-before two overs later, Australia were 90 for five. Only 17 were needed now 
but one more wicket would have exposed the bowlers, and who knows? It did not 
happen, though, and Adam Gilchrist bashed the winning runs over point.

It is 52 years since Australia last won the first four Tests of a five-game 
series against England and with a turning pitch in prospect for Stuart MacGill 
in Sydney, Waugh can match Warwick Armstrong's 1920-21 side's Ashes whitewash.

Even five-day matches can turn on a single moment, and one came in Harmison's 
seventh over yesterday. Fending at a short ball, Waugh got an edge to James 
Foster, but there was no appeal until the keeper had seen a big-screen replay.

To give him out on that basis would have been unethical, Hussain admitted. 
"Jamie had seen a deflection and even from mid-off I saw one. I was spewing 
when we didn't appeal. But any noise was drowned by the spectators roaring 
Steve Harmison in. You can't expect to get people out if you don't appeal." The 
next ball Waugh drove furiously but low to Hussain, who took a superb catch. 
But the umpire had called no-ball although again no one had heard it, least of 
all the batsman, who had set off back to the pavilion.

"It was the turning point," Waugh said. "It was an excellent catch all right, 
and at that stage - 66 for four as it would have been - England would have been 
on a bit of a roll and may have gone on to win."
 