
It felt like a year of contradictions. The huge corporations have never been 
bigger, yet the questions and criticism of Google andFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> piled up quicker than Santa’s 
shopping list.

The BBC continued to lead the cultural landscape, yet is now at its most 
vulnerable. And despite the shadow of the new breed of corporate giants, the 
determined actions of individuals had far-reaching consequences.

Larry Page <https://www.theguardian.com/media/larrypage>, the chief executive 
of Google, returned to the top spot, a reflection of the way in which the 
ever-expanding tech giant dominates our daily digital lives, from what we see 
to what we buy to whether we get lost on a night out.

But the question of what big companies do with our data – in the wake of 
Edward Snowden’s revelations about state surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>
 – is the most prevalent of our time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796728546%2F46a2edb2-c17c-404f-a175-8c63e0c69893-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796728546%2F46a2edb2-c17c-404f-a175-8c63e0c69893-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Edward Snowden’s revelations about state snooping have shifted the debate 
about digital privacy. Photograph: The Guardian/EPA 
We ask whether it is a high watermark moment for Google, though it is not 
clear who might topple Page; issues of privacy and data are just as current for
Mark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, the 
Facebook founder who is No 2 in this year’s list.

In previous years this list has recognised the increasing power of the 
individual in communicating news and important information. This is still the 
case but, in compilingthe power list for 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ng-interactive/2014/dec/08/mediaguardian-100-2014-interactive-guide>
, it seems there are still corporate giants who control that information and, 
perhaps more importantly, who gets to see it.

US tech companies dominate, with Apple chief executive Tim Cook in third after 
a year in which he emerged from the shadow of Steve Jobs, alongside Twitter 
chief executiveDick Costolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/dick-costolo> in sixth, a place behind 
Jeff Bezos, chief executive of Amazon and owner of the Washington Post.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796810567%2F72e7cd3f-6373-4ce3-9e73-38af1638892f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796810567%2F72e7cd3f-6373-4ce3-9e73-38af1638892f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Taylor Swift took a stand against Spotify. Photograph: Lucas Jackson/Reuters 
But it is not all about big business. Lenny Henry and Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> are both new entries in this 
year’s top 10 and are recognised for taking a stand – Henry for diversity, 
Swift against Spotify – the consequences of which are still being played out.

Elsewhere in the top 10 are BBC director general Tony Hall; Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>, boss of 21st Century Fox 
and News Corp; and Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre. Except Dacre now shares 
billing with Mail Online publisher (and his possible successor) Martin Clarke, 
a reflection of the website’s global growth and ambition.

Never before has MediaGuardian produced its list so late in the year and so 
for the first time, this 100 feels like a year in review. New entries 
indicative of the rapidly changing media landscape include Felix “PewDiePie” 
Kjellberg, the king of YouTube, Netflix content boss Ted Sarandos, and Vice 
Media’s Shane Smith.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797005075%2Fe47ceb17-1b11-48c5-a212-d17d554ab61d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797005075%2Fe47ceb17-1b11-48c5-a212-d17d554ab61d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tony Hall, the BBC’s director general. Photograph: Lewis Whyld/PA 
No single organisation is represented more than the BBC. With the debate 
around its charter renewal and licence fee due to begin in earnest after the 
general election, it will be one of the big media stories of 2015 (although, 
givengovernment criticism of its spending cuts coverage last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/04/osborne-accuses-bbc-hyperbolic-coverage-spending-cuts>
, you might think it had already started).

New talent this year includes actors Benedict Cumberbatch, Sheridan Smith, and 
Russell Brand. The No 100 spot, previously filled by the likes of Big Brother 
and the ghost of Lord Reith, is occupied by the quintessential modern digital 
media celebrity Kim Kardashian. Let’s hope shedoesn’t break the MediaGuardian 
100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/13/kim-karadashian-naked-break-the-internet-paper-magazine-photos>
.

Some things stay the same. White men dominate the media industry, whether in 
the US or UK, and that is reflected by this list. Despite a real focus on the 
people who have an impact on the way we think and not just the way we spend our 
money, nearly four-fifths of the most powerful and influential people in the 
media industry are men. But only six of them are not white – Lenny Henry, 
culture ministerSajid Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>, 
eBay’s Pierre Omidyar, Satya Nadella of Microsoft, actor, writer and director 
Richard Ayoade, and Independent editor Amol Rajan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797302533%2F1c02ad3b-447e-4da4-ba08-7d409215c66a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MediaGuardian%20100%3A%20corporate%20giants%20dominate%20a%20more%20vulnerable%20digital%20landscape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmediaguardian-100-2014-google-facebook-apple-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797302533%2F1c02ad3b-447e-4da4-ba08-7d409215c66a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The multi-talented Richard Ayoade. Photograph: Antonio Olmos 
Typically, the men at the top of our list run giant corporations that control 
what information we glean (Google), how we communicate with friends and family 
as well as the world (Facebook) and what sort of devices we use to do so 
(Apple).

The most powerful women also run large corporations with the power to make 
significant change to other people’s livelihoods (Rona Fairhead, the first 
woman to run the BBC Trust; “mega indie” chief Sophie Turner Laing; and 
Charlotte Moore, the controller of BBC1) but they are more likely to have 
influence through their creative efforts whether by talking to a new generation 
of young people (Taylor Swift and Zoella) or by writing TV drama that makes us 
think a bout the world in a different way (Sally Wainwright and Shonda Rhimes).

The fact that the media is still so dominated by men is no secret and this 
year women who called them out on it went mainstream, among them Lena Dunham 
and Laura Bates.

What does it take to get to the top of media? An Oxbridge degree definitely 
helps, while going to the so-called “Ivy Plus” universities, which include 
Stanford and MIT, helps in the US. Some 40% of our list went to one or other. 
You can go online and use our interactive guide to get a better sense of who 
these people are.

In the previous 14 years, listing the industry category in which our entries 
worked was relatively straightforward. But now not so much. How do you 
categorise Simon Cowell with his role as talent-spotter and on-screen judge as 
well as producer of top-selling content? Let alone Rupert Murdoch, whose vast 
empire spans newspapers, online, books, television and film? One thing we had 
to do was scrap the notion of a digital media category. In 2014, we are finally 
all-digital.

Meet the judges

Karen Blackett OBE, chief executive of Media–Com, media buying and planning 
agency

Adam Boulton, presenter of Sky News Tonight and Sunday Times political 
columnist

Matt Deegan, creative director at Folder Media, a radio and new media 
consultancy

Kim Fletcher, partner at PR firm Brunswick and former deputy editor of the 
Sunday Telegraph

Neal Mann, multimedia innovations editor of the Wall Street Journal

Sue Ryan, journalist, travel writer, media consultant and founder of Henley 
Literary Festival

Marie O’Riordan, editor-in-chief of John Brown Media and former editor of 
Marie-Claire

Richard Sambrook, professor of journalism at Cardiff University’s Centre for 
Journalism and former BBC director of Global News

Kevin Sutcliffe, head of news programming at ViceNews in the UK and former 
editor of Channel 4’s Dispatches

Pat Younge, consultant and former chief creative officer of BBC Productions

Guardian: 

Jane Martinson, head of media

John Plunkett, broadcasting correspondent

Julia Finch, business editor

Stuart Dredge, contributing editor, Technology

Frances Perraudin, digital journalist 

Aisha Gani, digital journalist
 