
✒ In appointing Keith "Chegwin" Blackmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/28/james-harding-hires-times-deputy-bbc>
, his former deputy on the Times, as managing editor of news, rookie BBC News 
boss James Harding has increased to three (after himself and Newsnight editor 
Ian Katz) the number of ex-press broadcasting virgins in senior positions in 
his empire, and to two (after his PA) the number of signings from the paper. 
But has his latest recruit undergone the necessary Damascene conversion? 
Wapping toilers speak of Blackmore as an eager pursuer at the Times of the 
Murdoch-driven anti-Beeb agenda.

✒ Blackmore's appointment also caused grumbling because it fits a recent 
pattern of hirings – which seems to contradict one of director general Tony 
Hall's favourite mantras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/22/bbc-management-payoffs-director-general>
. A new role has been created for Blackmore, as one was (head of TV current 
affairs) for Jim Gray; while the two jobs previously combined by Steven 
Mitchell (deputy head of news and head of news programmes) are now done by two 
execs, Fran Unsworth and Ceri Thomas. According to Monkey's banana calculator, 
there are now more senior news managers than there were when Mark Thompson 
left. Which seems at odds with Hall's pledges to create "a simpler, slimmer 
BBC" and reduce the "appalling divide" between staff and management.

✒ Whereas Harding is hiring, new ITV Network News editor Geoff Hill continues 
to see big names depart while he's still settling into the job: Laura 
Kuenssberg going to Newsnight in his first week has been followed by another 
defection to theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> (deputy editor 
Jonathan Munro, who will be head of newsgathering) and the loss of top 
international reporter Bill Neely to NBC. In his case it's the result of Hill's 
predecessor Deborah Turness cheekily "doing a David Moyes" by wooing someone 
from her equivalent of a former club. But could Neely be a Fellaini?

✒ Among the many revelations of David Yelland's lecture marking one year since 
the Leveson report was a previously undisclosed peccadillo ofRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>. When he was City editor and 
editor of the Sun, he recalled, all the men had the same footwear because 
"Rupert liked shiny black lace-up shoes". Being discreetly on the sauce (as 
Yelland has confessed to having been as editor) was apparently OK, but not 
disobeying the shoe code: "Never brown. Never boots. Never slip-ons." Old 
Telegraph and Evening Standard hands will have been reminded of the war on 
beards waged as the titles' editor by Max Hastings; and Mail males of the 
career-capsizing insanity of allowing Paul Dacre to spot you without a tie.

✒ Tony Hall's call last week for more shouting about the BBC's glories seemed 
to backfire; for by Friday former and current BBC beneficiaries were queuing up 
(following the recent blows landed by Roger Mosey and David Dimbleby) to bash 
it:Lord Sugar,  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/media/10481794/Lord-Sugar-criticises-overstaffed-BBC.html>
Jennifer Saunders 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2515368/Jennifer-Saunders-I-hate-BBC-wastes-money-talent.html>
 … At least Simon Albury, formerly of Granada and the Royal Television Society, 
couldn't be similarly accused of rank ingratitude or treachery when he joined 
in, but he snapped up the most eccentric contribution award by arguing for the 
conversion of BBC4 into an ethnic-minority channel. This can't be said to have 
gone down well when proposed at the (Grumpy) Voice of the Listener and Viewer 
conference, where hymning BBC4 as the jewel in the BBC's TV crown is compulsory.

✒ Hall himself, however, was embarrassed in a different way at the GVLV, sorry 
VLV gathering, as he was the victim of a technical glitch. In a farcical double 
snafu, the ebullient DG proudly introduced highlights of the BBC's forthcoming 
first world war output (Paxo goes over the top, etc), but nothing could be seen 
or heard for an agonising minute; and then he later stood up to propose a vote 
of thanks, only to be interrupted by the 1914 sneak preview starting up again 
(now with sound and pictures restored) when it wasn't wanted. Another 
disastrous BBC digital media initiative, harrumphed one VLV member annoyingly 
roused from sleep.

✒ Monday, 25 November: Media Monkey gently teases Arnaud de Puyfontaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2013/nov/24/doctor-who-rosamund-pike-sarah-lancashire>
, the French boss of the Hearst UK magazine business, for saying that, in the 
battle for power in glossyland, to be anything other than No 1 is to be 
"nowhere": as Hearst is not Britain's No 1 mag group, that's evidently where he 
is.

Tuesday, 26 November, 8.42am: tweet from MediaGuardian's Mark Sweney  
<https://twitter.com/marksweney>reveals De Puyfontaine is quitting Hearst for 
Vivendi and so repatriating himself across the Channel.

Mais non, Arnaud, c'etait pour rire seulement! Restez avec nous!

✒ Information is seeping out about plans for London Live, the local TV station 
run by Indy/Evening Standard overlord Evgeny Lebedev that's due to launch next 
year. Not much politics – that would just bore the young target audience (bad 
luck, Boris); nor much sport ("we don't want Alan Partridge TV", says one 
insider). And not much between breakfast and peak-time, with long fashion ads 
of up to 30 minutes helping to fill the gap (rumours of a switch of name to 
London Comatose in these daytime hours can't be confirmed). As for the 
breakfast show itself, Monkey's suggestion – an all-bearded dream team of 
Evgeny and Indy editor and Standard columnist Amol Rajan – has admittedly yet 
to gain traction, but is plainly the most cutting-edge proposal on offer. 
Evgeny's father Alexander, who has form as a sparky talk show guest, could play 
a regular role analogous to Jack Whitehall's dad's in BBC3's Backchat.
 