
Here's an exclusive clip from the new Coen brothers film, A Serious Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-serious-man> â€“ which luckily contains the 
moment when the lead character Larry Gopnik (played by Broadway veteran Michael 
Stuhlbarg) announces himself as such. Or at least he stutters out: "I've tried 
to be a serious man, you know? Tried to do right."

A Serious Man is essentially about things not always being what they seem 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/oct/28/a-serious-man-film-review>. Gopnik 
is a man in search of answers: his life is falling apart, his wife wants to 
leave him, one of his students is trying to bribe his way through his exams, 
his neighbour is building too close to the boundary line.

He therefore attempts to gain the wisdom of the ancients by going to see the 
rabbi and finds it an increasingly baffling and frustrating experience. First 
he gets fobbed off with the junior, Scott, who advises him to contemplate the 
car park. Then he manages an appointment with Rabbi Nachtner, who tells him a 
mystifying story about a dentist who discovers one of his patient's teeth has 
letters engraved on the back.

Finally he tries to barnstorm his way into the eminence that is Marshak. 
Marshak, as we see, is so important he never does anything except greet the 
barmitzvah boys. His secretary defends him against all comers. Gopnik can 
clearly see he's doing nothing after she tells him he's busy. How does she get 
out of that? "He's thinking," she says.

It's good to see the Coens stepping back a little from the star-stuffed casts 
of their last few films. What's so great about this clip is the way it sums up 
Gopnik's confusion and frustration: he wants to understand what's happening to 
him, but is stymied at every turn. Stuhlbarg's jitteriness leaps off the screen 
at us, instantly marking him out as a performer of hitherto undiscovered 
genius. He's the Coens' own discovery (though apparently well-known on 
Broadway), and his undeniably winning performance anchors the film.
 