
The Taiwanese electronics manufacture Asus 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/technology/asus> has unveiled a home robot called 
Zenbo that can talk, control your home and provide assistance when needed – all 
for the cost of a top-end smartphone.

The $599 (£410) robot rolls around on two wheels in the shape of a vacuum 
cleaner ball with cameras an oblong head extruding from the top with a colour 
touchscreen displaying a face with emotions. It is capable of independent 
movement, can respond to voice commands and has both entertainment protocols 
for keeping kids amused and home care systems to help look after older people.

Jonney Shih, the Asus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus> chairman, 
said: “For decades, humans have dreamed of owning such a companion: one that is 
smart, dear to our hearts, and always at our disposal. Our ambition is to 
enable robotic computing for every household.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fasus-zenbo-robot-price-smartphone-voice-face%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2bd2f45720dc39ec8ea6dfb79fa4cae56dc8ae1%2F446_0_3882_2330%2F3882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Zenbo%2C%20the%20Asus%20%20robot%20%20%20that%20costs%20no%20more%20than%20a%20smartphone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fasus-zenbo-robot-price-smartphone-voice-face%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Zenbo%2C%20the%20Asus%20%20robot%20%20%20that%20costs%20no%20more%20than%20a%20smartphone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fasus-zenbo-robot-price-smartphone-voice-face%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2bd2f45720dc39ec8ea6dfb79fa4cae56dc8ae1%2F446_0_3882_2330%2F3882.jpg>
 Zenbo on show st the Computex exhibition in Taiwan. Video calls can be made 
using its touchscreen and a head-mounted camera. Photograph: Sam Yeh/AFP/Getty 
Zenbo will remind older people of doctor’s appointments or medication 
schedules, and will monitor the home for emergency situations such as falls. If 
it detects a problem, it will notify carers and allow them to pilot the robot 
remotely, using the camera to inspect the area.

No sex, please, they're robots, says Japanese android firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/no-sex-with-robots-says-japanese-android-firm-softbank>
Asus hopes that children will take to the robot, which can sing, dance, tell 
stories and play games, while controlling the surrounding environment, 
including the lights, for a bit more novelty. For adults, Asus is pitching 
Zenbo as a moving Amazon Echo or Google Home competitor, capable of taking 
control of various internet of things devices, from televisions to thermostats. 
In a demonstration with Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan’s new president, Zenbo recognised 
a command for music 
<http://www.engadget.com/2016/05/31/taiwan-president-asus-zenbo/> and started 
playing, even over the sounds of an exhibition crowd.

Voice control is the new AI butler

The voice-controlled home assistant market is growing, with Amazon’s Echo 
making waves andGoogle’s recent foray with Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/google-home-assistant-amazon-echo-apple-siri>
. But most attempts are based around a fixed speaker that sits in the home and 
can be shouted at by owners.

Only SoftBank’s Pepper robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/no-sex-with-robots-says-japanese-android-firm-softbank>
, which is currently available in Japan costing 198,000 yen (£1,220), is close 
to what Asus is looking to offer, with articulated arms, cameras and sensors in 
a head and a screen on its chest.

Whether anyone will buy a general purpose robot that cannot physically help 
with tasks around the home, only through voice and sound interactions, remains 
to be seen. For Asus and other electronics manufacturers, in-home robots are 
still an experiment.

If they can capture the same enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/amazon-echo-alexa-voice-recognition-superfans>
 for interaction and usefulness to home owners as Amazon’s Echo, they could 
find success. Like any other product, these robots need a reason to exist to 
avoid becoming expensive novelty toys.

 * Google Assistant takes on Amazon and Apple to be the ultimate digital butler
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/google-home-assistant-amazon-echo-apple-siri>
 