
The government-appointed children's commissioner rounded on John Reid 
yesterday over moves to inform parents about paedophiles living in their area, 
saying any attempt to introduce the law would be entirely counterproductive.

Sir Al Aynsley-Green <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, who 
was appointed last year to provide a powerful national voice for young people, 
warned that the proposal could provoke vigilante attacks on the homes of 
discharged sex offenders - and could lead to more children being abused.

Mr Reid said at the weekend that he was prepared to consider importing a 
version of "Megan's law", the US legislation that provides parents with 
information about paedophiles released from prison into accommodation in their 
area. In an apparent concession to tabloid pressure, he said he was sending 
Gerry Sutcliffe, a junior minister, to investigate how the law has worked in 
the US since it was introduced in 1997.

The office of the children's commissioner issued a statement yesterday in the 
name of its director of policy and research, Claire Phillips. "Introducing a 
version of 'Megan's law' in the UK would do nothing to help parents keep their 
children safe from sex offenders," she said. "In fact, it could increase the 
risk of sexual abuse from strangers as offenders could be forced 'underground' 
after being released into the community, making it more difficult for 
authorities to monitor them. And it could encourage vigilante activity within 
communities.

"We are concerned that a version of Megan's law could detract from the fact 
that children are most at risk from people known to them. We would prefer to 
see more efforts directed in this area with further emphasis on early 
therapeutic treatment for the victims of sexual abuse."

The office of children's commissioner was set up in England last year after 
pressure from children's charities during an inquiry into the murder of 
Victoria Climbi√©, an eight-year-old from Ivory Coast who was starved and 
tortured by her carers in a north London flat.

Ms Phillips said last night: "We are not challenging government policy. We are 
pointing out that this is not the way to go ... We don't think it would stop 
children being abused. It would make it far more difficult to monitor sex 
offenders closely when they are released from jail."

Yesterday the Home Office revealed that nearly 30,000 registered sex offenders 
were living across England and Wales and that more than 95% of offenders were 
complying with the registration system.

Megan's law was introduced in the US after the murder of seven-year-old Megan 
Kanka in July 1994 by a known paedophile, Jesse Timmendequas. Mr Reid's 
decision to announce that he was thinking of importing it followed a campaign 
by the News of the World for the introduction of "Sarah's law" named after 
eight-year-old Sarah Payne, who was abducted and murdered in 2000. The paper 
wanted the government to name and shame paedophiles and publish the addresses 
of the 101 probation hostels housing offenders.

Yesterday Mr Reid denied his investigation of Megan's Law was driven by the 
News of the World. He said his interest in child sex abuse stretched back to 
1989 when he was deputy to Joan Lestor when she was Labour's first frontbench 
spokesperson on children.

Beverley Hughes, the children's minister, is supporting Mr Reid's initiative, 
but when she was minister for prisons and probation in 2003 she said adoption 
of Megan's law would drive registered sex offenders underground.
 