
There has been much recent discussion about spoilers, but I have yet to see 
any mention of Films That Spoil Themselves. Lars von Trier'sMelancholia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141827/melancholia> begins with the 
ultimate in spoileresque prologues – the end of the world – before the story 
backpedals to an earlier date. The foreknowledge changes the way we watch the 
film – we already know Bruce Willis or Tom Cruise isn't going to step in and 
save the day – and got me thinking about the reasons some films begin with 
their very own preview of coming attractions.

Screenwriter Stephen Volk <http://stephenvolk.net/> (co-writer of supernatural 
chillerThe Awakening 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2011/sep/15/awakening-watch-exclusive-trailer-video>
, out next month) says of films that begin with flashforwards: "It is basically 
to address a change in tone. If the tone of the ending is completely unlike the 
beginning, you can give a tantalising foretaste of what is to come, a kind of 
little appetiser, so to speak. But then again, it can't be the exact ending. 
The ending, when it comes, has to add something or put another spin on it."

I'm not thinking of backwards narratives such as Memento 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/85683/memento>, nor about Roman 
Polanski's vicious circles or Moebius-strip stories such asDead of Night 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037635/> or La Jetée 
<http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=4536409644066983943>. But there's a 
whole raft of biopics or fictional biographies that begin, as does Lawrence of 
Arabia, with the main character's death before flashing back to tell us who 
these people were before they died, sometimes with an added who-is-Rosebud 
teaser.

Writer Joseph L Mankiewicz evidently liked the Citizen Kane 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76006/citizen.kane> flashback structure, 
because he recycled it inThe Barefoot Contessa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QXjFFzDYFL0>, which begins with the funeral of 
Ava Gardner's character before backtracking to show her rise to stardom and 
ill-fated marriage. But it's not so much about the destination as the journey; 
Citizen Kane is less about the identity of Rosebud than what Rosebud represents 
to him, and to us.

Film noirs (Double Indemnity <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EcjfAAOBQx0>, 
Sunset Boulevard <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9TIDthcIHU>) often begin at 
the end, sometimes with the antihero already dead or dying, as if to emphasise 
the inexorability of fate. A similar structure can be found in noir's screwball 
flipside, with an absurd situation that needs explaining via flashback as the 
opening gambit of comedies such asThe Hangover 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuiBesJNlEE> or Pardon Mon Affaire 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076852/>. Where is the groom, and where did the 
tiger come from? And why is Jean Rochefort perched in his dressing-gown on a 
high ledge overlooking the Arc de Triomphe?

As for horror films: "Right now, it has become a cliche to start with a chunk 
of climax – screaming, bloody people – then run that 'two weeks earlier' 
caption and show the same folks being happy and en route to danger to establish 
characters and story," says Kim Newman, author ofNightmare Movies 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nightmare-Movies-Critical-History-1968-88/dp/0747502951>
. Judging by such recent examples asRogue River 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xf2i62_rogue-river-trailer_shortfilms> or 
Don't Let Him In <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sbAgd7kqnDA>, a remake of The 
Exorcist <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/22/exorcist-friedkin-horror> 
would now be obliged to give us a helping of pea-soup and head-swivelling right 
off the bat so ADD-afflicted audiences don't get bored and wander off, while 
I'll be amazed ifThe Thing prequel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/sep/16/the-thing-remake-prequel> 
manages to hold its horrors back for half an hour, as didJohn Carpenter's 1982 
film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rbtUjskfyA0>.

But as Volk suggests, such foretastes must invariably withhold vital 
information. Al Pacino gets shot at the start of Carlito's Way, but we have to 
wait for the end to find out if he'll survive. The opening credits for 
The Innocents roll out against images of hands clasped in prayer, but we don't 
yet know who's praying, or why. Or the climax we thought we've already 
witnessed – the exploding boat atthe start of The Usual Suspects 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t6msq8mgdnE>, Edward Norton threatened with a 
gun at the beginning ofFight Club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/79278/fight.club> – turns out to be sly 
misdirection.

Our foreknowledge of where Melancholia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melancholia> is headed ensures we won't be 
distracted by worrying about whether or not Bruce will find a way to save the 
planet. The spin is the way the film obliges us to confront our own feelings in 
the face of impending annihilation. Whether we respond with equanimity or 
sorrow, panic or boredom, the result will be the same. We already know what the 
ending is, and there's not a damn thing we can do to change it.
 