
The Meltdown festival takes place at London's Southbank Centre this year from 
1-12 August, and features performances fromElizabeth Fraser 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/nov/26/cocteau-twins-elizabeth-fraser-interview>
,Joan As Police Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/30/meltdown-joan-as-police-woman> and 
Lou Reed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/30/meltdown-2012-lou-reed-interview>, 
among many others.

We'd like to hear about the Meltdown shows you've attended. You can post your 
comments and reviews in the discussion thread below, which will stay open for 
the duration of the festival, and we'll also be keeping an eye on Twitter – tag 
your tweets #MeltdownFest, and you can ensure we'll see them by posting to 
@GuardianMusic.

We will be updating this article with your tweets and comments over the course 
of the festival.

Joan As Police Woman

@JOANPOLICEWOMAN 
<https://twitter.com/JOANPOLICEWOMAN/status/231548061703340032>

Queen Elizabeth Hall! Meltdown tonight was one of the highlights of my life. I 
thank you all for being there

@itnorris <https://twitter.com/itnorris/status/231826574121500672>

Joan as Policewoman at Meltdown. Acoustic set was fine. New songs good and her 
stage schtick, nicely open, laughing, anxious, confessional.

@sisika_ <https://twitter.com/sisika_/status/231517130649133056>

Meltdown festival <https://www.theguardian.com/music/meltdown-festival>, Joan 
as policewoman, vertebrae C1 to L5 still tingling from that voice.

Caroline Sullivan reviews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/06/joan-as-police-woman-review>:

An artist who keenly feels every emotional pinprick, Maine-born Joan Wasser 
seems to spend this set either laughing edgily or blinking back tears, making 
an evening with her something of a rollercoaster. Her openness packs a punch 
few other songwriters achieve.More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/06/joan-as-police-woman-review>.

Laurie Anderson

‏@MirandaGavin <https://twitter.com/MirandaGavin/status/231490381605376000>

Laurie Anderson DIRTDAY for Meltdown festival. Inspiring. There's no one quite 
like Laurie & her tales of blue tailshttp://pic.twitter.com/9CQ9TwC1  
<http://pic.twitter.com/9CQ9TwC1>

‏@alicma <https://twitter.com/alicma/status/231490079640666114>

Just seen Laurie Anderson meltdown. Demonstrating that when you've been cool 
for 63 years, you're really very cool indeed

@stripeycamel <https://twitter.com/stripeycamel/status/231678276156932096>

Laurie Anderson #meltdown gig culminated in YouTube clips of her dog playing a 
keyboard. Perfect.

Alex Macpherson reviews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/05/laurie-anderson-dirtday-meltdown-review>
:

If Anderson is no philosopher, she's certainly a gifted raconteur: her voice 
is warm and welcoming, her comic timing elegant, and she has a knack for 
bringing even her most abstract musings to life with the right details.More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/05/laurie-anderson-dirtday-meltdown-review>
.

Elizabeth Fraser

‏@mingskyy <https://twitter.com/mingskyy/status/232649549456498689>

What a beautiful performance from Liz Fraser at Southbank, absolutely amazing.

@Ghostdroids <https://twitter.com/Ghostdroids/status/232625453863694337>

We just saw Liz Fraser at #meltdownfest...our tiny minds are blown. 

@adrian_marshall 
<https://twitter.com/adrian_marshall/status/232595131772063745>

Worth the ticket price just to hear Liz Fraser sing Pearly Dew Drops one more 
time


Alexis Petridis reviews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/07/elizabeth-fraser-review>:

Almost half the set is new material: strange and serpentine in structure, 
entirely mesmerising, this music could audibly only be the work of one person. 
It says something that one track, on which Fraser's voice moves lightly over 
samples of woodwind and choral voices, receives as vociferous a response as any 
of the old stuff.More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/07/elizabeth-fraser-review>.
 