
Who: Softly spoken and painfully shy, Calvi is the guitar virtuoso who 
transforms into a dynamic, dramatic frontwoman; her theatrical, neo-operatic 
vocal style is comparable to Jeff Buckley, Martha Wainwright or PJ Harvey, the 
latter of which is the only artist ever to win theMercury prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mercuryprize> twice, which could work in 
Calvi’s favour. Originally from Twickenham, she is the child of two 
psychotherapists.

The album: One Breath 

Previous releases to date:
2011 - Anna Calvi
2014 - Strange Weather EP

What we said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/26/anna-calvi-one-breath-review>: 
“Still touching on the themes of lust, love and death, her new material amps up 
the theatricality of passion and sadness, and abandons the Ennio 
Morricone-aping of her 2011 release in favour of more contemporary 
experimentation.”

What Anna Calvi said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/06/anna-calvi-one-breath>: “I 
suppose the year that I wrote [the album] was quite turbulent on a personal 
level. It’s … kind of … very thrilling to feel you’re out of control and don’t 
know what’s going to happen but it’s also scary … I think that becomes very 
apparent when someone passes away because, suddenly, everything you thought was 
your reality changes.”

Mercury-friendly accolades: Calvi’s work to date is not just commercially 
successful – her last album sold upwards of 170,000 copies - but it is also 
critically celebrated. Mercury nominated for her debut in 2011, Calvi was 
listed in the BBC Sound of 2011 poll, the British Breakthrough Act at the Brit 
Awards in 2011, and has been revered ever since – even by the unshakable Nick 
Cave and Brian Eno. Her influences are varied, from composers such as Messiaen, 
Ravel and Debussy, to Django Reinhardt, Jimi Hendrix and flamenco dancers.

Likelihood of winning: One Breath was not the album that defined the year, nor 
was it received at the time with shock or surprise – but nonetheless, her 
enigma and raw talent may be enough to sway the judges, if they were after a 
rather stoic, safe winner. At the time of writing,Ladbrokes odds are 16/1 on 
Calvi winning this year 
<http://sports.ladbrokes.com/en-gb/Music/Mercury-Music-PrizeMusic/Mercury-Music-Prize-t210001761>
.

Stream the album:
 