
An Italian court’s decision on whether to uphold the convictions of Amanda 
Knox and Raffaele Sollecito for the murder of British studentMeredith Kercher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher> is imminent, court 
officials have said.

Italy’s highest court had been expected to reach its decision on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/25/prosecutor-calls-for-knox-and-sollecitos-convictions-to-be-upheld>
, but closing arguments took longer than expected. Officials said the decision 
is now due to be made on Friday.

Kercher, a 21-year-old from Coulsdon, Surrey, was sexually assaulted and 
stabbed to death in her bedroom in 2007 while studying in Perugia,Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. Her flatmate Knox, a student from 
Seattle in the US, and Knox’s then-boyfriend Sollecito spent four years in jail 
for the murder but were acquitted on appeal in 2011.

Knox returned to the US before an appeal court threw out the acquittal and 
reinstated her and Sollecito’s guilty verdicts last year.

Italy’s supreme court in Rome must decide if it finally upholds those 
convictions, which would put an end to eight years of courtroom twists and 
turns, or orders another appeal.

A spokeswoman for the court said: “The public hearing will continue at 9am, 
when one of the lawyers of the appeal will intervene. The panel of judges will 
go into chambers and then deliver their verdicts.”

Knox, 27, will not be in court to see if her 28-year sentence is confirmed. 
Sollecito, 30, who has had his travel documents seized, was mobbed by 
journalists and camera crews as he made his way into the Palace of Justice in 
central Rome. He faces a sentence of 25 years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fmeredith-kercher-murder-raffaele-sollecito-arrives-court-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427284411486%2Fcrop_KP_139494_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meredith%20Kercher%20murder%3A%20Raffaele%20Sollecito%20arrives%20at%20court%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fmeredith-kercher-murder-raffaele-sollecito-arrives-court-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meredith%20Kercher%20murder%3A%20Raffaele%20Sollecito%20arrives%20at%20court%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fmeredith-kercher-murder-raffaele-sollecito-arrives-court-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427284411486%2Fcrop_KP_139494_640x360.jpeg>
 Raffaele Sollecito arrives at Italy’s top court in Rome on Wednesday for a 
final ruling on his conviction and that of his ex-girlfriend Amanda Knox, for 
the 2007 murder of Meredith Kercher. 
The Kercher family were not in court on Wednesday but have said that if Knox’s 
conviction is confirmed they want authorities in the US to extradite her to 
Italy. The Kercher family’s lawyer, Francesco Maresca, said earlier this week: 
“The interest of the family is to arrive to the end of this trial. They want to 
be able to remember Meredith outside of the courtroom.”

Knox said last year she would become a fugitive if convicted and would have to 
be taken back “kicking and screaming” to Italy. If her conviction is upheld, 
she could delay going to jail if she were pregnant, according to Italian legal 
experts. Last month, she announced her engagement to 27-year-old musician and 
school friend Colin Sutherland, who wrote to her while she was in jail.

There has also been speculation that political pressure from the US could 
hamper a potential extradition process.

Sollecito is seeking to separate his case from that of Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/25/raffaele-sollecito-amanda-knox-retrial-high-court-ruling>
, with his lawyers pointing out that a partial confession written by the 
American and later retracted did not mention his presence at the scene of the 
crime. If that argument succeeds, the Italian could be given a new trial.
 