
The father of a British man killed when Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh17> came down over 
eastern Ukraine has said he hopes an official report into the crash, to be 
released later on Tuesday, will conclude that all of the passengers were killed 
as soon as the plane was hit.

Barry Sweeney’s son, Liam, was one of 298 on board the flight from Amsterdam 
to Kuala Lumpur when it crashed on 17 July last year. He was en route to watch 
Newcastle United play in a pre-season football tour in New Zealand.

MH17 crash report to be published by Dutch investigators - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/oct/13/mh17-crash-report-ukraine-live-updates>
The Dutch Safety Board (DSB) is publishing the findings of its 15-month 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/mh17-crash-report-release-closure-ukraine-evidence-russia>
 into how the plane came down over a war zone at a time of fierce fighting 
between pro-Russia separatists backed by Moscow and Ukrainian government troops.

Sweeney said: “I think what we are going to hear is that the plane was blown 
out of the sky, and hopefully everybody died instantly.”

The DSB will provide a technical account of how the plane came down near 
Grabovo in easternUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, but it 
will not deal with “blame and culpability”.

A second criminal investigation by the Dutch prosecutor’s office is due to 
conclude later this year or early in 2016. It is expected to answer the most 
politically charged question of who shot down MH17.

Tuesday’s report is expected to indicate whether some passengers survived the 
initial impact of a missile strike, after the body of one passenger was found 
with an oxygen mask around his neck.

Sweeney said he hoped none of the passengers survived the initial impact. 
Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: “I think once the missile 
hit the plane the decompression [would have meant] people were unconscious or 
dead within seconds. It’s a hard situation to comprehend.”

He said he was not frustrated by the length of the inquiry, which has been 
dogged by problems of investigators gaining access to the crash site. “It’s 
been a long time but I think the Dutch have had to be very meticulous – it is 
not something that they could do straight away,” Sweeney said.

The report is also expected to provide answers as to why the Dutch authorities 
took up to four days to inform relatives of the death of passengers. Sweeney 
said he found out about Liam’s death on a Newcastle United fan site, a day 
after the crash.

He said: “I basically found out on social media the next morning. I wasn’t 
sure what flight Liam was on – he just said he was going to New Zealand to 
watch Newcastle United and that was it. I got in touch with emergency lines and 
I wasn’t getting anything back. I found out on NUFC.com.”

MH17 crash report is set for release, but it is unlikely to offer closure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/mh17-crash-report-release-closure-ukraine-evidence-russia>
Contributors to the forum wrongly assumed that the Sweeneys knew of their 
son’s death at the time.

Two-thirds of those on board were Dutch. The remaining passengers were from 
nine other countries, including 10 from Britain.

It is widely assumed that Russia-backed separatists were responsible for 
bringing down MH17, but the US has stopped short of blaming Moscow directly. 
The Kremlin, meanwhile, has blamed Kiev. It has variously suggested a Ukrainian 
military jet shot down the Boeing, or that a missile was launched from a 
government-held area.

In Moscow, the makers of Buk missile systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/17/malaysian-airlines-plane-buk-missile>
, Almaz-Antey, gave a press conference on Tuesday morning apparently aimed at 
distracting attention from the Dutch report.

The manufacturer said it had performed two experiments which it says proves 
one of its missiles could not have been launched from areas under pro-Russian 
separatist control.

Representatives of the defence concern said they had used the carcass of a 
decommissioned Ilyushin-86 aircraft, similar in shape to a Boeing 777, as they 
did not have any decommissioned Boeings, and showed video of ground-based 
experiments in which Buk missiles were fired at the front section of the plane.

The press conference was held in a huge hall, and attended by journalists from 
around the world, some of whom had been flown in at the expense of the 
organisers to cover the event.

The company’s technical director gave a long presentation packed with graphs 
and data which he claimed backed up the Russian manufacturer’s results, but did 
not address why so much eyewitness evidence put the Buk missile system inside 
separatist territory.
 