


Television cameras have filmed inside MI5’s London headquarters for the first 
time for a special edition of flagship BBC children’s showBlue Peter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/05/blue-peter-behind-the-scenes>
.

The historic occasion was part of a competition called Project Petra, held for 
children interested in spies and the intelligence services. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/15/james-bond-jr-mi5-opens-its-doors-to-potential-spies-for-blue-peter-project>

Over 5000 Blue Peter <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/blue-peter> 
viewers applied to take part, with eight chosen to attend a special Spy School 
in Manchester.

There they were put through a series of observational, physical and mental 
challenges such as code-breaking and having to keep information secret during 
an interrogating interview, before being whittled down to the final three.

The trio, 13-year-old Reuben, 13-year-old Jamie and ten-year-old Finley, were 
then allowed, along with Blue Peter’s cameras, into MI5’s HQ Thames House for a 
TV first.

During their trip, which took place a fortnight ago, they were shown some of 
the top secret gadgets used by intelligence officers and then metMI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> director general Andrew Parker.

Reuben from North Yorkshire, who was inspired to take part by BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> drama Sherlock and the Arthur Conan 
Doyle books, told the Guardian that visiting MI5 was “an amazing experience 
because not many people have done that, plus being part of the first time TV 
cameras were allowed in was really fun because it is such a secret place”.

Jamie from Glasgow added: “I had a picture in my head that it was going to be 
an old-fashioned building. But it wasn’t. And I though they’d all be wearing 
suits but people were walking about in normal clothes just being normal. The 
most exciting thing was meeting the director general. There was a code on the 
table we had to break and it said we were meeting him for a rendezvous.”

The building was “quite mysterious”, according to Finley from Surrey.

James Bond Jr? MI5 opens its doors to potential spies for Blue Peter project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/15/james-bond-jr-mi5-opens-its-doors-to-potential-spies-for-blue-peter-project>
He said he enjoyed seeing the gadgets but they were not allowed to talk about 
them so, “I can’t really go into detail”.

However he said the director general’s office was “quite cool because it had 
sofas in, it was quite posh. I thought it was way cooler than I expected and 
that it was a nice place and they treated their employees well. They had a bar 
and tables and a vending machine where you can get hot baked beans and a hot 
baked potato.”

The three children were allowed to ask Parker a question each so Finley asked 
if he could join the service. “I love playing spies at school,” he said. “I 
want to be a spy”.


Judge and James Bond and Alex Rider novelist Anthony Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz> told the Guardian: “The 
process was a lot tougher than I had imagined – for the children, that is. The 
pressure was definitely on. The children who participated were all, without 
exception, serious and committed. If MI5 did run a recruitment programme, I’m 
sure it would be very similar.”


 Blue Peter presenter Barney Harwood was allowed to accompany the children but 
not Horowitz: “I have to say that I was extremely sorry not to have been 
invited along when the children visited MI5 … but I suppose that illustrates 
just how special this prize was. It must have been an extraordinary experience 
to get a glimpse of such a secret secret world but one which is arguably more 
vital than ever right now.”

Horowitz, who wrote ITV hit Foyle’s War and is writing a drama called New Blood
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/16/anthony-horowitz-pens-new-blood-drama-for-bbc1>
about investigators for BBC1 said: “I hope viewers will understand that this 
wasn’t just some sort of cheerful game show. Everyone – the producers, the 
presenters, the judges and above all the children – took it very seriously 
indeed. This was an extraordinary, unique prize and the winners most certainly 
deserved it.”

Blue Peter editor Ewan Vinnicombe said: “Blue Peter has got an amazing history 
of giving its audience unique experiences and we’re so proud that in 2015 we 
are continuing that tradition for the CBBC audience. MI5 and their official 
historian and judge Professor Christopher Andrew offered expert advice for all 
Project Petra’s on-screen challenges that were based on historical operations 
of real life officers.

“On the day it was very exciting to see our final three CBBC Intelligence 
officers walk through the doors of Thames House and meet the Director General 
Andrew Parker. I felt very privileged to be with the Blue Peter team filming a 
TV first; seeing inside Thames House on behalf of our viewers.”


Blue Peter viewers will see the final part of Project Petra when the show airs 
next Thursday at 5pm.
 