
Love has been the lifeblood of cinema, yet its portrayal on the big screen has 
been narrowly focused. Scroll through the6,609 titles keyworded "love" on IMDb 
<http://www.imdb.com/keyword/love/?title_type=feature> and you'll notice that 
most of the films rely on a rather particular notion of what love might be.

They tend to deal with the phenomenon dubbed "limerence" by psychologist 
Dorothy Tennov 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-sack-md/limerence_b_1627089.html>. This 
has been described as "an involuntary interpersonal state that involves an 
acute longing for emotional reciprocation, obsessive-compulsive thoughts, 
feelings and behaviours and emotional dependence on another person". The 
condition arises when the hypothalamus prompts the pituitary gland to release a 
cocktail of dopamine, norepinephrine, phenylethylamine, oestrogen and 
testosterone. Unless requited, it usually fades away quite quickly. Only 5% of 
the population are reckoned to be afflicted at any one time, but in movies the 
proportion seems higher.

The first Hollywood product to be titled Love 
<http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0018107/> appeared in 1927. It featured Greta Garbo 
as Anna Karenina <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hfrYs--P4pI>, literature's 
most illustrious limerent. This film's version of love has been echoed in 
movies ranging from Gone With the Wind and Brief Encounter to King Kong and 
pretty much the entire oeuvre of Jennifer Aniston. Yet in the real world, love 
is expected to mean more than romantic passion.

Reading on mobile? Watch it here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/nov/16/amour-video-review>

The ancient Greeks had four separate words for the emotion. Alongside eros 
(which would have included limerence) wereagape (charity), philia (friendship) 
andstorge (familial affection and suchlike). Our single word is expected to 
embrace all of these and also more nuanced concepts such as love of nation, art 
or nature. It's a lot to demand of one four-letter label.

We've got other words of course, such as liking, fondness, affection, 
endearment, devotion, hankering and partiality, but none of these really 
resonates. We accord love quasi-magical powers. In an increasingly godless 
western world, love has become an almost religious force, revered and cherished 
by some as humanity's most valuable asset. Yet few of us,apart memorably from 
the Prince of Wales <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eUtF034h41Q>, ask what this 
miraculous thing might be.

Still, Michael Haneke's choice of title for his second Palme d'Or winner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour> does seem to raise the 
question. Amour presents a version of love far removed from the kind celebrated 
inAn Affair to Remember <http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0050105/>, or even Notting 
Hill <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77241/notting.hill>. The film's 
stars, Jean-Louis Trintignant and Emmanuelle Riva, are both former 
heart-throbs, with films such asUn Homme et une Femme 
<http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0061138/> and Hiroshima Mon Amour 
<http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0052893/> behind them. This time, however, they're 
locked into a relationship from which all trappings of romance have been torn 
away.

A stroke leaves Riva's Anne speaking gibberish and wetting the bed, but the 
devotion of Trintignant's Georges is absolute. They can no longer share 
interests or memories, and their ability to communicate is evaporating. The 
most Georges can do for his wife is respect her previously stated wishes 
concerning the manner of her death. Nonetheless, we seem to be asked to accept 
that what continues to bind the two together is the distilled essence of love.

Of what might this essence consist? It's clearly not wholly benign. The bond 
that holds the couple together cuts them off from the rest of the world. It 
seems to exclude friends, neighbours and others who might want to help. Their 
daughter Eva,played by Isabelle Huppert 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/27/isabelle-huppert-interview-cannes-2012>
, would like to be involved, but her tepid concern doesn't qualify as love, and 
her parents have none to spare for her. So she's shut out. And yet Georges' 
utter commitment to Anne gives him no sense of fulfilment. It simply makes his 
life as empty as hers.

The bond between the pair turns out to be a kind of blind and futile loyalty. 
It gives them an affinity which fails to triumph over their circumstances. He 
wants to keep her alive, she wants out. She spits out the water he administers, 
so he hits her.

One of the things we believe about love is that it should somehow triumph over 
death. Evenas caustic a character as Philip Larkin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z9gx39T0ex4> was prepared to endorse this 
conceit. Haneke, on the other hand, denies it as emphatically as he denies the 
delusion that love can trump the travails of life. Eva, returning to her 
parents' vacant flat to try and make sense of it all, encounters only 
meaninglessness.

Amour's take on its eponymous subject is convincing but chilling. All you need 
is love? Perhaps not.
 