
Michael Haneke's Oscar-tipped, Palme D'Or-winning Amour may be the most 
high-profile film of 2012 from an Austrian film-maker, but it will not be 
featuring in the annual Austrian film awards. Haneke has decidednot to enter 
his French-language drama 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/-amour-not-submitted-to-austrian-film-awards-six-nods-for-seidls-paradise-love/5050293.article?blocktitle=Latest-news&contentID=1846>
 about an elderly couple dealing with the aftermath of a devastating stroke 
after being told it would not be eligible for several top categories.

Amour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amour> is Austria's entry for the 
Academy Award for best foreign-language film, where it is expected to be one of 
the frontrunners. But because it is filmed in French and does not meet other 
required criteria (including an Austrian certificate of origin, delegate 
producer and evidence of "significant Austrian cultural influence") it would 
only have been considered for directing, screenplay and editing prizes by the 
AFA.

Haneke is said to have decided to withdraw his film altogether upon hearing 
the news. Surprisingly, the move is not being described as the result of a fit 
of pique: instead, the film-maker has been praised for allowing other local 
movies a better chance of recognition. AFA managing director Marlene Ropac told 
Screen Daily that Haneke's decision had been considered "a very noble gesture" 
by his film-making peers.

In a letter to the AFA, Haneke's producer, Veit Heiduschka of Wega Film, 
explained: "He is of the opinion that the Austrian film awards will help other 
Austrian directors realise future films more than would be the case with him. 
Without vilifying the Austrian film awards, he refers to the fact that he has 
already been honoured internationally for this film, and another Austrian film 
should have the chance to be honoured."

Amour took best picture, best director, best actor and best actress at the 
European film awards last month and has picked up prizes from critics bodies in 
LA, San Francisco, Boston and New York. Early signs suggest it could yet break 
out of the foreign-language film "ghetto" at next year's Oscars to be a 
contender in mainstream categories.

In its absence the AFA could garland Florian Flicker's Grenzgänger 
<http://www.florianflicker.com/info-links/grenzgaenger/>, which picked up the 
highest number of nominations – seven – for the forthcoming awards. It is in 
the running for best feature film, best director, best actor, best 
cinematography, best score and best film editing. Also tipped for success is
Ulrich Seidl's Paradise: Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/18/paradise-love-review>, the first 
part of an intended trilogy of films, which has six nods. The AFA ceremony will 
take place in the ceremonial hall of Vienna's Rathaus on 23 January.
 