
An advertising exec gave a revealing account of the first time his firm pitched
Apple’s Think Different campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmwXdGm89Tk> 
to Steve Jobs, in 1997. They waited apprehensively as Jobs viewed the 
now-famous ad, where the voiceover intones, “Here’s to the crazy ones. The 
misfits. The rebels. The troublemakers …” over a montage of portraits of great 
innovators: Albert Einstein, Bob Dylan, Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi, er, 
Richard Branson. When it finished, Jobs said he loved it but they couldn’t go 
with it. “People already think I’m an egotist, and putting the Apple logo up 
there with all these geniuses will get me skewered by the press.” After a few 
seconds’ pause, Jobs then said: “What am I doing? Screw it. It’s the right 
thing. It’s great.”

As well as being possibly the longest recorded period of self-doubt in Jobs’ 
career, the anecdote brings home just how much Apple and its figurehead were 
one and the same, and how closely Jobs controlled the image of both. Before the 
Think Different campaign, there had already been the notorious1984 Macintosh 
ad, directed by Ridley Scott <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vNy-7jv0XSc>, 
which also cast Apple as the rebels and the troublemakers, bringing down some 
grey, Orwellian dystopia. Long after Apple had gone from sticking it to The Man 
to basicallybeing The Man, it somehow held on to those countercultural 
credentials. As did Jobs himself, who refined his own west coast hippie image 
down to a monkish brand identity: black polo neck; faded, beltless Levis; white 
trainers; round glasses. Meanwhile,Jobs’ product launches, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8le3Pk_cOsc> broadcast directly to the 
tech-hungry faithful, were as eagerly anticipated and rapturously received as 
any movie. Jobs controlled the medium and the message.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0913d76b848ec2cd40f7d3f09da7a6f10355eeee%2F18_0_2357_3537%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20'Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah!%20We%20all%20are'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%27Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah%21%20We%20all%20are%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0913d76b848ec2cd40f7d3f09da7a6f10355eeee%2F18_0_2357_3537%2F2357.jpg>
 Danny Boyle. Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
That Think Different ad also speaks volumes about the type of company in which 
Jobs expected history to place him, and so far history has obliged.Jobs’ story 
has been retold through countless books, TV programmes, documentaries and movies
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_artistic_depictions_of_Steve_Jobs>. 
There is even a Steve Jobs opera in the works. But by the time other media got 
round to mythologising him, Jobs had already done the job – which makes it 
difficult to tell his story without making a feature-length Apple ad. The last 
attempt,2013’s Jobs, starring Ashton Kutcher 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-jjv5BJ1MvU>, even ends with Jobs reading out 
the “Here’s to the crazy ones …” speech.

Steve Jobs review – gets to the core of Apple's co-founder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/steve-jobs-review-apple-co-founder-danny-boyle-michael-fassbender-aaron-sorkin>
“We’re all partly responsible for that,” says Danny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle>, whose new movie, Steve Jobs, 
seeks to tell the story in a different way. “We all bought into it, especially 
in America. He’s a businessman really, but in America it’s part of the myth of 
the frontier: the pioneer. One man forging ahead, breaking through any barrier. 
And what struck me about it is that we – lots of us in the arts and media world 
– we were his Trojan horse. We were the ones who said: ‘You’re idiots using 
that PC stuff. This is much more intuitive and cool.’ We did all that work for 
him, didn’t we?”

Steve Jobs the movie is an attempt to unscrew the back of that cultivated 
persona and show us what’s inside. Instead of the public-tech visionary, it 
gives us Jobs backstage, as he prepares for three of his famous product 
launches: in 1984, 1988 and 1997. Each time, those preparations are interrupted 
by a carousel of close colleagues and family members, who combine to reveal 
Jobs as bullying, pig-headed, control-obsessed, Machiavellian and morally 
deficient – especially when it comes to his daughter, Lisa, whom Jobs cruelly 
refuses to acknowledge. Aaron Sorkin’s script is based onWalter Isaacson’s 
official biography of Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/25/steve-jobs-biography-walter-isaacson-review>
, but rather than sticking to the gospel, it reconfigures Jobs’ life as a pacy, 
pithy, formally audacious piece of heightened drama. You could call it an 
alt-biopic – or perhaps an alt-shift-command biopic.

Predictably, the movie has not gone down well with the party faithful, 
starting with currentApple CEO Tim Cook, who derided it as “opportunistic” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/apple-ceo-tim-cook-attacks-steve-jobs-film-as-opportunistic>
. Sorkin’s script takes considerable factual liberties, such as the way
marketing executive Joanna Hoffman, played by Kate Winslet 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joanna_Hoffman>, appears throughout the movie, 
despite the fact she was no longer with Apple in 1997. Boyle is not concerned: 
“Historians tell you what happened, dramatists tell you what it felt like,” he 
says. Sorkin gave us a similar draft of tech history withThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/the-social-network-review>, on 
Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, but Zuckerberg was (and still is) a relative 
blank slate; Jobs is practically a religious leader.

Michael Fassbender <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender>, who 
plays Jobs, is similarly unfazed by the complaints. “People say it’s a really 
harsh representation and he’s a very unlikable person. These are things that 
don’t really interest me that much,” he says. “What I focused on was somebody 
who had a vision, and it required an awful lot of energy and focus to achieve 
that, and that might have brought out a very impatient side to him. Was he 
flawed? Yeah! We all are.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa509ddfcdcd18255963668b843bfc51ad003482b%2F0_0_5023_3013%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20'Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah!%20We%20all%20are'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%27Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah%21%20We%20all%20are%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa509ddfcdcd18255963668b843bfc51ad003482b%2F0_0_5023_3013%2F5023.jpg>
 Kate Winslet as Joanna Hoffman. Photograph: Francois Duhamel/PR 
Despite bearing little physical resemblance (less than Kutcher, anyway), 
Fassbender inhabits the Jobs persona with compelling conviction – long before 
he breaks out the black polo neck. He and the principal cast members did have 
the benefit of talking to many of the real-life Jobs affiliates who appear in 
the film, though. “What stuck with me was how much of an influence [Jobs] still 
was on these people,” Fassbender says. “How much love was there, and a real 
sense of sadness that he was no longer here. The effect the man had on their 
lives was very palpable.”

Winslet says the real-life Joanna Hoffman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V_lG8_2UwBU&t=4m54s> told her “unrepeatable” 
stories that revealed Jobs as almost charmingly naive, but Hoffman also 
admitted there were times she wanted to “stab him in the chest”. You can see 
why Sorkin’s script chose to keep Hoffman around even when she wasn’t supposed 
to be there. Smart, tough and demonstrative, she practically functions as Jobs’ 
moral conscience, revealing his fallible humanity – or perhaps inhumanity. In 
real life, Apple employees apparently gave an annual “Standing Up To Steve” 
award. Hoffman won it twice.

“There was nothing enigmatic or even particularly fantastic about Steve to 
her,” says Winslet. “There were times when she thought: ‘Oh God, he’s just 
wearing what I wear.’ She was into all these Japanese designers, like Issey 
Miyake, so she would laugh about how Steve suddenly started wearing all these 
designers, too, which he got from her. She had huge affection for Steve, partly 
because of all those things. She only ever saw him as just Steve.” Winslet 
slips into Hoffman’s Polish-American accent: “Like, it’s not a big deal.”

For better or worse, the movie puts a human face on Jobs, but it also shows 
how Jobs put a human face on technology. Literally in the case of the 
Macintosh, whose design, he explains, resembles a wonky human face. In the 
first scene of the movie we see Jobs in crisis because his technicians can’t 
get the Macintosh to say “Hello”. It speaks volumes thathe called one of his 
first computers Lisa <http://www.oldcomputers.net/lisa.html>, after his 
daughter, even as he was refusing paternity payments for the real Lisa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942a372e6f58ad93f8852149121600ce822e3935%2F0_201_5649_3389%2F5649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20'Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah!%20We%20all%20are'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20on%20playing%20Steve%20Jobs%3A%20%27Was%20he%20flawed%3F%20Yeah%21%20We%20all%20are%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-well-done-portraying-the-apple-legend-on-screen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F942a372e6f58ad93f8852149121600ce822e3935%2F0_201_5649_3389%2F5649.jpg>
 John Steen, Michael Fassbender and Kate Winslet in Steve Jobs. Photograph: 
Francois Duhamel/PR 
Jobs arguably rectified the movies’ technophobia in the process. Taking their 
cue from Kubrick’s HAL in 2001 (whose initials were transposed from IBM), the 
1980s was full of nightmare scenarios such as War Games, Tron and The 
Terminator. “Computers were these scary things with sharp edges, dark colours 
and something foreboding about them,” says Fassbender. “Jobs really wanted us 
to develop a relationship with them, to see them as non-agresssive, 
non-threatening. When you look at the first iMacs, they’re the colour of 
sweets. People almost wanted to lick them like lollipops. Now most people take 
their phones and laptops to bed with them at night.” Admittedly, that 
technophobia could be due for a comeback, as post-Snowden paranoia makes its 
way into mainstream movies such as Spectre, Furious 7 and Captain America: 
Winter Soldier – but Jobs cannot be entirely blamed for that.

Jobs also had a hand in making movie computers friendlier via his involvement 
with animation pioneers Pixar. He had no creative input, but Jobs bankrolled 
Pixar in its early years, and cannily manoeuvred its business dealings to the 
extentit became a threat to Disney, which then acquired it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/jan/25/citynews.filmnews> for $7.4 bn – 
as a result of which, Jobs suddenly became Disney’s biggest shareholder. 
Apple’s Think Different ad first aired on television during the network 
premiere of Toy Story. Talk about controlling the message.

If Jobs’ life has been mythologised, it is perhaps as much a product of our 
own limited narrative templates as his own self-promotion. Pixar boss John 
Lasseter once likened Jobs’ career to the classic “hero’s journey”: the chosen 
one who is banished from his kingdom, goes off into the wilderness on 
adventures, then returns stronger and wiser to reclaim his birthright (and turn 
it into the mightiest corporation on the planet). Others have noted the 
Biblical parallels to Jobs’ story: the tech messiah who was crucified by the 
number-crunchers but then rose again. He even performed miracles: many who came 
into contact with him have spoken of Jobs’“reality distortion field” 
<http://www.folklore.org/StoryView.py?project=Macintosh&story=Reality_Distortion_Field.txt>
 – a singular ability to bend reality to his will, to achieve, or compel others 
to achieve, what was considered previously impossible. The cliches are all 
readily applicable: the tortured artistic genius whose human failings we 
forgive, the American dreamer who started in his garage and conquered the world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&media=>
 Watch a video review of the film 
Steve Jobs the movie can’t help but conform to some of these, and there is a 
certain irony to the fact that it tells the story of a 21st-century innovator 
in a format that is essentially 19th-century theatre. But it at least bypasses 
Jobs’ reality distortion field. The movie has received widespread critical 
acclaim and is being tipped for awards, and yet itsUS box-office performance 
has been surprisingly disappointing 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=jobs2015.htm>. It was rolled out 
across 2,400 screens three weekends ago but only took $7.1m. Boyle’s assessment 
is that it was “too much, too soon”. The hope is that the movie will fare 
better outside the US and keep going until awards season, Boyle explains, with 
characteristic honesty. “That’s why I’m here talking to you, rather than at 
home watching football.” Not that the project was in any way futile. It’s one 
of the best films of his career, he feels, as does virtually everyone else 
involved. “On balance, given his importance, and his own sense of 
self-promotion and being a public figure, you’ve got to tell stories about 
these people. It’s extraordinary what’s happening to us, and the velocity of 
it. We’ve got to track these changes. We’re only just beginning really.”

Steve Jobs is on general release in the UK
 