
You may not be hearing much from Michael Fassbender in the run-up to the 
release of his new film, the much-admired adaptation of Shakespeare’sMacbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/macbeth-review-fassbender-and-cotillard-full-of-sound-and-fury-in-significant-shakespeare-adaptation>
, which drew fulsome reviews on its premiere at Cannes earlier this year. The 
reason? He’s hard at work on his next one, Assassin’s Creed, a film version of 
the barnstorming video game. Hecouldn’t even spare the time to turn up to the 
world premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/steve-jobs-movie-danny-boyle-kate-winslet-seth-rogen-aaron-sorkin>
 of Steve Jobs at the prestigious Telluride film festival three weeks ago.

Steve Jobs review: Fassbender excels but iWorship required if you're to care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/steve-jobs-movie-review-michael-fassbender-telluride>
Video game movies don’t have much in the way of artistic pedigree, to put it 
mildly, so it may seem a little odd that Fassbender appears to be throwing so 
much into it. The film industry can sense there is big money to be found in 
them, but has so far failed to locate it – the recent Prince of Persia fiasco 
in 2010 a particularly costly example of the breed, despite the heavyweight 
presence of Jake Gyllenhaal in the lead. The participation of Fassbender – a 
bona fide Oscar nominee, no less – is something of a coup, if truth be told, 
and presumably the pot was sweetened by giving Fassbender an outlet for his 
increasingly apparent ambitions as a producer. With hisMacbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/macbeth> director Justin Kurzel installed 
too, Assassin’s Creed just might be the film to finally crack the 
game-to-screen transfer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442418984733%2FKP_475917_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fassbender%20in%20Macbeth%3A%20watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20of%20the%20new%20Shakespeare%20adaptation%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fassbender%20in%20Macbeth%3A%20watch%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20of%20the%20new%20Shakespeare%20adaptation%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmichael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-macbeth-film-clip-shakespeare-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F16%2F1442418984733%2FKP_475917_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Michael Fassbender in Macbeth: watch an exclusive clip of the new Shakespeare 
adaptation 
However, the three films – Creed, Macbeth and Steve Jobs – function as a sort 
of cross-section of where Fassbender, now 38, finds himself, as if extracted by 
some sort of career-borehole drill.Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/steve-jobs> is a bid for leading-man 
credibility in an Oscar-bait Hollywood drama, edging along a path he’s 
previously trodden with The Counselor and, further back, as Rochester opposite 
Mia Waskiowska’s Jane Eyre. Creed is a big, fat commercial movie, no longer a 
handicap in a world where even Robert Redford does Marvel superhero movies. 
Again, Fassbender has a few of these already in his pocket: two X-Men prequel 
movies, where he played the young Magneto, and Prometheus, in which he took the 
creepy-android role. Macbeth, though, is part of Fassbender’s third string, the 
series of edgy, putatively dangerous films that, presumably, he would suppose 
is his “real” work. In this category you would find his Steve McQueen trilogy – 
Hunger, Shame and 12 Years a Slave, as well as David Cronenberg’s A Dangerous 
Method, existential western Slow West and Frank, the oddity about a musician 
encased in a giant papier-mache head that is almost, but not quite, Frank 
Sidebottom.

Fassbender’s reputation is that of a fearless, total-immersion performer, 
capable of bringing extraordinary intensity to the screen but just as capable 
of reverting to normality when the camera stops turning over. He also has – to 
put it politely – a reputation as a bit of a Don Juan, and has a speed-freak 
side to him that meanshe is excellent fodder for the sort of men’s magazines 
that like film actors to test out high-performance cars 
<http://www.gq.com/story/michael-fassbender-cover-story-november-2013>. He has 
also so far resisted the temptation to up sticks and move to Los Angeles, 
having kept a flat in the London district of Hackney for years.

With woad-daubed face and Pictish beard, as well as the backdrop of primeval, 
Pasolini-esque landscape, Fassbender’s Macbeth is unquestionably a 
boundary-pushing take on Shakespeare. Its big pitch is thatMacbeth is suffering 
post-traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/michael-fassbender-macbeth-suffered-from-ptsd>
 after fighting so many wars in medieval Scotland. “Never did it occur to me 
before this that this character was suffering from PTSD,” Fassbender said after 
the film’s premiere. “You have a soldier who’s engaged in battle 
month-after-month, day-after-day. Killing with his hands. Pushing a sword 
through muscle and bone. And if that doesn’t work, picking up a rock and using 
that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fmacbeth-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443693353661%2FKP_505287_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Macbeth%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fmacbeth-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Macbeth%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fmacbeth-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443693353661%2FKP_505287_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The film team review Macbeth 
But if Macbeth is designed to satisfy the intellectually curious thespian in 
Fassbender, it is Steve Jobs that will push him closer towards realising the 
predictions – going back as far as his first lead role, in McQueen’s Hunger in 
2008 – that he was“the next Daniel Day Lewis” 
<http://www.slantmagazine.com/features/article/interview-michael-fassbender>.

Although it is possibly galling that he wasn’t the first pick for the role – 
Christian Bale had been heavily courted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/04/christian-bale-leonardo-dicaprio-steve-jobs-apple-biopic>
 by the studio, but passed after director David Fincher left the film – 
Fassbender could at least be assured it was a blue-chip project. Scriptwriter 
Aaron Sorkin, best known for The West Wing, had proved his cinematic chops by 
writing another tech-era biopic, The Social Network, and while the replacement 
of Fincher by British director Danny Boyle may have spoiled the Social Network 
reunion, Boyle’s pedigree and long-proven skill with actors prevented the film 
drifting out of awards-season contention.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&media=>
 Steve Jobs premieres at Telluride: what did the audience think? 
Boyle is certainly a strong admirer of Fassbender: calling it an “amazing 
experience” working with him on Steve Jobs, he said he particularly admired 
Fassbender’s flexibility of performance in what – true to Sorkin’s reputation – 
is a comparatively talky film. “When you start off your career you think 
there’s only one way of achieving anything, but when you get to work with 
really experienced actors, they’ll give you alternatives, and emotional 
differences between scenes. Hot, then cooler so that you’ve got choices in the 
editing for how the storytelling is emerging. That’s what you get with an actor 
like Fassbender – he finds variation on multiple takes, rather than just doing 
the same thing again and again. It is incredible to witness.”

Fassbender’s greatest cheerleader however, is director McQueen, who gave him 
that first big role and then cast him in his next two films. After Shame, the 
sex-addict drama in which Fassbender starred opposite Carey Mulligan,McQueen 
likened him to Marlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/may/20/observer-profile-michael-fassbender>
, saying “there’s a fragility and a femininity to him, but also a masculinity 
that can translate. You’re not in awe of him. You’re part of him. He pulls you 
in.” After 12 Years a Slave, McQueenexpanded on their “understanding” of each 
other to Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2013/11/steve-mcqueen-michael-fassbender>: 
“I love him deeply … I don’t question it; that’s the funny thing. I think we 
have something and we just get on with it.” For his part,Fassbender says he 
repeats McQueen’s mantra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/06/michael-fassbender-shame-mcqueen> 
– “We’re all going to die one day!” – when he prepares for a risky or 
potentially humiliating scene, and remains grateful to him for being cast in 
Hunger when, as a 30-year-old, he was beginning to think acting success had 
passed him by.

Fassbender, born in Heidelberg in 1977 to a German father and Northern Irish 
mother,moved to Killarney in the Irish Republic as a two-year-old 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/blood-sweat-tears-1.1216110> where his 
family ran a popular restaurant, the West End House. Having got interested in 
acting thanks to some after-school workshops, Fassbender got a place at drama 
school in London, but swiftly dropped out. Like a string of other young male 
actors – including Tom Hardy and Damian Lewis – he got an early break on the 
Steven Spielberg-produced war series Band of Brothers in 2001; he then had to 
hack his way through the lower reaches of TV series and longform dramas – 
before landing his first feature film role in 300.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0xSqLrG-ow&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0xSqLrG-ow>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD0xSqLrG-ow&media=>
Even in this relatively difficult period he showed an ability to pick 
interesting projects – or at least, to attract the attention of those in charge 
of them. He swam the Atlantic for aGuinness TV commercial 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Y-UB5wXitw]%20and%20turned%20into%20a%20goat%20for%20the%20Cooper%20Temple%20Clause%20[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LXRSslBi2CY>
 andturned into a goat for the Cooper Temple Clause’s Blind Pilots. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LXRSslBi2CY>

But it was playing Bobby Sands in Hunger in 2008, for which he lost 16kg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/oct/31/periodandhistorical> as well as 
holding up his end ofa celebrated 17-minute single-take 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAkBz9glJFo> scene, that proved his 
breakthrough to the big leagues. Despite his apparently instinctive facility 
for emotional intensity and undeniable screen presence, Fassbender adopted a 
craftsmanlike approach to the art of acting, telling the Guardian after the 
Belfast premiere of Hunger: “Tiger Woods is Tiger Woods because he practised 
that fucking swing 100 times a day. Why should acting be any different? It’s 
just boring repetition, and through that, I find things start to break down, 
and you start to find the nuances, all the interesting little details.”

Early on, however, Fassbender took care to associate himself with high-end, 
marquee directors: he played smallish parts in Fish Tank, for Andrea Arnold, 
and in Inglourious Basterds for Quentin Tarantino. Lead roles were a different 
matter – at the beginning, you take anything you can get. He played a husband 
menaced by feral youths in the widely liked horror film Eden Lake, and a Roman 
soldier in the underperforming action film Centurion; Hollywood came calling 
with a villain role in the dud horror film Blood Creek (Fassbender played a 
Nazi demon trapped in a cellar for decades), and Jonah Hex – another flop – a 
supernatural thriller based on a DC comic book.

However, Fassbender was still happy to remain an ensemble player as his star 
rose, especially if the director was a top-notch auteur. David Cronenberg cast 
him as Carl Jung in A Dangerous Method (opposite Viggo Mortensen as Sigmund 
Freud), and Terrence Malick put him in Weightless, the long-gestating music 
drama due out next year (though Fassbenderhas expressed doubts his performance 
will make the final cut 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/michael-fassbender-says-still-more-work-to-do-on-malicks-austin-movie-william-friedkin-disses-to-the-wonder-20131030>
). Along the way he’s developed continuing relationships with Ridley Scott (for 
whom he played one of his relatively few top-of-the-bill lead roles, in The 
Counselor, as well asthe Prometheus films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/04/prometheus-2-rumoured-to-be-shooting-in-january-2016>
), Kurzel and of course McQueen.

Can Fassbender go on to secure an Oscar nomination for Steve Jobs? It seems 
possible, if not likely. Can he become the first performer to be nominated 
against himself in the best actor category: Macbeth v Jobs? That would seem 
unlikely, but not outside the realms of possibility. With the admiration that 
Fassbender appears able to secure across all levels of the film world – from 
art-cinema purists to superhero-movie geeks – you wouldn’t put it past him.

• Macbeth is released on 1 October in Australia, 2 October in the UK and 4 
December in the US. Steve Jobs is released on 8 October in Australia, 9 October 
in the US and 13 November in the UK.

Potted profile

Born: 2 April 1977

Age: 38

Career: Breakthrough role playing IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands in Steve 
McQueen’s awardwinning debut Hunger, in 2008. Followed this up with the 
McQueen-directed sex-addict drama Shame, as well as blockbusters such as X-Men: 
First Class and Prometheus. Moved into actor-producer role with Slow West and 
Assassin’s Creed.

High point: Landing title role in Steve Jobs after Christian Bale dropped out; 
very much in the frame for Oscar recognition.

Low point: Not working for a year after his first proper acting job, the 
Steven Spielberg TV series Band of Brothers; he said later he had been 
“arrogant and stupid”.

What he says: “I’m flavour of the month at the moment, but somebody else is 
going to roll around the corner in three months’ time. I just want to keep 
working.”

What they say: “I needed someone who could go beyond my reach. That’s what 
Michael does.” Steve McQueen
 