
Alastair Cook, England's one-day captain, was given plenty to think about at 
Chelmsford after Australia warmed up for their NatWest Series with an emphatic 
179-run win overEssex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essex>.

The Australia captain, Michael Clarke, and David Hussey made half-centuries as 
Australia notched up 313 for nine in their 50 overs. Essex, with the England 
duo Cook and Ravi Bopara in their ranks, were well off the pace in their reply 
and were all out for 134 in 32.4 overs, with Pat Cummins taking three for 26.

Cook's hopes of having a good look at Australia's bowling attack were ruined 
by Clint McKay in the fourth over of the Essex innings. After an imperious shot 
to the cover boundary from the second delivery, he was dispatched with the 
sixth as an intended drive was edged to Clarke at first slip.

Cook's contribution was five from 15 deliveries and his removal more or less 
ended the county's hopes of maintaining a serious challenge. Bopara, also set 
to turn out in the first match at Lord's, fared better and struck six fours 
until dabbing an easy catch behind off Shane Watson.

James Foster defied Australia for 36 balls while making 41 containing six 
fours but the 19-year-old Cummins was to have him caught by Stephen Smith at 
backward point, with the rest of the Essex lineup folding meekly.

Having won the toss and elected to bat, Australia's major batsmen managed to 
get among the runs before Friday's first duel against the old enemy.

Watson and David Warner produced an opening stand of 51 in just under seven 
overs before they departed for 33 and 26 respectively. Warner drilled Graham 
Napier to Ryan tenÂ Doeschate at midwicket while Watson was the first of Reece 
Topley's four victims when he was caught behind.

But it was the captain, Clarke, and Hussey who provided the backbone of the 
innings. Eschewing any risks, they found the gaps with ease while putting 
together a partnership of 137 in 20 overs.

That ended when Clarke, having struck 76 in 73 balls with the aid of nine 
fours, decided to retire to give others a taste of action out in the middle.

Hussey's innings of 67 from 66 deliveries, six of which he hit for fours, 
ended when he dispatched the left-arm spinner Tim Phillips to Bopara at deep 
cover, a dismissal that paved the way for Matthew Wade to inflict further 
punishment on Essex's toiling bowlers. He helped himself to 47 from 43 balls.

One bright spot for Essex was that Topley, the young left-arm pacemen, picked 
up four for 46 from eight overs.
 