
1. EL Grant Watson and CF Tunnicliffe

What to Look for in Autumn, a Ladybird Nature Book (no prizes for guessing the 
other titles in the series), was given to me by Aunty Mabel, Christmas 1960, 
although its satisfying retro matter-of-factness belongs to the previous 
decade. EL Grant Watson’s elegant present tense prose conveys vast numbers of 
facts by describing the detailed scenes illustrated on each facing page. He 
packs every paragraph without boring, making neither squeamish concessions to 
the age of the readers nor sensationalist exaggerations of his subject, 
describing for example the steel-blue backs of swallows gathering on telegraph 
wires in exactly the same even tone as he explains how the weasel, 
“instinctively knows where the artery of the neck is”. CF Tunnicliffe’s 
detailed illustrations are equally unshow-y and serve the subject with the same 
care. Unsung then and now, author and illustrator, each as unassuming as the 
book’s title, quietly confirmed for an eight-year-old boy the magic of autumn 
and opened his eyes to how little he had really experienced beyond the school 
nature table and the stringing of conkers. (MI)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233024935%2F9bfd2886-6785-4093-9aae-397867ef2308-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233024935%2F9bfd2886-6785-4093-9aae-397867ef2308-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The ‘swashbuckling’ Roald Dahl. Photograph: ITV / Rex Features 
2. Roald Dahl and Quentin Blake

Difficult to avoid eulogising this pair but you could hardly leave them off of 
the list. Together they are as swashbuckling, and vital as the Ladybird pairing 
are restrained. Nobody I know writes for children with quite the same gutsy 
abandon as Dahl without becoming self-indulgent or tricksily juvenile. Nobody 
invites us to subvert the adult in ourselves like he does and nobody has quite 
the same connection to their own inner child. Quentin Blake is his match. The 
vigour and freshness of his line shares the same DNA as Dahl’s handwritten 
stories. Both enjoy a kind of gleeful delight in the foibles, failures and 
sheer silliness of being human and both recognise that children can somehow 
ennoble the world. Invidious to choose a favourite but I will anyway: The BFG. 
(MI)


3. Cressida Cowell and Neal Layton

This pairing continues the tradition of gently playful anarchy in the Emily 
Brown series. That Rabbit Belongs to Emily Brown introduced me to them and is a 
delight. Terrific plot, fully realised characters and satisfying storytelling. 
Gloriously funny too. Neal Layton knows exactly how to push the limits, 
extending the reach of the story by exploring all the avenues that his 
freestyle approach to illustration makes possible. What results is a wonderful 
balance between the familiar and the new; between the comfort of a traditional 
story and the excitement of breaking its boundaries. (MI)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233240794%2F6647c721-b48f-4832-b504-3b1fff46dc95-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233240794%2F6647c721-b48f-4832-b504-3b1fff46dc95-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michael Rosen and Helen Oxenbury’s Bear Hunt is ‘as close to that oral 
tradition of storytelling as a picture book can get’. Photograph: Graham 
Turner/Guardian 
4. Michael Rosen and Helen Oxenbury

How we made: Helen Oxenbury and Michael Rosen on We're Going on a Bear Hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/05/how-we-made-bear-hunt> 
When I was little my dad used to sit us on his knee and tell my brother, my 
sister and me the story of Goldilocks and the Three Bears. He had as much fun 
hamming it up as we had listening to it. Exactly the same fun can be had with 
We’re Going on a Bear Hunt, which is as close to that oral tradition of 
storytelling as a picture book can get. The rising jeopardy associated with 
discovering the bear can be pushed as far as the storyteller likes, through all 
of this story’s brilliant repetitions. Scary anticipation will do the rest, the 
more so if the child has heard the story a hundred times before. Helen 
Oxenbury’s lovely illustrations set the story in a world as reassuring and 
familiar as the bedcovers they eventually hide under - which somehow only 
serves to point up the terror. (MI)


5. Patrick Kinmonth and Reg Cartwright

Fine storytelling of a different kind and another example of how complementary 
tone can make words and pictures combine to produce a picture book that fixes 
itself in the memory. In Mr Potter’s Pigeon, Patrick Kinmonth’s unhurried prose 
brings to life the journey of a racing pigeon and the character of its owner, 
Mr Potter, a man whose smile is permanently hidden under his moustache. 
Understated and atmospheric, his writing invites the reader to linger on Reg 
Cartwright’s illustrations, each a carefully conceived painting in its own 
right. Cartwright’s work is dense and detailed; everything placed and arranged 
within rich colour palettes. His pictures render the story of a working class 
man and his pigeon dreamlike and other-worldly, making an ordinary setting 
extraordinary. Together writer and illustrator illuminate the possibility of 
escaping the humdrum, or rather of finding a kind of magic within it. (MI)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233108355%2F34de63c1-d0ea-4a77-942c-89c6ea8803f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233108355%2F34de63c1-d0ea-4a77-942c-89c6ea8803f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Illustrator Quentin Blake: total talent! Photograph: Rex Features 
6. Michael Rosen and Quentin Blake

I discovered Michael Rosen’s Sad Book quite a few years back during art 
school. I was so moved by it I bought several copies to give to friends. In it 
Michael Rosen describes the depths of his own sadness following the death of 
his son Eddie. There’s something very moving about recounting such a deeply 
personal experience in the straightforward, unembellished language a picture 
book demands and Michael Rosen is brilliant at this. Many people have commented 
on the bravery of the book. I would also describe it as a generous book; 
everyone experiences sadness and reading this lovely book makes you feel like 
you’re not alone. Quentin Blake’s illustrations as always are beautifully 
composed. His expressive line is accompanied, in this case, by sombre inky 
washes and clever use of light and dark to create the atmospheric backdrops 
that capture the emotion in the text. I saw the illustrations for real in 
Quentin Blake’s opening exhibition at the House of Illustration in Kings Cross 
last year. It reconfirmed for me just what a talent he is. (CI)
 Sara Ogilvie’s drawings are ‘fresh and full of character’. Photograph: PR 
7. Sara Ogilvie and Anna Kemp

Sara Ogilvie came to talk to our illustration class at the Glasgow School of 
Art in 2007. She showed us drawings she’d made of people walking past her 
apartment in Minneapolis where she taught for a couple of years at the College 
of Art. They were brilliantly observed, quick sketchy illustrations, fresh and 
full of character. She inspired me to get out and draw people (albeit in the 
less exotic location of Sauchiehall Street). She manages to retain freshness 
and vigour in her picture book illustration, no mean feat when you’re drawing 
the same characters over the course of 32 pages. Her colourful, graphic 
approach works brilliantly alongside Anna Kemp’s comic rhyming tale in The 
Worst Princess. Kemp’s pacey rhythm is reminiscent of Roald Dahl’s revolting 
rhymes. So is her humour. I’ve always been a fan of the anti-princess story and 
this is my favourite one to date. I love the feisty princess and her casual 
dismissal of her idiot prince, along with all things patriarchal. Hilarious. 
(CI)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233901308%2F35a369b5-52a1-42e0-b695-e1e72f5b2527-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F14%2F1442233901308%2F35a369b5-52a1-42e0-b695-e1e72f5b2527-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An image from Janet and Allan Ahlberg’s Peepo. Photograph: PR 
8. Janet and Allan Ahlberg

Each Peach Pear Plum, Peepo, The Jolly Postman, Funny Bones, Burglar Bill - we 
had them all, and we read them over and over again. I still find myself quoting 
Burglar Bill on occasion; “That’s a nice tin of beans. I’ll have that!” The 
Jolly Postman and The Jolly Christmas Postman were particular favourites. I 
remember how exciting it was opening each letter and revealing the contents; 
postcards, recipes, invitations, a jigsaw, a miniature board game, every item 
was packed full of quirky little details. Looking back I’m amazed at how much 
work went in to every page. Brilliant storytelling, brilliant illustrations. 
You can’t get better than Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (CI)

Chris T-T sings AA Milne's poems - audio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2011/aug/31/booksforchildrenandteenagers-childrens-books-8-12-years>
9. AA Milne and EH Shepard

Not strictly a picture book pairing - but I couldn’t resist including these 
two. Unsurprisingly Winnie the Pooh made it into the BBC’s greatest children’s 
books of all time list this year although they failed to credit EH Shepard at 
all. For me the illustrations and the text are inextricably linked. The 
daftness of Pooh, the anxiousness of Piglet, the gloominess of Eeyore, expertly 
captured in pictures as well as words. The stories still make me laugh. I love 
how they centre on Pooh’s misapprehensions and I love the sense of anticlimax 
in their adventuring. Perhaps the best example of this is in the episode “In 
which Pooh and Piglet go hunting and nearly catch a Woozle”. EH Shepard’s 
illustrations capture movement and posture accurately without losing a lovely, 
loose, sketchbook freshness. If I could own an original picture book 
illustration it’d be a toss up between an EH Shepard and a Quentin Blake. (CI)

The Dark by Lemony Snicket, illustrated by Jon Klassen - watch the trailer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/apr/02/the-dark-lemony-snicket-watch-trailer>
10. Lemony Snicket and Jon Klassen

I came across The Dark quite recently. It’s a very original and thoughtful 
take on a familiar theme - fear of the dark. Lemony Snicket employs the clever 
device of personifying the dark. At first this heightens the scariness of the 
book as the Dark lures a little boy called Lazlo down stairs, through the big 
dark house and into the basement. ‘“Come closer,” said the Dark…even closer’”. 
But the author turns fear on its head as the Dark offers the boy a smiling 
chest of drawers full of light bulbs. The book manages to deliver a message 
about overcoming fear without being in any way trite. The sophistication of the 
text is matched by Jon Klassen’s illustrations which create a powerfully eerie 
atmosphere that brings the text to life. The interiors of the big dark house 
are drawn with dramatic perspective in scratchy ink lines. Colour is applied 
with a limited palette in flat textured blocks which simplify the graphic and 
allows the reader to hone in on the contrasting shards of light and dark at the 
heart of the story. (CI)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442485804086%2F051f966f-c28b-40ec-bc4b-e539aa4fa5ab-2060x2055.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mick%20and%20Chloe%20Inkpen%E2%80%99s%20top%2010%20author%2Fillustrator%20pairings%20in%20picture%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fmick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442485804086%2F051f966f-c28b-40ec-bc4b-e539aa4fa5ab-2060x2055.jpeg>
Mick Inkpen is an author and illustrator of children’s books, best known for 
his Kipper books. His daughter, Chloe Inkpen, is also an illustrator. Together 
they write and illustrate the Zoe and Beans series of picture books. Find out 
more about the books at theZoe and Beans website <http://www.zoeandbeans.com/>. 
Buy Zoe and Beans: Pirate Treasure! at the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zoe-and-beans-pirate-treasure-2.html>. Mick 
and Chloe’s latest book is I Will Love You Anyway.Buy I Will Love You Anyway at 
the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/325586/>. 

 