
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> is making a 
significant move into UK programmatic video advertising, one of the fastest 
growing digital commercial sectors.

The US tech giant is launching Microsoft Video Network in the UK, which will 
allow advertisers to buy pre-roll video ads programmatically across its MSN 
content portal, along with 350 publishers that are part of the network.

Microsoft is lagging behind its rivals when it comes to video content and its 
advertising opportunities.

Rival Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> owns YouTube 
while AOL boasts web advertising platform Adap.tv, which it has launched a 
programmatic network around.

However, Microsoft is aiming for Microsoft Video Network, which is supported 
by Nielsen, comScore and in-house data to help with targeting ads, to be a 
compelling sell to advertisers and help it win market share.

The network launches on Thursday in the UK, following its launch in the US, 
though Microsoft declined to name its publishing partners.

Owen Sagness, general manager of Microsoft Advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> & Online, UK, said: "Video is a 
hot topic and programmatic media trading is an area of massive growth for the 
industry. Over the past six years advertising budgets have significantly moved 
away from traditional TV and into online video, as audiences migrate to 
multiscreen and video on demand.

"With the supply and demand model driving efficiency and ROI for brands, 
automated buying will continue to become more important for advertisers looking 
to keep up with the consumers' online behaviour day in, day out."

While programmatic trading is well established in the digital display market, 
it is now growing fast in video.

According to global research specialist IHS, programmatic video ad buying 
across the UK, Spain, Germany, France and Italy is growing at an average of 77% 
a year and will be worth €627m by 2017.

Separately, video advertising specialist BrightRoll has recruited one of the 
key architect's behind the commercial success ofMail Online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> to head up its UK and European 
business to focus on growing programmatic video revenues.

Andy Mitchell spent six years at Mail Online as managing director of AnyMedia, 
Daily Mail & General Trust's advertising network and technology division. 
Mitchell oversaw behavioural targeting and also developed and designed digital 
advertising teams at Mail Online.

Mitchell is joining BrightRoll in the new London-based role of managing 
director Europe and will be responsible for heading up sales strategy and 
development, as BrightRoll looks to drive up usage of programmatic video 
trading in the region.

Mitchell said: "The Brightroll platform is unique in that it unites buyers and 
sellers in a single marketplace, which creates significant efficiencies. I am 
very much looking forward to helping advertisers and publishers realise the 
value of direct programmatic transactions."

Mitchell left Mail Online last year and subsequently worked at B2B video 
network Rightster before joining BrightRoll.

BrightRoll is one of the largest video advertising networks in the US. It 
launched in the UK in 2009.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 