
Robert Thomas, who plagued his neighbours by playing Radio 4 at full volume 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/law-and-order/9994723/BBC-World-Service-fan-plagued-neighbours-by-playing-Radio-4-non-stop.html>
 at all hours has appeared in court charged with breaking hisasbo 
<https://www.gov.uk/asbo>. While this case escalated rapidly – Thomas ended up 
with vandalism charges and sprayed his neighbours with a garden hose – his 
Radio 4 obsession initially struck me as a rather genteel form of noise 
pollution. When I think of noisy neighbours, I think of those who pump out 
happy hardcore at 3pm, not the ones avidly listening to the The Archers omnibus.

How many other stories concerning antisocial behaviour don't we hear about in 
the media? While you will often read gleeful stories in the tabloids about 
terrible neighbours who fight all day long or leave rubbish strewn around, 
you'll rarely hear much of the apparently mild-mannered man up the road who 
aggressively blocks your parking space every day just to get a rise out of you. 
I'd bet that most middle-class people would deny behaving badly in any social 
situation, imagining their conduct to always be absolutely appropriate. Yet I 
can think of many examples of situations in which the more fortunate in society 
enrage, irritate and provoke. Below are just a few of my candidates for 
middle-class asbos:

• The darling son of your next-door neighbour who is learning to play the 
violin. "Yes, little Gabriel has just started and already has such a gift! And 
he's so committed, he plays for at least an hour a day. Sometimes when he's 
feeling really inspired, he wanders around the garden, lost in the music he's 
creating!" Gabriel is a moron who makes a noise like scraping nails on a 
blackboard. On this occasion, playing happy hardcore is positively encouraged. 
Or you could do whatGiles Coren did 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/giles-corens-twitter-tirade-at-neighbours-boy-for-playing-drum-kit-6720441.html>
, and get in rather more trouble.

• People who buy those buggies that seem more hi-tech than your car, and take 
up more space. Try to overtake someone with one of those buggies, I dare you. 
The driver will miraculously weave across the pavement and cut you up, usually 
while looking harassed because they can't control the damn thing.And if you see 
one in a small cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/19/yummy-mummies-rude-demanding-cafes>
, give up your principles and just go to Starbucks. Big corporation, wide 
aisles.

• People without real allergies who order off-menu. Of course some people have 
coeliac disease <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coeliac_disease>, and some 
people can't eat nuts. But there seem to be a suspicious amount of them in 
trendy establishments. "I'd really love the risotto, but is it possible to 
order it without the tomatoes/parsley/oil? I'm just really intolerant." They 
are making the waiter's life harder, and assuming the chef has time to create a 
whole new dish. Be intolerant of these people instead.

• People who build massive, obnoxious extensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/15/planning-reforms-floodgates-unsuitable-extensions>
. Since Grand Designs, everyone with a urge to have their own glass-roof yoga 
room seems to think it's acceptable to tear half their house down and then 
invite the builders to stay for what seems like an eternity. You end up facing 
a monstrosity of steel and mirrors, and the foundations of your flat will most 
likely crumble to dust in the next five years.Thanks Kevin McCloud!  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jul/25/broadcasting.tvandradio1>

• The businessman who cannot put his Blackberry or iPhone down. He is so 
important, so desperately needed, that he'll order a coffee while not looking 
up from firing off a missive to some unpaid intern. He'll sit next to you on 
the train tapping away frantically for six hours, while simultaneously shouting 
importantly into his phone about quarterly figures. He is more successful than 
you; suck it up, underlings.

Those are some of my worst, but what have I missed? Can you help me build a 
comprehensive list of middle-class asbos? Give me yours below.
 