
Mike Leigh will be visiting the Guardian office on Wednesday lunchtime ahead 
of the release this Friday of his latest film, Another Year. We'll be ushering 
the director in front of a computer to answer questions on his work, his life 
and – who knows? – maybehis women 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2010/oct/31/mike-leigh-women-another-year>
 too.

Another Year <https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year>, for the record, 
is Leigh's 19th feature in a career that stretches all the way back to Bleak 
Moments in 1971. He spent the bulk of the 70s and 80s making teleplays for the 
BBC (rustling up a whopping 16m viewers for Abigail's Party – thanks in large 
part, he says, to a stormy night and a blackout over on ITV) before returning 
to the big screen with 1988's High Hopes. His other work includes the scabrous 
Naked, the Palme d'Or-winning Secrets and Lies and the Bafta-winning Vera Drake.

Leigh famously begins his films without a script, coaxing a drama out of an 
extensive rehearsal period, so let's not start drafting this interview in 
advance. The director trails such a long and rich history (on cinema, TV and 
stage) that it's unlikely we'll be stuck for conversation, although in recent 
weeks Leigh has been in the news for cancelling a scheduled trip to Israel, for
reportedly labelling a lot of actors "thick" 
<http://www.contactmusic.com/news.nsf/story/leigh-unimpressed-with-acting-talent_1178151>
, and forapparently expressing a belief in crop circles 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/8850/1/mike-leigh-on-another-year>
. You might care to ask if he's planning a remake of Signs. Then again you may 
not, because Leigh is known for not suffering what he regards as foolish 
questions gladly. Probably safer to stick to the films he has made. That's more 
than enough to be getting on with.
 