
Are there any women over 35 who will have watched Another Year without a 
shudder? Mary, Lesley Manville's character – who bowls her way self-pityingly 
into the lives of the central couple, Tom and Gerri (Jim Broadbent and Ruth 
Sheen) – is a brilliant and horrific creation. She is a bogeywoman with whom we 
womend'un certain age can scare ourselves stupid; a spectre of wine-soaked, 
self-regarding, middle-aged femininity that is all the more horrendous for its 
recognisability. Who among us hasn't known a Mary weeping into the lees of her 
wine, bemoaning singledom/heartbreak/bad luck? Who among us hasn't – at one 
point or another – been dangerously close tobeing Mary? My most fervent 
atheistic prayer on watchingAnother Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/another-year> was "Don't let me ever, ever 
become like her (again)."

Does Leigh's representation of Mary border on the misogynist, as David Cox 
suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/09/another-year-mike-leigh-women> in 
a blog on the film site this week? For my money, no. It's mostly because, 
actually, Mary rings so true. It's partly because Leigh distributes the 
nuttiness fairly even-handedly between the genders. (I don't want to give away 
the plot, in so far as it has one, but there are three men who are, shall we 
say, deeply troubled in the film, and two perfectly sane and delightful women, 
not that it's a numbers game). I think, too, that the crucial point is that 
Another Year should be seen in apposition to Leigh's previous film,
Happy-Go-Lucky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/13/festivals.berlinfilmfestival>. As 
Peter Bradshaw pointed out in hisGuardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/04/another-year-film-review?intcmp=239>
 of the film, Mary is the other side of the coin of Happy-Go-Lucky's central 
character, Poppy. Poppy is single, contented, self-possessed and enjoys happy 
relationships with friends. In that film, it is those in family units – notably 
Poppy's sister who is expecting her first child in supposed suburban bliss – 
who are angst-ridden and discontented. In my view, that film earned Leigh the 
right to create a Mary. The two films are companion pieces in many ways. The 
intertextuality alert (as Bradshaw points out) is surely Mary and Poppy's 
contrasting involvements with automobiles. (For an insight into Leigh's 
creative process, turn to Xan Brooks'srecent interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/28/mike-leigh-another-year> with the 
film-maker.)

Among women of my acquaintance, I was interested that one, a psychotherapist 
found that Another Year "mirrors middle-class life as I know it and see it. It 
shows explicitly why some people are miserable and others not." She added: 
"Mary prefers to live in denial of what she is rather than change herself," 
citing Mary's oft-repeated, and clearly absurd assertion, "I don't really 
smoke." In this state of denial, argued the therapist, "The problem will always 
be perceived to be external ('I have bad luck')." At one point, Gerri counsels 
Mary to "see somebody" and get some help. In my own imagined version of the 
continued story, that's just what Mary does. In good news, I've known few 
people who've been Marys for ever – thank god.
 