
Bangladesh police stormed a militant hideout outside Dhaka on Saturday, 
shooting dead three alleged Islamist extremists, including thesuspected 
mastermind of an attack on a cafe that killed 22 mostly foreign hostages last 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
.

“We can see three dead bodies here,” senior police officer Sanwar Hossain said.

“Tamim Chowdhury is dead. He is the Gulshan attack mastermind and the leader 
of JMB (Jamayetul MujahideenBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, a domestic militant outfit),” 
he said.

Dhaka cafe attack ends with 20 hostages among dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
Chowdhury, a Bangladeshi-Canadian citizen, had earlier been named by police as 
the suspected mastermind ofthe attack on the cafe in Gulshan, an upscale Dhaka 
neighbourhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-bangladesh-cafe-attack-hostages-victims>
.

The bodies were retrieved after police staged an hour-long gun battle with 
extremists in Narayanganj, a city 25km south of Dhaka, Hossain said.

“The operation went on for an hour. We can see three dead bodies. They did not 
surrender. They threw four, five grenades at police and fired from AK 22 
rifles,” Bangladesh national police chief AKM Shahidul Hoque said.

“Three extremists were killed. Among them, one of the dead persons looked 
exactly like the photo of Tamim Chowdhury that we have.”

Bangladesh’s government has blamed the JMB for the 1 July cafe attack in which 
20 hostages, including 18 foreigners, were killed along with two policemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-officials-say-they-knew-attackers-as-details-of-victims-emerge>
.

Bangladesh cafe attack: Japan, Italy and US mourn dead hostages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-bangladesh-cafe-attack-hostages-victims>
Police say Chowdhury, 30, who returned from Canada in 2013, has been leading a 
faction of the militant group, also said to be behind scores of murders of 
members of religious minorities.

“We heard that Tamim Chowdhury is among the dead. [His] physical appearance 
shows that it was Tamim Chowdhury. But we need to be 100% sure,” Bangladesh 
home minister Asaduzzaman Khan said.

Police on 2 August announced a two million taka ($25,000) reward for 
information leading to the arrest of Chowdhury, who disappeared after allegedly 
masterminding the cafe attack.

Together with the elite security force, the Rapid Action Battalion, they have 
carried out a series of raids on suspected militant hideouts.

In June more than 11,000 people were arrested in a bid to quash a spate of 
brutal murders of secular writers, gay rights activists and religious 
minorities.

Dhaka officials say they knew attackers, as details of victims emerge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-officials-say-they-knew-attackers-as-details-of-victims-emerge>
Isis claimed responsibility for the Gulshan attack, releasing photos from 
inside the cafe during the siege and of the five men who carried out the deadly 
assault and were shot dead at its end.

Bangladeshi authorities have rejected the claim, saying international jihadist 
networks have no presence in the world’s third largest Muslim majority nation.

Bangladesh has been reeling from a deadly wave of attacks in the last three 
years, including on foreigners, rights activists and members of the country’s 
religious minorities.

Both Isis and a branch of Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida>
 have claimed responsibility for many of the attacks.

Critics say prime minister Sheikh Hasina’s administration is in denial about 
the nature of the threat posed by Islamist extremists and accuse her of trying 
to exploit the attacks to demonise her domestic opponents.


 