 Doctors are wasting millions of pounds a year by prescribing an acne drug that 
costs almost three times as much as an alternative treatment and carries 
greater side-effects, a journal published by the consumer watchdog Which? says 
today.
Minocycline, an oral antibiotic commonly used to treat moderate to severe 
acne, cost the NHS in England £9.3m last year. But doxycyline, a drug from the 
same family, would have cost only £3.9m.

The disclosure comes in the Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (DTB), a respected 
journal which offers independent guidance on the value of sometimes heavily 
marketed treatments. It says that, of the other suitable antibiotics for 
treating acne, lymecycline would cost the NHS £5.4m a year and oxytetracyline 
£5m. Even the most expensive alternative, tetracycline, would have saved the 
NHS £50,000 a year.

Minocycline is routinely prescribed in the belief that it is more effective, 
easier to take and less likely to cause bacterial resistance than the other 
antibiotics. But DTB says that evidence suggests the other drugs are just 
effective and do not carry two serious side-effects associated with 
minocycline. The first is the risk of skin and internal organs turning a 
slate-grey colour - an effect that can be permanent; the second is a lupus-like 
syndrome, a form of arthritis which can occur with the other drugs but which is 
particularly associated with this treatment.

Ike Iheanacho, editor of DTB, said GPs often prescribed the drug because it 
was one they were familiar with. "There is no good reason to justify using 
minocycline as a treatment for acne, given the availability of less expensive, 
alternative antibiotics that are just effective and much safer for patients," 
he said. "By using these other treatments, doctors could help to save millions, 
a crucial point given the current financial climate for the NHS."
 