
At least 50 protesters were arrested at the Million Mask march in central 
London on Thursday night, including two for assaulting police officers, after 
protesters threw missiles and set off fireworks and flares. TheMetropolitan 
police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> said three officers 
were taken to hospital after being injured, while some protesters were treated 
for bloody injuries and given first aid at the scene.

What started off as a peaceful protest descended into violence when activists 
clashed with officers. A police car was set alight and its windscreen smashed 
near Green Park as thousands of anti-capitalist campaigners flowed past the 
capital’s landmarks wearing the trademark Guido masks of theAnonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> hacking group.

Million Mask March protest underway in London - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/nov/05/million-mask-march-gathers-in-london-live-updates>
Three men were arrested before the march began after a police search turned up 
knives, smoke and paint grenades, gas canisters and lock picks. The three men, 
aged 38, 55 and 50, were held at a centralLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> police station on suspicion of being in 
possession of offensive weapons.

There was a sudden surge of activity about half an hour into the event, as 
several people at the front broke off and ran towards the Churchill War Rooms. 
More crowds gathered outside Buckingham Palace, a long way from the agreed 
route.


Some tried to enter Great George Street, a short distance from Conservative 
party headquarters, which was closed off. A line of police and mounted officers 
formed a barrier against the densely packed protesters, some of whom were 
screaming about inequality. Stray bottles were thrust over the barriers towards 
officers to cheers and chants of “Shame on you, we’re human too”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fprotesters-clash-police-million-mask-march-london-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446760125991%2FKP_591450_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protesters%20clash%20with%20police%20at%20Million%20Mask%20march%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fprotesters-clash-police-million-mask-march-london-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protesters%20clash%20with%20police%20at%20Million%20Mask%20march%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fprotesters-clash-police-million-mask-march-london-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446760125991%2FKP_591450_crop_640x360.jpg>
Protesters clash with police at Million Mask march – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/nov/05/protesters-clash-police-million-mask-march-london-video>
The Metropolitan police deployed what they described as a “significant 
policing operation”, including thousands of extra officers drafted in to tackle 
expected unrest, after previous events ended in arrests and clashes with police 
across the city centre.

In Trafalgar Square at 6.40pm, sirens could be heard from almost all 
directions. The area was ringed by dozens of police in riot vans, their visored 
helmets strapped to their overalls. On the wall of the National Gallery was a 
message telling people that they might be asked to remove their face coverings. 
The march usually sees demonstrators march wearing Guy Fawkes masks. “Failure 
to comply is an offence,” it said ominously.
Damien Gayle (@damiengayle) 
A warning is being broadcast on the side of the national gallery with a laser 
#MillionMaskMarch <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MillionMaskMarch?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/DcVWTqn2ip <https://t.co/DcVWTqn2ip>
 <https://twitter.com/damiengayle/status/662335752605458432> November 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/damiengayle/status/662335752605458432> 
One protester, a musician who gave her name as Lola, said she had travelled 
from Hull to the capital to speak up for others. She said: “There are people 
who aren’t represented, they should be here. I am the people. We are peaceful, 
we are doing this in a peaceful manner, but the media focus on the 1% who cause 
trouble.”

Another self-proclaimed anarchist, Aztecarna Peatonito from Mexico, said he 
wanted a peaceful way of spreading a message against inequality: “We tried for 
six years to get the press to take us seriously. It is only when we wore the 
masks that we started getting attention. Anyone who is violent is not with us.”

As protesters returned to Trafalgar Square after some went to Parliament 
Square and Buckingham Palace, police used a kettle operation to contain them.

The Met said late on Thursday night: “To prevent further crime and disorder, 
two containments are in place in the vicinity of St Martin’s Place, Trafalgar 
Square and Parliament Street, Whitehall.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb6cdff4e6fa963199006f06fcb59a6864abed0a%2F0_292_2097_1406%2F2097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Million%20Mask%20march%3A%20scores%20arrested%20after%20clashes%20between%20police%20and%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Million%20Mask%20march%3A%20scores%20arrested%20after%20clashes%20between%20police%20and%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb6cdff4e6fa963199006f06fcb59a6864abed0a%2F0_292_2097_1406%2F2097.jpg>
 A protester emerges with a bloodied head as crowds surge forward on Great 
George Street. Photograph: Kate Ferguson/PA 
Jono, 24, from London, said: “What I’ve noticed since we’ve got into Trafalgar 
Square is police trying to contain large numbers of people who just wanted to 
stand in the square and allow their voice to be heard. It’s not really a free 
country if you can’t just stand in the streets and let your voice be heard. But 
I’ve not seen any aggression.”

Not everyone was impressed, however. Tourist Sarah Slone, 19, from Utah, said 
the protest was “a bit like anarchy, really – they don’t seem organised in 
their thoughts or actions”.

Ch Supt Pippa Mills earlier explained why the Met had imposed such stringent 
conditions on the demonstration. “It’s absolutely essential that the police are 
able to balance the needs of those who want to protest peacefully with those 
who live, work and visit London,” she said. “Over the last three years, we’ve 
seen people going about their daily business seriously intimidated and 
disrupted by these protesters at this event.”

The protest severely disrupted traffic in Westminster and central London 
because of the number of road closures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cdb640b1b4e1c11eefdf7abf844783c25165424%2F282_532_3814_1993%2F3814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Million%20Mask%20march%3A%20scores%20arrested%20after%20clashes%20between%20police%20and%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Million%20Mask%20march%3A%20scores%20arrested%20after%20clashes%20between%20police%20and%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthree-arrested-anti-capitalist-protesters-million-mask-march%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cdb640b1b4e1c11eefdf7abf844783c25165424%2F282_532_3814_1993%2F3814.jpg>
 Protesters clash with police during the Million Mask demonstration in central 
London. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA  