
Thousands of masked protesters descended on central London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> on Saturday night for the Million Mask 
March, an annual global anti-capitalism and pro-civil liberties demonstration.

Wearing characteristic Guy Fawkes masks, supporters of hacking collective 
Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> crowded into 
Trafalgar Square with scores of police on hand to keep order. The protest 
passed off without major incident, though by 10.45pm police had made 47 
arrests, the majority for drug offences and obstruction of officers.

Ugly scenes marred last year’s march, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/06/million-mask-march-police-chief-unacceptable-violence>
 which saw four officers injured by missiles and fireworks that were thrown at 
them.

Scotland Yard imposed restrictions on this year’s event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/04/million-mask-march-police-protesters-violence-fears-restrictions>
 amid concerns over any repeat of the disorder, limiting the march to three 
hours between 6pm and 9pm on a route between Trafalgar Square and Whitehall.

Million Mask March: police curb protests amid fears of violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/04/million-mask-march-police-protesters-violence-fears-restrictions>
Nearly 20,000 people had indicated they would attend on the event’s Facebook 
page, <https://www.facebook.com/events/267577580308917/> which warned “the 
police are not your friends”.

The protest began peacefully, with several participants climbing the base of 
Nelson’s column and chanting the slogan “one solution, revolution”. The 
procession headed along Whitehall and there were angry scenes as police formed 
a ring of steel outside parliament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590bb554cde0beb7ad5ce60e99034cf267c27159%2F0_244_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590bb554cde0beb7ad5ce60e99034cf267c27159%2F0_244_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 The march began at Nelson’s column. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images
Officers stood firm, telling protesters to stay within the boundaries. Several 
supporters, masked and otherwise, argued they should be free to pass on public 
roads. Fireworks and flares were lit in front of Westminster Abbey.

Among the protesters was Angela Windsor, an unemployed 40-year-old, who said 
she had travelled from Wales to take part in the event. “Nobody is protecting 
people – nobody cares. I think everyone here cares enough about people to make 
the effort to come down and try and do something, because the officials aren’t 
doing it.”

She said anyone who tried to incite a repeat of last year’s violent displays 
would be missing the point, adding: “Nobody wants a fight, we just want 
change.” But she was forced to defend the wording of a sign she was brandishing 
– including the words “death to the monarchy” – when questioned about it by 
passersby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f76715387382ae73b90c0f600d7fbf3c5e61d88%2F0_0_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f76715387382ae73b90c0f600d7fbf3c5e61d88%2F0_0_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Officers contained some protesters but the violent clashes that marred last 
year’s march were avoided. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images 
Another protester, a London-based mental health worker who gave his name as 
Jay, stood out from the crowd dressed as Santa and bearing a sign offering 
“free hugs”. The 30-year-old said he chose to dress as Father Christmas to show 
“not all of us are down here for violence … I’m the only Santa who doesn’t give 
out presents, because it is all capitalism. I give out free hugs, which I think 
is much better than a £300 present.”

The protest in Parliament Square had dwindled to several hundred people by 
around 7.30pm, when one man was seen being led away by officers. Another 
climbed the memorial to Field Marshal Haig and shouted “this is for all of us”.

Shortly before 9pm, as the end of the march approached, there were chaotic 
scenes as riot police moved in to make an arrest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2fcf116dad275af06fa9878e9c3cbc6f39b878c%2F0_196_3163_1898%2F3163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Million%20Mask%20March%20ends%20with%20dozens%20arrested%20in%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fdozens-of-arrests-at-million-mask-march-in-central-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2fcf116dad275af06fa9878e9c3cbc6f39b878c%2F0_196_3163_1898%2F3163.jpg>
 Riot police moved in and made arrests as the march’s 9pm deadline approached. 
Photograph: David Mirzoeff/PA 
A group of protesters surrounded and charged the officers, with shouts of 
“fuck the police” and “police brutality”. Several glass bottles were thrown as 
police escorted a protester away.
 