
Mining shares led a market slump fuelled by the US Federal Reserve signalling 
a possible end to quantitative easing and poor economic data from China.

Investors around the world took fright as Fed chairman Ben Bernanke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ben-bernanke> unveiled plans to start 
scaling back its $85bn a month bond buying programme later this year, depending 
on economic data, while China's manufacturing sector weakened to a nine-month 
low in June, according to a preliminary HSBC PMI report.

On top of that, China's central bank resisted further stimulus measures, and 
overnight interest rates have moved sharply higher.

A set of positive US economic figures - the Philadelphia Federal Reserve's 
monthly survey of business confidence turned positive while new housing starts 
were better than expected - had a negative effect. Analysts said the upbeat 
data, which could have boosted markets at another time, reinforced concerns 
that Bernanke would soon act to turn off the money taps.

So the FTSE 100 fell 189.31 points to 6159.51, a 2.98% decline which marked 
the biggest one day fall since 22 September.

Copper slid to a 20 month low on the Chinese and Fed news, while silver and 
gold also plunged. So miners made up six of the top ten FTSE 100 fallers, with
Polymetal losing 73.5p to 541p and Mexican silver miner Fresnillo falling 84.5p 
to 960.5p.Randgold Resources dropped 348p to £42.96 while Antofagasta lost 45p 
to 824.5p.

FTSE 250 miners were also under pressure, with New World Resources down 14.4p 
to 65.6p andPetropavlovsk 13.9p lower at 130.1p.

Away from the miners, chip designer Arm fell 36.5p to 799p on continuing 
competition worries.

Intel is entering its key tablet and smartphone market, with Arm's move into 
servers not certain to make up the difference. Now a new competitor is emerging 
in Nvidia, and analyst Anil Doradla at William Blair said:
 We believe the [Nvidia] announcement marks the entrance of a viable 
competitor in the graphics space to Arm. Over the past few years, Arm has 
emphasized its Mali graphics cores and has emerged as the primary competitor to 
Imagination Technologies. While Mali is still a fairly small portion of Arm's 
overall business (andImagination Technologies remains the market leader), we 
believe Nvidia's licensing model could prove to be a credible competitor to 
Arm's graphics segment momentum.

Imagination, which fell on Wednesday as profits dipped due to a slowdown in 
licensing, was down another 17.8p at 306.4p.

Associated British Foods fell 56p to £17.05, hit by concerns about sugar 
prices.

Earlier this week 500 sugar beet growers asked the National Farmers' Union to 
continue negotiating prices with ABF's British Sugar, after deciding its 
proposal for 2014 of £30.67 a tonne was not enough. In a sell note Canaccord 
Genuity analyst Alicia Forry said:
 We think there is significant risk that ABF will have to pay more for beet. 
We suspect consensus sugar forecasts will come under pressure in the next few 
months. 
There were some bright spots among companies reporting results.

Ted Baker surged to a new high of £17, up 230p, prompted by a jump in the 
fashion retailer's sales.

The high street designer said strong demand in the UK and north America had 
seen revenues rise 32.7% in the 20 weeks to the middle of June. It has been 
expanding internationally, opening flagship stores and concessions in the US 
and Asia to take its total number of outlets to more than 300.

Ashtead, the equipment rental group, added 31.5p to 658.5p after profits rose 
87% as builders moved more towards hiring diggers and tools on short term 
contracts. It also benefited from cutbacks it had made early in the 
construction recession.

Finally Falanx Group, an international security consultant, chose a bad day to 
list on Aim. But it bucked the falling market to close at 13.25p, compared to 
its 12p listing price. The company raised £595,000 and is expected to make £1m 
profit this year.
 