
 Stalingrad
Antony Beevor
512pp, Penguin, Â£12.99

Buy it at BOL <http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501024238,00.html>

When Antony Beevor's publishers met to decide on the initial print run for his 
history of the great second world war battle of Stalingrad, one senior 
executive claimed the book might sell as many as 10,000 copies. It was a 
bullish prediction. Military history is a pretty reliable seller and this was a 
particularly well matched author and subject, but 10,000? "There were a lot of 
raised eyebrows and teeth sucking round the table," says Beevor.

Eighteen months later what seemed wild optimism now looks more like a 
downright insult. Stalingrad sold 60,000 copies in hardback and has shifted 
nearly 250,000 in paperback. It has been a fixture on the bestseller lists 
since publication and is one of only three non-fiction titles to make the top 
fifty in last year's fast-sellers chart.

Admittedly, the Who Wants to be a Millionaire Quiz Book outsold it over 
Christmas, but Stalingrad is still seeing off both the Blackadder and Simpsons 
spin-offs. So what makes 500 pages of the worst horrors of 20th century warfare 
- complete with scholarly notes, bibliography and index - a more attractive 
read than Baldrick's cunning plans or Homer's reflections on beer and donuts?

"It is partly a matter of timing,"says Beevor. "When the 50th anniversary of 
the end of war came in 1995 I thought it was time to find new pastures because 
that would be the end of interest in the subject. In fact a renewed fascination 
has come from two entirely new directions. One is a younger generation, with no 
military experience, living in a politically safe and predictable world. They 
want to measure themselves against a period when every extreme of moral courage 
and physical courage was liable to be tested. The other is the way military 
history is presented. In the past it was all divisions moving in chessboard 
formations. In fact this obscured the truth about war rather than revealing it. 
To understand the reality of battle you have to look at it from below and from 
above. The fate of the individual within the maelstrom is a powerful theme and 
while you don't write the history as a novel, as some American historians tend 
to do, you do bring to life the narrative through the testimony, the reports 
and the letters of a very wide variety of human sources."

Beevor knows all about the techniques of fiction and was a novelist before he 
was a historian. He started to write as a young army officer. "I joined for all 
the wrong reasons," he says. "As a child my hip bone went soft and I had to use 
crutches. I was trying to prove something but didn't realise that until I 
started to write a novel. When I did realise I resigned my commission pretty 
rapidly and tried to write full time."

His ambition was to write a large novel about the political forces at work 
between 1917 and 1945, "but I knew I wasn't good enough to do that straight 
away. So I started on political thrillers but I never made enough to live off."

Beevor funded his new life working in advertising and marketing - "I had to go 
into bullshit industries because I had no relevant qualifications" - and then 
as a mini-cab driver. "It was best education I had," he recalls. "I used to go 
to Park Lane between one and three in the morning because you can get anywhere 
in London quickly from there. One night two underdressed girls tapped on the 
window and asked if I was interested in, erm, anything. Then they heard the 
radio and realised I was a mini-cab driver and our relationship was 
transformed. I became another worker of the night and they asked to get in to 
keep warm. We had this arrangement. I'd take them home after work and they'd 
pay nothing if they'd had a quiet night and double if it had gone well."

While his four novels were translated and sold respectably, Beevor claims his 
experience of writing fiction really came into its own when he was asked to 
write a history of the Spanish Civil War. "I found that the writing of the 
fiction had helped as much as my military experience. It was never planned like 
that but it worked well."

He then went on to write about wartime Crete and, with his wife Artemis 
Cooper, about Paris after the liberation. When first presented with the idea 
for Stalingrad Beevor's initial reaction was dismay at the thought of how 
difficult the research would be. "But I got some very hefty kicks straight away 
under the table from my agent who spotted immediately that it was a brilliant 
idea."

The book is a masterful recreation of the terrible battle and powerfully 
places the human dimension at its centre. "There is a debate that military 
history is too important to be left to the military historians," says Beevor, 
"and I agree with that entirely. The danger is that cultural historians come in 
with a lot of sociological theories but they don't know how an army works and 
sometimes they don't appear to have any desire to learn. I hope that a book 
like Stalingrad shows that armies are often rather emotional organisations, not 
the cold machines people imagine them to be."

He is currently working on a book about the fall of Berlin - "the obvious 
follow up to Stalingrad" - which will occupy him until 2002. So presumably his 
plans for the big novel will have to remain unfinished business? "Oh God no," 
he replies instantly. "The first third is sitting in a drawer. It's just 
waiting to be dug out after all this is finished."
 