
Forty-five minutes into the seventh Fast & Furious movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fast-furious-7>, Vin Diesel drives towards a 
huge precipice. The audience have only the faintest idea why he’s there. Ditto 
why they haveparaglided their cars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RDxQPRnIMdA>
 into Azerbaijan. Is it Azerbaijan? It’s probably to rescue someone … who was 
it again? Something to do with a surveillance gizmo means they need to find 
their nemesis Jason Statham, except Statham seems to find them whenever he 
wants, being the one about to push Diesel off the cliff, not the random 
mercenaries they’re nicking the device from. Only Kurt Russell – who’s watching 
everything from his covert-ops unit and chatting about craft ale – seems to 
understand what the hell is going on.

What was once a series content to celebrate simple boy-racer pleasures, the 
seventh Fast & Furious fell prey to a recent tentpole-film affliction: 
ridiculously over-complicated plotting.Iron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3> and Mission: 
Impossible – Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mission-impossible-rogue-nation> writer Drew 
Pearce <https://twitter.com/mrdrewpearce> draws an analogy for this blockbuster 
bloat, responsible for routinely pushing run times over the two-hour mark: 
“Much as I love a prog-rock album, if it’s a pop song I like it to be short and 
sweet, and I think it has more impact that way. And summer blockbusters are 
very proggy right now.”
 Try to keep up – Vin Diesel in Fast & Furious 7. Photograph: 
Allstar/Universal Pictures 
This byzantine plot sprawl has been in full effect this year. Avengers: Age of 
Ultron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> lost many 
round about the point the villain heads off to a South African shipyard in 
search of something calledWakandan vibranium 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vibranium#Wakandan_variety>. Promoting the film, 
writer-director Joss Whedonacknowledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/joss-whedon-nightmare-avengers-sequel-latest-trailer>
 that keeping all the narrative plates spinning for his six-man superhero team, 
plus all the side players, had left him “a little bit broken”.Terminator Genisys
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis> director Alan Taylor, 
faced with the collective “eh?” over his recent convoluted overhaul of the 
Schwarzenegger classic, made aspirited attempt 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/07/04/terminator-genisys-director-alan-taylor-knows-his-movie-makes-no-damn-sense.html>
 in interviews to break down the film’s supposed seven interweaving timelines. 
But if his film had worked, he wouldn’t have needed to.

Pacific Rim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/14/pacific-rim-review-philip-french> 
screenwriterTravis Beacham <https://twitter.com/travisbeacham> says he first 
noticed this “pet peeve” with the advent of the Marvel films: “It’s a very 
literal complexity, it’s not an emotional complexity. It’s very point A to 
point B, we have to get the talisman to stop Dr Whatever from raising an army. 
Very pragmatic stuff that doesn’t leave a lot of room for character.” He 
compares Jurassic World to the original Jurassic Park: “In the first film, 
there’s only a handful of major sequences: theT-rex attack in the rain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v5Co3A3fLBo>, the velociraptors in the 
kitchen. But because there are so few, you can really spend some time with 
them, and let them unfold. The latest one is this wall-to-wall sequence of 
events, and there’s not a lot of suspense.”

What happened to the industry in the intervening 20 years? In the rush to give 
restless, spoilt-for-choice modern viewers value for money, the studios are 
making their blockbusters in an ever more feverish climate. The past decade has 
seen, in the struggle for prime spots on the movie-going calendar, the rise of
release dates locked in years in advance 
<http://www.thewrap.com/why-studios-are-setting-movie-release-dates-5-years-advance-99936/>
. In order to hit those targets, production schedules have little room for 
deviation; finished scripts often lag behind the key special-effects sequences, 
which are devised early so mockups around which actors can be directed are 
ready when shooting starts. Screenwriters, says Pearce, are often left to link 
the showpieces as best as they can.

“Because of that, you get these kind of labyrinthine machinations to 
desperately weave in character motivation, geography and the practical aspects 
of getting from one scene to another.”

“People are so in the white-hot crucible of terror of making the movie,” he 
continues, “It’s very difficult for them to take a step back and look at the 
story at a macro level.” This often results in a storyline that’s hectoring but 
lacking in any emotional through-line; the kind of rickety plot-slalom that in 
the case of the interminable Transformers films, batters the viewer into a 
state of “weird, robot-based PTSD”.

Then there’s the added burden of clumsy exposition needed to make the thing 
work, often introduced at the behest of the studio executives.

“It is an industry that at its higher levels is motivated by fear,” says 
Beacham, “And often before there’s a reason to be afraid ... In my experience, 
very few people walk out of a movie. You have them for two hours, and you’re 
free to explain or not explain whatever you see fit.”

Finished scripts often lag behind the key special-effects sequences, which are 
devised early

Another major culprit in contorting and convoluting blockbuster plots is the 
need to service the overarching franchises that now rule the business. Not only 
is squeezing the likes of the voluminous Marvel and DC mythology into two-hour 
chunks a serious logistical challenge, but the reverence for branded IP 
(intellectual property) over original pitches has shifted the balance of power 
in the scripting process further from those most equipped to lead it.

“You have a lot of non-creative, business types leading the charge,” says 
Beacham, “because they’re the ones who control the IP. They have ownership of 
the thing everyone wants, and everyone’s coming to them to try to get that job. 
It ends up taking a lot of the creative leverage out of the hands of creative 
people.”

The current decree for the jobbing screenwriter is fitting franchise movies 
into the universes of inter-connected movies springing up left, right and 
centre. The old 80s and 90s “high-concept” simplicity that helpfully corralled 
the limits of an isolated story (“The bus blows up if it drops below 50mph”) 
has been shoved to the sidelines. Sequels and spin-offs have been proliferating 
for 15 years now, but what Marvel has set in motion – its superheroes making 
soapy cameos in each other’s works, The Avengers functioning as hub films for 
the whole circus – is a new level of integration. Warner Bros and DC are 
following suit withBatman v Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> and Suicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>, and Star Wars: The Force 
Awakens will float out Disney’s own Death Star of IP into this arena.
 Iron Man 3. Photograph: Walt Disney Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
This thicket of story sprouting out of these universes can be “harmful to your 
movie’s point of view,” says Pearce, “when those stories overwhelm the central 
one, or take up so much real estate in the running time that your story is 
choked out by the weeds”. He and director/co-writer Shane Black were watching 
rough cuts of the first Avengers as they were writingIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146938/iron-man-3> and were determined 
to make any linkages meaningful. “We took a step back and said: OK, if Tony 
Stark were a real character, the events [in which he passes through a wormhole 
into an alien dimension] at the end of the Avengers are enormous and beyond the 
ken of a normal person. And we realised that by exploring a kind of PTSD about 
events, we could make hisexistential crisis 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hscXHP9DoTU> richer.”

This is the ideal scenario, in which storytellers strive for enriching 
complexity. But such attempts can pull against the limits of the blockbuster 
form. Jonathan and Christopher Nolan’s screenplay forThe Dark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight> is a model of discipline in 
its attempt to infuse a pulp format with heavyweight contemporary concerns and 
real-world nuance. Thethird film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight-rises>, though, struggles for 
the same exhilarating concision, particularly in its deployment of Bane and 
Catwoman as some sort of confused analogy for the Occupy movements. “It’s 
pulling so many ideas along,” says Pearce, “Don’t get me wrong, aspiration is a 
big part of it, but sometimes it is detrimental to the efficiency and 
entertainment of the final piece of art.”

Still, at least the Nolans play by the rules, unlike whoever greenlighted 
Hollywood’s most insidious recent innovation: the alternate timeline. The 
rebooted Star Trek franchise – which takes place in an alternative reality to 
the original Shatner iteration, triggered by a Romulan vessel travelling back 
in time and killing Captain Kirk’s father – has handled the idearelatively 
gracefully <http://en.memory-alpha.wikia.com/wiki/Alternate_reality>. But, in 
the wrong hands,as in Terminator Genisys <>, it becomes a carte blanche for 
Hollywood to over-embroider stories already told succinctly, or erase them at 
will, usually when there’s a commercial incentive. The more it happens, the 
more Hollywood saps its own sense of dramatic finality. One trend Beacham has 
noticed is that it is rare for any character to die, just in case they are 
needed in future; Gemma Arterton’s character, Io, was destined for the chop in 
the first-pass draft <http://www.cinefile.biz/script/clashofthetitans.pdf> he 
did of Clash of the Titans, but in the final version Zeus handily resurrects 
her. And even if they do irreversibly shuffle off, like Darth Vader, there’s 
always the prequel.
 Terminator Genisys … there’s always the prequel. Photograph: 
Allstar/Paramount Pictures 
But Hollywood’s growing problem with story density may just be the natural 
progression of most art forms towards baroqueness – and perhaps a purge is just 
round the corner.Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> screenwriter Lawrence 
Kasdan <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001410/reference>, a veteran classicist 
practitioner, recently criticised the bloated brigade and promised he and 
director JJ Abrams would bring in the new film, like the old ones, close to two 
hours: “When it’s over you’ll say, ‘I wish there’s more.’ Or, ‘Wait, is it 
over?’ Because how rarely you get that feeling nowadays.” Pearce praises the 
recentMad Max <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, also a 
franchise film, for its spare arc; the simple forth-and-back boomerang of Tom 
Hardy and Charlize Theron’s desert trek opening up plenty of room for 
“weirdness and tonal zigzags”.

Beacham, whose Pacific Rim  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pacific-rim>had 
a refreshing idiosyncrasy, is even more optimistic. “A lot of my friends are 
very cynical about this trend in blockbusters: it’s the new normal. But it’s a 
bubble, a temporary trend. Increasingly they’re not going to be able to compete 
with the ones that don’t conform to the easy way, with the ones that do it 
right.” Good triumphs over evil; now that’s easy enough to follow.

• Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation is out now
 