
There’s always plenty of speculation in the lead-up to the Major League 
Baseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> non-waiver trade 
deadline, but the wheeling and dealing rarely matches the chatter.

It did this year, and then some. 

Thursday brought a flurry of transactions with oooohs and aaaah’s to match, 
and once the clock struck 4pm on the east coast, 36 players from 17 
organizations were on their way somewhere else. That doesn’t count deals made 
stretching back nearly two weeks. That is what we call action.


Before we take a look at the most significant deals, lets recap all the moves, 
backwards from the deadline, with thanks tobaseball-reference.com 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/> for the compilation:

31 July

• Boston Red Sox trade John Lester 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/l/lestejo01.shtml> and Jonny Gomes 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/g/gomesjo01.shtml> to the Oakland 
Athetics forYoenis Cespedes 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/cespeyo01.shtml> and a 
compensation pick.

• Tampa Bay Rays trade David Price 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/priceda01.shtml> to the Detroit 
Tigers. Tigers tradeAustin Jackson 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/j/jacksau01.shtml> to the Seattle 
Mariners. Mariners tradeNick Franklin 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/f/frankni01.shtml> to the Rays. 
Tigers tradeDrew Smyly 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/smylydr01.shtml> and Willy Adames 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=adames000wil> to the 
Rays.

• Red Sox trade John Lackey 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/l/lackejo01.shtml>, Corey Littrell 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=littre001cor> and cash 
to the St Louis Cardinals forJoe Kelly 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/kellyjo05.shtml> and Allen Craig 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/craigal01.shtml>.

• Red Sox trade Stephen Drew 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/d/drewst01.shtml> to the New York 
Yankees forKelly Johnson 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/j/johnske05.shtml>.

• Athletics trade Tommy Milone 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/milonto01.shtml> to the Minnesota 
Twins forSam Fuld <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/f/fuldsa01.shtml>.

• Cleveland Indians trade Asdrubal Cabera 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/cabreas01.shtml> to the Washington 
Nationals forZach Walters 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/w/walteza01.shtml>.

• Red Sox trade Andrew Miller 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/millean01.shtml> to the Baltimore 
Orioles forEduardo Rodriguez 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=rodrig006edu>.

• Arizona Diamondbacks trade Martin Prado 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/pradoma01.shtml> to the Yankees for
Pete O’Brien 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=obrien005pet>.

• Houston Astros trade Jared Cosart 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/cosarja01.shtml>, Austin Wates 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=wates-001aus> and 
Enrique Hernandez <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/hernaen02.shtml> 
to the Miami Marlins forJake Marisnick 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/marisja01.shtml>, Frances Martes 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=martes000fra>, Colin 
Moran <http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=moran-000col> and 
a compensation pick.

• Chicago Cubs trade Emiliano Bonifacio 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/b/bonifem01.shtml> and James Russell 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/r/russeja02.shtml> to the Atlanta 
Braves forVictor Caratini 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=carati000vic>.

• Diamondbacks trade Gerardo Parra 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/parrage01.shtml> to the Milwaukee 
Brewers forAnthony Banda 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=banda-000ant> and Mitch 
Haniger <http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=hanige001mit>.

• San Diego Padres trade Chris Denorfia 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/parrage01.shtml> to the Mariners 
forAbraham Almonte <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/a/almonab01.shtml>
 andScott Kohlscheen 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=kohlsc000sco>.

30 July 

• Red Sox trade Felix Doubront 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/d/doubrfe01.shtml> to the Cubs for a 
player to be named later.

• Indians trade Justin Masterson 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/masteju01.shtml> to the Cardinals 
forJames Ramsey 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=ramsey000jam>.

28 July 

• Cubs trade Darwin Barney 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/b/barneda01.shtml> to the Los 
Angeles Dodgers forJonathan Martinez 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=martin005jon>.

• Kansas City Royals trade Danny Valencia 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/v/valenda01.shtml> to the Toronto 
Blue Jays forEric Kratz 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/kratzer01.shtml> and Liam Hendricks
 <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/hendrli01.shtml>.

26 July 

• Red Sox trade Jake Peavy 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/peavyja01.shtml> and cash to the 
San Francisco Giants forHeath Hembree 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/hembrhe01.shtml> and Edwin Escobar 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=escoba001edw>.

24 July 

• Twins trade Kendrys Morales 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/moralke01.shtml> to the Mariners 
forStephen Pryor <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/pryorst01.shtml>.

23 July

• Texas Rangers trade Joakim Soria 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/soriajo01.shtml> to the Tigers for 
Corey Knebel <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/knebeco01.shtml> and 
Jake Thompson 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=thomps000jak>.

22 July

• Padres trade Chase Headley 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/headlch01.shtml> and cash to the 
Yankees forYangervis Solarte 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/solarya01.shtml> and Rafael De 
Paula <http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=depaul000raf>.

19 July 

• Padres trade Huston Street 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/streehu01.shtml> and Trevor Gott 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=gott--000tre> to the 
Angels forRJ Alvarez 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=alvare000rj->, Taylor 
Lindsey <http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=lindse001tay>, 
Elliot Morris 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=morris000ell>, and Jose 
Rondon <http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=rondon002jos>.

So, who are the winners and losers? Which general managers got fleeced? Those 
are tough questions to answer, at least immediately, but let’s take a closer 
look at the most significant moves of the deadline.

Tampa Bay Rays

We’ve been hearing the speculation regarding the future of David Price for 
what seems like forever, even if it really has just been a handfull of months. 
Before we get intothe haul the Rays received 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/31/red-sox-trade-jon-lester-oakland-athletics-yoenis-cespedes>
 from his trade, we have to acknowledge that we’re talking about the greatest 
homegrown player to ever wear a Tampa uniform leaving town, and that is 
extremely painful for Rays fans. Even if that group gets a lot of stick from 
the baseball community for their attendance, their stadium and thatalternate 
jersey <http://i.imgur.com/Nnhom.jpg> they wear now and again, they have 
feelings too, and it sucks to lose a player that helped turn your franchise 
from a total joke into the envy of small, medium and large markets. Now their 
ace, who won 82 games in six seasons and a Cy Young Award, and who is leading 
the league in strikeouts, is gone, just as his team is enjoying a remarkable 
rebound to what seemed like a dismal season. So if you see a Rays fan, pat them 
on the ass and wish them well.

Now, when you’re the Rays, and you don’t have big-market dollars to play with, 
these are the sort of tough decisions that must be made. With Price set to get 
a significant raise on his $14m salary for 2015, his last season before 
becoming a free agent, GM Andrew Friedman knew this was the best time to deal 
his cornerstone, regardless of the current status of his team. So he completed 
a three-team deal with the Tigers and the Mariners, bringing instarting lefty 
pitcher Drew Smyly 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20140731/SPORTS02/307310185/1048/rss03>and 
minor-league shortstop prospect Willy Adames from Detroit and shortstop Nick 
Franklin from Seattle. There was some confusion at the time of the 
announcement, with the initial reports only sighting Smyly and Franklin coming 
to Tampa, but the deal made a heck of a lot more sense when we learned that the 
18-year-old Adames was included. Smyly is no ace, but rather a serviceable 
starter with an upside who Tampa can control into 2018, while Franklin is a 
former first-round pick who needs a chance. The key to the deal isthe young and 
talented Adames, 
<http://www.mlive.com/tigers/index.ssf/2014/07/detroit_tigers_part_ways_with.html>
 but it will be a while before he gets to the big team. So the jury is out. 
Most baseball fans, however, were very surprised that Tampa didn’t get more.

Detroit Tigers

Remember when you were playing video-game baseball back in college and there 
was always that one kid who customized his own team, loaded it with All-Stars 
and then then beat the crap out of everyone in the dorm? That’s kind of what the
Tigers pitching rotation 
<http://www.blessyouboys.com/2014/7/31/5956921/david-price-trade-reaction-tigers-rotation>
 looks like right now.

David Price becomes the third Cy Young Award winner on their staff after 
Justin Verlander (although some uncharitable people say he’s beendistracted 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/gl.cgi?id=verlaju01&t=p&year=> by 
KateUpton 
<http://au.ibtimes.com/articles/561392/20140801/justin-verlander-rejects-kate-upton-request-new.htm#.U9t-24BdWVg>
) and Max Scherzer, and landing the Rays ace is nothing short of a splash for 
an organization that desperately wants to win one for the Gipper. Aging Tigers 
owner Mike Ilitch has made no secret about his wish to see Detroit win a World 
Series title before he departs for parts unknown, andGM Dave Dombrowski 
<http://detroit.cbslocal.com/2014/07/31/dombrowski-details-timeline-of-price-trade-explains-rationale-for-move/>
 has acted accordingly, answering the Oakland Athletics’ acquisition of Jon 
Lester hours earlier (more on that below andwith the emotionally bereft Hunter 
Felt here <http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>) with a 
A-list deal of his own. Dombrowski is on a major roll, looking like a genius 
for unloading Prince Fielder for Ian Kinsler in the offseason, so you trust him 
when he believes the loss of outfielder Austin Jackson is something the offense 
can weather. Don’t forget, they shored up their bullpen last week by acquiring 
Joakim Soria from Texas – if this isn’t going for it, I don’t know what is.

Oakland Athletics
 Billy Beane has yet to win a World Series title. Photograph: Reinhold Matay/AP
Just weeks ago, A’s GM Billy Beane traded for pitchers Jeff Samardzija and 
Jason Hammel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/oakland-athletics-land-pitcher-jeff-samardzija>
 from the Cubs. If that move wasn’t a clear sign that Billy Beane was in loud 
and clear “f*&k it” mode, then his latest gambit certainly is. On Thursday, he 
brought in the Boston Red Sox ace Jon Lester, along with outfielder Jonny Gomes 
in exchange for Yoenis Cespedes and a compensation pick. It’s a deal clearly 
designed to help him beat the Tigers, who have knocked his Athletics out of the 
playoffs in the American League Divisional Series in the previous two seasons, 
and in the Championship Series in 2006.

Yes, Beane has had enough, and he must have been muttering to himself when 
Detroit brought in Price. Still, Lester has three wins in the World Series with 
an ERA of under one, and that’s just the sort of front-of-the-rotation 
experience he wants when he bids to capture that elusive title.

Samardzija has performed reasonably well since arriving, but Hammel has been a 
bust with an ERA approaching double-digits – another likely reason Beane 
thought Lester was necessary. Now he’s got a rotation of Lester, Samardzija, 
Kazmir and Sonny Gray to take into the postseason, which his team are on their 
way to reaching for a third consecutive year.

In a season in which power is at a premium, trading away slugging ability is a 
gamble. But Beane feels that his explosive lineup can makeup for the loss of 
Cuban outfielder Cespedes, who seems like more of a threat then perhaps his 
statistics indicate. One thing that we know is that the A’s will miss is his 
arm.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
The rag-tag outfielder Jonny Gomes arrives in back in Oakland (unwillingly) 
for a second stint along with Lester, and he’ll compete for time in right field 
with Sam Fuld, who was acquired from the Twins in exchange for disgruntled 
starting pitcher Tommy Milone.

Seattle Mariners
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Robinson Cano has been complaining about the Mariners lack of a right-handed 
bat since arriving in Seattle this offseason. Now they’ve landed an everyday 
center fielder, and all they had to give up was Nick Franklin – in some ways, 
it’s one of the best deals of this entire trading frenzy and if you’re an M’s 
fan, you’ve got to be thrilled. Austin Jackson’s offensive output is trending 
downwards over a three-year period, but his bat still has to be respected and 
Seattle is getting a great clubhouse guy who will be missed in Detroit. He 
received a standing ovation after being removed in the seventh inning of 
Thursday’s game.

Seattle also added outfield depth for the stretch run, dealing for San Diego’s 
Chris Denorfia.

St Louis Cardinals
 Boston Red Sox pitcher John Lackey tips his cap to the fans at Fenway Park. 
Photograph: Robert Deutsch/USA Today Sports 
The Cards remade their pitching rotation in a series of deals that, as usual, 
seem to make complete sense. With Jaime Garcia out for the season and Michael 
Wacha's health in doubt, St Louis joined in on the Red Sox sale, bringing over 
the very same pitcher who beat the Redbirds in the final game of the 2013 World 
Series – John Lackey. The 35-year-old had a series of injury riddled and 
controversial seasons in Boston, but he has pitched consistently well for the 
past two years and becomes a solid third starter behind ace Adam Wainwright and 
Lance Lynn. Even better, thanks to an oddball clause in his contract Lackey 
will be paid just $500,000 in 2015, because he underwent elbow surgery during 
his deal.

Outfielder Allen Craig and pitcher Joe Kelly head to Boston in the trade, 
meaning prospect Oscar Tavares will get plenty of time to prove himself in the 
St Louis outfield. On Wednesday, St Louis dealt promising outfield prospect 
James Ramsey (who is killing it in AAA) to Cleveland in exchange for pitcher 
Justin Masterson. The Jamaican-born hurler is in the midst of a down season but 
as we know, everything the Cards touch turns to gold, so there’s every chance 
he will revert to his above average 2013 form. That’s two sensible acquisitions 
for St Louis, who have every chance of reaching the postseason yet again as 
they try to pass the Pirates and the NL Central-leading Brewers.

Boston Red Sox

Baseball fans should be sending Sox GM Ben Cherington a letter of thanks for 
the joy we’re getting out of this deadline. Since 19 July, Boston have traded 
away seven regulars, helping to make huge headlines while bringing in a haul of 
goodies in return. If you’re in the Sox marketing department, you’re elated with
Cespedes heading to Fenway Park 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/sports/2014/07/31/yoenis-cespedes-good-catch-for-red-sox/DyJrJQBnJ7bM5NgfCxL5aN/story.html>
 from Oakland. Cespedes will keep it interesting while Boston reshape their 
ballclub, which is rebuilding just nine months after winning a third World 
Series title in 10 seasons.

With Jon Lester in Oakland (at least for now – he could return in the 
offseason as a free agent), Lackey in St Louis, Felix Doubront in Chicago with 
the Cubs and Jake Peavy in San Francisco after being dealt on 26 July, the only 
pitcher left from the Opening Day rotation is the dismal Craig Buchholz.Boston 
have a series of young starters 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2014/07/31/red-sox-reportedly-trade-jon-lester-to-oakland-as/>
 in Rubby De La Rosa, Brandon Workman, Allen Webster and Anthony Ranaudo 
(debuting Friday), who are getting a chance in the rotation as Joe Kelly joins 
from St Louis. Their outfield, in desperate need of power, get some pop with 
Cespedes and Allen Craig, who also comes over from St Louis – Boston have just 
17 home runs from outfielders all season.

It may be a disappointing follow-up to a championship season, but Cherington 
has provided Boston with the potential pieces to turn things around as quickly 
as they did after the 2012 season, in which they lost 93 games.

New York Yankees

The Bronx Bombers are bidding to save their season and send the retiring Derek 
Jeter out a winner after aseries of moves 
<http://nypost.com/2014/07/31/martin-prado-stephen-drew-how-desperate-are-the-yankees/>
 that seek to bolster their ailing offense. They sent Kelly Johnson up to 
Boston for Stephen Drew, a player who has played every single one of his 974 
games in the field at shortstop. They’re now asking him to play second base. 
Good luck with that.

The Diamondbacks sent Martin Prado to New York for Pete O’Brian. Prado doesn’t 
get on base much, and he doesn’t hit for much power. Good luck with that.

It sure doesn’t sound like much to rev up the 10th-highest scoring offense in 
the American League. With Masahiro Tanaka possibly facing season-ending elbow 
surgery and CC Sabathia also out for the season, they probably could have used 
another arm to join Brandon McCarthy, who has pitched well since joining the 
rotation in early July.The Yankees are hoping Michael Pineda 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/yankees-insider-michael-pineda-rehab-start-article-1.1885064>
, out with strained shoulder since May, can contribute sometime this month, but 
with the Orioles, who bolstered their bullpen by acquiring Andrew Miller from 
Boston, and the Toronto Blue Jays, who really really could have used a starting 
pitcher, starting to win regularly, 2014 is looking more like a lost cause for 
New York.

Click here for the Major League Baseball standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>
 