
Earlier this week, Activision announced the latest title in its 
multi-gazillion-sellingCall of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> series. Subtitled 
Infinite Warfare – a level of titular hyperbole only previously explored by 
Marvel films and pay-per-view wrestling events – it takes the action into the 
far future, and more importantly, into space. The teaser trailer is a 
bewildering opera of explosions, zero-G dogfights and sociopathic astronaut 
melee combat – so it should have dominated online discussion among shooter fans 
for at least a few hours.

But Activision did something unexpected. It announced that an intricately 
remastered version of Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare would be shipping with 
special editions of the game. While all subsequent Call of Duty titles have 
longingly harked back to this absolutely seminal FPS title, none so far have 
more-or-less relied on it for a publicity push. The problem is, Modern Warfare 
seemed to attract more excitement and discussion than Infinite Warfare. In that 
moment, it’s arguable the first-person shooter, as a big budget, mainstream 
concern, crossed over into the nostalgia industry.

In music, this happens all the time with bands. At some point, touring becomes 
not a way to test and celebrate new material, but to appease long-running fans 
who just want to hear the hits. Sure, they’ll still grudgingly buy the latest 
release and may concede there are one or two good tracks, but what they really 
want is that 180g vinyl reissue of the group’s classic album, complete with 
unreleased tracks and limited edition art card inserts. Eventually, fans of 
legacy rock acts don’t really want the music anymore, they just want to be 
young again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1159c2e52bb60db189f49f38567b9c4e12f5e7f%2F713_0_3105_1865%2F3105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1159c2e52bb60db189f49f38567b9c4e12f5e7f%2F713_0_3105_1865%2F3105.jpg>
 Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare remaster Photograph: Activision 
We see this too in Doom, Bethesda’s faithful yet graphically hyper-upgraded 
version of the id Software classic. It is not Doom 4 for a reason. It is not 
continuation of the evolutionary path that Doom 3 set out on – it is a 
reimagining. A reboot. A re-Doom. When the game was shown off at Bethesda’s 
pre-E3 show last year, it was described on stage with the promise of, ‘badass 
demons, big effing guns, and moving really fast’. The choice of words is so 
telling in a number of ways, but mostly, it’s this: by adopting the language of 
a teenage boy (even self-censoring the f word), the company was directly 
speaking to the audience members as they were 20 years ago. It was taking them 
back to the early nineties. To Wrestlemania and death metal and 
straight-to-video horror flicks. The Doom of 2016 is not a radical 
blood-splattered thrill ride, it’s a museum of gore; it’s a National Trust 
stately home curated by doddering cyber-demons in chunky knit cardigans.

A much truer tribute to the aesthetics and mechanics of the original Doom can 
perhaps be found in Devil Daggers, a stripped down, ridiculously uncompromising 
blaster that thrusts players into the pit of hell to face eternal waves of 
monstrous demons. Created by unknown Australian developer Sorath it’s a 
shameless repackaging of 90s shooter dynamics: no item pick-ups, no character 
customisation, just wave upon wave of enemy forces and nothing to save the 
player but quick reflexes. Released in February, it’s become a cult hit, 
especially on YouTube where gamers show off their mastery of the game’s limited 
arsenal of moves and weapons. Its leaderboard system and choreographed enemy 
attack patterns graft on the form and function of arcade shoot-’em-ups, adding 
extra juice to the retro adrenaline rush. This is nostalgia as masochism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc78669a1e076867853ab460d937f3ff2e9bc0ccc%2F0_6_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc78669a1e076867853ab460d937f3ff2e9bc0ccc%2F0_6_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Overwatch: it’s bright, it’s fun, it’s... quite similar to Battleborn 
Photograph: Blizzard 
Of course, the idea of grafting new mechanics onto a favourite genre to perk 
it up a bit is not new – to use the music comparison again, it’s equivalent to 
forming a supergroup. So it’s no surprise that two games – Overwatch (from 
Blizzard) and Battleborn (from Geabox) – should come along at roughly the same 
time with roughly the same idea: first-person shooter meets the multiplayer 
online battle arena (moba). There have been a lot of fun articles about this 
crazy coincidence – the fact that both games merge their team-based approach 
with wacky characters and oversized weapons – but there have been just as many 
pointing to evergreen favourite Team Fortress 2 and old-timers like 
Timesplitters and Battlefield: Bad Company as the progenators of this 
hyperreal, comic book super-team approach to FPS functionality.

There are no new ideas. OK, we’ve got that. It’s a message that we receive on 
a daily basis from every cynical media pundit who hasn’t yet, like, totally 
given up on social media. But there sort of are new ideas. Superhot brilliantly 
disengages the first-person shooter from its basis in instinctive twitchcore 
action and turns gunplay into a slow-mo puzzle ballet.Glitchspace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/30/video-games-2016-dishonored-2-uncharted-4-xcom-2>
 is a visually beautiful first-person programming game (!) where you explore 
and alter a series of sci-fi environments using a visual coding language. Other 
titles have tried to “gamify” programming before but never in a way that uses a 
machine language as a weapon and an interface in such an ingenious way. Even 
Adrift, the weird floating-in-space simulator that divided critics on its 
release in March had interesting ideas about what it means to embody a 
character in first-person and to experience an environment that is so utterly 
alien and unknowable. But these are games at the fringes of the medium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff437e6d702927e973cdaa0725870f6a65896a52f%2F204_0_3032_1820%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modern%20warfare%20sucks%20%E2%80%93%20the%20crisis%20in%20first-person%20shooter%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fmodern-warfare-sucks-crisis-first-person-shooter-games-call-duty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff437e6d702927e973cdaa0725870f6a65896a52f%2F204_0_3032_1820%2F3032.jpg>
 Glitchspace – a different take on the first-person shooter, channeling 
Portal’s approach to puzzle-based interactions over shooting Photograph: Space 
Budgie 
The big question surrounding Modern Warfare is: do people want it back because 
they miss the purity of what it offered, or because they’re simply nostalgic 
for a past that involved Modern Warfare and games like it? In February, 
Derby-based studio Bulkhead Interactive launched a Kickstarter for its game 
Battalion 1944, a shamelessly retrospective WWII shooter inspired by the glory 
years of the Medal of Honor and early CoD titles. It pulled in over £300,000, 
three-times as much as the team was looking for. It looks good in a re-skinned 
Battlefield 1942 sort of way, but what does it say about the FPS genre and its 
future?

The early classics in the genre perfectly explored Mihály Csíkszentmihályi’s 
concept of the flow state, through minimal controls, hyper-accelerated 
movement, intense enemy threat and environment that invited smooth, seamless 
exploration. It could be argued that almost every addition after this – 
customisation, killstreaks, cover mechanics, etc – have served to throttle back 
on this sense of freedom and fluidity. Modern Warfare perhaps got the balance 
exactly right – offering 60 frames-per-second gun fights in super enclosed 
arenas, while laying on top the longevity conventions of the RPG genre. Perhaps 
everything after this took excited players further and further away from the 
spark at the centre of the shooter universe.

Or perhaps it’s that old story about true epoch-shattering innovation coming 
from comparatively small teams working on brand new projects. Far Cry, FEAR, 
Stalker, Bioshock, Thief – it’s hard to imagine a new first-person shooter 
really grappling with the whole meaning of the genre in the way these games 
did. The “walking sim” gets so much stick as a game concept, but in their use 
of form, space, narrative and mise-en-scene, titles like Everybody’s Gone to 
the Rapture, Gone Home and Fragments of Him are challenging ideas of 
inhabitation, embodiment and interactivity in ways that mainstream FPS titles 
haven’t really done in years.

This week, EA will be revealing more about the future of the Battlefield 
series. Developer EA DICE has remained steadfast in its dedication to gritty, 
authentic, multiplayer online battle, but it too has modernised the combat as 
the years have gone by. Where will it go next? The team is already doing space 
combat with Star Wars: Battlefront, so the future seems unlikely. Can it 
reverse back along the timeline of warfare without become a tribute act to its 
own past?

Doom used to be truly anarchic. It terrified politicians and right-thinking 
people all over the world. How do you know when something is no longer 
anarchic? When it is being marketed as anarchic by a major corporation.

Maybe, you know, people don’t want to go online and fight in the same way they 
once did. Maybe people are sick of the respawn treadmill, sick of voice chat 
insults, sick of the conflicts they see on the news being turned into a 
pantomime of honour – of duty. Tastes change, audiences diversify, kids grow 
up. Sometimes you listen to those albums you once liked, that really spoke to 
you, and suddenly they seem full of self-pity and crass, processed emotion. 
Maybe this isn’t a crisis, maybe it’s just maturity.

 * Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare – will the final frontier be a new lifeline? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/03/call-of-duty-infinite-warfare> 