
I feel as if my eyes are wading through murk. Dragging myself through clumps 
of daubed and dirtied paint in black, greys and filthy reds, forms start to 
reveal themselves. Staring into Philip Guston’s mid-period 1959 painting 
Traveller III, it seems that there are images buried there, almost as a secret.


Born in Montreal in 1913, to a family who had emigrated from Odessa at the 
turn of the century, Guston grew up in Los Angeles. In his late teens he 
painted lynchings andKu Klux Klansmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/20/ku-klux-klan-memphis-rally>, and 
developed an art that was both politically aware and influenced by Piero della 
Francesca. Guston moved to New York and briefly sharing an apartment with 
Jackson Pollock, with whom he had been friends since high school. Add to the 
mix Marxism and Mondrian, the influences ofMax Beckmann 
<http://www.wikiart.org/en/max-beckmann>, the Mexican Muralists 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexican_muralism> and Giorgio de Chirico 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=1106>, as well as an 
interest in eastern spiritualism and zen, and an enduring friendship with 
composerMorton Feldman 
<http://www.robertworby.com/writing/notes-on-for-philip-guston-by-morton-feldman/>
, and it’s clear that Guston carried a lot of contrary baggage.

During the 50s he was discussed more as an abstract impressionist than an 
abstract expressionist, but looking at Traveller III today, I imagine I see the 
pointy-headed Klansmen who reappeared in his later work. The blob on a stalk in 
the middle of this painting also reminds me ofGiacometti’s gigantic 1947 
sculpture of a human leg 
<http://wexarts.org/explore/?artwork_giacometti=la-jambe>. I don’t know how 
much of this I am imagining, or how much is really there. As we look we 
project, we remember and we invent. It keeps us looking.

Having emptied his paintings out in the 1950s, Guston slowly filled them up 
again. The marks he made were always going somewhere. Guston was struggling 
with something, but who knows what? Maybe he wanted us to struggle, too. Even 
at their most abstract, his paintings have an urgency. As he painted, Guston 
told himself stories, and this exhibition of his work, atTimothy Taylor gallery 
<http://timothytaylorgallery.com/exhibitions/> in London, is filled with them, 
just as it is filled with cartoonish violence and morbid monsters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435066382165%2Feca55d66-37e4-427a-a97b-10241efdfa92-2060x1869.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Morbid%20monsters%20and%20the%20Ku%20Klux%20Klan%3A%20the%20crude%20cartoonish%20genius%20of%20Philip%20Guston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Morbid%20monsters%20and%20the%20Ku%20Klux%20Klan%3A%20the%20crude%20cartoonish%20genius%20of%20Philip%20Guston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435066382165%2Feca55d66-37e4-427a-a97b-10241efdfa92-2060x1869.jpeg>
 ‘Even at their most abstract, his paintings have an urgency’ … Traveler III 
(1959-1960) by Philip Guston. Photograph: Timothy Taylor gallery 
Guston’s later art became caustic and intemperate, mean and raw. In the late 
1960s, at the height of the Vietnam war, his return to bleak figuration shocked 
many critics. The paintings from the last decade of his career have so much 
disgusted life in them. Every turn of his brush created startling and gruesome 
images that still won’t go away.

While other painters of his generation stripped their paintings down in their 
later years, Guston fleshed his out. He gave his paintings back to bodies and 
minds and crude, cruel mentalities. His was a thick and glutinous world. He 
used paint’s sluggishness against itself, dragging us down with it. But what 
horrible humour there is here, too.

Guston sets things out on the canvas as though he were explaining things to a 
child: here is a mailbox and here is a clock. They are scattered on a wasteland 
like discarded toys. Here is a Klansman and here is a hand. What is the hand 
holding? It is a nightstick. Guston’s later paintings are filled with familiar 
and clunky things: a horseshoe, a cigar, an open book. Richard Nixon drags his 
foot, swollen with phlebitis, across the world. There are black seas, lumps of 
wood (all the better to whack you with) and pointing fingers.

Guston also painted himself, as Klansman, painter, drinker. The edge of the 
table is the horizon. A lightbulb hangs like a full moon. On the horizon sits 
an empty green bottle, and hovering over it, a disembodied head with one huge, 
cyclopian eye staring at the bottle. The head is recognisably Guston’s own. 
Above the eye, the brow is furrowed and sweaty, and the ear echoes the rim of 
the bottle.

The green bottle casts a red shadow like a bloody bruise on the yellow table. 
A couple of objects sit on the table like stuff washed up on a beach. There’s 
an open book and a paintbrush clogged with the same red as the shadow and the 
head. The one great eye consumes the bottle’s emptiness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435062110765%2F26126b91-f310-427b-8ca9-52300b6bcd6b-2060x1946.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Morbid%20monsters%20and%20the%20Ku%20Klux%20Klan%3A%20the%20crude%20cartoonish%20genius%20of%20Philip%20Guston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Morbid%20monsters%20and%20the%20Ku%20Klux%20Klan%3A%20the%20crude%20cartoonish%20genius%20of%20Philip%20Guston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fphilip-guston-morbid-monsters-ku-klux-klan-crude-cartoon-genius%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435062110765%2F26126b91-f310-427b-8ca9-52300b6bcd6b-2060x1946.jpeg>
 ‘It is awful and dumb and cartoonish, but then that is the state of the world’ 
… Philip Guston’s Head and Bottle (1975). Photograph: Timothy Taylor Gallery 
Guston’s 1975 Head and Bottle 
<http://www.wikiart.org/en/philip-guston/head-and-bottle> is awful and dumb and 
cartoonish, but then that is the state of the world he depicts. What it really 
depicts is a state of mind.

Guston was as fond of George Herriman’s Krazy Kat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krazy_Kat> cartoons as he was of the Piero della 
Francesca postcard of theFlagellation of Christ 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palazzo_Ducale,_Urbino#/media/File:Piero_della_Francesca_042_Flagellation.jpg>
 that he kept beside him in his studio. Lots of artists have based work on 
cartoons: Warhol used Dick Tracy and Popeye. Roy Lichtenstein used comic books. 
Chris Ofili invented his own cartoon superhero,Captain Shit 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/ofili-double-captain-shit-and-the-legend-of-the-black-stars-t07345>
. The cartoonish is everywhere – especially in the world about us, never mind 
the funny pages.

The world itself is dumb enough. Guston was a painter of brute matter and even 
more squalid inclinations. He is a great corrective to so much fancy and flimsy 
tinkering in contemporary painting. He makes an artist likeAnselm Kiefer look 
effete and mannered <https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/anselm-kiefer>.

Guston didn’t dumb things down; he dumbed them up. You can’t escape how 
painted his world is, how nuanced and tragic and funny. Head and Bottle has a 
dreadful stillness.

Within the same hour as looking at Guston, I came across a painting by 
Guston’s fellow American painter,Nicole Eisenman 
<http://ci13.cmoa.org/artists/nicole-eisenman>, in a group painting show at the 
Sadie Coles gallery. Eisenman’s2015 untitled painting 
<http://www.sadiecoles.com/other-exhibitions/june-a-painting-show-2015> is a 
memory of Head and Bottle. A figure, foetal on a bed and with a similar 
ball-like head, peers with its single eye at the little clock on the bedside 
table. Time passes but nothing changes.

Guston, who would have been 102 this weekend, died from a heart attack in 
1980. His late work resists its time. It is magnificent. He is an influence 
worth having.

• A selection of paintings by Philip Guston is on show at Timothy Taylor 
Gallery <http://timothytaylorgallery.com/exhibitions/philip-guston1/>, London, 
until 11 July.
 