
The government’s flagship social policy, announced after the 2011 riots and 
intended to correct the anti-social behaviour of “troubled families”, has 
failed to achieve any significant impact, an official evaluation has found.

£1.3bn troubled families scheme has had 'no discernible impact'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/08/13bn-troubled-families-scheme-has-had-no-discernible-impact>
The troubled families programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/troubled-families-speech>, a scheme 
estimated to cost more than £1bn including £450m from central government, was 
launched by the former prime minister David Cameron with the aim of tackling “a 
culture of disruption and irresponsibility” by targeting households with high 
levels of crime, unemployment, pupil truancy and use of child welfare services.

However, a devastating study 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-evaluation-of-the-first-troubled-families-programme>
 concludes that after four years there was no clear evidence that the programme 
had any serious effect, despite persistent claims by politicians that it had 
“turned around” the lives of tens of thousands of families and saved over a 
billion pounds.

The study concludes: “The key finding from the impact evaluation using 
administrative data was that across a wide range of outcomes, covering the key 
objectives of the programme – employment, benefit receipt, school attendance, 
safeguarding and child welfare – we were unable to find consistent evidence 
that the troubled families programme had any significant or systematic impact.”

The study, carried out by an independent research consortium including the 
National Institute of Economic and Social Research (Niesr), suggested that 
ministers may have underestimated the scale of the problems faced by the most 
entrenched families and overestimated the capacity of the scheme to transform 
the lives of those who participated.

The troubled families programme was bound to fail – and ministers knew it | 
Jonathan Portes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/troubled-families-programme-ministers-data>
Last year the government massively expanded the programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/22/troubled-families-scheme-outcomes-miraculous-success-or-pure-fiction>
 to 400,000 families by 2020 claiming its“payment by results” approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/troubled-families-programme-failed>
 – in which councils were paid only if they could show they had successfully 
intervened with families – was a success.

However the decision to expand the scheme – which was widely criticised at the 
time as being unsupported by evidence – was taken before the formal evaluation 
was complete.

Ministers had seized on data that appeared to show that almost all of the 
120,000 families covered by the programme had undergone positive, life-changing 
experiences as a result of intervention by professionals but the study says 
that there was no evidence that the changes were attributable to the programme 
itself.

It said it was likely that the programme was poorly targeted, with little 
evidence that the families chosen reflected the true prevalence of families 
with multiple and complex needs. It said some councils felt that the scheme 
ignored the powerful determinants of poverty and disadvantage in the lives of 
some families.

The study said that despite the lack of evidence to support the claims for the 
programme some good may come out of it in the future. There were “some signs of 
green shoots” including evidence that families involved in the programme 
experienced increased levels of “confidence and optimism”.


The Department for Communities and Local Government, which slipped the 
evaluation report out unannounced to its website on Monday evening, declined to 
comment on the findings. Instead it referred toa statement published online at 
the weekend 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/troubled-familes-programme-transforming-the-lives-of-thousands-of-families>
 by the under-secretary of state for communities, Lord Bourne, in which he 
claimed the programme had made “significant improvements” for families.

The statement said: “We believe that this programme has transformed the lives 
of thousands of families. The councils and frontline staff who have put it into 
practice should be pleased with the work they have done.

The troubled families scheme has failed – this is the folly of payment by 
results | Anna Bawden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/troubled-families-programme-failed>
“And, most of all, the families should be proud of having had the courage and 
commitment to change their lives for the better. They valued the programme 
because, for them, it worked.”

The statement appears to suggest that the target participants of the programme 
now also include not just “troubled families” but the “just managing” 
low-income, working families identified by the prime minister, Theresa May, in 
July as a group she was determined to help.

Although Bourne says he is “confident that the programme will save money for 
the taxpayer”a separate evaluation  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/troubled-families-programme-local-authority-cost-savings>
 concludes that it was impossible to prove that any reductions in spending on 
services for targeted families were attributable to the programme or other 
factors.

One of the Niesr report’s authors, Jonathan Portes, told Channel 4’s 
Dispatches programme: “The only way you can measure whether a programme has had 
actually any impact is to compare whether the people affected by the programme 
do better or worse than people who weren’t affected by the programme, and we 
have that evidence.

“The troubled families programme has no significant impact on any of the key 
outcomes it was designed to change. As far as we can tell, there’s no evidence 
at all to suggest the programme had more than zero impact on any of the key 
findings it was designed to change.”
 