
The Melbourne Park triangle, otherwise known as the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, claimed yet another victim 
yesterday when Andy Roddick, fast gaining a reputation as Mr Accident Prone, 
turned his right ankle during the second set of his second-round match against 
Croatia's Ivan Ljubicic and had to retire when 7-6, 3-2 down.

These are worrying times for the 19-year-old Roddick, who is playing here for 
the first time. He has been working on building his body strength throughout 
the winter break, and was patently deeply frustrated by this latest injury 
setback.

Roddick had sprained his ankle during his opening victory against Argentina's 
Mariano Zabaleta, but played through on adrenaline. "I had it taped, it was 
almost like a cast, but I guess the ankle was still too weak," he said 
yesterday. The trainer told Roddick, who has been touted as the successor to 
Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi, that he might do some permanent damage if he 
tried to carry on, so Roddick had no option other than to quit while he was 
ahead.

He has a short-term history of injury. After he had defeated Sampras at Key 
Biscayne last year his wrist gave him trouble, and then he both cramped and 
damaged his leg during the French Open when he had to pull out of his 
third-round match against Australia's Lleyton Hewitt. "I'm kinda sick and fed 
up with it. I want to find a long-term solution, not just fixing it 
temporarily," said the 13th seed.

It may be that Roddick has to cut down his schedule a little, and build his 
strength more gradually. He has a tall, gangling frame which, like that of 
Venus Williams, puts a good deal of strain on the knees, ankles and wrists. He 
is, it must also be said, something of a drama queen on court, frequently 
spilling over in an exaggerated fashion and making a meal of every twinge. But 
it was impossible not to feel sorry for him afterwards. With the draw having 
fragmented, although not so much in his top half, the young man clearly had 
high expectations. And there is a great deal riding on his rather bony 
shoulders. The future of American tennis, as Sampras would say - and indeed has.

Last year it took Sampras five sets to defeat Juan Ignacio Chela in the third 
round. This time he accounted for the Argentine in four, and with a touch more 
conviction, although the American was often not moving awfully well, and rather 
more times than he would have liked found his serve being returned with 
considerable interest. "This has been a bizarre tournament, but, knock on wood, 
I still feel healthy."

Neither the public nor the experts is agreed who will end up lifting the men's 
singles trophy a week on Sunday. Small clusters can be found perusing the draw 
and shaking their heads, while the players keep a wary eye on the floor for 
anything that might trip them up, and are doubly circumspect when approaching 
doors and steps, to say nothing of showers and baths. The young men are getting 
particularly excited, none more so than Russia's Marat Safin, the 2000 US Open 
champion.

He reached the last 32 with a 6-2, 7-6, 6-1 victory over Belgium's diminutive 
Christophe Rochus, and believes he can win. He also has his own theory as to 
why so many of the top seeds have fallen by the wayside in the first few days: 
"I don't think they had enough time to rest or prepare themselves after the
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup in Sydney last 
November." Safin failed to qualify for that tournament, finishing outside the 
top 10, having ended 2000 as the world's No2.

"Because of that my season finished early and I had four weeks of hard work in 
preparation for Melbourne. I almost ended last year in the top 10, and I think 
that this year I will do much better," said the young Russian, who will be 21 
on the 27th, the day of the final, which might be deemed fate. He plays his 
fellow Russian Mikhail Youzhny in the next round, and then, if this draw goes 
to form, which it most obviously hasn't so far, it will be Sampras, whom he 
defeated for his first grand slam title at Flushing Meadows. "Mikhail is a good 
guy. I practise with him and we grew up in the same club - Youzhny, Anna 
Kournikova and me. As for Pete, everybody knows he is the biggest ever. But I 
want to win as many grand slams as I can, so why not here?" And he may.

The women's tournament has settled down to something like normality with 
straightforward victories for the leading players in the top half of the draw, 
Jennifer Capriati, the reigning champion, and the two Belgians, Kim Clijsters 
(watched by her boyfriend Hewitt) and Justine Henin. "I wouldn't say I am 
cruising but it is going well," said Capriati, who is nursing a thigh injury, 
almost de rigeur at this year's tournament. "Winning the Australian and the 
French Opens last year has made me even more hungry." But even those with 
hunger are being doubly careful not to choke.
 