
Naomi Wolf wrote of the obstetric profession that it had a "telling, subtle 
but distinctive lack of compassion", which you'd never know about if you didn't 
have a baby. At the time, some while off being pregnant, I railed against this. 
First, because parents are always moaning about something, and they're always 
trying to make out that they've unlocked some massive Aladdin's cave of wisdom, 
and yet, for all its priceless pearls, a lot of it just sounds like more 
moaning.

And I still think that, even as a parent who is often moaning. 

Second, it can't be true, can it? I mean, obstetricians might be bound by 
shared qualifications, but they're still people, prone to the same interior 
variations as any other group of people. You'd never say pilots had a lack of 
compassion.

However, with the benefit of a more kaleidoscopic view, I will admit one thing 
about the maternity industry, which is that there is an unconscionable amount 
of waiting around. An unbelievable amount. Man, if this was oncology, you'd 
have grown a fresh tumour. I went in today for my anti-D injection (it's so 
that ... Oh, never mind. All you need to know is that it's just an injection. 
Imagine having a blood test, take away the two minutes it takes to extract 
blood, that's how long the injection should take) and I was still there two 
hours and 15 minutes after my appointment. Why even have appointments? They 
should make it more like installation art: you arrive, you sit there, it 
happens when it happens. Do you remember that Tacita Dean video with the cows? 
Where they just go from their pen into a field, and it takes them 63 minutes? 
Midwives' waiting rooms are a bit like that.

Owing to their telling, subtle but distinctive lack of compassion, they will 
not deck the walls with art, these antenatal clinics, but that's not to say 
they don't show videos. No, no, no ... if you don't have a book or an interior 
life, you'll see three or four adverts roughly 15 times each, and they will be 
as follows: a truly sick-making Children's Mutual ad, where "tired dad" tells 
his newborn how well him and mummy are going to look after it; an ad for a 
humidifier that seeks to frighten new parents into thinking their baby's mucus 
membranes will dry out, in regular conditions, and then the child will die. 
After all that bother, pushing it out ... Then there's an ad for a buggy so 
expensive I've never even seen one in Peter Jones. Then there's another Child 
Trust Fund ad, insinuating that if you want your kid to be a premiership 
footballer, you better keep an eye on the Â£250 bestowed upon it, at birth, by 
the Exchequer. Yeah. How do you think Wayne Rooney got where he is today, 
people? Sure, some talent ... but also, a nugatory amount of money, invested so 
wisely by his parents that by the time he reached majority, it was still worth 
almost the same amount.

I wasn't even watching all these, to be honest; they were just osmosing into 
me while I stared at a wall, until there was a rumpus next to me. One woman - 
that jumped-up breeder - decided that two hours was just wrong. It was 
outrageous. Why was she still there, after two hours? "There's only three 
people ahead of you," said the receptionist, like that was going to help. "Two 
hours. TWO HOURS!" It was a compelling case, simply made, until she started 
crying. And because it's impossible to be outraged and comforted at the same 
time, she ran off to compose herself and didn't come back for so long that

I could, technically, have nicked her place but I would never do that.

I remembered that, when I was pregnant with T, I was constantly livid with the 
sheer mechanics of pregnancy. I was furious that they'd pipe these 
scaremongering ads into waiting rooms, to spin money out of your neurosis while 
they ignored you and wasted your time like you were nothing.

I would fume at the way they treated us, with this high-handed "well, you're 
entitled to take time off work for appointments anyway, you might as well take 
it sitting there" attitude. And this time, even though I can still muster fury 
about other things, I do not care about any of this. I sit there, totally 
biddable, totally placid, like a great big cow. Have I been through a learning 
curve or a lobotomy? It's so hard to say.
 