
Alan Davey <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-davey> is right ('We've got 
to rebuild our credit', G2, April 14) that it's not enough for him to have "a 
genuine relationship with art"; as he says, "I've got to be a good executive, 
too." Indeed I'm sure he is, but I would urge him to go further. He must think 
hard and fast about a contradiction at the heart of the Arts Council, if it 
moves as he suggests to take more risk and invest in the new.

While a single funding agency may be the way to support our establishment 
culture (because it's not that difficult to identify what that is, for better 
or for worse), asking that body to think outside the box, back hunches, take 
real risks, just doesn't make sense. It's like asking the Bank of England to do 
venture capital.

Judgments about the risky and the new are subjective and often wrong. That's 
absolutely not to say new art shouldn't be funded, but I'd urge Davey to give 
his new investment to a more diverse range of other funders, or to commission 
artists to curate grants programmes, rather than just being "a good executive" 
nursing a few more miles out of an outdated old steed.
Chris Naylor
 Director of cultural regeneration, City University

Alan Davey might find some favour if he implemented the bit in the McMaster 
report about "quality" as a valid criterion for support. He might even discover 
that "quality" does not necessarily exclude "appeal to a broad audience". Also, 
incidentally, he could bank a little credit with arts practitioners if, in the 
generic application form for grant aid, he eradicated, at least, the question 
about the sexual orientation of those practitioners.
Helen Goodway
 English editor, Tadeeb International
 