
The vast majority of young Arabs are increasingly rejecting Islamic State and 
believe the extremist group will fail to establish a caliphate, a  poll has 
found.

Only 13% of Arab youths said they could imagine themselves supporting Isis 
even if it did not use much violence, down from 19% last year, while 50% saw it 
as the biggest problem facing the Middle East, up from 37% last year,according 
to the 2016 Arab Youth Survey <http://www.arabyouthsurvey.com/2016/>.

However, concern is mounting across the region as a chronic lack of jobs and 
opportunities were cited as the principal factor feeding terrorist recruitment. 
In eight of the 16 countries surveyed, employment problems were a bigger pull 
factor for Isis than extreme religious views.

The eighth annual survey provides a snapshot of the aspirations of 200 million 
people. It found that five years after thestart of the Arab spring, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/arab-spring-badly-wrong-five-years-on-people-power>
 most youngsters prioritise stability over democracy. Optimism that the region 
would be better off in the wake of the 2011 uprisings has been steadily 
declining.


My Arab Spring: 'I envisioned a new Syria, but it never materialised'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/07/my-arab-spring-aleppo-new-syria-never-materialised>
In 2016, only 36% of young people said they felt the Arab world was in better 
shape following the upheaval, down from 72% in 2012. The majority (53%) agreed 
that maintaining stability was more important than promoting democracy (28%). 
In 2011, 92% of Arab youth said “living in a democracy” was their most 
cherished wish.

Concern about poor job prospects was observed across the Arab world, where one 
in four 15- to 24-year-olds are jobless – the highest youth unemployment on the 
planet, according to World Bank. The International Labour Organisation believes 
up to 75 million young people are without a job in Arab countries.


The Arab Youth Survey was based on 3,500 interviews across a range of issues 
with respondents aged 18 to 24.

It found that 47% believed Sunni-Shia relations were deteriorating and 52% 
felt religion played too big a role in a region dominated by Saudi Arabia and 
Iran – respective cheerleaders for each sect and on opposite sides of the wars 
inSyria and Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/26/iran-saudi-proxy-war-yemen-crisis>
.

Overall, 39% of Arab youth viewed the bloody conflict in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> as a proxy war fought by regional and 
global powers, 29% saw it as a revolution against the Bashar al-Assad regime, 
and 22% believed it was a civil war among Syrians.

Nearly half of those polled supported the 2015 international nuclear deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-expected-to-be-announced-in-vienna>
 that ended sanctions and brought Iran in from the cold – in striking contrast 
to thehostility of Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/18/as-iran-hails-a-historic-deal-saudi-arabia-looks-on-with-anxiety-and-irritation>
 and other Gulf governments. Divisions were also evident in Arab youth 
perceptions of the US, with 63% considering it an ally and 32% as an enemy.


Lack of democracy was cited as the biggest obstacle facing the Middle East by 
22%, compared with 50% pointing to the rise of Isis. But two-thirds of young 
Arabs (67%) still wanted their leaders to do more to improve theirpersonal 
freedoms and the human rights of citizens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/20/saudi-arabia-human-rights-rebrand-women-driving>
, particularly women.


The survey by the PR consultancy Asda’a Burson-Marsteller, which has an office 
in Dubai, found that theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/united-arab-emirates> is viewed by young 
Arabs as “a model country” that is economically secure, and is the most 
favoured nation to live in and set up a business.

Nearly one in four (22%) cited the UAE – a federation of hereditary sheikhdoms 
without elected representative institutions – as the country they would most 
like to live in. A similar number said it is the nation they would most like 
their own country to emulate (23%). Respondents were not asked specifically 
about abuses that areregularly highlighted by international human rights 
watchdogs <https://www.hrw.org/middle-east/n-africa/united-arab-emirates>.

The survey found 66% of Arab youth were increasingly concerned about falling 
oil prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/oil-price-slump-true-cost-uk-economy>
, though 78% still believed they were entitled to subsidised energy – despite 
plummeting revenues. Saudi Arabia, the world’s largest oil producer, is 
struggling to undertake large-scale economic reforms in response.


More young Arabs get their daily news online than from TV or print media, 
according to the survey – while 32% said they get their daily news online, 29% 
watch TV news and just 7% read newspapers daily (down from 13% in 2015).

• The Arab Youth Survey 2016 is carried out by international polling firm Penn 
Schoen Berland for Asda’a Burson-Marsteller. Respondents are from Algeria, 
Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, 
Qatar,Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, Tunisia, 
UAE and Yemen.
 