
News reaches me that Tim Martin, boss of mega-pub-chain Wetherspoons, has 
issued beer mats to persuade his drinkers to vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/wetherspoons-brexit-beer-mats-eu-referendum-imf>
. This breaks one of the all-time golden rules of pubs: never talk about 
politics.

But when it comes to something as monumental as the issue of remaining or 
leaving the EU, I have to step out from behind the pumps, roll up my 
shortsleeved shirtsleeves and get involved. After all, it’s beyond politics. 
This Brexit business is the most burning issue, because it’s about what sort of 
country we want to live in, and what we want to do about our horrible 
neighbours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2f83f573d3d8b180b3983ad7989084074b3188%2F24_0_1204_1204%2F1204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Wetherspoons%2C%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20Pub%20Landlord%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20beer%20mats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Wetherspoons%2C%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20Pub%20Landlord%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20beer%20mats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2f83f573d3d8b180b3983ad7989084074b3188%2F24_0_1204_1204%2F1204.jpg>
 Al Murray’s beer mat. Photograph: Getty/Rex 
Mr Martin’s move is bold. If, as they say, the medium is the message, then the 
message is don’t ruin the woodwork with nasty moisture staining.

These beer mats of his go into detail about the IMF. Unbelievable. Never has a 
beer mat like this been seen before. The thing is, though, Wetherspoons 
customers are exactly the sort of people who will be susceptible to this line 
of argument: they are in these places because they are thrifty, they watch 
their spending. Add to that the fact that any regular pub drinker is imbibing 
the world’s greatest problem-solving solution – booze – then perhaps the IMF 
would be better to shut up shop and hand over to my regulars, Steve, Steve, 
Alan and Steve. With six pints inside him, there’s nothing Steve can’t solve. 
Not that Steve, the other one.

One thing Mr Martin’s beer mat says is that no one voted for the IMF. Now, I 
don’t want to be a picky git, but no one voted for him either. Whereas I have – 
thanks to the voters of Thanet South –318 votes in my democratic quiver 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/politics/constituencies/E14000948>.

Design your own EU referendum beer mat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/design-your-own-eu-referendum-beer-mat>
So, how to discuss the EU?

Before we go any further, I’d like to make it clear that I will not be 
mentioning Hitler. Like any true Brit, I like banging on about Hitler as much 
as the next man – I have the Dambusters theme as my normal ringtone, Great 
Escape for the ex, obviously. I also realise that everyone is at it,even some 
top Labour people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
; I mean, you can’t get a straight answer on anything from anyone left or right 
these days without someone mentioning Hitler. But despite mentioning Hitler 
being the up-to-date way of doing politics, I’m not convinced that saying the 
EU is just like Hitler is really the best way of comparing the EU and Hitler, 
or Hitler with the EU. We’ve reached what you might call Peak Hitler. So, in 
summary: Hitler? Hitler. And for balance – it’s the Guardian, after all: Stalin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556b70fd00492a9c3a027c27f603fcdcf7a806ed%2F0_32_1133_1133%2F1133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%20Wetherspoons%2C%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20Pub%20Landlord%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20beer%20mats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%20Wetherspoons%2C%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20Pub%20Landlord%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20beer%20mats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmove-over-wetherspoons-heres-the-pub-landlords-brexit-beer-mats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556b70fd00492a9c3a027c27f603fcdcf7a806ed%2F0_32_1133_1133%2F1133.jpg>
 Leave or remain? Photograph: Getty/Rex 
Anyway ... the moment has arrived, a full 41 years after the last moment 
arrived, for the UK to make up its mind about the EU. Or the EC. Or the EEC. Or 
the Common Market. Or whatever it’s called currently. I can’t keep up, and 
neither can you.

That’s the main thing, they keep changing the name. That in itself is 
annoying. It’s like when the pub you drink in keeps being renamed and refitted 
and spends an inexplicable three and a half years being called the Birdcage. 
The EU is like a pub that used to have sticky floors and never served food 
that’s now doing olives on the bar. Olives on credit, the worst kind. It’s a 
boozer that’s gone gastro, where they expect you to play Scrabble and drink 
microbeer, whatever that is. Is that what we signed up to in 1975? I think not.

But the actual problem for you and me – the ordinary voter – is that we have 
both sides going full on Project Fear. In fact, Project Fear doesn’t do it 
justice: Project ArmageddonHitler!We’refullup would be a better name. So, in 
keeping with that, I’ve done some beer mats of my own for you, to reflect the 
high standard of argument on offer right now.

The Pub Landlord tours his new show, Let’s Go Backwards Together, from 
September,thepublandlord.com <http://thepublandlord.com/>.
 