
The Spanish bank set to acquire Abbey National for Â£8.4bn is considering 
sponsoring the Premiership or the England football team in an effort to raise 
the profile of the tarnished mortgage lender.

Sources close to Banco Santander, Spain's biggest bank, indicated yesterday 
that it was keen to secure a mass market sponsorship deal for Abbey, with 
football the preferred option.

However, with Barclays this season beginning a new three-year deal with the 
Premier League and the England football team already sponsored by Nationwide, 
Santander may be forced to look at a Premiership football club instead. Chelsea 
are known to be looking for a new sponsor to replace Emirates. Juan Inciarte, 
the Spanish board director leading the bid for Abbey, was at Stamford Bridge 
last week for the Champions League match between Chelsea and Porto.

"We need to do something to raise the profile of the Abbey brand and it needs 
to be mass market not niche," a source said.

The previous management of Abbey National attempted to revamp the tired brand 
by dropping the National name from its high-street fascia. However, the move is 
widely seen to have been a failure.

Separately, it emerged yesterday that Santander has started the search for a 
new chief executive of Abbey to replace Luqman Arnold, who will step down next 
year once the Santander deal has been completed. Sources close to Santander 
indicated that the new boss of Abbey was likely to come from within the ranks 
of the Spanish bank. Santander feels the appointment of a Spaniard would be 
acceptable to the UK authorities.

Recent rumours have linked Andy Hornby, the head of retail banking at HBOS, 
with the Abbey post.

Last week Adam Applegarth, the chief executive of Abbey rival Northern Rock, 
ruled himself out of the running for the position, saying that he already had 
the job he always wanted.

Shareholders are due to vote on Santander's bid for Abbey later this month. 
Unless a counter bid emerges the deal is expected to go through.
 