
Roger Federer and Andre Agassi cruised into the second round of the Australian 
Open today as fifth seed Carlos Moya crashed out.

Moya, a potential semi-final opponent for Federer, was dumped out in four sets 
by Spanish qualifier Guillermo Garcia-Lopez.

Playing only his second grand slam, the 21-year-old world No106 recorded the 
shock of the tournament so far with a 7-5, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3 victory.

Moya beat Garcia-Lopez in their only previous meeting earlier this year in 
Chennai, but had needed a third-set tie-break to get past his Davis Cup hitting 
partner in the semi-final.

"It is a big disappointment," the 1997 Australian Open finalist admitted 
today. "I was playing well before I came here.

"I think he played a great game. He's going to go higher in the rankings. But 
if I had won that first set, I think that things would have changed a little 
bit. But I didn't, so I'm really sad right now to leave the tournament."

Earlier in the day, Federer began the defence of his title in ominous fashion 
with a ruthless demolition of Fabrice Santoro.

The Swiss star took just and hour and 33 minutes to thrash the Frenchman for 
the loss of just four games, easing into the second round with a 6-1, 6-1, 6-2 
victory.

"It was good, a good start," said the 23-year-old. "I think the start of the 
match was important for me, you know. That set the tone for the rest.

"And I never really gave him a chance to get back into the match. 
Best-of-five, an easy three-setter sometimes they look very, very easy, but I 
always had the feeling I still had to play some good points to win them, 
especially against him.

"He gets back a lot of balls. But I'm happy with my performance, and that's 
what counts in the end."

Agassi was not quite as emphatic but still looked in good form as he eased 
injury worries with a 6-4, 6-3, 6-0 victory over German qualifier Dieter 
Kindlmann.

Agassi pulled out of an exhibition match against Andy Roddick last week with a 
tendon injury but was cleared to play after an MRI scan and declared himself 
happy with his fitness.

The 34-year-old, scheduled to face Federer in the quarter-finals, said: "Today 
I woke up feeling the best yet since it's happened.

"And with the assurance that I'm not going to sort of pull anything bad, I had 
the green light to push through anything I might be feeling.

"And that's what I did, I just pushed through a bit of stiffness, and then I 
felt like it loosened up nicely and I was OK.

"He didn't have a lot of weapons, but he made you work and I felt as the match 
went on I was getting more and more comfortable and better.

"It was a good first match for me but I have to be ready to step it up from 
here. I've always played well down here. Hopefully this year will be no 
different."

Former champion Thomas Johansson of Sweden had a much harder time before 
booking his place in the second round, the 2002 winner needing five sets to get 
past Australia's Peter Luczak.

Former junior star Gael Monfils enjoyed a notable victory on his senior grand 
slam debut, the 18-year-old beating American Robby Ginepri in four sets.

Monfils, who beat Britain's Miles Kasiri in the final of junior Wimbledon last 
year, also won the junior titles in Australia and France and is tipped for 
great things.

On the opening day of the centenary championships there were also victories 
for Spain's Tommy Robredo over Australian Scott Draper, and Mario Ancic cruised 
to a straight-sets win over Spain's Oscar Hernandez.

Ancic's fellow Croatian Ivan Ljubicic was another comfortable winner, beating 
Peru's Luis Horna 6-4, 6-3, 6-3.

Sweden's Joachim Johansson, one of the game's rising stars, later moved into 
the second round with a 7-6, 6-2, 6-3 victory over Sjeng Schalken.

RESULTS

16-Tommy Haas (Germany) beat Xavier Malisse (Belgium) 6-3, 6-2, 6-3
 * 24-Feliciano Lopez (Spain) beat Paul Baccanello (Australia) 7-5, 7-5, 6-2
 * Karol Beck (Slovakia) beat Todd Reid (Australia) 6-2, 6-2, 6-1
 * Sargis Sargsian (Armenia) beat David Sanchez (Spain) 7-6 (7-5), 4-6, 1-6, 
6-4, 6-2
 * Mardy Fish (U.S.) beat Juan Monaco (Argentina) 2-6, 6-0, 6-4, 4-6, 9-7
 * Jarkko Nieminen (Finland) beat David Sanguinette (Spain) 3-6, 6-4, 6-3, 6-2
 * Michael Tabara (Czech Republic) beat Thomas Enqvist (Sweden) 3-6, 6-2, 6-3, 
6-3
 11-Joachim Johansson (Sweden) beat Sjeng Schalken (Netherlands) 7-6 (8-6), 
6-2, 6-3
 27-Paradorn Srichaphan (Thailand) beat Potito Starace (Italy) 1-6, 6-2, 7-5, 
6-4

Janko Tipsarevic (Serbia & Montenegro) beat Daniele Bracciali (Italy) 7-6 
(7-4), 7-6 (8-6), 3-6, 6-1
 Rainer Schuettler (Germany) beat Olivier Patience (France) 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, 6-2
 Kevin Kim (U.S.) beat Lee Hyung-Taik (South Korea) 3-6, 6-4, 6-3, 3-6, 6-1
 1-Roger Federer (Switzerland) beat Fabrice Santoro (France) 6-1, 6-1, 6-2
 8-Andre Agassi (U.S.) beat Dieter Kindlmann (Germany) 6-4, 6-3, 6-0
 10-Gaston Gaudio (Argentina) beat Justin Gimelstob (U.S.) 7-6 (7-3), 6-4, 6-3
 13-Tommy Robredo (Spain) beat Scott Draper (Australia) 5-7, 6-2, 6-4, 6-2
 20-Dominik Hrbaty (Slovakia) beat Robin Soderling (Sweden) 6-4, 6-2, 1-0 
retired
 22-Ivan Ljubicic (Croatia) beat Luis Horna (Peru) 6-4, 6-3, 6-3
 28-Mario Ancic (Croatia) beat Oscar Hernandez (Spain) 6-3, 6-2, 6-1
 29-Taylor Dent (U.S.) beat Florent Serra (France 7-5, 6-2, 6-4
 30-Thomas Johansson (Sweden) beat Peter Luczak (Australia) 7-6 (7-5), 4-6, 
6-3, 4-6, 6-0
 Bohdan Ulihrach (Czech Republic) beat Ivo Karlovic (Croatia) 6-3, 6-7 (6-8), 
7-5, 6-2
 Gael Monfils (France) beat Robby Ginepri (U.S.) 1-6, 6-3, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6)
 Guillermo Garcia-Lopez (Spain) beat 5-Carlos Moya (Spain) 7-5, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3
 Peter Wessels (Netherlands) beat Lu Yen-hsun (Taiwan) 6-3, 6-4, 6-4
 Agustin Calleri (Argentina) beat Max Mirnyi (Belarus) 6-4, 5-7, 6-4, 4-6, 6-4
 Takao Suzuki (Japan) beat Jan-Michael Gambill (U.S.) 6-4, 6-3, 6-3
 Tomas Zib (Czech Republic) beat Wang Yeu-Tzuoo (Taiwan) 7-6 (7-5), 6-2, 6-4
 Marcos Baghdatis (Cyprus) beat Federico Luzzi (Italy) 6-1, 3-6, 6-1, 3-6, 6-3
 Bjorn Phau (Germany) beat Albert Costa (Spain) 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3

 