
During this traumatic year for our political culture, MPs have first tried to 
hide their abuse of parliamentary expenses, then claim in many cases they had 
done nothing wrong, thenmake insincere apologies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/12/smith-expenses-breach>, then 
display outrage at being asked by Sir Thomas Legg to both apologise and pay 
substantial amounts of the money back.

Each one of these responses is, when examined in turn, an unconscious 
admission that the previous statement was at best insincere. But for me, the 
most disturbing feature of this seedy series of justifications was the way in 
which it spat upon 177 years of franchise extension in Britain. WhenJohn Bercow 
insisted 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5974009/MPs-expenses-speaker-John-Bercows-20000-bill-for-apartment.html>
 – just a fortnight after being elected as a modernising, "clean-up" arbiter – 
that he wanted £20,000 to be spent on his free Westminster apartment, he struck 
a note more in keeping with Marie Antoinette than the role of Mr Speaker.

The key electoral legislation passed in relation to the Westminster parliament 
has been aRepresentation of the People Act 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representation_of_the_People_Act>. In the lexicon 
of suggested contemporary reform, we have heard talk of party quotas designed 
to make our MPs more "representative". This not only misses the point from 
frighteningly close range; it also fails to discern the glaring hypocrisy of 
that word: for despite five major democratisation acts over time, the Commons 
is as out of touch with ordinary lives as the duke of Wellington who grudgingly 
passed the first such legislation in 1832.

It is nowhere near enough (and probably not even relevant) to be 
representative: our legislators must relearn how to represent. Like many of 
those who see themselves as exceptional, they wish primarily to be the 
exception. If one asked a representative sample of Britons tomorrow who our MPs 
represented, far too many would say "themselves".

The symptoms of this belief are everywhere. At the last byelection, in Norwich 
North <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norwich-north-byelection>, taking 
the three main parties' votes there, just three in 10 of those entitled to vote 
offered their support for any part at all of the political status quo. Or, put 
another way, what the embittered folks tend to call "the system" was ignored by 
68% of the electorate. That's a lot of alienated people. Successful candidate
Chloe Smith <http://www.chloesmith.org.uk/about/about-chloe> was returned as 
the Conservative member with a mandate based on one in five of the electorate. 
There were 18th-century rotten boroughs with better representative democracy 
than that.

In 2009 Britain, a frighteningly large proportion of UK voters feel 
effectively disenfranchised 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/helena-kennedy-this-outdated-political-system-has-alienated-voters-526678.html>
. This applies as much to how the legislative output of that political class 
has altered the role of key institutions – pillars of order that can make or 
blur the difference between a civilised society and a Hobbesian free-for-all. 
The best idea the elite can come up with for a "reformed" upper house acting as 
a check on the executive is to cram it with cronies, and those already either 
in or aspiring to that elite.

New Labour has created 37,082 legal instruments since coming to power. But UK 
common and criminal law today is no longer for the protection of the weak and 
underprivileged, it is a tool to be employed largely by the rich and powerful 
to stifle criticism, and discourage investigation.

There are four things the political class could do immediately to engage more 
of the electorate, and truly enhance electoral democracy in Britain: make the 
entry costs for new parties much lower, move swiftly to proportional 
representation, give all serious parties state funding while banning other 
contributions and drastically reduce the power of whips.

This last is absolutely essential if backbench idleness, disillusionment and 
cynicism are to be curbed – and the executive controlled. Those few still in 
touch – the likes of Kate Hoey, David Davis, Dennis Skinner and Graham Brady – 
are popular because they understand widespread concerns (respectively) about 
rural life, personal liberty, uncompromising values and educational aspiration. 
Only constitutional changes in how we elect, control and reward those charged 
with government will ensure that these exceptions become the rule, keep an 
eagle eye on obedience of the rules and represent all of us to the best of 
their ability.
 