
The bill for politicians is now nearly as high as it was before the 2009 MPs' 
expenses <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> scandal, with 
claims of almost £100m last year, official figures show.

The total cost of travel, accommodation and running the offices of MPs rose by 
10%, taking it close to the record for claims by politicians in a single year.

Figures from the expenses watchdog show the overall bill for 2012-13 was 
£98.1m, approaching the previous high of £102.3m claimed in 2008-09. The 
expenses scandal of that year sparked outrage as some politicians claimed for 
trivial items and played the system to get taxpayer cash for furnishing two 
homes.

After the scandal broke, MPs' claims fell to £95.4m – or £88.5m excluding 
winding-up costs – as parliament brought in an independent watchdog to keep 
down the bill.

The Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa) said the cost to 
taxpayers was higher this year because MPs were allowed higher staffing 
budgets. The watchdog said it had helped save a total of more than £35m over 
the last four years by keeping tighter control of parliamentary expenses.

Over the last year, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> got £121,872.97, which was 
mostly spent on running his office. In parliamentary expenses he claimed just 
£282.55, including 10 claims for train travel, one for a taxi journey, and one 
mileage claim on behalf of a secretary.

Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>, the Labour 
leader, claimed slightly more at £136,115.71, with the vast majority on 
staffing and office costs. He also claimed £10,508.08 in parliamentary 
expenses, including £9,340.18 on accommodation and bills, plus £1,167.90 on 
travel.

Claims made by Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> 
were even higher at £152,553.82, again with most going towards the running of 
the deputy prime minister's office. The Liberal Democrat leader received 
£12,688.01 in expenses, including £9,767.41 for accommodation and bills, and 
£2,920.60 for travel and subsistence. Within that, he claimed for a £145.50 
television licence and five first-class train journeys.

The largest claims excluding payroll costs were from Ian Paisley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ianpaisley>, the Democratic Unionist MP 
for North Antrim, at £100,204; and Alistair Carmichael, Liberal Democrat MP for 
Orkney and Shetland, at £82,878 – reflecting high travel costs from their 
constituencies. The next highest were those of David Morris, Conservative MP 
for Morecambe and Lunesdale, who claimed £75,902; and Debbie Abrahams, Labour 
MP for Oldham East and Saddleworth, who claimed £74,615.

Zac Goldsmith, the multi-millionaire Tory MP for Richmond Park and North 
Kingston, made no claims at all, while the business minister and Conservative 
MP for Sevenoaks,Michael Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-fallon>, claimed just £38.74. 
Adam Afriyie, another wealthy businessman and Conservative MP for Windsor, 
claimed £604.20.

• This article was amended on 26 September 2013. The earlier version said this 
year's expenses figure of £98.1m was above the previous high of £95.6m claimed 
in 2008-09. Ipsa says the comparable figure for 2008-09, from an auditedHouse 
of Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> report, is 
£102.3m; the £95.6m figure is not from an audited report and excludes some 
items, such as pensions for MPs' staff. The earlier version also said MPs' 
claims fell to £90.7m after the 2009 expenses scandal. Ipsa says the audited 
figures for 2010-11 total £95.4m, or £88.5m excluding winding-up costs 
(expenses associated with shutting down the offices of departing MPs, which 
peak in election years). The headline and subheading have also been amended to 
reflect the changes made.
 