
David Cameron has seen off an attempt by Tory rebels to force a referendum on 
Britain's European Union membership before the next election.

Conservative MPs voted overwhelmingly against a proposal to bring forward the 
date of a referendum tabled byAdam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie> â€“ a backbencher said to be 
keen to oust Cameron as Tory leader.

The Commons voted on Friday by 249 votes to 15 against Afriyie's amendment to 
the European Union (referendum) bill, which is backed by the Tory leadership 
and states there will be a poll before the end of 2017.

The Conservative leadership successfully argued that a referendum must be held 
after attempts to renegotiate Britain's relationship with Brussels, which could 
take several years.

Many Tories were frustrated by Afriyie's move, fearing their Eurosceptic 
constituents would not understand why they failed to back an earlier poll.

Afriyie, the MP for Windsor, insisted he was right to ignore warnings from the 
Tory leadership and press ahead with his attempt on behalf of voters.

"I tried my hardest to give the British people a 2014 referendum. By putting 
the 2014 option before parliament, I was reflecting the opinion of the vast 
majority of the British people," he said.

"A 2014 vote was the only way to guarantee that the British people would get 
their say on our relationship with the EU and show that asConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, we were listening to the 
public."

But James Wharton, the backbench Conservative MP bringing forward the bill, 
described Afriyie's amendment as a waste of time.

"At the end of the day, Adam's amendment would have meant the chances of this 
important bill passing would be diminished and I am pleased so many MPs voted 
with their good sense to ensure we do everything we can to let Britain decide," 
he said.

Cameron has thrown his weight behind the EU referendum bill but it is unlikely 
to make it through parliament without being blocked as it is not supported by 
Labour or the Liberal Democrats.
 