
Britain’s Department for International Development  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-international-development>
(DfID) should have worked harder to pressure the government of Sierra Leone to 
endfemale genital mutilation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/female-genital-mutilation>(FGM), according 
to a group of British MPs.

In its final report  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmintdev/1138/1138.pdf>
ahead of the UK elections, theInternational Development Committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/>
 (IDC) said Sierra Leone had “ceased to matter to the development community” 
before the Ebola outbreak drew the world’s attention to west Africa, wheremore 
than 10,300 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/ebola-expert-david-nabarro-renewed-outbreaks-inevitable-guinea-sierra-leone-liberia>
have been killed by the disease.

The IDC chided DfID for failing to do more to stamp out FGM in Sierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone> and said that, since the 
practice had stopped during the Ebola outbreak, the department – one of the 
country’s biggest bilateral donors, with a stated aim of ending violence 
against women and girls – should now make the issue a priority.

About 88% of girls  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/06/what-is-female-genital-mutilation-where-happen>
undergo FGM in Sierra Leone, often during mass initiation ceremonies led by 
powerful secret societies. The IDC said it was disappointed that Sierra Leone 
was not included in the DfID-fundedUN Joint Programme on Female Genital 
Mutilation. 
<http://www.unfpa.org/publications/unfpa-unicef-joint-programme-female-genital-mutilationcutting-annual-report-2012>

In the report released on Thursday, the IDC reviewed its work between 2010 and 
2015, arguing that it had succeeded in influencing government policy, including 
on the need for reform of the international approach to health emergencies.

Sierra Leone aside, the IDC said DfID had failed to exert enough pressure on 
donors and the Afghan government to entrench hard-won progress in women’s 
rights inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. The 
department’s refusal to reconsider a decision to end bilateral aid to Burundi 
was also censured.

The IDC defined DfID’s “failures” as recommendations the government had 
rejected. The committee expressed hope that policies would still change in the 
longer-term.

Sir Malcolm Bruce, the IDC chair, said he had asked Justine Greening, the 
international development secretary, about FGM duringparliamentary questions  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmhansrd/cm150318/debtext/150318-0001.htm>
on 18 March.

“She informed him that following the Ebola outbreak FGM had stopped because it 
was one of the main ways in which the disease could spread and that she was 
having discussions about how to prevent it becoming back. We urge DfID Sierra 
Leone to make this a priority,” the IDC said.

In response to the report, DfID said the issue of FGM had to be handled 
sensitively, and led by Sierra Leoneans, pointing out that it had worked with 
survivors, local NGOs and partners in the country to advocate against FGM.

The committee also noted that its work on Sierra Leone and Liberia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/liberia> had been hampered by the fact that, 
prior to the Ebola outbreak, it encountered difficulty in getting evidence from 
different development actors.


“Evidently, Sierra Leone and Liberia had ceased to be of interest in the first 
half of 2014, although the situation changed as the Ebola outbreak refocused 
international attention on the country. We initially received fewer than 10 
written submissions; in other inquiries we received closer to 100,” the IDC 
said.

Last week, Baroness Lindsay Northover, parliamentary undersecretary of state 
at DfID, urged donors, aid agencies and campaigners to use the apparent 
cessation of FGM in Sierra Leone during the Ebola crisis to eradicate the 
practice altogether.

“We are aware that at the moment, with the Ebola crisis … cutting has 
temporarily stopped,” Northover told a conference on FGM in London,according to 
Reuters. 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/03/20/us-health-ebola-fgm-idUKKBN0MG2AD20150320>
 “We have to seize this opportunity and see if we can move forward and end FGM.”

The IDC said DfID told the committee that, because FGM was legal in Sierra 
Leone, the UK could only take limited steps. The IDC rejected this argument.

“We believe that the UK and DfID holds considerable influence in Sierra Leone 
and it should be putting far more pressure on the leadership to end this 
practice,” said the committee.

Another failure identified by the IDC related to DfID’s policies on women and 
girls in Afghanistan. The departmenthas committed  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67582/strategic-vision-girls-women.pdf>
to putting women and girls at the heart of the UK’s development assistance, and 
London hosted a high-profile summit last year onending sexual violence in 
conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ending-sexual-violence-in-conflict-summit>
, setting itself up as a world leader on the issue.


Before last year’s London conference on Afghanistan, however, DfID was 
criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/21/afghanistan-womens-rights-britain-urged-support-london-conference>
by some activists for sidelining women’s rights. It said the rights of Afghan 
women and girls were a priority for the UK.

The IDC’s final report suggested there was still a gap between rhetoric and 
reality. The committee said it had asked DfID to pressure other donors and the 
government in Kabul to back commitments to women, and to set up a joint 
donor-government plan to ensure money was funnelled to specific programmes for 
women and girls.

“It is to our great regret that DfID rejected these recommendations and we are 
now receiving reports from Afghanistan that women are being kept out of peace 
negotiations,” the report said, citingan Oxfam study from late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/24/taliban-peace-talks-a-threat-to-womens-rights-in-afghanistan-oxfam-warns>
 highlighting the absence of women in peace talks with the Taliban.

“Without women and women’s rights activists being included in the process 
there is a risk that their hard-won rights may be lost in a peace settlement. 
We hope that our successor committee looks again at the position of women in 
Afghanistan,” the IDC said.

DfID said it was supporting girls’ education and women’s economic and social 
empowerment, and working with the Afghan government to ensure it upholds its 
commitments to protect women. The department had provided £3.2m to strengthen 
access to justice for women and build awareness of women’s rights in six 
provinces, it said.

The IDC also listed the closure of DfID’s bilateral aid to Burundi under its 
failures, noting its 2011 recommendation that DfID should reconsider this 
decision. The government did not accept the recommendation, sayingBurundi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, where tensions have been rising 
ahead of elections this summer, would continue to benefit from DfID-funded 
multilateral organisations.


“We do not consider the decision to close the bilateral aid programme was 
rational or consistent. We urge our successor committee to maintain a focus on 
DfID’s portfolio of priority countries inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, including Burundi, and to ensure 
the smallest and poorest countries continue to receive the bilateral support 
that they need,” the IDC said.

Mary Creagh, the shadow secretary of state for international development, said 
the IDC report showed the government had missed opportunities to ensure the 
equal treatment of women and girls.

“DfID failed to include Sierra Leone in its project to end female genital 
mutilation despite the country having one of the highest prevalences in the 
world. And in Afghanistan, there was inadequate funding to supports women’s 
rights,” she said.
 