
7.50pm GMT 

Early evening summary

So, where do we stand?

• The welfare benefits uprating bill, which will impose a 1% cap on 
working-age benefit increases until 2016, has easily passed its first Commons 
hurdle. It was given a second reading by a majority of 56

• Tories have ditched their anti-shirker rhetoric. Originally George Osborne 
and other ministers defended benefit cuts on the grounds that they would 
penalise "shirkers" who were staying at home with the curtains drawn while 
ordinary people went out to work.An advertising campaign was launched at the 
end of last year based on this theme. 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/thetorydiary/2012/12/cchq-launches-attack-ad-in-marginal-constituencies-hardworking-families-vs-people-who-dont-work.html>
 But today ministers have avoided such divisive rhetoric and Sajid Javid, the 
Tory Treasury minister, even made a point of accusing Liam Byrne, the shadow 
work and pensions secretary, of demonising "shirkers" himself. (See 6.56pm) The 
only Tory MP I heard who delivered a full, Sun-style "they're all shirkers" 
speech was Aidan Burley. (See 5.05pm.) But Burley is about as close to the 
Cameron inner circle as my cat.

• The DWP has admitted in its impact assessment that nearly 10m households 
will lose out as a result of the bill and that the poorest families will lose 
the most.(See 12.42pm.)

• David Miliband has used a rare intervention in the Commons to dismiss the 
measure as a "rancid bill" that is "not about fairness or affordability". He 
said the government should abandon the 1% cap and instead raise the money by 
imposing a cap on tax relief for pension contributions at £26,000. It was a 
powerful speech, not least because it managed to sound like a "full throated 
assault from the left" (see 4.55pm) while also advocating an acceptance of the 
coalition's overall spending limits. Miliband also used it to attack Gordon 
Brown for practicising the politics of division.

• The Lib Dems have suffered a minor rebellion. I have not seen the voting 
list yet, but,according the Labour whips, 
<https://twitter.com/labourwhips/status/288730608660803585> six Lib Dems, 
including the former leader Charles Kennedy, did not support the government on 
the second reading. They were: Charles Kennedy, Andrew George, David Ward, 
Julian Huppert, John Leech and Sarah Teather.

But the real question is whether George Osborne's weaponising strategy (see 
9.29am) has successfully paid off - and at this stage, I'm afraid, I don't know 
the answer. At the end of last year the Tories seemed ultra-confident about 
being on the right side of public opinion. Having listened to the debate, I 
sense they are a bit more nervous than they were, but only by a little. Labour 
is still weak on how it would fund higher benefits, and why it supports the 1% 
cap for public sector pay but not the 1% cap for benefits. Public opinion is 
probably still up for grabs, and it is going to take a lot of time, and 
polling, before we really work out who's ahead.

That's all from me.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated at 8.01pm GMT

7.29pm GMT 

And now we've had the result of the vote on the second reading. The government 
won by 324 votes to 268 - a majority of 56.

7.14pm GMT 

The Labour amendment has been defeated by 321 votes to 262 votes - a 
government majority of 59.

Update: I heard 321/262, but Twitter and the Press Association tell me that I 
misheard and that the result was was 328/262 - a majority of 66.

Updated at 7.23pm GMT

7.03pm GMT 

MPs are now voting.

They will vote first on the Labour amendment (see 10.16am for the wording) and 
then on the main motion to give the bill a second reading.

The results themselves will not be particularly interesting - the government 
has a healthy majority, the Lib Dem revolt is tiny, and so the bill will sail 
through the Commons easily - but the debate has been reasonably illuminating.

I will post the results of the votes as we get them (at about 7.15pm and 
7.30pm) and a summary.

6.56pm GMT 

Sajid Javid, the Treasury minister, is winding up the debate now for the 
government.

He says the government has been criticised for adopting the wrong tone.

We have been wrongly accused by many on the opposite benches today of using 
inflammatory language on this most important issue.

But Liam Byrne himself demonised shirkers, he says.

Let met me start with inflammatory language that has been used. Let me quote. 
"Let's face the tough truth – that many people on the doorstep at the last 
election, felt that too often we were for shirkers not workers". Not the words 
of anyone on this side of the House, but the words of the shadow secretary of 
state [Liam Byrne, in his speech to the Labour conference in 2011]. So let us 
not hear about tone again from anyone on that side of the House.

Updated at 7.00pm GMT

6.51pm GMT 

Jamieson winds up saying Britain needs Labour's jobs guarantee. It's tough, 
it's fair and it works.

6.47pm GMT 

George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has just 
arrived on the government frontbench.

As Iain Duncan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> 
said earlier, Osborne has been in Germany, giving a speech.

6.42pm GMT 

Cathy Jamieson, the shadow Treasury minister, is winding up now for Labour.

She says that 13 government backbenchers spoke in the debate and that two of 
them were critical. The government also ran out of speakers an hour before the 
debate was due to finish, she says. That shows how little support there is for 
the bill.

6.40pm GMT 

Caroline Lucas, the Green MP, is speaking. She says the bill is part of a war 
on the poor waged by the very rich.

And she challenges Labour to say that it would repeal the bill.

(Natalie Bennett, the Green party leader, has set out her views in a blog for 
Huffington Post.) 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/natalie-bennett/a-historic-day-what-will-mps-do-welfare-bill_b_2430104.html?utm_hp_ref=uk-politics>

6.35pm GMT 

Another Lib Dem, David Ward, has indicated that he will not support the bill. 
(See 5.44pm.) I missed his speech earlier, but I've just caught up with the 
Press Association report. Here's an extract.

National payments on benefits as a nation is, without a doubt, far too high. 
However, what we are facing here, seems to me, in this Bill seems to be a huge 
lack of confidence by the coalition in its own policies and programmes to deal 
with that situation ...

There could be another reason [for this bill)] and I hope it is not true. That 
is to do with a sense that the public at large are in favour of these welfare 
reforms, so what a good opportunity some people on this side see to attack the 
unemployed. What's driving that, I fear, is it is based upon a deep-rooted 
conviction unemployed people are unemployed by choice. That's what worries me. 
I hope it's lack of confidence but I suspect there are far too many people on 
this side of the house that believe these are the deserved poor. It is not 
fair. I will not support it.

6.30pm GMT 

Watching the debate on a TV monitor you cannot always see how many MPs are in 
the chamber.

Helpfully, Labour's Angela Eagle has posted this on Twitter.
Angela Eagle (@angelaeagle) 
Only 5 Tories in the Chamber listening to their 'rancid' Welfare Benefits 
Uprating Bill#StriversTax <https://twitter.com/search/%23StriversTax>
 <https://twitter.com/angelaeagle/status/288713244816859136> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/angelaeagle/status/288713244816859136> 
6.28pm GMT 

Here is some more comment on the bill from the web.

• James Kirkup at the Telegraph says the bill will penalise mothers when they 
have children. 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/jameskirkup/100197176/welfare-cuts-and-childcare-why-is-the-coalition-cutting-maternity-pay/>

For reference, statutory maternity pay is available for 39 weeks per child. So 
the bill would cost 340,000 women £156 each, unless their employers volunteer 
to fill the gap.

To some people, £4 a week isn't much money. To others, it is. But whatever the 
view of its value, what about the symbolism? Later this month, the Coalition 
will unveil measures it says will make it cheaper for women with children to go 
to work. Today, it’s proposing a law that will make it more expensive for 
working mothers to take time off work to care for newborns. What message does 
that send?

• Nigel Stanley at the TUC's Touchstone blog says that over the long term the 
value of benefits has fallen sharply in relation to wages. 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2013/01/unemployment-benefits-and-earnings/>

6.26pm GMT 

Labour's Julie Hilling says this "rotten, heartless" government will make the 
poor even poorer.

6.22pm GMT 

Labour's Nic Dakin says some in the party of Beveridge (ie, the Lib Dems) are 
deeply unhappy about this bill.

6.15pm GMT 

Labour's Albert Owen says this bill is proof that the government is missing 
its fiscal targets.

And he says that trying to use the bill to create dividing lines is crude 
politics. Mentioning Lynton Crosby, the strategist hired by the Tories, he says 
the crudest elements of Australian politics have now been imported into the UK.

6.05pm GMT 

The Labour MP Ian Lucas posted this on Twitter a few minutes ago.
Ian Lucas (@IanCLucas) 
Still 14 Labour speakers in Chamber waiting to speak.Last Tory is now taking 
interventions to use up time. And it's a Tory Bill.
 <https://twitter.com/IanCLucas/status/288706387511496704> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/IanCLucas/status/288706387511496704> 
After Stewart Jackson finished, Nigel Evans, the deputy Speaker, said he was 
cutting the time limit for backbench speeches to three minutes. On that basis, 
all remaining MPs who want to speak should get a chance to do so, he said.

Updated at 6.11pm GMT

6.02pm GMT 

Stewart Jackson, a Conservative, says that being tough on Coco Pops and tough 
on the causes of Coco Pops 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/9675904/MPs-should-consider-banning-Frosties-says-Andy-Burnham.html>
 will not make Labour appear credible.

5.49pm GMT 

Marcus Jones, a Conservative, says before the general election Labour pledged 
to cut spending roughly in line with the coalition's current rate of deficit 
reduction. Yet now they are opposing almost all cuts, he says.

5.44pm GMT 

Labour's Lisa Nandy says every MP has a minimum household of over £65,000.

For any of use to vote for this bill today is, quite simply, shameful.

5.44pm GMT 

While we're on the subject of Liberal, Stephen Tall on his blog has been 
monitoring the size of the Lib Dem rebellion. 
<http://stephentall.org/2013/01/08/3-lib-dem-mp-rebels-on-benefits-uprating-bill-so-far/>

And, on the current figures, even Philip Cowley would struggle to get excited. 
Tall says two Lib Dems MPs have said they will vote against (Sarah Teather and 
John Leech) and two have said or indicated they will abstain (Adrian Sanders 
and Julian Huppert).

5.39pm GMT 

Greg Mulholland, the Lib Dem MP, is speaking now.

He says the Lib Dems made it clear they would not accept certain red lines. 
For example, they would not agree to taking away housing benefit from the 
under-25s, cutting benefit for families with a large number of children, 
freezing benefits or cutting them, or taking £10bn out of the welfare budget.

This is a temporary measure, he says. It "can and will be reversed as the 
economy improves".

Trying to divide those who work and those who don't has not been helpful, he 
says.

A Liberal (William Beveridge) introduce the welfare state. If this bill were 
taking away the welfare state safety net, he would oppose it, he says. But it 
won't.

5.32pm GMT 

Turning away from the chamber for a moment, here is some reaction to the bill 
from charities, unions and other political parties.

From Alison Garnham, chief executive of Child Poverty Action Group

We know this is a bill which will make many people poorer so it is simply 
indefensible that the government has, at the last minute, published an impact 
assessment [see 12.42pm] that says nothing about poverty. Absolutely nothing. 
Whether you agree with the proposed cuts or not, it cannot be right to ignore 
their impact on child poverty. Discounting inconvenient facts is not a sound 
basis for policymaking.

The truth, of course, is that the main impact of this bill will be to make 
life much more difficult for millions of ordinary families, whether they are 
surviving on meagre benefits or relying on tax credits to make work pay.

From Jonathan Edwards, the Plaid Cymru Treasury spokesman

There is no question that the proposals included in the Welfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/welfare> Uprating Bill will have a 
disproportionate impact on the nations and regions outside the South East of 
England.

Wales will be hit particularly hard as a far greater percentage of our 
population are recipients of Tax Credits and/or benefits.

Therefore, the real-term cut in these entitlements will inevitably have a 
dramatic effect on the amount of money spent in local economic across Wales, 
clearly highlighting the entirely self-defeating nature of the Coalition's 
economic experiment.

From Natalie Bennett, leader of the Green party

MPs are being asked whether they are prepared to deliberately, with all of the 
facts before them, choose to significantly reduce the living standards of 
millions of their voters.

Not only is the cut immoral, but it is economically illiterate - facing the 
clear risk of a triple-dip recession, the government is planning to pull 
millions of pounds out of the pockets of people who, had they received it, 
would certainly have fed the money back into the economy in buying food, buying 
energy, and buying services.

From Len McCluskey, the Unite general secretary

These latest cuts to welfare show the disdain with which this government views 
ordinary people and underlines just how out of touch they are with working 
families struggling to make ends meet. 

Cuts to vital support, like housing benefit and tax credits, will have a 
devastating impact on many in society, sucking money out of the economy and 
plunging people in to poverty. This is not just self-defeating, it will set 
this nation back a generation.

From Julia Unwin, chief executive of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation

Today’s bill is bad news for people living in poverty, whether they’re in work 
or out of work. Clearly, there are difficult decisions to be taken by 
government, but ministers’ opportunistic rhetoric on this issue is disturbing. 
Allowing today’s Bill to be presented as a choice between the ‘deserving and 
‘underserving poor’ is both morally and economically wrong. As incomes fall and 
costs rise for people – whether they are in or out of work - we are at risk of 
entering a decade of destitution.

From the Children's Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/news-views/our-blog/bill-will-push-many-more-families-poverty>

This new law would affect all families with children receiving child benefit 
or child tax credit in the UK, roughly 11.5 million children.

Many of the families affected 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2013/jan/05/soldiers-nurses-teachers-benefit-curbs>
 by these changes are those who are in work - 300,000 nurses and midwives, 
150,000 primary school teachers and 40,000 armed forces personnel.

For a single-parent primary school teacher with two children this could mean 
losing £424 a year by 2015 and a second lieutenant in the army with three 
children earning £470 per week losing £552 a year by 2015.

From the PCS union 
<http://www.pcs.org.uk/en/news_and_events/news_centre/index.cfm/id/2A8E80BB-9F37-45BD-8E70BBAB1441577D>

The union, which represents 80,000 Department for Work and Pensions staff, 
opposes all cuts to benefits and tax credits and utterly condemns the language 
used by politicians and sections of the media to describe people who rely on 
welfare support.

Nothing in the benefits uprating bill being debated by MPs today will help 
more people find work and increase low wages - despite these being the best 
ways to reduce welfare spending.

The union says we should be proud of our welfare state and the support it 
provides and be looking at how to improve it - including restoring the link 
between benefits and average wages, broken by the Tories in the 1980s, as well 
as paying people who are in work a living wage.

From Chris Wellings, Save the Children’s head of UK policy 
<http://www.twitlonger.com/show/kl4580>

Parents already struggling to get by will find it even harder to afford basics 
like food and clothing for their children as their income fails to keep pace 
with spiralling living costs. 1.6 million children are now growing up in 
extreme poverty, sometimes missing out on hot meals, decent clothing and a warm 
home to live in.Benefits <https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> and tax 
credits are there to help families reach a minimum standard of living. This 
decision today will make their lives even tougher.

From Fiona Weir, the chief executive of Gingerbread, the charity representing 
lone parents

This is a deeply unfair bill which will deliver further cuts for those who can 
least afford it: low-income families who are already struggling to cope. The 
government’s own figures show that single parents will face the biggest blow.

5.20pm GMT 

Labour's Yvonne Fovargue says that the Child Poverty Action Group have 
described this as a poverty-producing bill.

She says she deplores the fact that people are having to use food banks.

5.17pm GMT 

Alec Shelbrooke, a Conservative, is speaking now.

He says the only good speech from Labour was David Miliband's. Miliband 
understands what the welfare state is about.

Other Labour speakers have been guilty of "shameful posturing", he says.

5.11pm GMT 

Labour's Stephen McCabe is speaking now.

He says the IMF have warned about the dangers of cutting the automatic 
stablisers when the economy is weak. But that is exactly what this government 
is doing, he says.

5.05pm GMT 

Aidan Burley, a Conservative, is speaking now.

He quotes a caller claiming to be unemployed who rang LBC before Christmas to 
say that he would not accept a job because he was expected to start at 8am.

(There is more about this here on the Guido Fawkes blog.) 
<http://order-order.com/2012/12/30/on-the-dole-because-he-didnt-want-to-get-up-at-800-a-m/>

Updated at 6.00pm GMT

5.02pm GMT 

In the debate John Bercow, the Speaker, has just said he is reducing the time 
limit for backbench speeches from five minutes to four minutes.

5.01pm GMT 

And here are some full quotes from the Sarah Teather speech I reported 
earlier. I've taken the quotes from the Press Association.

In an atmosphere of uncertainty and limited resources, where every family in 
this country is struggling, there is a natural tendency to try and find someone 
to blame for our own woes. A fissure already exists between the working and 
non-working poor. Hammering on that faultline with the language of shirkers and 
strivers will have long-term impacts on public attitudes, on attitudes of one 
neighbour against another. It will make society less generous, less 
sympathetic, less able to co-operate. The marginalisation of the undeserving 
poor will place one group outwith society entirely over time and leave them 
less able to make choices about their own lives and less able to participate. 
That fragmentation of society is, for me, the spectre of broken Britain and it 
is one that we should worry about hastening at our peril.

4.55pm GMT 

Dan Hodges has been blogging again about David Miliband. He says that 
Miliband's speech represented "a full throated assault from the left" and that 
it shows Miliband is planning a return to the front bench. 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/danhodges/100197212/david-miliband-attacks-the-government-from-the-left-on-welfare-hes-planning-a-comeback/>

Updated at 4.57pm GMT

4.43pm GMT 

David Miliband's speech - Summary and analysis

The David Miliband speech will probably reignite the debate about whether he 
should be Labour's shadow chancellor. Personally, I would not waste too much 
time worrying about that now. Ed Miliband was quite dismissive when asked about 
his brother returning to the shadow cabinet yesterday, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2013/jan/07/cameron-clegg-coalition-review-live-blog#block-50eaffa3b579b90984dd5a6c>
and, as Dan Hodges has explainedin a blog, 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/danhodges/100196934/david-miliband-had-his-chance-and-it-passed-his-return-to-the-front-lines-would-be-catastrophic-for-labour/>
 replacing Ed Balls with David Miliband would bring plenty of problems.

Yet, it was a powerful performance; not so much because it was a punchy 
speech, but because, within five minutes, Miliband set out a distinctive 
approach on welfare that would shield Labour from some of that attacks being 
launched on it by the Tories.

Here are the key points.

• Miliband said that the government should abandon the 1% cap on welfare 
benefits and instead cap tax relief on pension contributions at £26,000 instead.
 He said this would be fair because £26,000 is the level of the government's 
benefit cap.

The government have made a great deal of the point that no one should receive 
more from benefits than the average wage of £26 000. But they offer tax relief 
of £40 000 – for those with £40 000 to spare. That costs £33bn a year.

If we limited tax relief on pension contributions to £26 000 a year, we would 
have no need for this bill.

This was a powerful point because it answered the point that government 
ministers have been making all day: how would Labour fund the benefit increase 
it is proposing? Labour frontbenchers have been arguing that a Labour 
government could find the money by not cutting the 50p top rate of tax, or by 
implementing a work programme that would cut benefit spending. But the idea 
that cutting the 50p rate costs £3bn is contested (to put it politely), and the 
other saving is a hypothetical one.

• Miliband mocked the idea that the government was expecting everyone to make 
an equal sacrifice.

The measures before us raise £3.7 billion in 2015/16 from poor and lower 
middle income people.

Meanwhile the Chancellor has cut tax relief for pension contributions – but 
only by £200m in 2013/14 rising to £600 million in 2015/16. The cumulative 
saving between now and 2015/16 from the richest is £1.1bn - compared to £5.6bn 
for those on benefit and/or receiving tax credits.

So this is not equality of sacrifice. The Chancellor reminds me of the man in 
the 1929 election poster, standing above others on a ladder. Water is up to the 
neck of the man on the bottom rung, while the man at the top shouts “Equality - 
let’s all go down one rung”.

Here's the poster.
 Election poster. Photograph: Election Poster 
• He said that he was prepared to accept the government's overall budget.

The government themselves have projected the total cost of all benefits, all 
tax credit and all tax relief for the next few years. And I'm happy to debate 
priorities within that envelope. I will take the envelope that they have set. 
But let's have a proper debate about the choices, not the total sum - a 
priorities debate, not an affordability debate.

It was not entirely clear whether Miliband was saying that he was just 
accepting the spending total for the sake of argument, or whether he was saying 
that Labour should go into the next election saying Labour should accept the 
coalition's overall spending envelope, but he implied that he would be willing 
to campaign in 2015 on that basis. Ed Miliband and Ed Balls have not made that 
commitment, and I presume George Osborne will be hoping that they do not do so 
because he would probably like to run a traditional Tory campaign saying that 
Labour's spending promises will lead to tax increases.

• David Miliband said the politics of the future would involve hard choices 
about spending.

It should be common ground that all Western economies need to reshape their 
social contract to meet the challenges of economic competition and demographic 
change.

Expanding childcare versus higher child benefit; Housing Benefit versus 
housebuilding; long term care versus reliefs and benefits for old age. In each 
case, we need to choose.

In the jargon, this is "switch spending". You are going to hear more about 
this before 2015.

• He conceded that Gordon Brown's use of dividing lines was wrong. In this 
passage he was ostensibly attacking George Osborne, but any student of New 
Labour politics can spot his real target.

This rancid bill is not about fairness or affordability. It reeks of politics, 
the politics of dividing lines that the current Government spent so much time 
denouncing when they were in Opposition in the dog days of the Brown 
Administration. It says a lot that within two years it has fallen into the same 
trap.

We all know the style. Invent your own enemy. Spin your campaign to a 
newspaper editor short on facts – or high on prejudice. “Frame” the debate.

Updated at 4.52pm GMT

4.08pm GMT 

Here's the full text of the David Miliband speech. 
<http://davidmiliband.net/speech/speech-on-welfare-debate/>

3.55pm GMT 

David Miliband's speech was the highlight of the debate so far, although it 
did sound like an excellent 10-minute speech that was crunched down into a good 
five-minute speech. It was powerful because it contained a specific policy idea 
(capping pension tax relief for the rich) with a vivid critique of the 
government's plans (the ladder analogy). It was also critical of Labour, 
because the passage about dividing lines was all about Gordon Brown.

I'll post some key quotes from it shortly.

Updated at 6.00pm GMT

3.50pm GMT 

Miliband is still speaking.

This "rancid" bill is not about affordability, he says.

Instead, it reeks of the politics of dividing lines that the Tories used to 
attack in the final days of the Labour government, he says.

The enemy within is not the unemployed. It is unemployment, he says.

It is hard to stomach a government that takes no responsibility for its 
mistakes, he says.

At this point Tory MPs laugh.

Miliband says he is willing to say what Labour did wrong.

Updated at 3.56pm GMT

3.48pm GMT 

David Miliband's speech
 David Miliband Photograph: BBC Parliament 
David Miliband, the Labour former foreign secretary, is speaking now.

He says every western state has to reshape the relationship between the 
individual and the state.

But this bill is flawed, he says.

The government presented this as a measure to help strivers not shirkers. But 
that distinction has been "blown out of the water".

The government claimed it was going to stop people spending a life on benefits 
with its 2010 welfare bill.

Only 0.7% of welfare spending is wasted on fraud. And immigrants are 
responsible for less fraud than other groups, he says.

He says this bill reminds him of the story about men on a ladder, where the 
bottom person is up to his neck on water. The man at the top the ladder calls 
for "equality of sacrifice - everyone down one rung". That's not fair, he says.

Capping pension relief for high earners at £20,000 would avoid the need for 
this bill, he says.

Updated at 3.55pm GMT

3.42pm GMT 

Teather is still speaking.

Percentages do not matter. They do not buy bread and milk. it is pounds and 
pence that count, she says.

Labour's Alex Cunningham intervenes. He says he has never agreed with Teather 
more than he does now, hearing her talk about language.

Teather says she does not enjoy voting against her party. She will not vote 
for the Labour amendment. But she will vote against the bill with a heavy heart.

Updated at 3.54pm GMT

3.40pm GMT 

Sarah Teather's speech
 Sarah Teather Photograph: BBC Parliament 
Sarah Teather, the Lib Dem former education minister, is speaking now.

She says people on benefits often come to her surgery. They often spend some 
time trying to explain how they are not like other benefit claimaints.

Language is very important to politicians, she says. They spent a great deal 
of time thinking about how their remarks will be reported. They test their 
messages in focus groups.

Politicians should not use language to create divisions, she says.

She says many people affected by the bill are in work.

Updated at 3.53pm GMT

3.36pm GMT 

Labour's Karen Buck is speaking now.

She says the claim that this bill is about deficit reduction is absurd.

For the first time, there are more people in poverty who are in work than out 
of work, she says.

Updated at 3.38pm GMT

3.29pm GMT 

We are now on to the backbench speeches.

Gavin Williamson, a Conservative, is speaking.

Anyone reading this debate would get the impression from Byrne's speech that 
Labour reformed welfare. It didn't, he says.

Nadhim Zahawi, a Conservative, asks Williamson what he thinks of Labour 
opposing child benefit being cut for the rich but backing higher taxes for the 
rich.

Williamson says Labour is inconsistent.

Updated at 3.31pm GMT

3.22pm GMT 

Byrne says this bill fails David Cameron's Ronseal test. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2013/jan/07/cameron-clegg-coalition-review-live-blog#block-50eafe7b95cb954a5fdacf15>
 It does not do what it promises because it does not reduce welfare spending.

He urges MPs to vote against the bill, and to "strike a blow for Britain's 
strivers". They should vote for the Labour amendment, he says.

See 10.16am for the wording of the Labour amendment.

3.19pm GMT 

Back in the debate, Byrne says Duncan Smith has gone from being "the saint of 
Easterhouse to the punch bag of the Treasury".

3.18pm GMT 

On the subject of the Children's Society and second lieutenants, the Sun's Tom 
Newton Dunn had this to say on Twitter last night.
Tom Newton Dunn (@tnewtondunn) 
Children's Society report on benefits uprating is flawed re the forces - very 
few "2nd Lieutenants with 3 children" actually exist...
 <https://twitter.com/tnewtondunn/status/288350075850203136> January 7, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/tnewtondunn/status/288350075850203136> Tom Newton Dunn 
(@tnewtondunn) 
...young Army officers straight out of Sandhurst are very seldom married, let 
alone encumbered with lots of kids too.
 <https://twitter.com/tnewtondunn/status/288350235263111168> January 7, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/tnewtondunn/status/288350235263111168> 
3.16pm GMT 

Byrne says the IFS is very clear about the fact that the rise in the income 
tax threshold will not compensate for the amount families will lose.

And he quotes from the Children's Society report on the impact of the bill 
(pdf). 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/tcs/Policy/1_benefit_up-rating_cap.pdf>

Second lieutenants could be affected, according to the Children's Society 
analysis, he says.

On average, 6,000 families in every Tory constituency will lose out. There are 
107 Tory seats where the majority is lower than this, he says.

Updated at 3.24pm GMT

3.10pm GMT 

Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem deputy leader, says the Labour government allowed 
the rich to get richer.

Byrne asks Hughes if he thinks a top-rate tax cut is the right priority.

Hughes replies: "No, I don't think it's the right priority." But it was part 
of a package that saw the income tax threshold go up.

In this place we make balanced choices. This is a reasonable, balanced choice.

3.08pm GMT 

Sarah Wollaston, the Conservative MP, intervenes.

Byrne says Wollaston made an important intervention about "shirkers" 
yesterday. (See 9.44am.) He hopes she will repeat it.

Wollaston said she made her point about shirkers. She asks Byrne how many days 
the 50p top rate of tax applied under the Labour government.

Byrne says Labour put the top rate of tax up.

3.05pm GMT 

Steve Webb, the pensions minister, intervenes.

He says if Byrne votes against the bill, he will be voting to throw away 
£1.1bn. Can he compare that with the £300m a day that Labour was spending on 
borrowing in its last year in office?

Iain Duncan Smith also intervenes. He asks Byrne to accept that the Office for 
Budget Responsibility says the rich will pay more than under Labour.

Byrne says Labour put taxes up for the rich. The government has given them a 
tax cut costing £3bn. Labour thinks the government should raise more from the 
wealthy.

Updated at 3.14pm GMT

2.59pm GMT 
 Liam Byrne Photograph: BBC Parliament 
Liam Byrne again says he wants incomes to rise faster than benefits.

Nick de Bois, a Conservative, says the best way to help those in work is to 
raise income tax thresholds.

Byrne says the increase in the tax threshold will not compensate for the 
amount of money people will lose from these measures.

Updated at 3.00pm GMT

2.55pm GMT 

A Tory MP asks Byrne about Jacqui Smith, the Labour former home secretary who 
has criticised her party's approach recently. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2258230/Labour-risks-seen-party-scroungers-opposing-benefits-squeeze-says-Jacqui-Smith.html?ITO=1490&ns_mchannel=rss&ns_campaign=1490>

Byrne says he spoke to Smith yesterday. He says the choice at the debate is 
between the Tory approach, hitting people in work, and the Labour approach, 
helping people into work.

2.52pm GMT 

Bryne says that when Duncan Smith was in opposition, he said welfare policies 
should be judged by their impact on the poor.

After today's debate, people will wonder what happened to that man.

2.51pm GMT 

Byrne says the welfare cap was meant to be introduced in April. But now it is 
just being introduced in pilot areas.

Duncan Smith's record is terrible.

Jake Berry, a Conservative, asks Byrne to explain why benefits should go up by 
more than public sector pay.

Byrne says he wants incomes to go up faster than benefits.

Updated at 3.11pm GMT

2.48pm GMT 

Liam Byrne's speech

Liam Byrne is speaking now.

He starts by saying that it is surprising George Osborne is not here.

Iain Duncan Smith intervenes. He says Osborne is making a speech in Germany. 
It was a long-standing commitment. Osborne will be back in time for the end of 
the debate.

Byrne says Osborne's absence is a disgrace.

The financial assumptions in the DWP's impact assessment are radically 
different from those in the autumn statement.

This bill is a hit and run on the poor, he says.

Osborne has a reputation as a maker of recessions. He is the first chancellor 
in 35 years to preside over a double-dip recession.

Updated at 3.10pm GMT

2.45pm GMT 

A reader has been in touch about the impact of the bill on disabled people 
claiming Employment and Support Allowance. (See 2.13pm.) According to 
Disability Rights UK, it is not just people in the work related activity group 
who are affected. There are more detailshere. 
<http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/upratingbill.htm>

Updated at 3.01pm GMT

2.44pm GMT 

Liam Byrne intervenes. He says the coalition's work programme is "literally 
worse than nothing".

Duncan Smith says the coalition's record at getting people into work is better 
than Labour's. Labour spent money like drunks on a Friday night, he says.

2.41pm GMT 

Duncan Smith says that when Labour was in power, it came up with a programme 
called Step Up. Gordon Brown proposed it. Duncan Smith suggests Ed Balls was 
involved. Balls is shaking his head. Duncan Smith says that Balls is now 
denying having been a friend of Brown's.

Duncan Smith says Step Up involved finding work for the unemployed. But it was 
never introduced nationwide because research showed it had little effect. Every 
job was costing £10,000, he says. And prospects for the under-25s got worse.

Over the Christmas recess Labour was attacked for not having a plan. So Ed 
Balls remembered this programme, and proposed it, Duncan Smith says.

And Labour would raid pensions to fund it. It's "pathetic", Duncan Smith says.

Updated at 2.45pm GMT

2.37pm GMT 

Caroline Lucas, the Green MP, says this is a "mean and miserable piece of 
legislation from a mean and miserable government".

2.32pm GMT 

John Redwood, a Conservative, intervenes. Will Duncan Smith confirm that the 
government is committed to getting inflation down?

(In a post on his blog  
<http://johnredwoodsdiary.com/2013/01/08/todays-vote-on-benefits/>today, 
Redwood says that he supports the bill but that the best way to cut the 
benefits bill would be "to remove eligibility from recent arrivals in the UK".)

Duncan Smith says he agrees with Redwood about inflation.

Updated at 2.34pm GMT

2.30pm GMT 

Duncan Smith addresses Ed Balls, who is in the chamber. He likes to dish it 
out but he does not like to take it, Duncan Smith says.

2.28pm GMT 

Duncan Smith says £4bn was lost through fraud and error in the tax credits 
system. Another £4bn could also be lost, he says.

Labour would spend more, tax more and borrow more, he says.

2.26pm GMT 

Ian Paisley, the DUP MP, asks Duncan Smith to confirm that benefits will 
actually go up in cash terms.

Duncan Smith says that is correct.

2.25pm GMT 

Duncan Smith says that under Labour nine out of 10 families were eligible for 
tax credits. Some familes earning more than £70,000 qualified. What a nonsense, 
he says.

2.24pm GMT 
 Iain Duncan Smith Photograph: BBC Parliament 
Liam Byrne intervenes again.

He says the amount spent on out-of-work benefits fell by £7.5bn between 
1996/97 and 2009/10.

Duncan Smith says that Byrne has not mentioned the amount Labour spent on tax 
credits.

Labour increased spending on tax credits to buy votes before an election, he 
says.

(This has been a constant line of attack for some days now, although Duncan 
Smith's tax credit claims did not survive the Channel 4 FactCheck treatment.) 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/factcheck/factcheck-ids-tax-credit-claims-discredited/12160>

2.19pm GMT 

Duncan Smith says Labour needs to explain what it would do to cut the deficit.

Andrew George, a Lib Dem, suggests the government should introduce a bill 
saying benefits should not increase by more than average wage inflation.

Duncan Smith says that recently benefits have gone up by more than wages. The 
government is trying to get them back in synch.

George says the government does not know what will happen to inflation. That 
is why introducing a formula might be more fair.

Duncan Smith says the government's priority is reducing the deficit.

2.15pm GMT 

In response to an intervention, Duncan Smith conceded the point about 
employment and support allowance. (See 2.13pm.)

Labour's Derek Twigg asks Duncan Smith to confirm that households with a 
disabled person are more likely to be affected. (See 12.42pm.)

Duncan Smith accepts that. But he says Labour introduced ESA.

Updated at 2.15pm GMT

2.13pm GMT 

Duncan Smith says there are exemptions. The 1% cap does not apply to 
pensioners, to the disabled or to carers, he says.

(This is not strictly true. Scope, the disability charity, sent me an email 
after I posted a summary of the DWP's impact assessment saying that some people 
on employment and support allowance will be affected. There are more details
here.) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2012/dec/20/welfare-benefits-uprating-politics-live-blog#block-50d322a995cb94a7be21b260>

2.08pm GMT 

Liam Byrne, the shadow work and pensions secretary, intervenes.

Could Duncan Smith confirm that welfare spending has actually gone up £14bn 
since 2010?

Duncan Smith says much of that money has gone on pensions.

Updated at 2.31pm GMT

2.07pm GMT 

MPs debate the welfare benefits uprating bill

Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, is opening the debate now.

He says the coaliton inherited and "unsustainable and costly" welfare system.

People were trapped in welfare.

It was also costly. Liam Byrne needs no reminding. He was the person who told 
the coalition that there was "no money left".

Updated at 2.49pm GMT

1.50pm GMT 

A welfare benefits uprating bill reading list

The welfare benefits uprating bill debate will start shortly.

Before it gets going, here's a reading list.

Some of the best blogs about the bill posted today

• Gary Gibbon on his Channel 4 blog says the Tories are abandoning the 
"strivers/shirkers" rhetoric originally used to defend their welfare cuts. 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/gary-gibbon-on-politics/tories-to-tone-down-skiver-attacks/21712>

In discussions ahead of today’s vote on the benefits cap they’ve decided to 
tone down the language on skivers versus strivers. They think they risk turning 
what they remain convinced could be an “electoral game-changer,” as one aide to 
David Cameron called it, into a millstone if they get the language too strident 
and play into the old Tory image of “the nasty party.” So the top team, 
including George Osborne (who’d probably used the language more than anyone), 
is changing the tone – well, that’s the agreed plan anyway.

• Duncan O'Leary at Demos says it is hard to see which party will gain from 
this debate. <http://www.demos.co.uk/blog/theelephantintheroom>

Both sides ought to re-consider how they are framing the arguments. Once upon 
a time, modern conservatism was an optimistic creed: its basic frame was of 
good people in bad systems. Public sector workers were good people weighed down 
by targets and bureaucracy, for example. Welfare claimants were good people who 
wanted to work, but were being held back by a system that rewarded the wrong 
things. Today the frame is different: it’s the people with the blinds down who 
are the problem, not the system that is failing them and the country.

Labour too should do some reflecting. The problem with the welfare bill is not 
simply that it hits strivers rather than shirkers – it is that the distinction 
between the two makes little sense in many cases.

• A Guardian data blog post about how much welfare spending actually costs. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2013/jan/08/uk-benefit-welfare-spending>

• George Eaton at the New Statesman lists four reasons why the bill should be 
defeated. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/01/why-welfare-uprating-bill-deserves-be-defeated>

• Benedict Brogan on his Telegraph blog says the Tories should not appear to 
relish cutting benefits. 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/benedictbrogan/100197024/labours-in-a-welfare-trap-but-david-cameron-mustnt-gloat/>

Some background research and analysis

• A House of Commons library briefing paper about the bill (pdf). 
<http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/RP13-1.pdf>

• The DWP's impact assessment for the bill (pdf). 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/docs/welfare-benefits-up-rating-bill-ia.pdf>

• An Institute for Fiscal Studies analysis of the bill. 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/6539>

• A report on the impact of the bill from the Child Poverty Action Group (pdf).
 
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/sites/all/modules/contrib/pubdlcnt/pubdlcnt.php?file=/sites/default/files/The%20Double%20Lockout%20FINAL.pdf&nid=1247>

• A Resolution Foundation report on the impact of the 2012 autumn statement, 
including the 1% benefits cap (pdf). 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/us/downloads/resolution-foundation-autumn-statement-2012-analys/Resolution_Foundation_AS_Reaction.pdf>

• The Treasury's distributional analysis of the impact of the 2012 autumn 
statement (pdf). 
<http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/as2012_distributional_analysis_impact_on_households(1).pdf>

• A Compass report (pdf) saying that rich tax avoiders are the real shirkers. 
<http://clients.squareeye.net/uploads/compass/documents/COM_J307_strikers_scroungers_shirkers_30%2011%2012%202_1.pdf>

Polling evidence

• Anthony Wells at UK Polling Report on the latest YouGov polling on welfare.  
<http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/blog/archives/6805>

• A post by Wells about the way different polling organisations obtain quite 
different results when they ask about welfare. 
<http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/blog/archives/6701>

• A post from me about the contrary polling results on this subject. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2012/dec/20/welfare-benefits-uprating-politics-live-blog#block-50d2d5ecb579a9dd79231b13>

• A post from YouGov's Peter Kellner about public attitudes to welfare. 
<http://yougov.co.uk/news/2013/01/07/welfare-reform-who-whom/>

1.37pm GMT 

Lunchtime summary

• Iain Duncan Smith has defended the government's decision to restrict social 
security and tax credit payments to below-inflation rises, saying it will bring 
about a rebalancing of wages and benefit payments, ahead of a Commons vote on 
the proposal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/08/duncan-smith-defends-benefits-squeeze>
. Nick Clegg also defended the plans at deputy prime minister's questions. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20936833> The Commons debate on the 
welfare benefits uprating bill will start at around 2pm and I will be covering 
it in detail.

• The Department for Work and Pensions has confirmed that almost 10m 
households will lose out as a result of the bill. Poorer families will lose 
more than richer families, the DWP says. (See 12.42pm.)

• A second Lib Dem MP has said he will vote against the government over the 
welfare benefits uprating bill. This is what John Leech said:

I voted against the Welfare Reform Bill, and I find it objectionable that the 
Tories are using 'Skivers v Strivers' rhetoric to justify a cut to seven 
million working families. I strongly support raising the tax threshold for 
low-paid workers, but this cut will wipe out much of that good work.

Yesterday Sarah Teather, the Lib Dem former education minister, also said she 
would vote against the bill. 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/01/07/sarah-teather-lib-dem-benefit_n_2424001.html>

• A consultation has concluded that a London hospital trust which ran up debts 
of £150m should be broken up 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-20944705>.

• Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, has partly blamed Theresa May for 
the disappearance of a terrrorist suspect. Ibrahim Magag absconded from a 
Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures (Tpims) notice after failing to 
meet his overnight residence condition. In a Commons urgent question, Cooper 
said that May was partly culpable because Tpims are less stringent than the 
Labour control orders they replaced.

Magag is still missing after 13 days. Clearly the home secretary has no idea 
where he is. You should put national interest ahead of your political interests 
and stop ducking this. Isn't it time you took some responsibility and sorted 
this mess out?

May said under the control order regime suspects also went missing.

• Nick Clegg has suggested that the 45p top rate of tax will not be cut before 
2015. (See 12.15pm.)

• Network Rail has unveiled a plan to invest £37.5bn in Britain's rail 
infrastructure over the next five years <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20938280>.

Updated at 3.34pm GMT

1.17pm GMT 

There's also a statement on the EU fisheries policy in the Commons. That means 
the debate probably won't start until about 2pm.

1.14pm GMT 

David Miliband has sent out this teaser.
David Miliband (@DMiliband) 
Looking forward to speaking in today's debate on welfare in the House of 
Commons.
 <https://twitter.com/DMiliband/status/288634320795627521> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/DMiliband/status/288634320795627521> 
12.42pm GMT 

The DWP's welfare benefits uprating bill impact assessment 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/docs/welfare-benefits-up-rating-bill-ia.pdf> (the 
Whitehall document spelling out the exact financial implications of a piece of 
legislation) runs to 11 pages. Here are the key points.

• The DWP says that nearly 10m households - or 30% of all households - will 
lose money. On average they will lose £3 a week, but the poorest families will 
lose the most.

Here is the chart setting out the figures.
 Impact of welfare benefits uprating bill Photograph: DWP 
And here is a quote from the document.

The average change for those households in lower deciles is higher than those 
in higher deciles. This is because they currently receive a higher level of 
benefit payments and so they are impacted more from the same percentage change 
in benefit. Those in higher deciles who are affected may only receive Child 
Benefit.

• Lone parents will lose more than other family types.

Lone parents are the family type who are most likely to be affected and also 
have the highest average change (-£5 per week). This is because they have a 
lower employment rate than average and also often qualify for in-work support.

• Women are more likely to be affected than men. Some 33% of women are 
affected, compared to 29% of men.

• Households with a member who is disabled are more likely to be affected than 
non-disabled households. That's because, although the 1% cap does not cover 
disability benefits, people with a disability are more likely to be receive the 
benefits that are covered by the bill.

• The bill will save £1.1bn in 2014/15 in cash terms, and £1.9bn in 2015/16. 
Savings will be higher if inflation is higher than forecast, but lower if 
inflation comes in below forecast.

12.17pm GMT 

The Department for Work and Pensions has just published an impact assessment 
for the welfare benefits uprating bill.
Patrick Wintour (@patrickwintour) 
bit.ly/ZBBUxe <http://t.co/nYCNBu7a> DWP Impact assessment of upratings bill 
has been published here
 <https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/status/288619735451586561> January 8, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/status/288619735451586561> 
12.15pm GMT 
 Nick Clegg Photograph: BBC Parliament 
Nick Clegg has been taking questions in the Commons. Harriet Harman, his 
Labour shadow, challenged him to defend the welfare benefits uprating bill and 
their exchanges mostly did not add anything new to the debate. But Clegg did 
appear to rule out any further cut in the top rate of tax before 2015.

On the upper rate of tax, her party makes a great deal of play about 50p. It 
is worth putting on record that the 50p upper rate of tax only existed in 36 
days out of the 13 years her government [were in power]. I know they had a 
deathbed conversion to the 50p, but now they pretend that they were believers 
all along. Actually, the upper rate of tax from Labour was 40p. That's what it 
was. Under this government it will be 45p. Justify that.

Updated at 12.19pm GMT

11.58am GMT 

You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/all> And all the politics stories filed 
yesterday, including some in today's paper, arehere. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2013/jan/07/all>

As for the rest of the papers, here's the PoliticsHome list of top 10 must 
reads, <http://www.politicshome.com/uk/todays_must_reads.html> here's the 
ConservativeHome round-up of today's political stories 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/frontpage/2013/01/newslinks-for-tuesday-8th-january-2013.html>
and here'sthe New Statesman list of top 10 comment articles. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/staggers/2013/01/morning-call-pick-papers-4>

I've already mentioned some of the alternative accounts of the IFS report 
about the welfare benefits uprating bill. (See 11.32am.) Here are two other 
articles I found particularly interesting.

• Janan Ganesh in the Financial Times (subscription) says that although the 
government is succeeding at cutting the welfare bill, its attempts to reform 
the welfare system could fail. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1dad5608-58bd-11e2-bd9e-00144feab49a.html#axzz2HNgL0Nl6>

Much is made of the purported lack of faith that George Osborne, the 
chancellor, has in Mr Duncan Smith, as if concerns are confined to the 
traditionally snooty Treasury. The truth is that it is hard to find any senior 
minister or mandarin who does not name welfare reform – along with a winter 
hospital crisis – as one of the biggest bombs ticking away beneath the 
government. And their doubts are less about Mr Duncan Smith’s capacity as an 
executive than about his plan. The blueprint was drawn up by those on the 
socially conservative wing of the party. They are people of faith and good 
intentions but not always sticklers for analytical rigour.

• Simeon Kerr in the Financial Times (subscription) says that a Commons 
committee inquiry into relations with Saudi Arabia and Bahrain has excluded 
evidence from the opposition in Bahrain. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b8bb98f8-5903-11e2-b59d-00144feab49a.html#axzz2HNgL0Nl6>

MPs have come under fire for their handling of an inquiry into the UK’s 
approach to its Gulf allies after it emerged that evidence from the opposition 
in the troubled state of Bahrain had been excluded.

Lord Avebury, vice-chairman of the parliamentary human rights committee, said 
he was “very disturbed” about the omission of dissident voices from a Commons 
probe into the UK’s relations with Saudi Arabia and Bahrain.

In a letter to the foreign affairs committee, which is conducting the inquiry, 
he said the list of approved submissions published last week excluded “all the 
pro-democracy and human rights submissions on Bahrain”, while including 
pro-government contributions.

11.46am GMT 

Civil servants are not always devoid of a sense of humour. Last year the toy 
company Bigjigs submitted a bid to run the west coast mainline.As they reveal 
on their website, 
<http://blog.bigjigstoys.co.uk/our-wcml-bid-has-been-accepted-almost/>they 
eventually got a rather sweet reply from Patrick McLoughlin's private secretary.

Updated at 12.00pm GMT

11.39am GMT 

For the record, here are today's YouGov GB polling figures. 
<http://yougov.co.uk/news/2013/01/08/update-labour-lead-9/>

Labour: 41% (down 2 points from YouGov in the Sunday Times)

Conservatives: 32% (no change)

Lib Dems: 11% (up 1)

Ukip: 9% (no change)

Labour lead: 9 points (down 2)

Government approval: -29 (up 4)

11.32am GMT 

According to the Daily Telegraph, the welfare benefits uprating bill is going 
to clobber people in work. It's running a story today with the headline:Seven 
million working families hit by benefits cut. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9786389/Seven-million-working-families-hit-by-benefits-cut.html>

But the Sun's version of the story has a rather different slant. Its story 
carries the headline: 9 in 10 jobless will bear the brunt of benefits freeze. 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/4731686/9-in-10-jobless-will-bear-the-brunt-of-benefits-freeze.html>

Both stories are based on the same report from the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies. <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/6539> How come? A larger number of 
people who are working will be affected. But people who are out of work will 
lose more on average in cash terms, and they are also proportionally more 
likely to be affected. Here's the IFS explanation.

Because the proposed uprating changes apply to almost all benefits and tax 
credits, both in-work and out-of-work households are affected. Of 2.8 million 
workless households of working age, 2.5 million will see their entitlements 
reduced, by an average of about £215 per year in 2015 –16. Of 14.1 million 
working-age households with someone in work, 7.0 million will see their 
entitlements reduced, by an average of about £165 per year. Note that this 
figure includes 3.0 million families who lose only from the cuts to Child 
Benefit, at an average of about £75 per year (monetary amounts are in current 
prices).

Updated at 11.59am GMT

11.18am GMT 

The Unite union has published the results of a survey of workers (mostly its 
members) saying that only 17% of them think the welfare cuts will make the 
system fairer.

Here's an extract from the news release.

Nearly 60 per cent of working people believe changes to the welfare system 
will plunge people in to poverty and make life harder for their own families, 
with just 17 per cent believing the changes would make the system fairer ...

Polled over the New Year, nearly half of working people (47 per cent) reveal 
that they are in the dark over how the government's cuts will hit them.

The findings also point to growing fuel poverty and increasing reliance on 
food banks, with nearly one in four (24 per cent) of those losing out because 
of the cuts saying they would cut back on heating and 23 per cent on food.

11.15am GMT 

There are two urgent questions in the Commons this afternoon.
Labour Whips (@labourwhips) 
2 Urgent Questions and a statement from 1230 PM: 1. @yvettecoopermp 
<https://twitter.com/yvettecoopermp> asking for a statement on the 
disappearance of Ibrahim Magag...
 <https://twitter.com/labourwhips/status/288603575695835136> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/labourwhips/status/288603575695835136> Labour Whips 
(@labourwhips) 
2nd UQ: Joan Ruddock asking @jeremy_hunt <https://twitter.com/jeremy_hunt> 
about the report of the special administrator on South London Healthcare Trust
 <https://twitter.com/labourwhips/status/288604195316191232> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/labourwhips/status/288604195316191232> 
That means the welfare debate will not start until about 2pm.

11.01am GMT 

After Sarah Wollaston posted a tweet about her objection to "skivers" rhetoric 
(see 9.44am), her Tory colleagueLaura Sandys posted a tweet saying she agreed.  
<https://twitter.com/LauraSandysMP/status/288419967290974208>

The ConservativeHome editor Tim Montgomerie also backed Wollaston. 
<https://twitter.com/TimMontgomerie/status/288421854639702017>

10.55am GMT 

Over the holiday period there was a lively and intelligent debate on the 
internet about whether the Tories have any chance of winning the next election. 
If you want to catch up,this post by Anthony Wells at UK Polling Report 
provides the best overall summary 
<http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/blog/archives/6744> (although it's not short).

Lord Ashcroft has now written his own contribution. He is not as gloomy about 
his party's prospects asPaul Goodman 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/majority_conservatism/2012/12/why-cameron-cant-win-a-majority-in-2015.html>
, but he's not betting on a Tory victory.

Unlike the commentators, the bookies have to back their theories with cash. 
Their expectations are clear. For them, an overall majority for Labour is the 
most likely result in May 2015 – Ladbrokes will give you only 11/8, and Paddy 
Power 5/4 on this outcome. A hung parliament looks to them less probable than a 
Labour victory, with the two firms offering 13/8 and 7/4 respectively on no 
party winning outright.

The odds on a Conservative majority look comparatively remote. Paddy Power 
will give you 11/4, and Ladbrokes a tasty 3/1 on such a result. As far as the 
Liberal Democrats are concerned, Ladbrokes expect their most likely haul to be 
between 21 and 40 seats – and the odds show they believe Nick Clegg’s party is 
more likely to end up with fewer than 20 than to win more than 40.

With the polls as they are, and political prospects as they currently seem, it 
would be hard to argue that the bookmakers are seriously misguided. Any 
realistic survey of the political landscape surely shows the odds are against 
the Tories metaphorically as well as literally.

10.37am GMT 

Summary
 Liam Byrne, the shadow work and pensions secretary. Photograph: Lewis Whyld/PA
Liam Byrne, the shadow work and pensions secretary, will speak for Labour in 
the welfare benefits uprating bill debate. He has been rehearsing his arguments 
on the airwaves all morning. Here's an extract. I've taken the quote from
PoliticsHome. <http://www.politicshome.com>

The first point is we wouldn’t be giving £3bn away in a tax cut for Britain’s 
richest citizens. But the second problem I’ve got, I suppose, with this bill is 
that it doesn’t solve the underlying reason why the benefit bill is rising over 
the next few years. If you actually look at the period that this bill is in 
effect, the benefit bill doesn’t come down over this period –it actually goes 
up by another £8bn. Now why is that?

It’s because it doesn’t create another single new job, get any one more person 
off the dole. It doesn’t fix the problems the Government’s got with the Work 
Programme, it doesn’t solve the IT chaos that’s broken out in the Universal 
Credit system. It doesn’t actually bring down the unemployment bill, and so 
that’s why what Labour is going to do today is we’re going to propose a motion 
that calls for something very different.

We’re going to say look, welfare spending does need to come down, but there’s 
a different way of doing it, and the different way of doing it is to introduce 
a compulsory jobs guarantee that means if you’ve been out of work for a couple 
of years, that’s it. Your JSA will have to stop, you’ll have to take a job, and 
if you can’t find one we’ll invest in making sure there’s one available for you.

(By the way, Labour's claim that cutting the top rate of tax will cost the 
Treasury £3bn is contested. For more details,here's the transcript of Andrew 
Neil having a row about this with Ed Balls.) 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2012/03/25/ed-balls-on-top-rate-tax-cut-a-question-of-priorities/>

Updated at 10.56am GMT

10.22am GMT 

Steve Webb, the Lib Dem pensions minister, was on ITV's Daybreak this morning. 
As PoliticsHome  <http://www.politicshome.com>reports, he said he would never 
call the unemployed "scroungers".

As a Liberal Democrat in the coalition I wouldn’t dream of describing people 
on benefit as scroungers. You hear many people are desperate for a job, and 
that’s why we have to make sure that, for example, interest rates are kept low.

Updated at 10.54am GMT

10.16am GMT 

Votes in the House of Commons are not just about passing laws, or not passing 
laws. They're also about establishing positions, and allowing parties to go 
into election campaigns saying "we voted for X".

If you listen to the Tories, Labour is today voting against welfare cuts and 
in favour of paying benefit claimants more than public sector workers.

But Labour's version is different. It argues that the party is voting in 
favour of a welfare reform plan that would cut the benefits bill and in favour 
of the long-term unemployed being forced to work in return for their benefits.

The details are set out in the amendment to the bill tabled by Ed Miliband. 
Normally amendments of this kind just highlight the opposition's complaints 
about a bill. This one sets out an entire alternative policy. Here it is in 
full.

That this House declines to give a Second Reading to the Welfare Benefits 
Up-rating Bill because it fails to address the reasons why the cost of benefits 
is exceeding the Government’s plans; notes that the Resolution Foundation has 
calculated that 68 per cent of households affected by these measures are in 
work and that figures from the Institute for Fiscal Studies show that all the 
measures announced in the Autumn Statement, including those in the Bill, will 
mean a single-earner family with children on average will be £534 worse off by 
2015; further notes that the Bill does not include anything to remedy the 
deficiencies in the Government’s work programme or the slipped timetable for 
universal credit; believes that a comprehensive plan to reduce the benefits 
bill must include measures to create economic growth and help the 129,400 
adults over the age of 25 out of work for 24 months or more, but that the Bill 
does not do so; further believes that the Bill should introduce a compulsory 
jobs guarantee, which would give long-term unemployed adults a job they would 
have to take up or lose benefits, funded by limiting tax relief on pension 
contributions for people earning over £150,000 to 20 per cent; and further 
believes that the proposals in the Bill are unfair when the additional rate of 
income tax is being reduced, which will result in those earning over a million 
pounds per year receiving an average tax cut of over £100,000 a year.

Miliband has been making this point on Twitter.
Ed Miliband (@Ed_Miliband) 
Today the Labour Party is going to be voting against a tax on strivers and in 
favour of real welfare reform to put people back to work.
 <https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband/status/288582708970545153> January 8, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband/status/288582708970545153> 
10.02am GMT 

Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, did a round of interviews 
this morning to defend the government's plans. Here are the key points. I've 
taken the quotes fromPoliticsHome <http://www.politicshome.com> and the Press 
Association.

• Duncan Smith suggested that the Conservatives could cut benefits for wealthy 
pensioners after the next election. Wealthy pensioners will still get benefits 
like free bus passes and winter fuel payments until 2015 because David Cameron 
promised to protect them during the 2010 campaign. But Duncan Smith floated the 
prospect of pensioners being told the rules could change after 2015.

We gave that clear commitment at the last election. You give a commitment, you 
do it for the right reasons - which, as I said, pensioners need a much longer 
time if you are going to make changes to their income, because they cannot 
effect that change.

• He rejected Labour claims that it was unfair to curb benefits while giving a 
tax cut to the rich.

The very richest do not get a tax cut. What we established here is that the 
top 5% of British people working to pay the highest levels of taxes – they pay 
about 50% of all of the income tax under this Government. Let me remind you 
from Liam Byrne and Labour, who were in power for something in the order of 
4000 days, only 30 days of those did they actually think of raising the upper 
rate of tax to 50 pence, this is hypocrisy. We put it back to 45 because it 
didn’t make the money that they thought it would. It costs dramatically to 
raise and it drove people away from the UK.

• He said allowing welfare payments to go up by more than wages would decrease 
the incentive to find work.

• He said Labour was "unrealistic and ridiculous" because it could not explain 
how it would fund higher welfare payments. He also said it was "nonsense" for 
Labour to say it was on the side of strivers. "They have punished strivers over 
the years through higher levels of taxes and this deficit is punishing those 
who are working, trying to get by and provide for their families," he said.

I only heard the Today programme interview during which Duncan Smith was not 
pressed particularly hard about "shirkers" or the Conservative party's "slob on 
the sofa" advertising campaign. That's a shame because,according to a column 
Peter Oborne wrote in the Telegraph just before Christmas, 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9762509/Iain-Duncan-Smith-has-to-win-the-day-in-the-Tory-war-over-welfare.html>
 Duncan Smith went "absolutely livid" when he heard about that poster.

Updated at 10.12am GMT

9.44am GMT 

Benedict Brogan in his blog named Sarah Wollaston as a Tory MP unhappy about 
George Osborne's "skivers" rhetoric. Here's the tweet she posted last night.
Sarah Wollaston MP (@drwollastonmp) 
#newsnight <https://twitter.com/search/%23newsnight> Not just libdems unhappy 
at terms like 'skivers'. Difficult decisions should not use divisive rhetoric
 <https://twitter.com/drwollastonmp/status/288418760153522176> January 7, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/drwollastonmp/status/288418760153522176> 
9.29am GMT 

According to Janan Ganesh’s recent biography, The Austerity Chancellor, George 
Osborne believes that it is important for politicians to be able to “weaponise” 
policy. The chancellor doesn’t just mean coming up with ideas that are popular. 
He means sharpening them, finessing them, and spinning them until they become 
electorally potent, capable of swaying voters and disabling opponents who find 
them impossible to argue against convincingly. Ganesh cites the Tories’ 
pre-2010 “jobs tax” slogan as an example, but the welfare benefits uprating 
bill, which gets its second reading in the Commons this afternoon, is the best 
example in recent history of policy being weaponised.

The bill imposes a 1% cap on benefit increases (ie, an effective cut) until 
2016 and it is a testament to Osborne’s ingenuity because it is a piece of 
legislation that is both apparently popular and opposed by the Labour party. At 
the Conservative conference last year Osborne started making a distinction 
between “strivers” and “shirkers”, the people who supposedly stay at home with 
the curtains drawn while everyone else goes out to work, and the bill is 
designed to place Labour on the side of the “shirkers”.In the Observer at the 
weekend, Andrew Rawnsley said it should be properly described as the Welfare 
(Make Labour Look Like the Party for Skiving Fat Slobs) bill. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jan/05/labour-party-bill> Before 
Christmas the Conservatives launched an advertising campaign 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/thetorydiary/2012/12/cchq-launches-attack-ad-in-marginal-constituencies-hardworking-families-vs-people-who-dont-work.html>
 that actually depicted a slob (but not a particularly fat one) on the sofa. 
More recently the Conservatives have toned down their “skivers” language, but 
they are still on the offensive and today they have launched a new poster 
attacking Labour for opposing the bill.
 Conservative poster Photograph: Conservative party 
There are more details here. 
<http://www.conservatives.com/News/News_stories/2013/01/Returning_fairness_to_welfare.aspx>

But is this bill really going to work as well for the Conservatives as Osborne 
hopes? Although the public appear to approve, the polls give quite different 
answers, depending on how the questions are asked, and the TUC has published
some important research showing that opposition to welfare spending is based on 
ignorance about where the money actually goes. 
<http://www.tuc.org.uk/social/tuc-21796-f0.cfm>Some 60% of the people who will 
lose out as a result of this bill are in work and it is conceivable that this 
could backfire. In a Telegraph blog today, the Tory commentator Benedict Brogan 
says that the public could side with Labour.

When times are tough there is little collective appetite for generosity beyond 
what is affordable and fair. But tone is all. The challenge for the Tories is 
to portray themselves as doing what is difficult but necessary in the national 
interest, without appearing to relish either the measure or the game too much. 
It may not be surprising that Sarah Teather will vote against the Government, 
but her point about ‘playground politics’ will find some sympathisers. Sarah 
Wollaston, the Tory GP, for example, said last night: “Not just libdems unhappy 
at terms like ‘skivers’. Difficult decisions should not use divisive rhetoric”. 
Politics sometimes requires going for the kill, but Mr Cameron cannot be 
certain whether voters will be happy to see Labour’s noses being rubbed in it 
today.

You can read the full blog here. 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/benedictbrogan/100197024/labours-in-a-welfare-trap-but-david-cameron-mustnt-gloat/>

The bill will easily get a second reading today and there is unlikely to be a 
large government rebellion. But I will be covering it in detail because this is 
such an important debate. Welfare spending will be a key issue - possibly the 
key issue - dividing the parties in the runup to the general election.

Here’s the full diary for the day.

11.30am: Nick Clegg takes deputy prime minister’s questions in the Commons.

12.30pm: MPs start debating the welfare benefits uprating bill. Iain Duncan 
Smith, the work and pensions secretary, is opening the debate, and Liam Byrne, 
his Labour shadow, is responding. I will cover the debate in detail until it 
ends at 7pm.

2.40pm: Sir Hugh Orde, the president of the Association of Chief Police 
Officers, gives evidence to the Commons home affairs committee about policing. 
At 4pm Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, 
gives evidence.

As usual, I'll also be covering all the breaking political news as well as 
looking at the papers and bringing you the best politics from the web. I'll 
post a lunchtime summary before the debate starts at 12.30pm, and another when 
it's over.

If you want to follow me on Twitter, I'm at @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>

Updated at 10.09am GMT
 