
MPs are to debate a private member's bill designed to give the UK a guaranteed 
referendum on Britain's membership of the EU before 2017.

The debate was stalled a fortnight ago after mainly Labour MPs tried to talk 
the bill out.

MPs are expected to vote on Friday on an amendment, tabled by Adam Afriyie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie>, the Conservative MP for 
Windsor, that would bring the referendum forward to 2014.

Although many Tory MPs agree with him, he is likely to attract limited support 
as Conservative MPs gather around the position adopted by No 10.

David Cameron has said he needs time to renegotiate Britain's relationship 
with the EU before he puts the new arrangement to a public vote after the next 
election – by 2017 at the latest.

More than 100 backbenchers have written to Afriyie telling him to drop the 
amendment, according to reports.

"The whole Tory party is united behind giving people a say," the Windsor MP 
said this week. "What we have here is a difference in timing. The reason 2014 
is important is it is within this parliament. That is the only time we can 
guarantee to deliver something."

He has called Cameron's offer "pie in the sky". The prime minister hopes the 
referendum bill will be sabotaged in the Lords as a political shield that will 
protect him during the European parliament elections next year. The elections 
are likely to see Ukip come first in terms of seats as they reap the rewards of 
a backlash over UK borders being opened to Romanian and Bulgarian immigrants.

James Wharton, the Conservative MP for Stockton South who is behind the EU 
referendum bill, has threatened to call Labour MPs to account at the election 
if they vote against a referendum: "To those MPs who wish to scupper the bill 
and block a referendum, I would say this – you will have voters to answer to in 
2015. I know my constituents would take a dim view of those who would deny them 
a say."
 