
The homes of the men and women that run Australia have dark secrets hidden in 
their walls and ceilings. When Mr Fluffy came to visit, he left a surprise that 
has made its way into the wardrobes, the floors and even the beds of parents 
and their children.


Mr Fluffy may seem like a playful name that would fit well in a picture book, 
but in the Australian city of Canberra it’s a name of fear, of panic, and when 
uttered to homeowners it can mean only one thing: asbestos.

“Our home was once our safe haven. It is now our prison. We do not feel safe 
in our home, and we do not invite visitors into our home,” said Brianna 
Heseltine, the founder of the Mr Fluffy Owners and Residents Action Group.

“We have abandoned as much of the old part of our home as we can, moving our 
toddler and baby into an extension added by the former owners. We left our 
toddler’s clothing, bedding, shoes and books in his old built-in wardrobe after 
finding cracks at the join between the ceiling and the wall, and a hole at the 
back of a shelf.”

The heart of the Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> has 
been gripped by renewed fears this year about a dangerous form of loose-fill 
asbestos used by a sole contractor known as Mr Fluffy in 1968.

A campaign spearheaded by Heseltine and other residents of Mr Fluffy homes has 
catapulted the issue onto front pages, as homeowners, workers and the 
government struggle to come to grips with a problem that is believed to affect 
over 1,000 homes - and may be even more widespread than previously thought.

Mr Fluffy’s Asbestos Coatings: ‘retains winter warmth’

The story of Mr Fluffy spans decades. A lone operator by the name of Dirk 
Jansen began supplying home insulation across the territory in 1968. His 
advertisements would appear in newspapers, quite innocuously, next to a 
crossword or food advertisements, tax agents, or school tuition. The cheerful 
font would proclaim the benefits of his marvellous product:“Asbestosfluf: The 
perfect thermal insulation material.” 
<http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/107060499?searchTerm=&searchLimits=l-publictag=Dirk+Jansen+and+Company>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406865996979%2Fa397f82a-9bb9-43a5-afe3-46334c6429ae-631x720.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406865996979%2Fa397f82a-9bb9-43a5-afe3-46334c6429ae-631x720.png>
 A Mr Fluffy asbestos advertisement from 1969. Photograph: National Library of 
Australia 
Jansen was using a type of asbestos known as amosite. This loose form of 
asbestos is particularly dangerous because it doesn’t have a bonding agent and 
the fibres are more easily spread.

“The problem with loose fill asbestos is that any air movement generates 
fibres. Most asbestos compound material are in bonded materials like fibro,” 
said Peter Tighe, the head of the federal government’s Asbestos Safety and 
Eradication Agency.

“The issue with the Mr Fluffy product is that because it’s so loose it was 
able to migrate into corners of houses and could sit on top of cabling, water 
pipes, it works its way into the subfloor, and still sits in cracks even when 
it’s been vacuumed out.”

Just one stray fibre and one short breath is all it can take for exposure to 
occur.This small exposure can lead to lung cancer 
<http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Risk/asbestos>, mesothelioma and 
other serious dust diseases. The exposure can lie dormant for many years until 
the diseases can manifest themselves.

It wasn’t long until the federal government began keeping an eye on Jansen. 
The ACT Health Services Branchsent an inspector to investigate possible hazards 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0ByW2V3f-jYBRWm1jeDd5T1lIQmc/edit?usp=sharing> 
arising from Mr Fluffy’s work in 1968. The report said: “Some thought should be 
given to whether D. Jansen & Co Pty Ltd should be dissuaded or even prevented 
from using asbestos as insulation material in houses.”

Even at this early point, the report found that there was “some evidence” that 
community exposure to asbestos dust was “undesirable.” Despite this, Jansen 
kept working for another decade until 1978. He died much later in 2001, and 
while there were reports his death was linked to mesothelioma, a family 
spokesmantold The Canberra Times 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/mr-fluffy-descendants-express-sympathy-for-affected-families-20140724-zwewf.html>
 he died from a heart attack.

But eventually the advertisements changed. 
<http://trove.nla.gov.au/ndp/del/article/102032763?searchTerm=&searchLimits=l-publictag=Dirk+Jansen+and+Company>
 Throughout the 1980s a sustained campaign was waged by unions, health 
organisations and lobby groups against the risks of asbestos. The campaign 
snowballed, eventually leading to bans on asbestos use across the country.

Finally, responding to widespread panic about Mr Fluffy’s legacy, the ACT 
administration began a massive survey of over 8,000 homes to determine the 
extent of asbestos contamination. From 1988 to 1993, millions were spent on a 
survey and remediation program, which led to the creation of a list of houses 
believed to be contaminated by Mr Fluffy’s work.


The houses were cleaned and the families returned to what they thought was the 
safety of their homes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406871555328%2F306111c6-7483-41f0-873a-366185e22be0-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406871555328%2F306111c6-7483-41f0-873a-366185e22be0-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Chrysotile or white asbestos. Mr Fluffy was made out of blue asbestos or 
crocidolite, which – because of the size of the particles – is more than 100 
times more dangerous. Photograph: Visuals Unlimited/Corbis 
The missed house

It wasn’t until the middle of 2013 that anything was believed to be amiss. But 
an old fibro house on a quiet street in the suburb of Downer reignited the 
problem that Canberra thought it had overcome.

When the ACT government became aware of the presence of loose-fill asbestos in 
the house, they purchased it from the owners for $743,200 in mid 2013. They
undertook a major deconstructive assessment 
<http://www.cmd.act.gov.au/open_government/foi/cmcd/asbestos-report-on-a-property-in-downer-act>
 of the house to determine, down to the finest details, the true extent of 
contamination.

What they found was alarming. They quickly began to notify the residents of 
other Mr Fluffy houses through a major letter campaign. The presence of the 
asbestos and what had happened to it over time was worse than initially 
thought. The letters urged residents not to undertake renovations without 
having a proper assessment.

Andrew Kefford, the head of the ACT government’s taskforce set up to provide 
advice on how to respond to the Mr Fluffy houses, said the original removals 
were not as robust as they could have been.

“It only ever started out with the aim of removing visible and accessible 
asbestos … those that were found to contain loose asbestos had it vacuumed, and 
the area was sprayed with a bonding agent,” he said.

What the Downer house and assessments from later houses had revealed was that 
the level of risk was far greater than was anticipated during the earlier 
removal scheme.

“What we’re finding now as we do more assessments is yes, there are fibres in 
the walls, there are also fibres under the house, and also in a good number of 
homes those fibres are penetrating the living spaces either through holes in 
the walls or through cracks in the cornices or other penetrations,” he said.
 Founder of the Mr Fluffy Owners and Residents Action Group Brianna Heseltine 
with her son Marcus. Photograph: Supplied 
Heseltine, who works as a public servant, received one of the letters shortly 
after her son Marcus was born.

“Before 2014, my family had never heard of Australia’s Mr Fluffy asbestos 
homes. The news that so many homes are contaminated with this highly toxic 
asbestos has been life changing,” she said.

The discovery had a devastating effect on her family, but it was also the 
catalyst to the formation of the Mr Fluffy action group, which has been a key 
force in drawing attention to the issue.

“I formed the Action Group to rally affected Australians who found themselves 
in the same dark place as we did, and to bring together their representative 
views to inform an appropriate shift in government policy. “

Many other families have come forward to the group. Sonia, who owns a house in 
southern Canberra with her husband and four children, knew she was living in a 
Mr Fluffy house when the family renovated.

But they weren’t aware of the extent of the risks. When the remediation 
occurred during the 1980shomeowners were given a small certificate 
<http://www.cmd.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/493913/FOI-054-Released-Documents-to-applicant.pdf%20>
 that is attached to their contracts for sale that said the house was cleared 
as part of the scheme.

After the letters were sent to residents warning them of the risks to their 
houses, the family had an assessment done. It found fibres in the roofspace, in 
the wall cavities - and even on top of the doorframes in their children’s 
bedroom.

“We didn’t know it was a risk. We were aware of it being one of the houses 
that had been cleaned, but at no point were we ever aware of it being a real 
risk,” she said.

They now face the prospect of having to demolish a house they had thought 
would be their family home, as well as the even more frightening thought that 
their children may have been exposed.

“All of a sudden now you know that in the next 30 years your kids could be 
facing this horrific condition, this terminal cruel illness, it’s like you’ve 
got this clock ticking away in your head,” she said.

“You go from a point of having nothing to worry about to having to really 
worry about your health, and it’s quite overwhelming.”

Heseltine adds the problem shouldn’t just be viewed as a risk for homeowners 
and workers, but that it should be seen as a broader community health issue.

“I believe our homes raise a possible health risk for the entire community. 
Any number of people deliver services in homes, from cleaners, mortgage 
brokers, real estate agents, mobile hairdressers to government employees 
including therapy workers and midwives,” she said.

The cost of early failures

The ACT government has taken action quickly on the issues raised by the Mr 
Fluffy homes, but it remains to be seen what the solution will be for 
homeowners.


For 40 years Mr Fluffy has been coming to the attention of governments in 
Australia. Each time action has been taken, but it has always fallen just a 
little short. Successive governments have then had to continue dealing with the 
fallout. The current ACT chief minister, Katy Gallagher, hopes the course they 
take this time will truly put an end to the problem.

“We’ve got the taskforce in place and that’s really coordinating our efforts 
across government as we finalise our advice on what has to be done on the long 
term. That’s really what we’re waiting on for a decision on the next steps,” 
she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406871193740%2Fb12a5ed1-dd9f-497c-a2d3-6e813626b48b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406871193740%2Fb12a5ed1-dd9f-497c-a2d3-6e813626b48b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brianna Heseltine with Katy Gallagher (right) at a Fluffy Owners and 
Residents’ Action Group town hall meeting. Photograph: Tracey Pearce/PR 
That advice is due to be handed down in August. Many believe the response will 
need to be a recommendation for a wide-scale demolition. This is because the 
most significant problem for the known Mr Fluffy houses is that the loose fill 
asbestos is so difficult to contain.

Tighe explains that in his view the only way to secure the houses would be to 
completely seal off internal gaps in the room – but the problem with this is 
that all houses move slightly over time, and even slight gaps can allow fibres 
to spread. He has already called for the demolition of the houses, based on 
this assessment.

“The only way to remove it properly is to do what they did with that house in 
Downer and deconstruct it – basically demolish it,” he said.

“To try to manage it through encapsulation means you will continually have to 
pay to monitor it anyway.”

Kefford, whose advice will be what the government acts on, offers a more 
cautious assessment. He maintains the taskforce is still considering a range of 
options in their advice, although demolition is certainly one of them.

“We have to consider all options, but that’s not to say that decision’s been 
made or is even indeed in front of government at the moment,” he said.

Whatever the final decision may be, the costs are continuing to mount. And 
until the advice has been received we won’t know who is going to pay for it.

In another one of the strange aspects to this story, it was actually the 
federal government in Australia that commissioned the first decontamination 
program in the 1980s, before the Australian Capital Territory became 
self-governing. Originally, amemorandum of understanding 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0ByW2V3f-jYBRQUlXZE5OQ0ticEU/edit?usp=sharing> 
existed between the federal government and the ACT administration that created 
a payment formula where costs were shared.

Gallagher is firm that the federal government does bear some responsibility 
for the costs: “The commonwealth has significant responsibility here, and 
that’s because they were the governing entity when this business was allowed to 
operate in the territory,” she said.

“Now that we know 20 years on that there are still ongoing legacy issues then 
ultimately I don’t think it’s an issue the commonwealth can wash its hands of.”

It is not clear who will pay yet, although Gallagher said the original 
memorandum was a “pretty good framework to be operating under.” Negotiations 
with the federal government are continuing, but she said they had shown a 
willingness to work with the ACT that continued to be positive.

Legal action a possibility for Mr Fluffy owners and residents

The potential health risks have inevitably led to questions of legal action 
being taken. But against whom would such a case be brought, and for what?

In the last six months there have been two cases of mesothelioma that have 
been diagnosed in people who lived in a Mr Fluffy house. There has not been a 
clear link established to the houses at this stage, but the cases have further 
alarmed residents.

Theodora Ahilas, a principal and director of Maurice Blackburn Lawyers with 
longstanding experience in dust disease cases said: “The position is that 
mesothelioma is theoretically a one dose disease. Any exposure within the 
latency period – 20 to 60 years – any exposure within that period can be deemed 
to be causative of mesothelioma.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406869986881%2Ff512c5a4-9b59-4aa0-9d44-d21ebf94f646-2001x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Fluffy%3A%20the%20cancerous%20legacy%20hidden%20in%20hundreds%20of%20Canberra%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2F-sp-mr-fluffy-cancerous-legacy-canberra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406869986881%2Ff512c5a4-9b59-4aa0-9d44-d21ebf94f646-2001x2040.jpeg>
 A chest x-ray showing lung cancer. Experts say there is no level of safe 
exposure to asbestos. Photograph: SMC Images/Getty Images 
“If you’ve got an asbestos exposure that occurred in that period and you have 
a situation where the defendant had knowledge of that exposure then it can 
become a live issue.”

A live issue means that it is possible a legal case could be brought to the 
court or dust diseases tribunal for those . There also needs to be a legal 
entity that can be sued, which can be an issue in asbestos cases because the 
contractors existed such a long time ago.

“So let’s take the Mr Fluffy situation as an example. We have Dirk Jansen who 
was obtaining this asbestos from the wharfs in Sydney.”

“He was pumping it into the roof cavities of homes in the ACT and surrounding 
areas. So the question is, between 1961 and 1978 did Dirk Jansen know about the 
dangers of asbestos? And if he did what live entity exists in law today to sue? 
There is no surviving entity from the Jansen period,” said Ahilas.

But she adds that it might be possible for other litigation to occur – perhaps 
against the commonwealth – surrounding the later failure to conduct full 
remediation of the houses during the 1980s.

“Post remediation you would need to show there was also loose-fill remediation 
at the time, and you would need to show that the exposure occurred during the 
second period. That’s possible, and you could bring the facts of it home, so 
that’s what you would need to show.”

But much of this is far beyond what the homeowners and residents are thinking 
now. They are more concerned for their families. There are already 20 
homeowners who have taken the ACT government up on their offers of temporary 
support and have moved out of their homes with small emergency grants. Many 
others are expected to follow if the advice received by the government 
indicates demolition should take place.

For the families living in a Mr Fluffy house now, or for those who may have in 
the past, the last 12 months have had a profound effect on their lives.

Heseltine hears the stories of many of these owners as part of the action 
group. They share their worries, the fears for their children that may have 
been exposed, and what will happen to the houses they made their family homes.

“I go for long walks to shake off the vicarious trauma I absorb from the daily 
outpourings of grief from people who are staring down the barrel of asbestos 
exposure. The human impact of this manmade disaster is immense,” Heseltine said.

Editor’s note: This article was amended on 7 December 2015 to give a more 
precise date, 1968 rather than the early 1960s, for the start of Jansen’s 
operation to install loose-fill asbestos insulation in ACT homes.
 