
It’s the last day of the NBA’s regular season, and there’s still way too much 
left to be decided when it comes to the upcoming playoffs. Seven out of the 
eight first-round matchups, in fact. At the beginning of the season, we could 
only hope that there would be meaningful games being played until the very end 
of the season. TheBasketball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/basketball> 
Gods have, perhaps, over-delivered.


What we do or don’t know: the East


They weren’t supposed to do this, not this Boston Celtics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boston-celtics> team. It was presumed that 
the Celtics were still in the demolition stage of the rebuilding process. It 
was clear they were looking ahead to the lottery when they traded away Rajon 
Rondo and Jeff Green for players, draft picks and spare parts. Then they went 
and traded away some of the players they’d only just received (Austin Rivers, 
Tayshaun Prince, Brandan Wright).


At the trade deadline, however, they made an unexpected move by acquiring 
guard Isaiah Thomas from the Phoenix Suns. While Thomas is young and relatively 
inexpensive, it was an odd move for a team that many assumed would be looking 
ahead to the lottery like the Philadelphia 76ers or theNew York Knicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-knicks>.
John Karalis (@RedsArmy_John) 
In the broadcast, Ainge tells Mike&Tommy basically that the deal to get Thomas 
was so good, it outweighed the risk of falling out of lottery
 <https://twitter.com/RedsArmy_John/status/588132918561792001> April 15, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RedsArmy_John/status/588132918561792001> 
Had general manager Danny Ainge and the rest of the Celtics organization known 
the signing would spark a run that would eventually secure them a spot in the 
playoffs, perhaps they might have not made the deal. Who could have predicted 
that a few months ago, though?

The Celtics clinched that unlikely playoff appearance by beating the Cleveland 
Cavaliers twice in a row, a feat which would have been way more impressive if 
the Cavaliers had had anything to play for and hadn’t sat nearly their entire 
starting lineup in the back end. Boston secured the No7 seed last night when 
Jae Crowder hit a ridiculous game-winning shot to beat the Toronto Raptors.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjTyu5AHAgY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjTyu5AHAgY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjTyu5AHAgY&media=>
Of course, the Celtics might have preferred the No8 seed if you asked them. 
Their reward for securing the seventh slot is a seven-game series against the 
second-seeded Cavaliers rather than theAtlanta Hawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks>, the No1 seed who right now 
look like the less formidable team despite their superior record over 82 games. 
Unfortunately for Boston, it doesn’t seem all too likely that LeBron James, 
Kyrie Irving and company will be sitting out this time around.


The Hawks instead will face whichever team wins the No8 seed, which won’t be 
the Miami Heat. The Indiana Pacers’ thoroughly unwatchabledouble-overtime win 
<https://sports.yahoo.com/news/pacers-survive-scare-99-95-double-ot-win-033518893--nba.html?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
 over the Washington Wizards officially eliminated Miami, whose playoff hopes 
dimmed the moment theylost Chris Bosh for the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/20/miami-heat-star-chris-bosh-could-miss-rest-of-season-according-to-report>
. The Pacers’ win also put the Brooklyn Nets on life support. The only way the 
Nets enter the postseason is if they win their game against the Orlando Magic 
tonightand the Memphis Grizzlies defeat the Pacers.

Meanwhile, the No5 seed Washington Wizards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-wizards> and the sixth-seeded 
Milwaukee Bucks know where they are in the standings, they just don’t know who 
they are playing. The Raptors’ chances of clinching the No3 seed and drawing 
the ‘just happy to be here’ Bucks took a hit with Tuesday’s loss to Boston. 
They would have to beat the Charlotte Hornets while hoping that the Bulls lose 
to the Heat. Any other scenario, the Bulls take the No3 seed and the Raptors 
would face a more formidable opponent in the Wizards.


What we do or don’t know: the West


Here’s what we know for certain in the Western Conference: The Golden State 
Warriors <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> clinched the 
best record in the Western Conference eons ago, and the best overall record in 
the NBA shortly after. The Dallas Mavericks are locked in as the No7 seed.


The Portland Trail Blazers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/portland-trail-blazers> will be the No4 
seed, because they won their division, but will not have home-court advantage 
in the first round because whoever emerges as the No5 seed will be will have a 
better record than them. (Can someone remind me why we need divisions again?)

And that’s it.


Just like in the Eastern Conference, there are still two teams battling it out 
for the No8 seed in the Western Conference. Currently the New Orleans Pelicans 
andOklahoma City Thunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oklahoma-city-thunder> both have 44-37 
records, with the Pelicans holding the tiebreaker. That means that if the 
Thunder want to advance, they will not only need a win of their own, but a 
Pelicans loss as well.

That seems like a tall order for the Thunder, but the schedule might be on 
their side. The Thunder will be facing the Minnesota Timberwolves whilethe 
Pelicans have to defeat 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/25149589/pelicans-are-embracing-the-pressure-of-win-and-youre-in-wednesday>
 the San Antonio Spurs. This Spurs team has been the most dangerous team in 
basketball over the last few weeks, and they will be very motivated as they 
wouldclinch the No2 seed with a win 
<http://www.expressnews.com/sports/spurs/article/Spurs-hit-New-Orleans-with-much-still-at-stake-6199812.php?t=550df37162927fc3fb&cmpid=twitter-premium>
.


A Spurs’ loss, on the other hand, could drop them down as low as the No6 seed, 
which feels like a state of affairs that shouldn’t be possible with just one 
game remaining on the schedule.


That’s how much things have been in flux in the Western Conference this 
season. With the exception of the Warriors, the contending teams in the 
conference have all been very close to each other in the standings. While that 
has made for one of the most meaningful regular seasons in recent NBA memory, 
it has also createda confusing, tangled mess 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/nba-playoff-picture--one-night-remains-with-so-much-left-to-decide-061744499.html>
 of a playoff picture with the No2, No3, No5 and No6 seeds all potentially in 
play with less than 24 hours left to figure things out.


Luckily for us, CBS Sports’ Matt Moore 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/25149508/nba-playoff-races-and-magic-numbers-update-for-april-15-2015>
 has managed to make sense of all the possible scenarios:

The Grizzlies are eliminated from division-title contention, and cannot gain 
the No. 2 seed. It’s a pretty stunning collapse from a team that looked certain 
to finish in a top-three spot only two weeks ago. But their late schedule, 
injuries and the Spurs have conspired against Memphis.

The Clippers cannot finish sixth, the best they can finish is second. They 
clinched no-worse-than-third with their win over the Suns Tuesday.

The only way the Grizzlies can move up is if the Rockets lose their last game 
and Memphis beats Indiana at home. The only way the Spurs don’t finish with the 
two seed is if they lose and the Clippers or Rockets win. But if the Spurs lose 
and the Clippers, Rockets, and Grizzlies win, San Antonio falls to the sixth 
seed.

Got all that? Moore also came up with this handy chart 
<http://sports.cbsimg.net/images/visual/whatshot/BLOODBATH041515.jpg> as a 
workable reference guide. Or maybe we should could just forget about this 
playoff math and just let the games play out tonight.


Thabo Sefolosha seeks legal action against the NYPD

While the Atlanta Hawks get ready to face either the Indiana Pacers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiana-pacers> or the Brooklyn Nets in the 
first round of the playoffs, one of their players is preparing to wage a 
different type of battle against a much larger opponent: the New York Police 
Department.


At first it was just a footnote. When news came about that the Indiana Pacers’ 
Chris Copeland was stabbed at a night club, the reports mentioned thatthe 
Atlanta Hawks’ Thabo Sefolosha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/09/atlanta-hawks-thabo-sefolosha-suffered-fractured-leg-during-arrest>
 and Pero Antic were also arrested in the aftermath. Shortly after that came 
the news that Sefolosha had a broken right fibula and ligament damage and would 
miss the rest of the season.

While initial reports claimed that Sefolosha suffered the injury while 
“resisting arrest,”footage of the incident soon emerged 
<http://www.thenation.com/blog/203937/so-nypd-just-broke-nba-players-leg> that 
told a different story. In the video, it appears that a police officeruses his 
baton 
<http://www.tmz.com/2015/04/10/thabo-sefolosha-arrest-video-nypd-officer-swing-baton/>
 on an already subdued Sefolosha.


Yesterday, Sefolosha directly blamed  
<http://www.ajc.com/news/sports/basketball/thabo-sefolosha-speaks-for-first-time-following-ar/nktFD/>
the NYPD for his injury and announced plans to launch legal action against them:

On advice of my counsel, I hope that you can appreciate that I cannot discuss 
the facts of the case. These questions will be answered by my lawyer in a court 
of law. I will simply say that I am in great pain, that I have suffered 
significant injury and those were caused by the police.

The National Basketball Players Association also plans to investigate the 
incident 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/hawks/2015/04/11/thabo-sefolosha-nbpa/25626921/?siteID=je6NUbpObpQ-CUGzJcHGCwn2OzpQ7Sc6EA>
.


Given the current climate, and the increased scrutiny on the use of excessive 
force by law enforcement agencies against African-Americans, it’s unlikely that 
this particular story will be disappearing any time soon.


Let’s make this official: Steph Curry is the MVP

Throughout this season, writers and experts and broadcasters kept telling us 
that we couldn’t decide who the MVP was until the NBA season played out. There 
were so many worthy candidates, with the Golden State Warriors’ Steph Curry and 
the Houston Rockets’ James Hardenat the forefront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/apr/09/why-stephen-curry-not-james-harden-is-this-years-nba-mvp>
, that it wouldn’t be fair to them.


Why Stephen Curry, not James Harden, is this year's NBA MVP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/apr/09/why-stephen-curry-not-james-harden-is-this-years-nba-mvp>
While this was true enough, it was also a handy excuse to put off making a 
decision for as long as possible. Now that we’ve reached the last day of games 
before the postseason begins, and it bears repeating that the MVP is strictly a 
regular-season award, that excuse will no longer work. Steph Curry should be 
the consensus favorite for MVP. Not even a Kobe-esque 81 point performance from 
James Harden tonight would be enough to make a difference.


Other candidates have had worthy campaigns. The Rockets would be struggling to 
even make the playoffs rather than fighting for a potential No2 seed without 
Harden’s offensive contributions. By the end of tonight’s games, either Russell 
Westbrook or Anthony Davis will have basically single-handedly carried their 
team into the postseason. LeBron James recovered from a tepid start to help 
turn the Cleveland Cavaliers from a complete mess to the best team in the 
Eastern Conference in a matter of months.

None of that matters though, this has been Curry’s season. He has been so 
unreal that we no longer even blink when he does things like make77 consecutive 
three-pointers 
<http://www.sbnation.com/lookit/2015/4/14/8418173/stephen-curry-warriors-77-consecutive-3-pointers-video-god-mode>
 in a practice. Golden State has been so dominant this year that the biggest 
knock on Curry’s MVP case is that he often sits out during the fourth quarter 
because the Warriors are already in the process of blowing out their opponents. 
It’s hard to show that you’re clutch when your team is rarely in much trouble 
late.


Maybe there’s a case to be made that a Harden, or a James or someone else, may 
have been a slightly better player than Curry this season. No other player 
fully took control of the league like Curry did this season. Nearly every night 
he played, Curry was the biggest and best reason to watch basketball and when 
we look back at the 2014-15NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> season, 
he will be the first thing we remember.

That’s an MVP.


Other things we’ve learned

• In a fascinating interview 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12690080/washington-wizards-paul-pierce-speaks-truth>
 with Jackie MacMullan, the Washington Wizards’ Paul Pierce spoke, well, the 
Truth, about the internal dysfunction within the Brooklyn Nets, his nonexistent 
friendship with former Boston Celtics teammate Ray Allen, and why he sleeps in 
a X chamber.

• In a possibly Real Genius <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rthHSISkM7A> 
inspiredprank 
<http://sacramento.cbslocal.com/2015/04/14/watch-nik-stauskas-home-gets-popcorned-by-rudy-gay-demarcus-cousins-reggie-evans/>
, Nik Stauskas’s Sacramento Kings teammates filled his house with popcorn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEd00wXuXdt4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEd00wXuXdt4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEd00wXuXdt4&media=>
• The New York Knicks can’t even tank right 
<https://sports.vice.com/article/the-knicks-crowning-hilarious-wonderful-failure>
. A win on Monday has jeopardized the Knicks’ draft lottery fueled quest for 
the worst record in the NBA. The Minnesota Timberwolves are now a game behind 
them in the standings with, of course, just one game to go. It would be a shame 
if they lose out (win out?) because no team has done more to earn this dubious 
honor.


• In the last few days, San Antonio Spurs’ Matt Bonner met up with comedians 
Tim & Eric and Spuran Spuran was born. This is clearly the best example of a 
team doing their own playoff anthem since the golden age of the Superbowl 
Shuffle.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqxw2FZBd7aY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqxw2FZBd7aY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqxw2FZBd7aY&media=> 