
The second best player in the world was on show here and it was not Rafael 
Nadal. At least that was the opinion of many of those who left the Rod Laver 
Arena in the early hours of yesterday morning. Yes, the dynamic and 
effervescent Spaniard, winner of the French Open title for the past two years, 
defeated Andy Murray 6-7, 6-4, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1 to reach the quarter-finals of the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> for the 
first time, but for 2Â½ sets the Scot was dominant, displaying a variety of shot 
and pace that for the past year has had him marked down in the locker room as 
somebody very special indeed.

If there were doubts they concerned Murray's core fitness. Understandably he 
tired towards the end of the fabulously absorbing five-set match which lasted 
only a little short of four hours, but then Nadal demands the most of all his 
opponents. Ask Roger Federer.

Mentally, emotionally and physically Nadal was that little bit stronger than 
Murray. However, there were numerous moments when the world No2 stared back 
over the net, or across towards his uncle and coach, Toni, with a look of 
incredulity. Small wonder that after hitting the match-winning shot he briefly 
lay face down on the court in obvious relief at having finally brought Murray's 
challenge to a halt.

"Andy is a great player and he's going to be in the Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup this year for sure," 
said Nadal. In his opinion, in other words, Murray is going to finish in the 
world's top eight. Barring injury it cannot be long before the teenager and 
world No16 enters the elite of the top 10, and nobody now doubts that it is 
already his rightful place.

Murray, ever the pragmatist, knows he has still to earn it and that one great 
performance in a grand slam is not enough. However, this was his third 
consecutive fourth-round match in a slam, including Wimbledon and the US Open. 
Both the previous defeats had left him a little upset with himself. Not this 
time. "I'm definitely not disappointed."

Drop the ball short and Nadal's forehand is a killer. Murray has always had 
the ability to vary his game and deny his opponents rhythm. Nadal was 
frequently baffled and increasingly perplexed as Murray denied him the chance 
to play his natural game. And added to the variety were shots of stunning 
power, coming at moments that the Spaniard clearly could not anticipate.

Murray also served wonderfully, which further unsettled Nadal. At 7-6, 4-1 
there seemed a real prospect that a major upset was about to unfold, only for 
Murray suddenly to lose his intensity and begin to make mistakes. Two or three 
times he held his right side as if he had tweaked a muscle, although afterwards 
he refused to make any excuses for this lapse. As it was, he picked his game up 
again in the third set to take the lead and thereafter had numerous 
opportunities to tip the match his way, even in the deciding set. It was always 
that close.

"Rafa is a great tennis player," he acknowledged. "I went on court knowing 
that I was going to have to play one of my best matches if I wanted to win. I 
practised with him before. I watched a lot of his matches. He hasn't beaten 
Federer six times for nothing. He's an awesome player. Everybody knows how good 
his forehand is."

When Murray turned professional two years ago there were those who wondered if 
he possessed the weapons to transform his undoubted talent into a truly potent 
mix. This is no longer an issue, although the power he generated against Nadal, 
on both forehand and backhand, was at a new level. "I learned I could hit the 
ball much harder than I thought consistently," he grinned. "I hit some huge 
shots, although I did miss a few that maybe I wouldn't normally. I was trying 
to play more aggressive tonight than I normally do, and I felt like I showed 
I'm not just a counter-puncher. I was being the aggressor for a lot of the 
match, hitting a lot of winners."

Understandably, once the three-hour mark was passed, those winners diminished 
and Nadal finally began to dominate in the fashion to which he has become 
accustomed. He generated nothing like the kick off these courts that he manages 
on clay, or even grass, and knowing the danger he faced he had very much wanted 
to play the match in the heat of the day.

The way Murray mixed things up will, without doubt, be a plan that others will 
follow in the future, albeit most do not have the Scot's ability. "Hopefully 
I'm only going to get better," he said. "I'm happy the way that I fought and 
that physically my body held up. I'm glad that all the work that I put in the 
off-season has paid off, but I definitely still need to get stronger. I'm 
nowhere near as good a player as him and haven't achieved anything close to 
what he has so far."

This was Murray's first match against Nadal, with the future promise of a 
compellingly watchable rivalry. "I've still got a long way to go, but when 
Federer's gone, which I hope is pretty soon," he smiled, "I hope we can play 
against each other a lot." It seems a certainty.
 