
While the presence of the world tennis No1 Andy Murray on the shortlist for 
BBC Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/andy-murray-heads-spoty-list-but-there-is-no-place-for-chris-froome-and-others>
 suggests the outcome of the public vote will be a formality, there are several 
conspicuous inclusions and absentees from a roll of honour that largely 
comprises Olympians and Paralympians nominated for their contributions to Team 
GB’s record‑breaking medal hauls in Rio.

Sports Personality of the Year 2016: who should win the award? – poll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/bbc-sports-personality-year-andy-murray-spoty-who-win-award>
The Masters winner Danny Willett and the footballers Jamie Vardy and Gareth 
Bale are the only three members of the 16-strong shortlist who did not 
represent Great Britain in Brazil, while the triathleteAlistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee>, the long-distance runner 
Mo Farah and the track cyclist Laura Kenny are the nearest rivals to the 
white‑hot favourite Murray in the betting market.

The Scot will take some beating, having won gold in an epic Rio final against 
Juan Martín del Potro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
, just one of many highlights in a year when he also won asecond Wimbledon 
singles title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
 andtopped the ATP rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-novak-djokovic>
 for the first time. As fierce a competitor on the court as he is modest and 
likeable off it, Murray is a two-time winner of the award and ticks both boxes 
required as he is currently peerless at his particular sport.

In Kenny, her husband Jason, the Paralympians Kadeena Cox and Dame Sarah 
Storey, the sport of cycling is well represented on the list, but the notable 
omission of Sir Bradley Wiggins, who in August became the most decorated 
Olympian in British history, has raised eyebrows. There is no place either for 
his former Sky team-mate Chris Froome, who has never captured the public 
imagination to the same extent as the more charismatic Wiggins, but whose 
achievement inwinning a third Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
, as well as a bronze medal in the men’s Olympic road time trial at Rio, surely 
ought to have earned him a show.

The only obvious conclusion to be drawn is that the triumphs of both men have 
been overshadowed by their “outing” by Fancy Bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/fancy-bears-chris-froome-bradley-wiggins-tues-cycling>
, the controversial hacking group that leaked documents revealing both riders 
had obtained therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) in recent years.

If that is the case, Froome is entitled to feel hard done by as his use of 
TUEs was already in the public domain. Wiggins, by contrast, has yet to provide 
what many believe to be a satisfactory explanation for his use of the 
exemptions before the 2011 and 2012 Tours de France and the 2013 Giro D’Italia.

Once an undisputed national treasure, it is probably fair to say his halo 
could do with a spit and polishfollowing controversial revelations about his 
three one-off injections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-full-story-asthma-allergies-tues>
 of triamcinolone for a pollen allergy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fspoty-murray-froome-wiggins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c3a07b9eddcd3f400a45c70ba413ec551fa9db6%2F249_189_3251_1951%2F3251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murray%20in%2C%20Wiggins%20out%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20Spoty%20time%20again%20%E2%80%93%20let%20the%20carping%20commence%20%7C%20Barry%20Glendenning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fspoty-murray-froome-wiggins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murray%20in%2C%20Wiggins%20out%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20Spoty%20time%20again%20%E2%80%93%20let%20the%20carping%20commence%20%7C%20Barry%20Glendenning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fspoty-murray-froome-wiggins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c3a07b9eddcd3f400a45c70ba413ec551fa9db6%2F249_189_3251_1951%2F3251.jpg>
 Charlotte Dujardin’s performances in Rio made her Britain’s most successful 
Olympic equestrian, but she has not made the Spoty shortlist. Photograph: Tony 
Gentile/Reuters 
There are other notable absentees. In isolation, the inclusion of the 
58-year-old Olympic gold medal‑winning showjumper Nick Skelton is far from 
extraordinary, but seems odd considering the absence from the shortlist of 
Charlotte Dujardin. Great Britain’s most successful Olympic equestrian, the 
31-year-old from Enfieldwon gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/charlotte-dujardin-wins-olympic-gold-dressage>
 and silver in the individual and team dressage events in Rio and her omission 
suggests Skelton may have been selected as the token oldie by a panel that 
includes the former athletes Ryan Giggs, Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson and 
Victoria Pendleton, as well as assorted newspaper and TV sports editors.

While the astonishing achievements of the Premier League winners Leicester 
City and Euro 2016 semi-finalists Wales have been rightly saluted with the 
nominations of Vardy and Bale, it is also noteworthy that not a single player 
from the England rugby squad that followed up this year’s Grand Slam sweep with 
theirfirst series win in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
 has been honoured.

Andy Murray heads Spoty list but no place for Chris Froome and others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/andy-murray-heads-spoty-list-but-there-is-no-place-for-chris-froome-and-others>
The 2014 Spoty winner Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/15/lewis-hamilton-rory-mcilroy-bbc--sports-personality-award>
 also failed to make the cut, although his omission is less surprising and 
almost certainly down to his failure to win the F1 drivers’ championship rather 
than any fallout from his apparently endless series of entertainingly petulant 
spats with his Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg.

Despite these assorted absentees, it is difficult to identify anyone who is 
undeserving of their place on this year’s extended 16-strong shortlist although 
that is unlikely to prevent the cacophony of carping that invariably 
soundtracks the buildup to this enjoyable orgy of backslapping which will be 
hosted by Gabby Logan, Gary Lineker and Clare Balding before a crowd of 12,000 
people at Birmingham’s Genting Arena on 18 December.

Viewers can have their say on the night by phone or online and are invited to 
vote early and vote often.
 