Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcItHOl5LRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcItHOl5LRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcItHOl5LRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 In one small way, Madonna's current single, Give Me All Your Luvin', marks 
the end of an era. It's the last time for the foreseeable future that Nicki 
Minaj, who guest-raps on it, intends to collaborate with another artist. "I'm 
done with the collabs,"she said last year 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/music/news/a304863/minaj-wants-to-collaborate-with-britney.html>
. "No more collabs for the next two years."

If anyone is entitled to call it a day on the "collab" front, it's Minaj – 
Give Me All Your Luvin' is the 40th she's appeared on (including 11 in 2011 
alone). If only her attitude were shared by other serial collaborators. Right 
now, on a pop record near you, you'll almost certainly encounter one of the 
following doing a little turn on someone else's song: Pitbull, Rihanna,Chris 
Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chris-brown>, Akon, Lil' Wayne, Bruno 
Mars – and the list goes on. In the last couple of years, there's hardly been a 
successful chart act who hasn't turned up as a "featured artist" on another 
successful chart act's single.

It goes like this: Big Star A – Madonna, let's say – is recording a single. 
It's destined to sell well because Madonna is still a huge brand. But how many 
more people would listen to and download it if she invited Big Stars B and C – 
Minaj and MIA – to add guest verses? Everyone benefits: Madonna gets the kudos 
of working with a couple of hip names, while Minaj and MIA get the kudos of 
working withMadonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna>, and all three 
reach not just their own fanbases but those of the other two as well.

Give Me All Your Luvin' debuted in America at No 13 – Madonna's highest 
position since 2008.Her appearance at the Super Bowl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ROkhklj0ZGs>, where MIA flashed her middle 
finger at the camera, helped, of course: a case of a collaboration that will go 
down as one of pop's more memorable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH86m44hQgy0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH86m44hQgy0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH86m44hQgy0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 More often, though, A-list hookups aren't landmark events. How can they be, 
when they've become mandatory for the generic pop/urban acts who've dominated 
the charts for the past half-decade? There are half a dozen in every week – and 
for every one that shows an actual affinity between the acts – such as Drake 
and Rihanna'sTake Care <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H86m44hQgy0> – there are 
a dozenPitbull/Chris Browns <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CdXesX6mYUE>, who 
exhibit all the passion of two CEOs signing a corporate merger. Even Brit acts 
such as JLS are traipsing on to the bandwagon; theirBrit-nominated outing with 
American singer Dev <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FuwTgZOKcf8&ob=av2e> is a 
fine example of two acts being put together for the greater good of their 
record labels.

Obviously, some collaborations have been inspired matches: Jay-Z and Alicia 
Keys brought different but equally stirring things toEmpire State of Mind 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0UjsXo9l6I8>; ditto Katy Perry and Snoop Dogg 
on California Gurls. Christina Aguilera's contribution to Maroon 5's Moves Like 
Jagger blasted an already euphoric song into the ionosphere, andLady Gaga and 
Beyoncé <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OW1JP7qNPw8> made Telephone an 
irresistible détente between two alpha females.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiEPTlhBmwRg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiEPTlhBmwRg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiEPTlhBmwRg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 More often, though, collaborations are soulless things whose ubiquity is 
changing the tenor of the chart. The more successful they are, the more get 
released, and if you've been thinking pop has been a depressing place for the 
last few years because it's stuffed with schlock-merchants such asBruno Mars 
<http://www.brunomars.com/uk/>, it's even worse when it's Lil' Wayne featuring 
Bruno Mars.
 