
Five years ago, the demise of the music industry seemed almost inevitable. 
Recession, rampant piracy, falling CD sales and a fear that “kids just don’t 
buy music any more” had giant record labels, once oozing wealth, counting the 
pennies.


Yet 2016 has seen a reversal of fortune – and the industry’s saviour is not 
what many predicted. Profits from music streaming, first championed by Spotify 
andnow offered by Apple and Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/12/amazon-music-unlimited-launch-spotify-apple-streaming-competitor-echo>
, have given some labels their largest surge in revenue in more than a decade.

At the beginning of December, one of the world’s biggest labels, Warner Music, 
announced revenues of $3.25bn (£2.66bn) this year – its highest in eight years. 
More significantly, $1bn of that was from streaming, more than double its 
download revenue and more than $100m more than its physical revenue.

The surge in profits is being seen across all the major labels. In the first 
half of 2016, streaming revenue in the US grew by 57% to $1.6bn, and worldwide 
digital revenues overtook those from physical sales for the first time in music 
industry history, mainly because of streaming. This year’s most-streamed artist 
was Drake, with 4.2bn streams.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F842294c619ecbbecf5f67835435616c2816b3004%2F0_198_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry's%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry%27s%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F842294c619ecbbecf5f67835435616c2816b3004%2F0_198_2144_1286%2F2144.jpg>
 Taylor Swift had a public row with Spotify over the amount it pays artists 
when their songs are streamed on the service. Photograph: Darron Cummings/AP 
There are 90 million people signed up to streaming services worldwide and the 
shift, and the aggressive speed at which it has taken place, is having the 
greatest impact on music since digital downloads were introduced. It makes
boycotts by artists such as Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/04/taylor-swift-spotify-streaming-album-sales-snub>
, who condemned Spotify for only paying between $0.006 and $0.0084 each time 
someone listens to a song, seem redundant.

Paul Smernicki, who was head of digital at Universal Records for 17 years 
before leaving this year to start his own venture, Restless Natives, said: “I 
thought the days of the music industry talking about anything in terms of 
millions were gone, but now we are looking at billions of streams on an almost 
daily basis. If you look at the the raw numbers of people who are streaming, I 
think you could now argue that music has never been more popular.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbf01e6b2cf43c0805a3abd0323654341a48bcb5%2F16_0_1143_686%2F1143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry's%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry%27s%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbf01e6b2cf43c0805a3abd0323654341a48bcb5%2F16_0_1143_686%2F1143.jpg>
 Spotify’s Today’s Top Hits playlist. Labels now see getting songs on to 
streaming playlists as a big part of their marketing strategy. Photograph: PR 
Smernecki said streaming had democratised access to music by making it easy 
and cheap, even for those who were previously unwilling to buy it.

“The value of reliability, convenience and accessibility to an enormous 
catalogue of songs for a small cost now trumps illegally downloading a song 
free,” he said. “Spotify andApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> are now simply better than 
any hassle of an illegal download service and come without the risk, so people 
are willing to invest.

“You don’t even have to be a hardcore music fan for it to seem like good 
value. People who previously thought they weren’t that into music, or didn’t 
like artists enough to buy entire albums, are now discovering they are far more 
interested in music than they thought. I think streaming has woken people up to 
how music can really find its place in your life.”

The format is so popular that less than a year after the Official Charts 
Company decided to count streams, as well as physical sales and downloads, it 
has had to change the formula. Currently, 100 streams count as one “sale” of a 
song, but from January, the ratio will become 150:1 to avoid certain songs, 
such as Drake’s One Dance, remainingunmoved at the top of the chart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jul/15/one-dance-phenomenon-drake-no-1>
 for weeks based almost entirely on their popularity on Spotify.

The figures now generated by a select few artists also make Sony’s decision to 
poach Adele from indie label XL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/23/adele-set-to-sign-90m-sony-deal> 
for a mammoth £90m this year, the biggest record deal with a British musician, 
seem like savvy business sense; her hit single Hello has been streamed 632m 
times and counting.

But it is not just the three major labels, Universal, Warner and Sony, that 
are benefiting. With album purchases and single downloads, it made no 
difference if they were ever played, but streaming rewards consumption – the 
more times a song is played, the more money it makes. That shift has rewarded 
many independent labels, particularly those with big-hitting artists on their 
roster.

Jamie Oborne, manager of Mercury-nominated band the 1975 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/the-1975-matt-healy-no-ones-asking-you-to-inspire-revolution-interview>
, said that streaming was responsible for a music industry “renaissance”, 
financially rewarding not just labels but also musicians. ““We’ve seen this 
cultural shift where people are willing to pay for music again, not just 
illegally download it from LimeWire, so of course my artists have benefitted 
from that. Sales used to be decimated by a leak, whereas now it just doesn’t 
matter. Digital downloads are shrinking so rapidly that I’d say they will 
almost certainly be gone in a couple of years”

Jane Third, senior vice-president of Because Music, whose artists include 
Metronomy, Christine and the Queens, Major Lazer and Django Django, said 
revenue from streaming had ensured profits more than doubled on last year. 
Third attributed it almost entirely to thesuccess of Christine and the Queens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
, the French singer who became one of this year’s most talked about musicians, 
and Major Lazer, whose track Lean Onwas the most-streamed song of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/spotify-most-streamed-track-all-time-major-lazer-lean-on>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8d938c2b56694ad71d4d389b9dd07fe8d1eb3ac%2F220_0_2664_3328%2F2664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry's%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Music%20streaming%20hailed%20as%20industry%27s%20saviour%20as%20labels%20enjoy%20profit%20surge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmusic-streaming-industry-saviour-labels-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8d938c2b56694ad71d4d389b9dd07fe8d1eb3ac%2F220_0_2664_3328%2F2664.jpg>
 The singer Christine and the Queens is one of the most talked about artists of 
2016. Photograph: Alamy 
“Streaming is a positive thing, 100%,” Third said. “We have seen an upswing 
this year for the first time in more than 10 years and it’s going to continue 
to grow. Our company has grown exponentially, and as soon as we started having 
hits in the streaming world, our revenues doubled. Overall, streaming is going 
to save the industry.”

Third said playlists on streaming services, particularly Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, were becoming as essential as 
radio in generating interest in a track. Indies and major labels see streaming 
playlists as a major part of the marketing strategy around a song, trying to 
“put your music into people’s consumption habits, whether it’s a playlist they 
listen to on the way to work, at the gym or just as part of their streaming 
library”.

Streaming playlists are increasingly the way many people find their music. 
Creating interesting playlists is also a major focus for Spotify, which recently
hired the former head of music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/15/bbc-radio-1-spotify-uk-george-ergatoudis>
 at Radio 1 George Ergatoudis to head up its playlisting team and seek out new 
music to champion. Streaming playlists have become so important that the major 
labels now have “streaming pluggers”, just as they have radio pluggers who push 
for songs to be played on major stations.

Third was adamant that this shift towards play count, or consumption, would 
not have an impact on the sort of artist signed and championed by the indie 
sector. However, Darius Van Arman, the co-owner of the Secretly group, whose 
artists include Bon Iver, Angel Olsen and The War on Drugs, predicted there 
would be some impact on more experimental artists who in the past might have 
sold well due to credibility, but were unlikely to generate numerous repeated 
plays on streaming services.

Van Arman said independent labels were definitely “keeping up with the majors” 
in terms of benefiting from streaming, but added: “I think it’s probably 
inevitable that the market is going to invest more in music that is accessible 
and caters to repeat listening. For labels and artists who are more 
experimental, the new streaming economy is going to make it harder for them to 
earn money on their recordings.

“It has some impact on our A&R philosophy. We do think it’s very important 
that experimental music and challenging music is released. There are important 
artists that need to be supported because they are culturally exciting and push 
the boundaries of what is mainstream, so we will always have one foot in that 
world.

“But we have to be realistic and have another foot in the world where we are 
working with artists to make recordings that people want to listen to over and 
over again.”

The focus of labels and artists has shifted even more towards generating a hit 
single, but Van Arman emphasised that streaming had not completely eliminated 
the album format. Albums tend to perform less well on streaming – currently it 
accounts for 30% of most album revenues, with the rest from downloads and 
physical purchases. However, Van Arman pointed toBon Iver’s recent release, 22, 
A Million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/02/bon-iver-22-a-million-review-distressed-hyper-modern-balladeering>
, which data from Spotify showed most people were listening to the whole way 
through. The flipside is that labels are encouraging artists to make longer 
albums to monetise the format as much as possible for streaming.

The domination of streaming has not benefited the entire industry. Geoff 
Travis, the founder of Rough Trade records, said: “Our sales figures seem to me 
shockingly low given the acclaimed quality of the releases. [But] other people 
seem optimistic and we are still in the game, so maybe there is a future.”
 