
Vincent Cable  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/vincentcable>

Politics needs fixing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform>. Trust in 
politicians and politics is at an all time low. The public are, rightly, 
demanding change and theLiberal Democrats have led the way 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/may/27/nick-clegg-a-new-politics> 
in calling for a series of measures – reform of the House of Lords and party 
funding, fixed term parliaments, enabling legislation for a referendum on 
electoral reform, to name but three – in a bid to restore faith in our 
political system.

In my view, one of the biggest institutional weaknesses in the government's 
management of the economy is the total lack of parliamentary involvement in the 
governmental allocation of funds, before a penny is spent. At present, tax is 
scrutinised in detail but spending choices are entirely a matter for the 
executive. There is of course the National Audit Office but their oversight of 
spending is limited, selective and retrospective.

Line by line approval of spending commitments (and cuts) would concentrate the 
minds of legislators in a way which is currently missing in the opaque 
processes of Whitehall.

Public spending is going to dominate the political agenda for the foreseeable 
future. Making the process open and transparent would go a long way to fixing 
politics and restoring the public's faith in the system.
 Jo Swinson MP Photograph: Guardian 
Jo Swinson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/joswinson>

Involve people. The public's disengagement with politics is both a symptom and 
a cause of our broken politics. To break the vicious cycle, we need a radical 
shake-up of how the voting public can take part in democracy. It should no 
longer be just about casting a vote every couple of years, and leaving the rest 
up to those elected – fixing politics can't be left to the politicians. We must 
encourage much wider involvement, through a citizen's convention to recommend 
big changes to our political system.

We should build on the pioneering work of initiatives like theyworkforyou.com 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/>, to help people know and understand what is 
going on. The arcane Westminster culture that seeks to place barriers between 
MPs and the public must be challenged: why, in 2009, does the House of Commons
still not allow clips of Parliament 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Axe-Parliaments-YouTube-ban/10131801380> to be 
shown and shared on YouTube and other sites? We should implement the idea put 
forward by Parmjit Dhanda in his hustings for the Speakership, to let the 
public have a say over what gets discussed in Parliament, for example by voting 
on the subject of each week's topical debate.

Most of all, there should be a concerted effort from all involved in politics 
(and ideally also from the media) to encourage people to get involved. By 
harnessing people's genuine interest in political issues, we can reinvigorate 
our broken politics.
 Norman Baker MP Photograph: Guardian 
Norman Baker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/normanbaker>

We need to implement three key reforms. First, we need greater transparency. 
We must extend the scope of theFreedom of Information Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/may/18/freedomofinformation-information-commissioner>
. That might prove unpopular with many MPs – only eight months ago, the 
government was trying to claim that MPs should be exempt from the act 
altogether – but it is absolutely necessary. We need to end the present culture 
which allows for far too many government exemptions, and we must increase the 
level of funding we give to the Information Commissioner.

Second, we need greater accountability. There are some significant changes 
that must be made to our parliamentary system. We need to change our archaic 
voting system so that it better represents what people really want, and reform 
the Lords, as the Lib Dems have been advocating for years. Key changes must be 
made inside Westminster as well. Some of the traditions that we cling to do 
nothing to improve accountability. I believe that if we are to have members of 
the House of Lords as Secretaries of State, they should be accountable for oral 
questions in the Commons. We must also address the government's lack of respect 
for Parliamentary Questions – for example, my research indicates that less than 
20% of a random sample of questions asked of the prime minister receive any 
sort of meaningful response.

Third, we must ensure that anybody who spends public money is subject to 
transparent external audit. As far asMPs' expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> go, all of us must be 
prepared to accept the recommendations of Sir Christopher Kelly's report, 
whatever those may be. It won't be easy to cure the problems that have blighted 
our political system for so many years, but greater transparency and 
accountability will put us on the way towards regaining the public's 
confidence. Sunlight really is the best disinfectant.

John Curtice <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/john-curtice>

The MPs' expenses row is but the latest in a long list of alleged political 
scandals that began when John Major's government became mired in sleaze. Each 
time the same remedy has been proposed – greater transparency and tighter 
regulation. So, for example, political parties and MPs have to report details 
of the donations they receive, which are published for all to see. Now a new 
body has been created to regulate MPs' finances, while full details of their 
claims are on the web.

Yet despite repeated applications of the remedy, scandals still erupt and 
trust is not restored. The problem with transparency is there is no guarantee 
the public will like what it sees. Who thought more highly of Tony Blair 
because we knew he raised money from wealthy businessmen? And the trouble with 
tighter regulation is that it creates more and more tripwires for MPs to fall 
over. Witness thedifficulties that befell Peter Hain 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7206812.stm> over his deputy leadership 
campaign.

MPs need to look at how they behave. Rarely do political opponents avoid the 
temptation to cast aspersions when a MP is alleged to have broken some 
rule. And so long as politicians constantly treat each other with suspicion, 
how can they possibly expect the rest of us to trust them?

The Guardian debate – "How can we fix politics? Is this the Liberal Democrats' 
hour?" – at the 2009 Liberal Democrat Party conference will take place on 
Monday 21 September at 1pm at the Royal Bath Hotel, with Vincent Cable, Jo 
Swinson, Norman Baker and John Curtice, chaired by Simon Hoggart
 