
Abraham Lincoln’s father ridiculed and abused him, and the young Lincoln was 
surrounded by physical cruelty, especially towards animals – part of life on 
the American frontier. Yet when, as an adolescent, he was asked to kill a 
snake, he replied: “It enjoys living just the same as we do.” The response 
shows a commitment to behaving in the way that Lincoln had decided was right, 
no matter what other people thought.

After a lifetime of reading Lincoln, what I have learned is that you can 
choose happiness, and that most of our happiness is based on following the 
better angels of our nature. It astonishes me how often Lincoln was honest when 
it would have been easier for him not to have been. Running for the Illinois 
state legislature, he said he stood “for all sharing the privileges of the 
government, who assist in bearing its burthens” – a Jacksonian bromide that was 
expected. And then, though no one was asking, he offered the following 
sentence: “Consequently I go for admitting all whites to the right of suffrage, 
who pay taxes or bear arms (by no means excluding females).”

When his beloved son died, instead of sinking into grief, Lincoln spent each 
evening with a friend and member of the cabinet and they would read jokes to 
each other from a book. To me, this is a supreme example of how one can be 
unhappy and simultaneously aware that delight remains in the world.

Though Lincoln said “Do I not destroy my enemies by making them my friends?”, 
and he lived by this, we can see his ordinary humanity in the instances where 
he failed. When his tormenting father lay dying, he sent his son a note asking 
him to visit. Lincoln wrote back: “If we could meet now, it is doubtful whether 
it would not be more painful than pleasant.”

Akhil Sharma <https://www.theguardian.com/books/akhil-sharma> won the Folio 
prize on 24 March for his novelFamily Life.
 