
In the 1950s I was an athlete. Those were the days before joggers clogged the 
highway, so it was unusual for me to see another runner when I was training. We 
fell into the habit of meeting up and pounding the miles together for company.

He was stocky, barrel-chested, with a high-pitched, donnish voice and the 
aerodynamics of a brick. He was funny and witty and he talked endlessly, but I 
understood very little of what he was saying, and it became clear that he ran 
in order to think. He seemed to be obsessed by mathematics and biology. That 
much I could work out.

We had one thing in common: a fascination with Disney's Snow White and the 
Seven Dwarfs <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0029583/>, especially the 
transformation of the Wicked Queen into the Witch. He used to go over the scene 
in detail, dwelling on the ambiguity of the apple, red on one side, green on 
the other, one of which gave death. We had both been traumatised by Walt.

On one occasion he asked me whether, in my opinion as a classical linguist, 
artificial intelligence was possible. After a couple of miles of silence I said 
that, in my opinion, it was not. And that was that.

He killed himself when an ignorant and uncouth judge gave him the choice of a 
prison sentence or chemical castration; and I was overwhelmed by fury at the 
salacious, gloating humiliation imposed on my friend, and by a sense of guilt 
that I did not, could not, help him; which lasted for decades, and was made 
only worse when theOfficial Secrets Act revealed his true heroism 
<http://www.turing.org.uk/publications/cambridge1.html>.

He died of cyanide poisoning. By his body was an apple, partly eaten. The 
apple was not tested for cyanide. His name wasAlan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>.

â€¢ Alan Garner's Collected Folk Tales is published by HarperCollins Children's 
Books.
 