
Pamela Butchart’s My Head Teacher Is a Vampire Rat illustrated by Thomas 
Flintham has just been announced asThe Children’s Book Award 
<http://www.fcbg.org.uk/childrens-book-award/> winner 2016. The book was 
crowned winner of the overall prize, shortly after winning the Books for Young 
Readers category!

My Head Teacher Is a Vampire Rat 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-head-teacher-is-a-vampire-rat.html> is a 
zany story about a group of kids who decide that their new head teacher is a 
vampire. They’ve figured it out because he is quite scary, has the blinds down 
in his office all day and has banned garlic bread at lunch! The book is 
fast-paced, irreverent and full of explosive illustration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpamela-butchart-my-head-teacher-is-a-vampire-rat-wins-childrens-book-award-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74044a8feea18b58aea32767c47c98d127dc3a50%2F0_0_1522_2339%2F1522.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20Headteacher%20is%20a%20Vampire%20Rat%20wins%20Children%E2%80%99s%20Book%20Award%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpamela-butchart-my-head-teacher-is-a-vampire-rat-wins-childrens-book-award-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20Headteacher%20is%20a%20Vampire%20Rat%20wins%20Children%E2%80%99s%20Book%20Award%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fpamela-butchart-my-head-teacher-is-a-vampire-rat-wins-childrens-book-award-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74044a8feea18b58aea32767c47c98d127dc3a50%2F0_0_1522_2339%2F1522.jpg>
The other winners are Apple and Rain 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/apple-and-rain-255905.html> by Sarah Crossan, 
which came first in the Books for Older Readers category andIs There A Dog In 
This Book? <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/347021/> by 
Viviane Schwarz, which won the Books for Younger Children category.

Apple and Rain by Sarah Crossan - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/11/sarah-crossan-apple-and-rain-review>
Sarah Crossan, who has recently also won the Children’s Books Ireland 2016 
awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/23/sarah-crossan-louise-oneill-childrens-books-ireland-2016>
 with her book One, writes about Apple (her real name is Apollinia 
Apostolopoulou), a girl abandoned by her mother on a Christmas eve when she was 
little. When the mother returns from the US, where she left to fulfil her dream 
of becoming an actress, Apple expects an explanation. But she only finds 
someone who is even more lost than she is. Reunited in their fragility, the 
mother and the daughter have to learn how to love each other again.

Is There A Dog In This Book? 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/347021/> by Viviane 
Schwarz, which won the Books for Younger Children category, is an interactive 
book, the third of a series, in which three cats smell something weird in their 
book so they ask... Is there a dog in this book? One of them wants to pet it 
but the others express their fear as dogs hate cats. A funny book for cat and 
dog lovers.

Sarah Crossan: I had this idea that writers were a different breed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/21/sarah-crossan-interview-apple-and-rain>
The prize, now in its 35th year (it used to go by the name of the Red House 
children’s books award), is unique in the UK in being chosen entirely by 
children. It has previously brought acclaim and strong sales to past winners 
such as JK Rowling, Patrick Ness, Andy Stanton, Malorie Blackman, Anthony 
Horowitz and Michael Morpurgo, who has won a record three times.

Congratulations to all the winners! 

Find out who was shortlisted for the prize below:

Books for Younger Children

Is There a Dog in This Book?  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/is-there-a-dog-in-this-book.html>by Viviane 
Schwarz (Walker)

The Children's Book Award – shortlist 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/02/the-childrens-book-award-shortlist-2016>
Read, Steady, Jump <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ready-steady-jump.html> 
by Jeanne Willis and Adrian Reynolds (Anderson)

This Book Just Ate My Dog 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-book-just-ate-my-dog-2.html> by Richard 
Byrne (Oxford)

Fabulous Pie <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fabulous-pie.html> by Gareth 
Edwards and Guy Parker-Rees (Scholastic)

Books for Younger Readers

Boy in the Tower <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-tower.html> by 
Polly Ho-Yen (Doubleday)

Horrid Henry’s Krazy Ketchup 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/horrid-henry-s-krazy-ketchup.html> by 
Francesca Simon, illustrated by Tony Ross (Orion)

My Headteacher is a Vampire Rat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-head-teacher-is-a-vampire-rat.html> by 
Pamela Butchart, illustrated by Thomas Flintham (Nosy Crow)

Books for Older Readers

Michael Morpurgo: how the sinking of the Lusitania inspired my new book <>View 
gallery

Listen to the Moon <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/listen-to-the-moon.html> 
by Michael Morpurgo (Harper Collins)

Apple and Rain <https://www.facebook.com/guardianteenbooks?ref=hl> by Sarah 
Crossan (Bloomsbury)

Smart <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/smart-266355.html> by Kim Slater 
(Macmillan)
 