
Heston Blumenthal <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/hestonblumenthal>

It can be quite difficult to control what you eat when your schedule is all 
over the place. I tend to make small allowances when I can – for instance, 
cutting down on carbs by taking one layer of bread off a sandwich. I also 
exercise every day, even if it's just a short run. I'm tasting and developing 
dishes all the time – we can have around 500 dishes in development at any one 
time betweenthe Fat Duck <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/the-fat-duck>, 
Dinner <http://www.dinnerbyheston.com/>, Waitrose and the two 
<http://www.hindsheadbray.com/> pubs <http://www.thecrownatbray.com/>, and 
that's not including the food for the TV work, so when I'm not filming, I'm 
kind of constantly eating/tasting. This has been an interesting exercise, 
though – I've never really analysed what I eat or drink. I guess I need to 
organise breakfast better, and I'm quite famous for drinking my body weight in 
Earl Grey tea, but the rest is just madness.

Sunday

Breakfast Filming this morning, so just had a quick Earl Grey tea.

Lunch Tuna sandwich… from a shop somewhere.

Dinner Sunday lunch – well, kind of lunch/dinner by the time I got home. I 
think it was about 8.30pm, so that makes it officially Sunday dinner. A roast, 
of course! Dorset lamb this week. I always try to have a Sunday joint with all 
the trimmings – it's one of my favourite meals of the week.

Monday

Breakfast Early morning phone interview with Australia and a cup of tea (Earl 
Grey with skimmed milk).

Lunch Lunch? Not today… : (

Dinner Filming at the BBC studios for Jimmy Carr's Channel 4 show 8 Out Of 10 
Cats <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/8-out-of-10-cats> – great night, 
hilarious, but was up early, then straight off to filming and hadn't eaten all 
day. Arrived at the BBC starving – big mistake (dried-out meatballs) washed 
down with a few glasses (slightly warm pinot grigio). Delicious!?
 A taste of Heston Blumenthal's week… Photograph: Heston Blumenthal 
Tuesday

Breakfast My new TV series is out mid-November and we're still filming – 
cutting it neat! Had bacon butties to start the day off, cooked in the engine 
of a steam train – why not?

Lunch Lunch was a bigger affair, but at least had packed my lunchbox. Grabbed 
some veg from the catering van, too.

Dinner Popped into the amazing Zuma 
<http://www.zumarestaurant.com/zuma-landing/london/en/welcome> with my 
youngest, Joy, for her birthday. We were too full for dessert, so they just 
sent a little something.

Wednesday

Breakfast Waitrose tasting for new hot cross buns for next Easter – Earl Grey 
jasmine tea and orange-flower water versus ginger and acacia honey. May sound 
nice, but had to taste brussels sprout leaves cooked in different ways at the 
same time.

Lunch Lunch at the lab: yoghurt and tampons. We were testing the effect of 
certain foods and how they coat the palate for an interactive presentation. The 
tampon dries the saliva out between spoonfuls, so you can identify how the 
tongue perceives flavour. It did work, but I wonder how it will go down. 

Snack Everything is getting bigger for the new programme. We supersize 
everything, and cook and eat it with different communities throughout the UK. 
Things like afternoon tea and old sweets. Not sure where the huge whisky gum 
came from, but I think I know someone at the lab who knows.

Tea We have a lab grade centrifuge, a distillator, a rotary evaporator, vacuum 
centrifuge, vac packs, water baths… But no bloody kettle. A very complex cup of 
tea.

Dinner After a full day in Bray and a brainstorm meeting that overran, ended 
up in the garden ofthe Crown <http://www.thecrownatbray.com/> for fish and 
chips – took the opportunity as a rare warm evening.

Thursday

Breakfast Book signing back in office – finally a decent cup of tea, ahhh, 
found teapot.

Lunch Spent most of the day at Dinner <http://www.dinnerbyheston.com/>. 
Meeting withAsh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/23/heston-blumenthal-palmer-watts-interview>
 to discuss a new project – a historic British food book – and trying to get 
a modern "meat fruit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/02/heston-blumenthal-christmas-canapes-meat>
" shot to contrast with the historic image. Lunch was a tasting of new dishes: 
new terrine, autumn tart and sambonade – a goat's cheese cheesecake with 
elderflower and a secret centre.

Dinner Stayed and had dinner with a couple of friends – obviously had a meat 
fruit. We're serving around 1,000 of them a week now!

Friday

Breakfast None at home because I was running late, but I had tea and breakfast 
canapés at the launch of a newVision Express 
<http://www.visionexpress.com/news/0042//> shop on Oxford Street – loads of 
bites, so breakfast in stages.

Lunch Vision Express sushi before cutting the ribbon for the official store 
opening. I met another great spectacle-wearing geek,Jason Bradbury 
<http://gadgetshow.channel5.com/profiles/Jason_Bradbury>, there from The Gadget 
Show, so had a lot to talk about.

Dinner Roast chicken at a friend's – it's the biggest joy when someone asks 
you to their home and cooks for you, but my mates always joke that it's such a 
stress. I think it's the other way round when they come to mine – it's not as 
if I can just cook up a steak. People are expecting to eat the cutlery at the 
very least.

Saturday

Breakfast A quick tea and pastry on the way to the lab – more Earl Grey.

Lunch Tasting two new dishes for the Duck. Nowhere near finished, but one will 
end up on the menu for Christmas as a kind of "partridge in a pear tree" – 
partridge cooked in butter at a low temperature to relax the meat, served on 
the breastbone with brandy butter, and chestnut and pine and mandarin 
(basically all the aromas and flavours we associate with Christmas). We're also 
looking at the leathering process from the 1800s for a turbot dish – tanning 
agents in early 1800s Britain were sumac, oak and mimosa bark, so we use all 
three. The drainage from the tanneries heated up the land, and we grew 
pineapples and melons on it, so we serve the fish with savoury melon and purple 
carrot. Oh, and frankincense and crystalised sea veg – we make our own leather 
from the fish skin, which you don't eat, but which will be part of the cutlery 
for the texture and smell. Easy, really, to balance all that?!

Dinner Working late in Bray after tasting, so had a beer and some of head chef 
Jonny Lake's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/28/staff-meals-worlds-best-restaurants>
 nachos with the boys after service.

• Heston's Fantastical Food starts on 6 November at 9pm on Channel 4.



Nigella Lawson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/nigellalawson>
 Nigella Lawson. Photograph: Jay Brooks for the Guardian. Food styling: Helen 
Macintyre. Hair and makeup: Tricia Woolston using Armani 
Monday

Breakfast Egg on toast, wolfed down too fast for a picture, but this is the 
deal (and it's often repeated): wholegrain rye toast, with a soft boiled egg 
schmooshed on top, with lots ofMaldon salt <http://www.maldonsalt.co.uk/> and 
coarsely ground white pepper. Straight after breakfast, made batch of coffee 
ice-cream and chocolate nougat cookies to take to curry favour with various 
radio and TV interviews that I have lined up for day.

Lunch I am not good when I miss meals; being hungry makes me both murderous 
and suicidal. So didn't feel good that I didn't manage to get back for lunch 
until about 4.30pm and had to leave house for the next thingy at 5pm, so all I 
had time for was some rye toast with hummus and coriander on top, and a far too 
small portion at that.

Supper Roast chicken – I have all the bits with cartilage and skin, by choice, 
while pretending to make great sacrifices so that the children can eat the 
white meat – on escarole (my favourite lettuce) dressed just with Maldon,Mellow 
Yellow cold-pressed rapeseed oil 
<http://www.farrington-oils.co.uk/products/mellow-yellow/>, lemon and lots of 
English mustard.

Tuesday

Breakfast Made an egg and bacon sandwich for one of the children, but then ran 
too late to have breakfast myself. Not a good start to the day, made worse by 
the fact that I was going to a photographic shoot, which always makes me nervy.

Lunch Made up for lack of breakfast by eating huge amounts of rotisserie 
chicken, char-grilled corn and crinkly chips fromChicken Shop 
<http://www.chickenshop.com/> in Kentish Town. Don't blame them for the poor 
display: I had a takeaway and didn't present the food (such was my quaking 
hunger) to its best advantage. From this point onwards, my life started looking 
up.

Supper By special request, made risi e bisi, a Venetian recipe (think a soupy 
pea risotto) that's a favourite in my home. I am always grateful when this is 
what I'm asked to cook, because it's quick and easy, and as comforting for the 
cook as the eater.
 Nigella Lawson: 'I am not good when I miss meals; being hungry makes me both 
murderous and suicidal.' Photograph: Nigella Lawson 
Wednesday

Breakfast Rye toast with Mellow Yellow cold-pressed rapeseed oil and Vegemite. 
I feel a real traitor to my country choosing Vegemite over Marmite, but there 
it is.

Lunch Since this is a day of interviews, and the meagre toast with Vegemite is 
wearing off to the point of panic, I order a steak and chips. True, there are 
only four chips on the plate (though I must tell you they were much bigger and 
hunkier than they look), but they've been generous with the béarnaise sauce, 
and I also have a tube ofColman's <http://www.colmans.co.uk/> in my bag, so I 
manage to get through the afternoon.

Supper By request, again, I make another of my children's favourites – penne 
with ham, peas and cream.

Thursday 

Breakfast The usual rye toast and egg – and an awful lot of tea. In fact, I 
can never actually eat breakfast before I've had my two mugs of tea.

Lunch Have a meeting at home over lunch, so roast a butterflied leg of lamb, 
along with a tin of sliced pink fir apple potatoes, yellow courgettes, cherry 
tomatoes, leeks and black olives. There is no particular design to this 
vegetable mixture: I was just giving my fridge a bit of a going through, and 
bunged everything that needed to be used up into a roasting tin.

Supper Although I complied with children's wishes, making them burgers (not 
homemade, I must own up, butHeston's from Waitrose 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/ProductView-10317-10001-134075-Heston+from+Waitrose+2+Ultimate+Beef+Burgers>
) with plastic cheese, potatoes cut somewhere between wedges and chips, roasted 
with garlic cloves and pancetta cubes, and a rather 1970s-looking salad, I 
needed the simple salve of an avocado, eaten with nothing more than a spritz of 
lemon and a snowy throw of salt.

I did succumb to some Booja-Booja champagne truffles 
<http://www.boojabooja.com/chocolate_truffles.asp> later, but I never feel bad 
about that.

Friday

Breakfast Smoked salmon, coarsely ground white pepper, lemon juice and lots of 
dill – for me, the best way to eat it. I am very fussy about the smoked salmon, 
though; it must be London-cure, which is so lusciously mild that it's more like 
eating wafer-thin sashimi than anything else. I get mine, as my grandmother did 
before me, fromPanzer's in St John's Wood <http://www.panzers.co.uk/>, despite 
the schlepp.

Lunch A frantic day, and much as I like having proper meals and not grabbed 
snacks, lunch today is a toasted sandwich. Still, it's a very good toastie, 
buttery-crisp on the outside, lined with ham as thin and tender and pink as a 
kitten's tongue, and gooey with jarlsberg.

Supper Going to see Michael McIntyre at the O2, so supper has to be a picnic 
on the way there. I have an old picnic box I bought on eBay, and make a few 
batches of rice noodle and prawn salad, with beansprouts, sugar snaps and a lot 
of ginger, chilli and soy to go inside it. Friends we're going with a supply of 
champagne and, given that I can get drunk on one glass, I am reeling by the 
time I get home. Fantastic night, though, topped off by a buttered, toasted 
bagel on my return, followed by crisps and chocolate.

Saturday

Breakfast Get up too late for breakfast, but manage a good 
lunch-after-the-night-before (and pre-opening snoop) atColbert 
<http://www.colbertchelsea.com/> of fried eggs with black pudding and crêpes 
with lemon and sugar.

Supper I live very near the Chelsea Fishmonger 
<http://www.thechelseafishmonger.com/> and generally throw myself at Rex, the 
fishmonger, and get myself comfortingly overstocked for the weekend. Tonight's 
supper is part of this catch: halibut, juicily roasted and plonked on top of 
some treviso leaves, with broccoli cooked with garlic oil, anchovies, chilli 
and dry white vermouth. This is what I use whenever I want white wine taste, 
but without having to open a bottle. I know it sounds odd, but unless we're 
having friends over, it never occurs to me to open a bottle of wine.

Sunday

Breakfast Up too late for breakfast, but I do manage a supersized cappuccino 
in bed with the papers.

Lunch Tuna tartare with capers, lemon zest, spring onions and rocket: this 
takes about three minutes to make and is a virtuous reward for the lazy and 
greedy.

Supper Ever since the children have been teenagers, the ritual of Sunday lunch 
has been shunted on to Sunday supper. Tonight, we're having pork belly slices – 
think melting meat and triumphant, bronze crackling – with soy and cumin gravy, 
mashed potato and broccoli. I've been experimenting with some mini versions of 
my cappuccino pavlova and have some bases left, as well as some coffee 
ice-cream from Monday, so do a housekeeping job of getting rid of the two 
together (that's my excuse), anointed with a sticky, gleaming drizzle of Golden 
Syrup which, along with Maldon and Colman's, constitute the holy trinity 
of Great British Foodstuffs.

• Nigella Lawson's new book, Nigellissima: Instant Italian Inspiration, is 
published by Chatto & Windus at £26. To order a copy for £20.80, plus free UK 
mainland p&p, go toguardian.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701187330>
, or call 0330 333 6846.



Marina O'Loughlin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/marina-oloughlin>

A lunatic mishmash of fayn daynin', boozing and comfort eating with the odd, 
breakfast-based attempt at healthiness. When not working, I'll cheerfully eat 
the same things over and over. I was on holiday for much of the week, so I'm 
amazed there's no Indian or a Thai: I usually pine for them after 
monoculturalist Italy. No apologies for the datterini surfeit – I'd happily 
live on them. And toast.

Saturday

Breakfast Tomatoes with chilli: I can't get enough of the local datterini 
tomatoes of joy.

Lunch Risotto at Trattoria Carmello <http://www.trattoriadacarmelo.com/> – 
I practically live in this restaurant in Marina di Ragusa whenever I'm in 
Sicily. Simple but wonderful.

Dinner Satro in Scicli – new and still finding its feet. Toast, anchovy, 
sliver of lemon – tangy! Maccheroni with swordfish. The inevitable almondy, 
custardy cakes to finish.

Sunday

Breakfast More datterini.

Lunch Tuna and green peppers – usually hate green peppers, but these almost 
melted down into the tuna.

Dinner Lobster paella – bizarre to be eating paella in Sicily, but that's what 
our hosts cooked for us.

Monday

Breakfast Berocca and banana (and one or two datterini) – healthy!

Lunch A horrid little salad with tinned corn in a Modica cafe – you can get 
bad food in Italy.

Dinner Anchovy toasts. Bread with red tuna and its roe. Roast pancetta at the 
local bar: magnificently fatty, piggy porchetta.More almond cakes.
 Marina O'Loughlin: 'A lunatic mishmash of fayn daynin’, boozing and comfort 
eating with the odd, breakfast-based attempt at healthiness.' Photograph: 
Marina O'Loughlin 
Tuesday

Breakfast Unidentified Sicilian object stuffed with cheese and sausage. Almost 
Glaswegian in its loveliness.

Lunch More Don Carmello – no apologies for going back. Antipasto di mare 
included fish-laced caponata.

Dinner Negroni and cicchetti at Grand Café Tabbacco, Catania 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/italy/sicily/catania/restaurants/other/grand-cafe-tabbacco>
. Then airline food worse even than it had been on way over. "Beef rendang" 
looked like Pedigree Chum, so I ate cheese and oatcakes and BA nuts.

Wednesday

Breakfast Bagel and tea – am a sucker for a bagel, one side marmalade, the 
other Marmite.

Lunch Homemade lemon cake and tea. I meant not to eat because I knew what was 
coming later…

Dinner Kitchen Table <http://www.bubbledogs.co.uk/amp> on Charlotte Street, 
for a review – though you'll have to wait until 10 November to read it.Fourteen 
courses. Several highlights, chief among them a giddily brilliant liquoricey 
pear cake.

Thursday

Breakfast Tea and a Crunchie – not proud of this: I'm calling it elevenses.

Lunch Garufin 
<http://www.viewlondon.co.uk/restaurants/garufin-info-278713.html> in Holborn. 
Pulled pork, chorizo, beans, squash – earthy and wonderful. Quail cooked in an 
escabeche – the presentation made me hoot. Presa Ibérico on quinoa flavoured 
with smoked oil – could almost convert me to quinoa.

Afternoon Pal who owns Belvidere Place B&B in Broadstairs 
<http://www.belvidereplace.co.uk/> has just got a licence, so I'm "helping" her 
with a bloody mary tasting. (Big Tom <http://www.bigtom.co.uk/> wins.)

Dinner Thai sticky rice with a little lime and fish sauce. Sometimes you just 
need something, well, soothing.

Friday

Breakfast Espresso, pomegranate, banana – almost healthy.

Lunch The last of the (possibly illegally imported) datterini, evoo, smoked 
Maldon, bread, Berocca.

Snack Percy Pigs – I buy them "for the children".

Dinner Risotto with tagliata hacked from a mammoth T-bone from the Butcher of 
Brogdale <http://www.thebutcherofbrogdale.co.uk/>. Husband made it: bloody 
gorgeous in every sense.



Allegra McEvedy <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/allegramcevedy>
 Allegra McEvedy. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Breakfast is important in our house – it's the one meal of the day that I'm 
guaranteed to have with my daughter. Lunch is a big variable – weekdays, if I'm 
writing, I'll just grab a bowl of soup or knock up a salad, but more often than 
not I'll be recipe testing or out tasting for the businesses I consult for, so 
don't want a proper lunch. Suppers, too, have no real pattern – I'm generally 
out no more than twice a week, and at home it's usually based around what's 
about to go off in the fridge.

Saturday

Breakfast Bacon and pineapple butties – must be a Saturday!

Lunch Friends over. Stunning bit of plaice, and probably the last time I do 
peas and lettuce this year – definitely a sunshine dish. And an emergency pud – 
vanilla sponge stolen from a friend with a quick plum compote and pistachios.

Dinner My sister and her kids came round for supper, so we had the first big 
beefy braise of the winter.

Sunday

Breakfast Some days I have eggs, others muesli. On big days, eggs are the way 
to go.Homemade River Cottage green tomato chutney 
<http://www.rivercottage.net/recipes/jps-green-tomato-chutney/> put some zoom 
in today's oeuf.

Lunch Cafe Anglais <http://www.lecafeanglais.co.uk/>: the compulsory 
umami-laden starter that isRowley <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rowley_Leigh>'s 
parmesan custard, then more beef.

Supper A rioja-based meal with friends. Ended up making canapés a bit pissed: 
hummus and mung beans, potatoes and pesto... Basically any leftovers I had in 
the fridge.

Monday

Breakfast Had the plaice bones from Saturday in the fridge, so put on a fish 
stock while eating my muesli.

Lunch A cheese straw Parthenon set the tone on the first day of cooking for 
the new book. Didn't have a sit-down lunch because of that: shared a PPP – 
potato pesto pizza – with the girls for lunch, then more baking with raspberry 
jam tarts. Had a proper madeleine moment when I ate one later – hadn't had 
a jam tart for years and I came over a bit emotional. Love that food can do 
that to you.

Supper Easy supper with my daughter – my favourite Turkish veggie pilaff.
 Allegra McEvedy: 'At home it’s usually based around what’s about to go off in 
the fridge.' Photograph: Allegra McEvedy 
Tuesday

Breakfast Quick and yum hot breakfast on a cold day: lemon and sugar pancakes. 
LunchMore baking. Limbering up for Bonfire night with spicy sausage rolls. 
Munched a lot of sponge today, plus peppermint cream hearts. A great day in the 
McEvedy kitchen.

Dinner One of the girl's boyfriends had been shooting at the weekend, and she 
brought round pheasants as a present. Because I don't have enough food in my 
life...

Wednesday

Breakfast Marmite crumpet.

Lunch A typing-in-the-recipes day, so had salad with poached egg and homemade 
chorizo.

Supper Went to a Peruvian place called Ceviche 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/may/04/ceviche-london-w1-restaurant-review>
. Had a fantastic dish called pisco – so good.

Thursday

Breakfast Muesli.

Lunch Tasting, so didn't really eat lunch. On the menu were 14 organic Irish 
seaweeds.

Supper Mussels were on day three, so needed cooking: never-fail marinière.

Friday

Breakfast A white peach compote that I made in August – I'd taken it out of 
the freezer for an end-of-work bellini yesterday, so we had the rest as a 
smoothie this morning.

Lunch Was left with an empty tart shell after testing a shortcrust recipe, so 
rummaged around in the fridge for ingredients to fill it with: last of my 
homemade chorizo, four old ends of various cheeses and peas from the freezer. 
With a bit of lettuce and the last of the toms, it made pretty much my perfect 
lunch (just add a glass of sauvignon blanc).

Supper The Queen Adelaide <http://www.thequeenadelaidew12.co.uk/> on Uxbridge 
Road. Scotch eggs make the best pub supper – the kedgeree ones were awesome, 
closely followed by the pickled egg one.



Tom Parker Bowles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/tom-parker-bowles>
 Tom Parker Bowles. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
"The primary requisite for writing well about food," mused the great AJ 
Liebling <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A._J._Liebling>, "is a good appetite. 
Without this, it is impossible to accumulate… enough experience of eating to 
have anything worth setting down. Each day brings only two opportunities for 
field work, and they are not to be wasted minimising the intake of cholesterol. 
They are indispensable, like a prizefighter's hours upon the road." Far be it 
from me to contradict AJ, but with training that "field work" can be stretched 
to at least five instances a day. The first bit of this week was fairly normal, 
the second more gruelling, as I was in the US to flogmy new book 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781862059306>
 – and to miss out on a raft of New York newbies and old favourites would be 
remiss. Well, that's my excuse.

Monday

Breakfast Nothing at all, but that's pretty much normal for me.

Lunch Tom yum goong soup at Tawana 
<http://www.tawana.co.uk/tawanathairestaurant> on Westbourne Grove, followed by 
larb gai and miang kum – hot as buggery.

Dinner Couscous with pickled chillies and harissa, a bowl of lentils and a 
Drumstick 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Drumstick+images+sweet&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&prmd=imvnse&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=3kGBUJXqH-va0QXyvoGwBA&ved=0CCAQsAQ&biw=1544&bih=989>
for pudding.

Tuesday

Breakfast A rare occurrence: fruit and carrots.

Lunch Haddock and potato soup, and then plaice at Hereford Road 
<http://www.herefordroad.org/> (a rather more regular occurrence).

Dinner Boiled egg and soldiers.
 Tom Parker Bowles: 'Breakfast? Are you kidding?' Photograph: Tom Parker Bowles
Wednesday

Breakfast and lunch Typical last-minute rush to get ready to go to 
Philadelphia for filming, so didn't get round to eating a thing all day, until 
I sat down to fish pie on the 5pm BA flight from Heathrow T5 – just about OK.

Dinner Landed in NYC around 8.30pm and went straight to dinner at Smith & 
Wollensky <http://www.smithandwollenskynyc.com/> – a brutally monolithic onion 
and tomato salad, then a gargantuan New York strip that was not as good as it 
thought it was.

Thursday

Mid-morning A day in Philly. Cheese steak sandwich at Jim's 
<http://www.jimssteaks.com/> – a touch bland; should have added onions. Then a 
hot dog. Good bun and topping, but the sausage lacked snap and smoke. Good 
local fizzy drink.

Dinner Oysters, clams and lobster roll at Sansom Street Oyster House 
<http://oysterhousephilly.com/>.

Friday

Didn't eat all day because was in and out of QVC's studio. Ended up in some 
bar in the evening for a much-needed drink. They did a good burger, too.

Saturday

Mid-morning snack Still in New York – gobstoppers to keep me going.

Lunch To Tomoe Sushi – one of the best in town for spicy tuna tartare and eel 
otoro among other things.

Dinner Blue Smoke's Memphis ribs – not enough smoke, but the pulled pork was 
pretty damned good.

Sunday

Breakfast Are you kidding?

Lunch Sunday lunch at Má Pêche: to start, a broth of glorious, beefy, greasy 
depth – the sort you want to dive into – filled with chunks of wobbling tendon. 
And then, of course, David Chang's pork buns – world-famous, still world-class.

Dinner Il Buco Alimentari e Vineria <http://www.ilbucovineria.com/> in the 
East Village. Good food. Noisy, though. Home-cured salumi were damned good. And 
then spaghetti con bottarga – sweetly saline.

• Tom Parker Bowles's new book, Let's Eat: Recipes From My Kitchen Notebook, 
is published by Pavilion at £25. To order a copy for £20 including free UK 
mainland p&p, go toguardian.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781862059306>
 or call 0330 333 6846.



Angela Hartnett <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/angelahartnett>
 Angela Hartnett. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Few chefs get three square meals a day – sometimes I'm lucky to get one – but 
I pick at stuff through service, so don't go hungry. Looking back, I should eat 
breakfast more, but that would mean being organised first thing, which is not a 
strong point.Monday

Breakfast Black coffee, like every day.

Lunch A day off, so went to see my mother. We had a nice minestrone.

Dinner Nuts, beans, salad leaves and beetroot, all bought at Aldeburgh food 
festival <http://www.aldeburghfoodanddrink.co.uk/> at the weekend.

Tuesday

Breakfast Coffee, then to Murano <http://www.muranolondon.com/> for service – 
that keeps you going, as you pick and taste right through.

Dinner Late supper at the Green Man & French Horn 
<http://www.squaremeal.co.uk/restaurants/london/view/108371/Green_Man_and_French_Horn>
 on St Martin's Lane. I joined friends after service, so hoovered up the 
remains of what they'd been eating – zander, partridge, leeks, eggs – and 
rounded things off with an ace jam tart.

Wednesday

Breakfast I actually had some time today, so grapefruit with the usual coffee 
– more treat than habit.

Lunch Staff lunch is always at 10.45am – today it was leftover veg turned into 
a stew or pasta.
 Angela Hartnett: 'Looking back, I should eat breakfast more.' Photograph: 
Angela Hartnett 
Thursday

Breakfast Coffee first, as always.

Then testing for a private party – couscous salad with hot smoked salmon. 
Stayed on for lunch service, and picked my way through to lunch.

Dinner Spent afternoon on admin and errands, so headed to Murano: pasta with 
bread, high in carbs!

Friday

Dinner Pretty much what I ate on Wednesday, except I came home to a slice of 
spinach tart. It's a thing of beauty when made well, but I have to admit this 
was not the best – still, the spinach came from Mum's garden.

Saturday

Breakfast Late breakfast coffee and toasted St John 
<https://www.stjohngroup.uk.com/bakery/> bread – it's so handy to have the 
bakery round the corner.

Lunch Running late (again) and had to get to work, so just a quick salad.

Dinner Good job I had something light earlier, because tonight I had a huge 
Action Against Hunger <http://www.actionagainsthunger.org.uk/> meal: Claude Bosi
 <http://www.hibiscusrestaurant.co.uk/claude_02.swf>'s buckwheat soup, Tom 
Kerridge <http://www.thehandandflowers.co.uk/hand_flowers_team.php>'s 
slow-cooked hake, carrot purée and lardo,Phil Howard 
<http://www.squarerestaurant.com/Food/PhilHoward.aspx>'s roast guinea fowl with 
semolina gnocchi andAndrew Fairlie <http://www.andrewfairlie.co.uk/>'s 
chocolate hedgehog.

Sunday 

Breakfast To Nordic Bakery <http://www.nordicbakery.com/> with my nephew, who 
loves the place – egg and herrings on rye bread while the kids ate their way 
through cinnamon buns and rye muffins. Numerous coffees, too, obviously.

Lunch Had family over – made some salads, sardines on tomato and fennel, and 
linguine with vongole, chilli and garlic. No dessert, because I didn't get to 
St John in time to pick up some of their doughnuts – they always sell out so 
early

• Angela Hartnett is chef/patron at Murano <http://www.muranolondon.com/>, 
London W1.
 