
With the iPad, and subsequent tablets, came a new enthusiasm for aggregation 
tools for both media and social content - and a new opportunity for more visual 
ways of representing data.

Pulse <http://www.alphonsolabs.com/> and Flipboard <http://www.flipboard.com/> 
attracted some serious attention at launch, reincarnating text RSS feeds into 
something more magazine-like - more visual, more delightful and less of a chore.

Rather, it's a about a more leisurely and pleasant reading experience - and 
consequently of great interest to the media industry. The New York Times 
thought the Pulse reading experience was compelling enough that itbanned it 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/jun/08/ipad-new-york-times> from 
using its feeds at one point, though laterreinstated 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/06/09/pulse-app-pulled-then-rei_n_605994.html>
 it.

As a power RSS user (and a 'feed zero' compulsive) I'm not convinced that 
these are the most efficient way to deal with a few hundred must-read feeds. 
Taptu want to convince me otherwise. Until now a mobile search specialist, and 
the firm behind theWapedia <http://wapedia.mobi/en/> Wikipedia app, the My 
Taptu app <http://beta.taptu.com/> launching today for iPhone, iPod Touch and 
Android.

My Taptu presents RSS feeds in a similar way, ambitiously but fairly 
effectively breaking stories down into browse-able squares with enough text and 
image to illustrate each of them. Add feeds by choosing from editorially 
curated lists including celebrity, tech and politics - of which Taptu have 
channelled 5,000 specialist feeds into 200 lists under the app's 'StreamStore'. 
There's also a bookmarking feature so you can browse headlines offline and read 
full stories later.


Konstantinos Papamiltiadis 
<http://uk.linkedin.com/pub/konstantinos-papamiltiadis/3/91/44b>, Taptu's 
senior director of product and engineering, says Taptu is not looking to extend 
the app to the iPad, so contests that there's any competition with Pulse or 
Flipboard. It's about creating that experience on mobile, he says.

"A typical mobile user might have 30 or 40 apps on their phone, and would 
start the day checking Facebook, then Twitter and then the BBC," said 
Papamiltiadis. "That kind ofapp hopping is what we are trying to solve by 
aggregating all that content."

Taptu, based in Cambridge and with a team of 30, appears to be treading 
carefully when it comes to relationships with media companies, being quick to 
point out that linking through to a story within the app only serves up the 
first paragraph - users need to click through to the home site for the full 
story. "We want to make sure the media gets the right attention, making it as 
sexy as possible to go through to the website. That's why we are sticking with 
our search principles and using only part of the story [in the app]. It's a 
teaser."

Though ads within publishers' feeds show up within the My Taptu app, 
Papamiltiadis says it does run minimal ads itself but is waiting to see how the 
app performs before committing to banner, in-stream ads or anything else.

My Taptu is light and about as well designed as that 3.5" screen will allow. 
The customisation is much more comprehensive than Pulse or Flipboard and it's 
an attractive proposition, so for most consumers it will be worth a try.

But back to the power RSS user issue. I follow 80-or-so feeds and read every 
headline from the last 24 hours on all of those. I useByline 
<http://www.phantomfish.com/byline.html> on iPhone (not perfect - very crashy 
and quite slow) because it integrates with Google Reader - I don't want to have 
to set up all those feeds again every time I try a new RSS reader. But I also 
need to share and star stories in the reader I use.

There's no Google Reader integration with My Taptu at all at the moment. Maybe 
that will change, but I think there's still a good deal of work to be done in 
bridging the gap between visual and interesting RSS readers and heavy-duty 
tools capable of efficiently serving up several hundred headlines.

â€¢ Update: Taptu say they are working on an iPad version, but wanted to 
concentrate on mobile initially as that's their background, but also to 
discourage comparisons with Pulse, etc...

 