
Q I bought a one-year warranty for my Citroen C5 estate for Â£525. The warranty 
was from a car dealership in Northampton and not Citroen. I explained I would 
be moving to Cornwall but was reassured that should anything go wrong the 
warranty would be honoured by any garage within the group, irrespective of the 
brand of vehicle sold. Alternatively, they said I could go to any Citroen 
garage for the repair and they would send the invoice for the repair to the 
group.

I started experiencing problems with the car and contacted my Citroen garage 
in Plymouth. They said they would not honour the warranty as their experience 
under such warranties was that their invoices for work done were never paid.

Another Citroen dealership told me the same thing. Then I went to two local 
dealerships, Jaguar and Vauxhall, both part of the group. But they said they 
could not do the work as they did not have the necessary equipment to work on 
Citroens.

Finally I contacted the original garage and said I wanted my money back. They 
said they were not prepared to offer a refund as they felt the product had been 
sold in good faith.

In the meantime many other niggles and irritations manifested themselves and I 
cut my losses and traded the car in - I was heading for a very expensive time 
without the protection of the warranty I had purchased.

Do I have any grounds legally to seek my money back? And if so how would I go 
about it?
DS

A You bought the extended warranty for peace of mind and it turned out to be 
completely useless. This doesn't surprise me in the slightest since time and 
again these warranties are found to be poor value for money.

Legally, your rights are against the warranty company and not the dealer. They 
depend on the wording of the warranty and what you were told when you took it 
out.

Whichever way you look at this though the warranty is worthless to you since 
Citroen no longer carry out work for the warranty company and the other 
dealerships are unable to do the work. You are effectively deprived of any 
benefit from taking out the warranty so this is a fundamental breach of 
contract and the warranty company should give you a refund in full.

It is unfortunate that you have now sold the car since the warranty company 
may now try to argue that they could have put the matter right if you had 
persisted with your claim. Try reporting them to the your local trading 
standards department - you will find them in the phone book under the local 
authority. If this has no effect you would have to use the small claims court 
to claim your money back.
 