
“I apologise, but I cannot help you with words. I am a composer and express 
myself with sounds.” This was the opening of Arvo Pärt’s short speech at the 
Vatican in February 2015. The Pontifical Council for Culture had invited 
Estonian-born composer to speak at a plenary assembly that focused on the role 
of women in the Catholic church.

The speech that followed, which we documented in our film The Lost Paradise 
<http://accentus.com/productions/arvopaert-robertwilson-thelostparadise>, was 
brilliant. And still Pärt made it clear with his opening words that he feels 
visibly uncomfortable in the role of speaker, and that he would rather let his 
music do the talking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fvideo-extract-the-lost-paradise-arvo-part-documentary&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446205818338%2FKP_573884_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20an%20extract%20from%20The%20Lost%20Paradise%20-%20a%20documentary%20about%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fvideo-extract-the-lost-paradise-arvo-part-documentary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20an%20extract%20from%20The%20Lost%20Paradise%20-%20a%20documentary%20about%20Arvo%20P%C3%A4rt&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fvideo-extract-the-lost-paradise-arvo-part-documentary&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446205818338%2FKP_573884_crop_640x360.jpg>
And Pärt’s music does, in fact, say an awful lot about him as a composer and 
his view of the world. His compositions have always fascinated me - you could 
call it love at first listen. Back then, and still to this day, I could hardly 
put into words exactly what accounts for this fascination. One thing is clear: 
one only has to hear a few bars and know immediately that you are listening to 
something special.

I first developed the idea to create a film about his music back in 1997. When 
an Estonian television station approached producerPaul Smaczny 
<http://accentus.com/paul-smaczny> last year with the idea of making a 
documentary about the composer based on the music-theatre production Pärt’s 
Adam’s Passion directed by Robert Wilson, a lifelong wish finally came true.

But how does one make a film about an artist who is notoriously shy and avoids 
all contact with the media? We quickly learned that it requires time and 
patience.

Pärt was very open to the project from the start, but his schedule was filled 
to the brim, especially during this, his 80th birthday year. As soon became 
clear, with Pärt, one has to wait for the right moment. Long-term planning is 
difficult and the best results occur spontaneously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmy-year-with-arvo-part-documentary-gunter-atteln%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445874294739%2F7d5c466c-24ac-433a-a6be-4c0d23d345c3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Arvo%20Part%20-%20%20he%20is%20a%20man%20of%20courage%2C%20humility%20and%20authenticity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmy-year-with-arvo-part-documentary-gunter-atteln%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Arvo%20Part%20-%20%20he%20is%20a%20man%20of%20courage%2C%20humility%20and%20authenticity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmy-year-with-arvo-part-documentary-gunter-atteln%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445874294739%2F7d5c466c-24ac-433a-a6be-4c0d23d345c3-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘One has to wait for the right moment’ Photograph: Kristjan-Jaak 
Nuudi/Accentus Music 
And so the plan to use the world premiere production of Adam’s Passion, staged 
in a former submarine factory in Tallinn, as the outer bracket for the film was 
perfect. He has been engaged in the topic of Adam very intensively for several 
years. Starting with rehearsals, we could slowly approach Pärt through 
observation. From there, we followed him all the way to Tokyo and the Vatican. 
The further we moved from Tallinn, the closer we got to Pärt as a person, 
delving into his biography as well as the content of his work during our 
travels. The help of companions such asTõnu Kaljuste 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEUn5dBzdhI>, Sofia Gubaidulina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/31/sofia-gubaidulina-unchained-melodies>
,Paul Hillier <http://theatreofvoices.com/paul-hillier/> and Gidon Kremer 
<http://www.gidonkremer.net/> along the way proved invaluable.

During the filming, we soon saw that Arvo Pärt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arvo-part> can and will talk, but it had to 
be the right moment, and a topic that he considered important. Pärt is a person 
who observes his environment with very alert eyes. He sees exactly what works 
and what doesn’t. He sees the injustices and the imbalances of our world today 
and takes a political stand again and again. And yet I would not define his 
work as political, but as deeply human.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBDaqcymuJaw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBDaqcymuJaw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBDaqcymuJaw&media=>
In order to understand Pärt, one needs to know that he is a religious person. 
You don’t need to be religious to feel his music, just as you don’t need to be 
religious to feel the music of Bach. But if you want to listen to his work 
structurally then it helps to know of Pärt’s faith and the meaning of the texts 
he has chosen, and that he becomes subordinate to the word in his composition. 
He has a deep humility, with which he follows the direct tradition of Bach: his 
music is “in the honour of God”.

This requires courage. As a man of faith, an artist makes himself vulnerable. 
Pärt has been attacked from many sides during his lifetime, whether by party 
officials in Soviet times or from representatives of the Modern School after 
his emigration to the west. One bows to a great composer who unflinchingly 
follows his path, authentic and real. And if we have succeeded in capturing a 
little of this authenticity in the film, then we have achieved our goal.

•Günter Atteln is director of Arvo Pärt/Robert Wilson: The Lost Paradise, out 
now onAccentus Music 
<http://accentus.com/productions/arvopaert-robertwilson-thelostparadise>.
 