
Scotland's mystery book sculptor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/dec/01/edinburgh-book-sculptures>
 has been up to her old tricks again this week, leaving a series of 
literary-themed sculptures in secret locations.

The sculptor – all that has been revealed about her is that she is female, and 
that she loves books – made her first startling appearances last year, leaving 
intricate paper models of a tiny Ian Rankin in a cinema, a model of a 
gramophone and a coffin and a detailed paper tree around Edinburgh. Now, to mark
Book Week Scotland <http://www.scottishbooktrust.com/book-week-scotland-2012> 
this week, she has been enticed into making a comeback, with five new 
sculptures inspired by classic Scottish stories hidden around the country.

Each day this week, a clue has been released that leads to one of the 
sculptures. On Monday, Emma Lister, a teaching assistant at Glasgow University, 
found a piece inspired by Alasdair Gray's Lanark at Glasgow School of Art, and 
on Tuesday Stranraer student Jemma Dornan tracked down a sculpture based on 
Robert Burns's poem Tam o'Shanter in the Robert Burns Birthplace Museum in 
Alloway. Wednesday saw a class of pupils from Eriskay Primary School find the 
third sculpture, inspired by Compton Mackenzie's classic novel Whisky Galore, 
at the island'sAm Politician Lounge Bar 
<http://www.welcometoscotland.com/things-to-do/eating-out/western-isles/am-politician-lounge-bar>
, and on Thursday Stephen Ryan found a Peter Pan book sculpture in the 
birthplace of his creator JM Barrie, Kirriemuir. The final sculpture will be 
unveiled on Friday afternoon, with each successful detective winning their own 
sculpture to take home.

"I am so excited, as I am very interested in the book as an art object," said 
Lister. "I only discovered the competition [on Monday] and decided to take a 
chance. I am a bigAlasdair Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>
 fan – he's my favourite author and Lanark is one of my favourite books. I'll 
treasure my sculpture."

With more than 350 free events from authors including Iain Banks, Val McDermid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/val-mcdermid>, Christopher Brookmyre and 
Debi Gliori, Book Week Scotland is the country's first national celebration of 
reading. "Book Week Scotland is an ideal time to celebrate these unique pieces 
of art, inspired as they are by a love of books, reading, and libraries," said 
Scottish Book Trust chief executive Marc Lambert. "We are delighted that the 
artist has agreed to come out of retirement, if not hiding, to give booklovers 
across Scotland a chance to own one of these amazing homages to literature."

We will publish a gallery of the sculptures as soon as the final one is 
revealed.
 