
Goalie Evgeni Nabokov stopped two shots in the shootout to give the New York 
Islanders a hitherto elusive win against the New York Rangers at Madison Square 
Garden on Thursday night. John Tavares scored one of his team's three-second 
period goals and then netted the winner in the shootout for a 4-3 final score. 
Tavares followed Frans Nielsen's goal in the opening round of the tiebreaker 
with one of his own.

The Islanders had dropped eight straight at Madison Square Garden, including a 
loss there last week. The Rangers squandered a 2-0 lead and had their 
three-game winning streak snapped.

The Staal brothers played key roles as the Carolina Hurricanes beat the 
Toronto Maple Leafs 3-1 on Thursday, to increase their lead in the NHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> Southeast Division to four points. 
Jordan Staal scored and brother Eric had an assist to extend his point streak 
to a league-best 11 games.

Carolina's Joe Corvo had a goal and an assist while Jussi Jokinen also scored 
for the Hurricanes, while Nazem Kadri scored for Toronto, which had won its 
previous four games.

The Nashville Predators' Pekka Rinne extended his shutout streak to just shy 
of 138 minutes as his team beat the Phoenix Coyotes 3-0. Gabriel Bourque, Nick 
Spaling and Mike Fisher had the goals for the Predators.

Rene Borque netted 2:10 into overtime, providing the sole goal in the Montreal 
Canadiens' 1-0 win over the Florida Panthers. Bourque's winner came on a tip-in 
just in front of the net. The puck drifted in front of the crease and Shawn 
Matthias couldn't clear it for Florida. Instead, it bounced off goalie Jose 
Theodore's pad and Bourque poked it in.

Milan Hejduk and Matt Duchene scored in the shootout to lift the Colorado 
Avalanche to a 4-3 win at the Minnesota Wild, while Eric Fehr scored twice as 
theWashington Capitals beat the Tampa Bay Lightning 4-3 to notch a third 
straight win after a dire start to the season.
 