
A ceasefire has been announced in the breakaway region of Nagorno-Karabakh 
after four days of intense fighting that has left dozens dead and threatened to 
degenerate into full-blown war between Armenia andAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>.

Karabakh is technically part of Azerbaijan but has been run by an ethnic 
Armenian government ever since the Soviet Union collapsed. Azerbaijan said 16 
servicemen were killed in the past 48 hours, while the separatist Karabakh 
authorities said 20 of its troops had died and also reported civilian 
casualties.

The ceasefire announcement on Tuesday came amid diplomatic pressure to stop 
the fighting, with fears the localised clashes could spiral into a wider 
conflict betweenArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> and 
Azerbaijan, and possibly even a proxy war involving Russia and Turkey.

Armenia and Azerbaijan fought a war over Karabakh as both became independent 
countries when the Soviet Union collapsed. There was widespread violence as 
Armenians living in Azerbaijan’s capital, Baku, were driven out and ethnic 
Azeris in Karabakh were forced to flee. By the time a ceasefire was agreed in 
1994 at least 25,000 people were believed to have been killed and hundreds of 
thousands displaced from their homes. Since then, the two countries have no 
diplomatic links and strained relations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c5b0bfeb7e2441c3a458f30a6f41f217ab13160%2F0_0_1732_1040%2F1732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c5b0bfeb7e2441c3a458f30a6f41f217ab13160%2F0_0_1732_1040%2F1732.jpg>
 An Armenian tank, which Azerbaijani forces say they destroyed, is ablaze in 
Nagorno-Karabakh. Photograph: AP 
Since 1994, an uneasy truce has held, with Armenian and Azerbaijani soldiers 
facing off against each other from muddy trenches a few hundred metres apart. 
There are frequent minor skirmishes along the line of control but the recent 
violence has been the worst since the war ended. Armenia has stopped short of 
recognising Karabakh as independent, but provides military and financial 
support to the territory. A comprehensive settlement has proved elusive as both 
countries’ presidents fear losing face in any deal.

Azerbaijan, buoyed until recently by windfall profits from oil sales, has 
spent billions of pounds on modern weapons systems, mainly purchased from 
Russia, and has refused to rule out a military solution to the conflict. 
Armenia has also bolstered its military capacity.

This week, Azerbaijan’s defence minister, Zakir Hasanov, said his troops had 
been instructed to target Karabakh’s capital, Stepanakert, if the separatist 
forces continued to shell Azerbaijani settlements, while Karabakh authorities 
promised a “crushing response” if this happened.

Though a ceasefire has been declared, it is too early to say whether it will 
hold on the ground. Thomas de Waal, senior associate at CarnegieEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and author of a book on 
Karabakh, said: “The problem with the geography of this conflict is that if the 
ceasefire breaks down there are no peacekeepers and even if you don’t have a 
full-scale war there could be low-intensity fighting which completely destroys 
the peace process.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8662f0a218cf8425b0148201c739366002203f06%2F0_0_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8662f0a218cf8425b0148201c739366002203f06%2F0_0_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
 An Armenian man walks past a destroyed house during clashes in Martakert 
province, Nagorno-Karabakh. Photograph: Vahan Stepanyan/AP 
The danger of escalation is real, with both societies having been fed 
militaristic propaganda for the past two decades, said De Waal, but added that 
international pressure may be enough to stop the conflict from escalating into 
a full-blown war.

“The Azeris know that if they go for all-out war it will be tossing all the 
oil profits of the past decade on to the roulette wheel, and in the last six 
months they have been seeking international loans due to the drop in oil 
prices, so there is leverage there,” he added.

A further complication is the potential for the regional dispute to spill into 
a proxy conflict between Russia and Turkey, whose relations have deteriorated 
since Turkish fighter jetsshot down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/turkey-shoots-down-jet-near-border-with-syria>
 a Russian plane it said infringed on its airspace last November.

Russia has treaty obligations to Armenia and would be required to defend it if 
it were attacked, while Turkey has traditionally supported Azerbaijan. While 
president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has usually been measured on the Karabakh issue, 
in recent days he and other top officials have made a number of strong 
statements of support for Azerbaijan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b548a75638b84ec5910ac6ce713866dd6c88ffa%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagorno-Karabakh%3A%20Azeri-Armenian%20ceasefire%20agreed%20in%20disputed%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fnagorno-karabakh-azeri-armenian-ceasefire-agreed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b548a75638b84ec5910ac6ce713866dd6c88ffa%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Protesters in Vienna, Austria, call for peace in Nagorno-Karabakh. Photograph: 
Leonhard Foeger/Reuters 
On Tuesday, Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoğlu, reaffirmed his country’s 
support for Baku. “Let the whole world know that Turkey will be shoulder to 
shoulder with Azerbaijan until the end of time,” he said. “We will continue 
supporting Azerbaijan on all issues, including Nagorno-Karabakh, until all its 
lands are liberated.”

Envoys from Russia, France and the USwere planning a trip to the region to 
attempt to begin negotiations. Minsk Group, which mediates in the conflict, 
said: “The deterioration of the situation on the ground demonstrates the need 
for an immediate negotiation … on a comprehensive settlement.”

The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will travel to Azerbaijan’s 
capital Baku on Thursday while the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, is due in 
Armenia’s Yerevan, in a further attempt to allay the tensions.
 