
The man known as the Naked Rambler has made legal history by appearing before 
leading judges in the nude.

Former marine Stephen Gough, from Hampshire, watched proceedings at the court 
of appeal in London via videolink from prison.

Gough, who says it is his human right to be naked in public, remained seated 
behind a large table as the judges were asked to quash his most recent 
conviction.

The Naked Rambler: the man prepared to go to prison for nudity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/23/naked-rambler-prison> 
A lawyer representing him in court argued that the conviction for breaching an 
antisocial behaviour order (asbo) - by walking out of prison wearing only his 
boots and socks - was unsafe because he was not permitted to stand trial “not 
wearing any clothes”.

The trial at Winchester crown court in October last year was held in his 
absence. He was found guilty by a jury and sentenced by the trial judge to two 
and a half years’ imprisonment.

Gough, now 56, had refused to put on clothes when he left Winchester prison 
after being released from a jail term for a previous breach of the Asbo, which 
bans him from appearing in public without clothing. He was arrested outside the 
prison.

His appeal against the conviction was thrown out on Tuesday by Lady Justice 
Rafferty and two other judges.

Rafferty said: “In our judgment, were the defendant to have appeared naked in 
front of the court it would have been a further breach of the anti-social 
behaviour order.” She said this “bizarre notion” would have been fatal to 
Gough’s argument.

The judges also rejected an attempt by Gough to challenge his “manifestly” 
excessive jail sentence.

While sentencing Gough last year, Judge Jane Miller had suggested moves should 
be made to find him a closed nudist community to live in to prevent the cycle 
of imprisonment which has seen him jailed for much of the past eight years.

Gough earned his nickname when he completed a naked trek from Land’s End to 
John O’Groats in 2003 and he featured in a BBC documentary covering his journey.
 