
Results in Naplan schools tests have remained stable in the past year but 
Indigenous students have recorded significant gains since 2008.

The National Assessment Program Literacy and Numeracy results, released on 
Tuesday, show better results in all content areas, except writing, since the 
test was first conducted in 2008.

Results improved in year 3 and 5 reading, year 3 spelling, grammar and 
punctuation, and year 5 numeracy since 2008. But there was “no significant 
improvement” in the past year on any of the measures. The report confirms 
preliminary Naplan data,released in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/naplan-results-show-disadvantaged-children-left-to-languish-expert-says>
.

The Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority said there had 
been “significant cumulative gains” in some domains and year levels for 
Indigenous students including reading (years 3 and 5), numeracy (year 5), 
spelling (year 3), grammar and punctuation (years 3, 5 and 7).

Parental anxiety and Pisa: to lift academic standards, stop segregating kids | 
Joel Windle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/parental-anxiety-and-pisa-to-lift-academic-standards-stop-segregating-kids>
There has also been a significant increase in the percentage of students 
performing at or above the national minimum standard in writing at year 7.

There were significant gains in some domains in each state and territory, with 
Western Australia and Queensland registering the biggest improvements. The 
Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales and Victoria continue to have the 
highest average achievement.

Two weeks ago the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study showed 
Australia’s performance in maths and science had flatlined for the past 20 years
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/australian-students-results-in-maths-and-science-falling-in-international-rankings>
 and slipped relative to comparable countries.

The Program for International Student Assessment, released last Tuesday, 
showed a long-term decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/pisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline>
 in year 9 students’ results in maths, science and reading literacy.

The chief executive of the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting 
Authority, Robert Randall, said the Naplan results since 2008 were welcome, but 
there was room for more improvement.

“At a national level Naplan results have shown no significant improvement 
across the domains and year levels in the last few years. We should expect more 
for our children,” Randall said.

“As we have also seen recently with Australia’s performance in international 
assessments, there is broad scope for improvement in achievement. We need to 
raise our expectations and strive for improved results across the board.”

'This costs money': why school funding is the Rorschach test of Australian 
politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/11/this-costs-money-why-school-funding-is-the-rorschach-test-of-australian-politics>
The federal education minister, Simon Birmingham, said the Naplan results were 
the latest to show that “while strong levels of investment in schools are 
important, it’s more important to ensure that funding is being used on 
initiatives proven to boost student results”.

The shadow education minister, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, said: “The 
results of three major school tests have been released in the past couple of 
weeks, and all three show disadvantaged Australian kids are still struggling at 
school.

 “That’s why Labor supports extra needs-based funding for schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/11/this-costs-money-why-school-funding-is-the-rorschach-test-of-australian-politics>
 – so every Australian school gets the money it needs to achieve great results.”
 