
Australian soap stars have form on British stages. Jason Donovan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jason-donovan> pulled on Joseph's 
technicolour dreamcoat.Dannii Minogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/oct/31/artsfeatures.popandrock> 
followed a stint in Home and Away with Lady Macbeth. Literallyhundreds of them 
have done panto <http://perfectblend.net/reference/pantoarchive.htm>.

Now Natalie Imbruglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/apr/16/weekend7.weekend>, who 
became a Grammy-nominated singer after two years on Neighbours, is to make her 
first non-panto stage appearance, starring in a revival of Alan Ayckbourn's 
1997 play Things We Do For Love.

To date, Imbruglia's only stage role in the UK was as Snow White at the 
Marlowe theatre in Canterbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/28/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, a production famous for the non-appearance of Spike Milligan.

However, next April, the 38-year-old will play Nikki Wickstead, the top floor 
resident currently shacked up with her irritating, clean-living fianc√©e, at the
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal Bath, before 
embarking on a national tour.

The artistic director of the theatre's studio space Laurence Boswell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/jul/06/whoswhoinbritishtheatre.features3>
 will direct Ayckbourn's play, which is a farce set across three floors of a 
London apartment building and staged in such a way that allows the audience to 
view the action in different flats simultaneously.

Boswell knows a thing or two about stage debuts, having directed Madonna's 
first theatrical performance in David Williamson'sUp For Grabs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/may/24/theatre.artsfeatures2>.

Imbruglia played Beth Brennan in Neighbours from 1992, before starting a pop 
career that included the incessant hit single Torn and the album Left of the 
Middle, which sold more than six million copies worldwide. She has returned to 
acting in recent years, appearing in the spoof spy filmJohnny English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/95182/johnny.english> and starring in 
the Australian feature Closed for Winter four years ago.
 