
The National Gallery of Australia returned artefacts from its troubled Asian 
art collection to India at a handback ceremony inCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> on Monday.

Two pieces, a 900-year-old stone statue of the Goddess Pratyangira and a 
third-century rock carving of Worshippers of the Buddha, were purchased from 
disgraced art dealer Subhash Kapoor in 2005 for $328,000 and $790,000 
respectively.

The arts minister, Mitch Fifield, handed those objects back to the Indian arts 
minister, Mahesh Sharma, at a ceremony in the gallery’s Asian exhibition on 
Monday afternoon.

The NGA bought $11m worth of antiquities from Kapoor in recent decades, 
including a 900-year-old bronze Hindu “dancing shiva” statue, Shiva Nataraja 
for $5.6m in 2007. The Shiva Nataraja washanded back to the Indian government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/05/stolen-indian-statue-shiva-nataraja-to-go-home-during-tony-abbott-visit>
, alongside a $300,000 stone Shiva with Nandi, in 2004, after reports it had 
been stolen from a temple in Tamil Nadu.

Stolen Indian statue, Shiva Nataraja, to go home during Tony Abbott visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/05/stolen-indian-statue-shiva-nataraja-to-go-home-during-tony-abbott-visit>
A third piece, a 900-year-old stone Buddha, was brought from Nancy Wiener 
Gallery, a New York-based antiquities dealer, for $1m in 2007.

The dealer refunded that price last year 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-06/national-gallery-of-australia-to-receive-1-2m-refund-for-statue/6285060>
 after it was revealed it had an “unclear” buyers’ history, prior to being 
acquired by Nancy Wiener Gallery and sold to the NGA in “good faith”, and may 
have been stolen. It was also handed back to India on Monday, though not in the 
ceremony. There’s no suggestion Nancy Wiener Gallery acted unethically.

An independent review earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/17/provenance-of-22-asian-artworks-at-national-gallery-of-australia-in-doubt>
 found that 22 of the 36 Asian art objects acquired by the NGA between 1968 and 
2013 had questionable ownership history and 11 of those were considered to be 
“highly problematic”.

The review, by the former high court justice Susan Crennan, found items were 
of highly problematic provenance, “because documentation recording a recent 
chain of ownership now appears dubious or because there is no certainty about 
when, and in what circumstances, an object was exported from its country of 
origin, or both”.

Crennan said the objects had been purchased in “good faith” by the NGA.

The review found that 14 of the 22 questionable objects were purchased from 
Kapoor’s former dealership, Art of the Past. Kapoor was extradited to India in 
2011 to face charges over amultimillion dollar looting scandal 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/subhash-kapoor-arrested-extradited-idol-smuggling-stolen-2918744/>
.

In the case of the Pratyangira statue, provenance issues were confirmed when 
researchers at the NGA examined new photographs indicating it was inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in 1974, which conflicted with the 
provenance history provided to the NGA and suggested that documentation was 
false. It has since been reported missing to the Idol Wing of the Tamil Nadu 
police.

Provenance of 22 Asian artworks at National Gallery of Australia in doubt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/17/provenance-of-22-asian-artworks-at-national-gallery-of-australia-in-doubt>
Separate photographic evidence showed the Worshippers of the Buddha carving 
was in India as late as the 1990s, which again contradicted the provenance 
history provided to the NGA.

“This new evidence means the NGA cannot legally or ethically retain these 
works, and returning them to India is unquestionably the right thing to do,” 
NGA director Gerard Vaughan said in a statement on Monday. “We have been 
working closely with the Archaeological Survey of India and the Indian high 
commissioner in Australia to find the best outcome.”

The Indian high commissioner to Australia, Navdeep Suri, welcomed the return 
of the sculptures, and said he “commended the National Gallery of Australia for 
its approach to dealing with this complex and difficult issue”.
 