
Backed by major writers including JM Coetzee, Margaret Atwood and Anthony 
Horowitz, plans to open the National Centre for Writing, in Norwich – a first 
in the UK – have moved closer to fruition after the project was awarded a grant 
of almost £1m. The project is being organised by theWriters’ Centre Norwich 
<http://www.writerscentrenorwich.org.uk/AboutUs/>, a literature development 
agency.

It hopes to open the facility in the city’s Dragon Hall, a medieval building 
dating back to the 1430s, in early 2018. Arts Council England has awarded it a 
grant of £900,000, with an initial amount of £110,566 and £789,434 to follow as 
the project progresses. The amount is 88% of the funds Writers’ CentreNorwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/norwich> estimates it needs to open the 
National Centre for Writing. The organisation will campaign over the year to 
raise the rest of the funds.

Patrons of the project include Atwood, Coetzee and Horowitz, as well as John 
Boyne, Jon McGregor, Ali Smith and Rose Tremain. Chris Gribble, chief executive 
of Writers’ Centre Norwich, said the facility would include a 120-seat venue 
for literary events, as well as a “writers’ colony” where authors and 
translators would be able to gather to work and meet, an event space, a cottage 
for resident writers, and spaces devoted to education and literacy for adults 
and children.

“There isn’t anything similar anywhere – it’s something we dreamed up,” he 
said, describing the centre as a “significant development for the literature 
sector and a major achievement” for Norwich, which isEngland’s first Unesco 
City of Literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/03/welcome-to-norwich-englands-first-city-of-literature>
.

“The centre’s development will enable our country’s most significant art form 
to have a space to explore its role in the modern world, champion writers and 
translators as well as readers, bring the literature world together and promote 
the export and exchange in the best of new work and new talent. It will be a 
world-leading centre of excellence in a city with an outstanding literary 
heritage,” he said.

Writers’ Centre Norwich has run a series of talks 
<http://www.writerscentrenorwich.org.uk/thenationalconversation.aspx> by 
authors such as Kerry Hudson and Kamila Shamsie over the last year, tackling 
topics from diversity to gender bias in publishing.

“We want to be one of the places these ideas are discussed – to be a crucible 
for ideas, bringing together writers and translators from around the world,” 
said Gribble.

Writers’ Centre Norwich chair David Gilbert added: “There is still much to do, 
but we’ve taken a big step forward, and will be redoubling our campaigning 
efforts to make sure we [create] this world-class venue for a world-class 
literary city.”
 