
Anne-Marie Duff taking on one of the biggest roles in American playwriting, a 
long-awaited musical by Tori Amos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/20/tori-amos-musical-light-princess>
 and a gala night celebrating the theatre's history are all on the menu for the 
National Theatre's 50th anniversary year – not to mention the prospect of Sam 
Mendes returning to the stage to direct Simon Russell Beale in King Lear early 
in 2014.

Duff is to play the role of Nina in Eugene O'Neill's sprawling family epic 
Strange Interlude, which has not been produced professionally in the UK since 
1985. The saga, according to the National's artistic director, SirNicholas 
Hytner <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner>, "reads like a 
page-turning novel".

It tells the story of a family from after the first world war until the late 
1940s – and clocks in at five hours uncut, though the National will trim it to 
under four.

"It will be a major event," said Hytner. "It was an extraordinarily 
influential play in its day and has an enormous part forAnne-Marie Duff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anne-marie-duff> … it is one of the most 
challenging and interesting parts in American drama."

The National's half-century will be celebrated by an autumn gala night of what 
Hytner called a "montage of highlights" from the theatre's history – such as 
the night in 1963 when, under the directorship of Laurence Olivier, the company 
gave its first performance at the Old Vic: Hamlet, starring Peter O'Toole.

The evening's events – which will also be broadcast on BBC2 – will include "as 
many of the great performers as possible" from the theatre's past, according to 
Hytner, interspersed with archive film. While the theatre looks back for a 
night, much of its energy in 2013 will go into planning for the future: its 
redevelopment – Hytner's last big project before he steps down in the next two 
years or so – is under way.

Fundraising is only £9m short of the £70m target and foundations have been 
laid for the new production building.

The Cottesloe, the National's smallest stage, will close in four weeks' time, 
to reopen next February as the Dorfman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/28/national-theatre-dorfman-donation>
, named after foreign-exchange entrepreneur Lloyd Dorfman who has donated £10m 
to it. During the closure, from April, the National will present a programme in 
a temporary, 225-seat structure called theShed 
<http://theshed.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>, with cheaper tickets (£12 and £20), 
less predictable start times and a more experimental feel than has been 
possible in the Cottesloe.

Work will include Bullet Catch <http:>, originally produced by the Arches 
<http://www.thearches.co.uk/> in Glasgow and a hit at last year's Edinburgh 
fringe; and a new work about the Occupy movement directed by Polly Findlay and 
written by Tim Price.

Other work is to include a rare outing of the German expressionist masterpiece 
From Morning till Midnight by Georg Kaiser, directed by Melly Still, and a 
Christmas show for families – an adaptation of the classic children's story 
Emil and the Detectives.

Russell Beale's Lear will be seen in the Olivier in February 2014 and The 
Light Princess, with music by Tori Amos and book by Samuel Adamson, will 
finally make it to the stage in October this year. It was originally programmed 
for spring last year, but was postponed afterfears it would not be ready in time
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/20/tori-amos-musical-suspended-national-theatre?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The National was, said Hytner, in rude financial health despite Arts Council 
England's cuts, because of the continuing commercial success of a handful of 
its shows: War Horse and One Man, Two Guvnors are still attracting audiences in 
the UK and on international tours.

According to figures released this week by the Society of London Theatre, 
productions from the National accounted for 35% of all playgoing in London in 
2012.

This spring, said Hytner, there would be a record four National productions 
running in the West End: War Horse; One Man, Two Guvnors; Alan Bennett's Untold 
Stories; and the Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time, adapted from 
Mark Haddon's novel.

Bennett's latest play, People, will tour cities including Birmingham, 
Leicester and Leeds this autumn.
 