
If you have any interest in animals that aren’t humans, it is easy to find 
yourself sympathising with Rex Harrison as he struggles to communicate with a 
pushmi-pullyu in the 1967 film ofDoctor Dolittle, then singing along as he 
dreams of not only talking to the creatures in his menagerie (“grunt and squeak 
and squawk with the animals”) but having them answer back.

'Rogue taxidermy': a misunderstood ethical art form or the next hipster fad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/16/taxidermy-hipster-art-ethics-morbid-anatomy-museum>
As soon as our own species stepped away from the teeming continuum of the 
surrounding world, we started talking to its variousness and began trying to 
deduce what other species might be saying. For more than 30,000 years, from the 
first known cave paintings of lions and wild horses, to the most recent 
“sci-art” works featuring transgenic organisms, the multifarious histories of 
our attempted conversations with nature have had one thing in common. All 
describe our separation from it, and at the same time our attempts to bridge 
the gap. Our talking to the animals has mostly been one-sided, domineering at 
times, cloth-eared at others and frequently plain wrong, but it continues, 
richly reflecting our evolving beliefs about the 8.7m or so other species on 
Earth.

Orpheus had a similar project to Dr Doolittle. His singing in Ancient Greece 
was said to be so charming that animals and plants gathered to listen. But what 
happened next? The stilling of the wild was the thing; what the lion or the 
dandelion made of what they’d heard isn’t recorded. Nor could it be. If a lion 
could talk, Wittgenstein advised, we wouldn’t be able to understand it. The 
outward-facing openness of animals’ looks, as described by the 
Orpheus-infatuated poet Rilke (and taken up by Heidegger and others including 
John Berger in hisWhy Look at Animals?), is closed to us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0546e6b396fa86450b8913d20d2090a64f1fb2%2F0_0_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0546e6b396fa86450b8913d20d2090a64f1fb2%2F0_0_1840_1104%2F1840.jpg>
 A tiger observes its own reflection in the 2014 documentary film,Ming of 
Harlem: Twenty One Storeys in the Air. Photograph: courtesy the artist © 
bigotherfilms 
How, in the absence of any intelligible crosstalk, we have scientifically and 
imaginatively processed the planet’s other occupants is the concern of the 
Wellcome Collection’s exhibitionMaking Nature 
<https://wellcomecollection.org/MakingNature>. The show’s curator, Honor 
Beddard (working with natural history consultant Jack Ashby), has brought 
together more than a hundred objects from literature, film, taxidermy and 
photography and organised them in four sections: Ordering (mostly about 
taxonomy and systematics from Linnaeus onwards), Displaying (about museums and 
collecting specimens), Observing (animals and their capture in zoos), and 
Making (about genetic manipulation, artificial selection and the unstoppable 
urge humans have to interfere with all levels of life).

Included here are world consciousness-altering enterprises, such as a first 
edition of Linnaeus’s whole Earth catalogue, theSystema Naturae, from 1735. But 
there are also telling jokes, such as the fake apeman that the maverick 
naturalist Charles Waterton assembled around 1825. Nearby are first-time 
groupings of specimens and artefacts: various remains of Count Raggi’s birds of 
paradise, with an intact body (a study skin) put alongside another with its 
feet and wings removed (looking like a flaming carrot, it perplexed early 
European curio-hunters who deduced the bird lived without touching the Earth); 
there are also the feathers of other birds fashioned around 1910 into a chic 
Parisian hat at the height of the plume boom, and other feathers from birds 
slaughtered on their home ground in the 19th century to make a headdress for a 
Torres Strait Islander. Here too are freshly incarnated dreams: a selection 
from the Pittsburgh Center for PostNatural History of various organisms that 
have been intentionally altered by humans, including dried and preserved E coli 
bacteria assembled in an acrylic block to spell out the words “Hello World”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc326cfa868833f3f0f53c3c93318719088ad264%2F0_0_2126_2024%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc326cfa868833f3f0f53c3c93318719088ad264%2F0_0_2126_2024%2F2126.jpg>
 Set of 29 papier-mache models of horses’ teeth (c1890). Photograph: Whipple 
Museum of the History of Science, University of Cambridge 
In the biblical account of creation, the separation of humans from other 
animals needed to be asserted. Adam was given an Eden project of his own: the 
job of naming every beast of the field, every fowl of the air: “Whatsoever Adam 
called every living creature, that was the name thereof.” “Naming the Animals”, 
a poem by Anthony Hecht, develops the story. Adam, new – understandably – to 
the game, is bewildered by his task. Shyly addressing a cow, he ventures to 
call it Fred.

Fred the cow and Adam’s efforts underline the paradoxical effect of naming 
nature. Organising the world with words, representations or manmade symbols 
brings wildlife closer to us. Differentiating every hummingbird in the Americas 
by a scientific and a common name raises each hectic blur of metallic colour 
into a humanly graspable object: the birds exist and now we know them to exist. 
To know that there are 340 species of hummingbirds, where once there were 
thought to be just 20, enlarges both our perception of biodiversity and our 
minds. But, as we discover quite how profuse life is, we also learn that each 
bundle of feathers most likely cares little for our taxonomical attentions. 
Naming gives us some purchase, but it also teaches that nothing in nature is 
for sale, that nothing beyond us – animal, vegetable or mineral – can be truly 
ours to have. We are having to learn to read over and over again as we discover 
more and more species; our naming, therefore, can only be a holding measure, 
the truth for now.

Naming gives us some purchase, but it also teaches that nothing beyond us – 
animal, vegetable, mineral – is ours to have

Look out of your window and think how every blackbird you might see is unaware 
it is a blackbird, not one tree cares whether it is an oak, anash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/ash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe>
 or a lime. And yet the blackbird lives as a blackbird, not as a blackcap; the 
ash is an ash and not an alder. We are right to tell the difference because the 
difference is telling. And this truth is imaginatively stimulating as well as 
intellectually invigorating. How much better to know that, instead of generic 
little brown things flying away from us, there are rock pipits and water pipits 
and tree pipits and meadow pipits. What a good day it was when Gilbert White’s 
repeated walks around his parish at Selborne in Hampshire in the 1770s prompted 
him to realise that there wasn’t just one but three kinds of leaf‑green 
warblers among the spring leaves: chiffchaffs, willow warblers and wood 
warblers.

Careful-looking lies behind this enlarging of life. Our species has been doing 
this for a long time: one of the wonders of cave paintings is the accuracy of 
their depictions. We may not know whether the lions or the horses represent a 
shopping list, or a field note, or a frieze of totemic animals to inspire 
shamanic dreaming, but we can immediately recognise precisely what the 
creatures are. They are named in ochre. Such diligent attention to the real and 
translations from it have remained a human trait ever since, throughout art and 
science history. One of my favourite stories aboutCharles Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> has his son asking another 
boy, “Where does your father do his barnacles?”, assuming all dads were like 
his: organising geniuses intent on peering down microscopes and infatuated with 
life in all its forms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65210adcf11630d100779884a5897215663db126%2F0_512_6497_3898%2F6497.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65210adcf11630d100779884a5897215663db126%2F0_512_6497_3898%2F6497.jpg>
 Skull of a genetically modified BioSteel goat. Photograph: Wellcome Images 
Not everyone would agree. Some think naming is a quasi-colonial action, a 
possessive anthropo-something grab after other species; some think that 
attempts to organise life and to understand it lose sight of its deeper truth 
and dilute its organic magic. The early 19th-century poetJohn Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/09/john-clare-poetry> was 
an extraordinary field naturalist. His poems and prose writings comprise a 
remarkable 65 first bird records for his home county of Northamptonshire. Their 
names brightly mark all of his writing but he was hostile to the idea of 
scientific study: “I love,” he wrote, “to see the nightingale in its hazel 
retreat and the cuckoo hiding in its solitude of oaken foliage and not to 
examine their carcasses in glass cases.” Another poet,William Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/william-blake>, was furious with Isaac 
Newton for, as he put it, unweaving the rainbow.

Let me try to convince the doubters. In the last few years the DNA of the 
large gulls of the northern hemisphere has been scrutinised. What I grew up 
thinking were herring gulls and lesser black-backed gulls have been closely 
studied. These two species had populations all around the planet that more or 
less merged with one another in a continuous grey and white flight of feathers. 
Geographical races or subspecies were known, usually defined by having separate 
breeding colonies every thousand kilometres or so. But “herring gull” was what 
I’d call any bird like it that I saw in the Mediterranean, or the Black Sea, or 
off the west coast of Ireland, as well as on my local reservoir, where I’d been 
birdwatching since I was a child. It was the same for the lesser black-backed 
gull. Then suddenly – for me at least – the two species became about 10. The 
herring gull survives but what were previously thought of as subspecies have 
been promoted to species. There are new birds to twitch: Caspian gulls and 
yellow-legged gulls moving north and west from their breeding grounds, and 
American herring gulls and Azorean gulls displaced around the Atlantic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F613bab984b169888175d93c8305300ba218a27d7%2F322_961_1540_924%2F1540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natural%20curiosity%3A%20how%20we%20have%20always%20wanted%20to%20talk%20to%20the%20animals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnatural-curiosity-how-we-have-always-wanted-to-talk-to-the-animals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F613bab984b169888175d93c8305300ba218a27d7%2F322_961_1540_924%2F1540.jpg>
 The face of a Waterton monkey head (c1820). Photograph: Roddy Paine Photography
The birds themselves haven’t changed. They are as they were before the 
ornithological journals published papers splitting the species apart. My eyes 
are the same, too – straining through lenses and watering in cold winds and 
frosty dusks. But what is now known has changed everything: the gull world has 
got larger. There seems to be more life on the planet. That must be a good 
thing.

It is, of course, a question of terms. But, language being what our thinking 
lives by, these new terms have gone in deep. Taxonomy is an unfashionable 
discipline in the sciences today but should be valued as a key building block 
for understanding biological processes. All understanding of the species 
interactions on which life depends relies on knowing what a species is, even if 
the boundaries, as declared by us, are arbitrary, and nature doesn’t care where 
one species ends and another begins.

I said just now that it is my way of seeing that has changed, not the gulls 
themselves. But that isn’t quite true. Contemplating the findings and decisions 
of taxonomists and other organisers of the wild is a good way to keep fresh in 
our minds the fact that evolution is far from finished. The process did not 
come to an end when Darwin and those other bearded Victorians described it in 
the 19th century. Nothing is fixed in the world of the gulls of Britain, nor of 
any life on the planet. We are living our own evolution. It is as relentless as 
ever. And the extraordinary collection of texts and illustrations and artefacts 
and skins inMaking Nature show how our single species has grown up – enamoured 
and provoked, troubled and fascinated – as we have tried to work out what on 
Earth is going on.

• Making Nature is at the Wellcome Collection from 1 December. 
wellcomecollection.org <https://wellcomecollection.org/>. Tim Dee has written 
an introduction to the accompanying bookAnimal Vegetable Mineral.
 