
Spring blossom; a row of decapitated heads; a black ship on a dark sea. One 
thing leads to another in the 58 drawings currently at theDrawing Room 
<https://drawingroom.org.uk/> in south London: a constellation of discs, a 
cake, a self-portrait. There seems no end to it. What connects drawings made in 
Poland in the late 1940s and 50s, in Amsterdam in the 1980s and in Antwerp from 
the late 70s to today isn’t clear, though there are affinities and echoes 
everywhere. The mind skips from one thing to another.

The exhibition DE.FI.CIEN.CY 
<https://drawingroom.org.uk/exhibitions/de.fi.cien.cy> brings together the 
drawings ofAndrzej Wróblewski <http://culture.pl/en/artist/andrzej-wroblewski> 
(1927-57) and contemporary artistsRené Daniëls 
<http://vanabbemuseum.nl/en/programme/detail/?tx_vabdisplay_pi1%5Bptype%5D=18&tx_vabdisplay_pi1%5Bproject%5D=927>
 andLuc Tuymans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/21/luc-tuysmans-katrijn-van-giel-dedecker-legal-case>
. The title is disjointed, just like the broken narratives and fragments the 
works themselves present in an exhibition first shown in Poznań. Wróblewski is 
at the heart of it. As a young boy, he witnessed the death of his father, who 
suffered a heart attack when the Nazis searched the family home. Wróblewski 
went on to make numerous drawings and paintings called The Execution, based 
both on his own childhood trauma and the many public executions perpetrated, 
and photographed, during the German occupation of Poland.

Japanese cannibals and German executions: Luc Tuymans goes over to the dark 
side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/28/luc-tuymans-the-shore-cannibal-killers-exhibitions>
The executioners are often absent from the works. Exhibition curator Ulrich 
Loock 
<http://artguideeast.com/main-news-stream/2015/01/09/interview-ulrich-loock/> 
suggests that the artist is the executioner, playing on the idea that he, after 
all, is the one who executes the work, and that painting itself is a kind of 
disruption and mutilation, a negative as much as it is a positive act. 
Wróblewski’s figures are often left headless, or with their torsos inverted. 
Near one such drawing is a figure by Daniëls, made in 1983, in which a man is 
cut in half at the waist and reassembled upside down. Where Wróblewski’s work 
is despairing, Daniëls’ drawing is comic, almost joyous. Between these two 
hangs a recent work by Tuymans depicting a winged, flying monkey. The image is 
partly derived from a memory of a scene in The Wizard of Oz, but Tuymans also 
relates it to depictions of monsters in the middle ages.

We look in vain for a signature style in this fascinating exhibition, losing 
ourselves among monstrousness and delicacy, private jokes, offhand 
cartoonishness, diagrams, abstractions and precise self-portraiture. Many of 
Tuymans’ drawings are preparatory works for paintings, or – as a kind of 
reversal – made after the paintings. They have, typically, the look of some 
worn-out, faded and discarded image, resurrected as a faked pictorial document, 
what Tuymans calls “authentic forgeries”.

One of the paradoxes of Tuymans’ work is the degree to which his evident 
technical competence and pictorial inventiveness is disguised, as though he 
were acting the part of an amateur, or adopting various personas in the making 
of works that range from a delicate and precise watercolour of a naval officer, 
to what looks like a stencil for patterned wallpaper, not so much cut from a 
piece of card as chewed by mice. Another drawing, made specially for the show 
here, has been drawn directly on the wall. In it, Tuymans has used photocopies 
of earlier works to produce a degraded image that contains the heads of Nazi 
officers, someone hanged on a scaffold, and a bier of flowers. The grainy 
blacks of the drawing and the blank flare of the photocopier’s light have 
reduced the image to something incomprehensible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432641596514%2F71b334a0-7458-4055-a611-8875ad7c7907-1020x741.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nazis%2C%20cake%20and%20the%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%3A%20a%20drawing%20show%20with%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nazis%2C%20cake%20and%20the%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%3A%20a%20drawing%20show%20with%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432641596514%2F71b334a0-7458-4055-a611-8875ad7c7907-1020x741.jpeg>
 Composition No 47 by Andrzej Wréblewski. Photograph: Andrzej Wréblewski 
Foundation 
One sometimes thinks that this exhibition could have been made by 20 people 
rather than three. The shifts in Wróblewski’s art were determined by both the 
larger social and political circumstances under which he worked in postwar 
Poland and by his own changes in belief – a utopian, modernist abstract artist 
who became a dedicated communist, then renounced his political faith. Had he 
lived longer, who knows what he might have achieved. A number of drawings 
depict the interior of a bus, heading towards a distant vanishing point. We 
might as well be driving towards a wall; the bus is going nowhere.

In several of Daniëls’ drawings, a tree is covered by words rather than 
leaves. Along one branch the phrase “Places, buildings, where feelings are 
closely related to fright …” has been written with a brush (the phrase 
continues but it is not decipherable). Sometimes Daniëls switches to Dutch or 
French, just as, in a single drawing, a shape twists from being a diagrammatic 
rendition of an intersection between two walls, to a butterfly, to a bow tie. 
This became a familiar motif in his rich and lively art, whose forms mutate and 
multiply and turn about themselves, depending on their context. Born in 1950, 
he became well known during the 1980s for paintings that used both abstraction 
and figuration, and words and images, in ways that were both extremely personal 
and contained an implicit critique of the fashionable, image-based
neo-expressionism <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neo-expressionism> of the time. 
His development was cut short by a brain haemorrhage in 1987 from which he has 
never fully recovered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432640731084%2F69d9a149-44bc-45fa-8bef-9391eb7915b3-2060x1565.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nazis%2C%20cake%20and%20the%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%3A%20a%20drawing%20show%20with%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nazis%2C%20cake%20and%20the%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%3A%20a%20drawing%20show%20with%20a%20difference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Fandrzej-wroblewski-rene-daniels-luc-tuymans-drawing-room-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432640731084%2F69d9a149-44bc-45fa-8bef-9391eb7915b3-2060x1565.jpeg>
 Bullfight (1985) by René Daniëls. Photograph: Peter Cox/Paul Andriesse 
Daniëls’ pictorial language games – a tree might also be a view of roads, a 
map of his familiar cycle routes or divergent paths through a city – are a kind 
of chart of possibilities. This can lead to an image of a lone pianist playing 
in the dark or to a skein of telegraph wires festooning the evening sky. We are 
never certain whether we are looking at a direct or innocent image or a symbol 
for something darker. I can’t look at a drawing of cut-up carp by Andrzej 
Wróblewski without thinking of the sliced bodies in his executions images.

Each image has a story behind it, and there are other stories – the things the 
artist meant and the ones you invent. All three artists have, in different 
ways, a conflicted relationship to modernism, to figuration as well as 
abstraction. For all three, the idea that making art is an expression of some 
essential self, and that style is somehow innate, is inconceivable.

There is a palpable suspicion of the supposed power of images on display here. 
How much do the drawings reflect the tropes of weariness and wariness? Doubts 
about the efficacy or ability of a medium to tackle large subjects can lead one 
to stop making images altogether; or to work as if inside some larger fiction, 
as though one were a character in some story. That is how it feels for the 
spectator, too. Going from image to image – from the eager eyes of pigeons to a 
red goitre on a woman’s neck, from a bullring to an execution – we invent our 
own plot, tracing the storyline, following the broken branches of great and 
small histories. Just as if we were drawing.
 