
Over 48 hours, the NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> postseason gave 
us: teams coming back from double-digit deficits, a game-tying buzzer-beater 
from half-court – and one of the most confounding final sequences in basketball 
history. In these four games, the second round of the playoffs might have 
already given fans as much entertainment value as the entire first round. 
(Granted, that may not have been a difficult task.)

Last night, the Golden State Warriors, still playing without Stephen Curry, 
came back tobeat the Portland Trail Blazers 110-99 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/playoffs/2016/05/04/golden-state-warriors-stake-2-0-lead-trail-blazers-nba-playoffs/83911694/>
 despite being down bys 17 points in the first half. In the fourth quarter, the 
Warriors went on a 9-0 run to tie the game and went on to stifle the Trail 
Blazers’ offense and win by a comfortable margin. The Warriors now have a 2-0 
lead over the Trail Blazers, who had to have felt like they lost their best 
chance at making this a series.

Had the Toronto Raptors <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toronto-raptors> 
not faltered in overtime a few hours earlier, the Warriors’ comeback would only 
be the second most impressive of the night. At the end of regulation in game 1, 
the Miami Heat had a six-point lead, and the ball, with only eight seconds 
remaining. Then, a few Heat blunders allowed the Raptors to trim the lead to 
three points and get the ball back with just enough time for Kyle Lowry to 
successfully pull off this miracle heave at the buzzer:
SB Nation NBA (@SBNationNBA) 
Kyle Lowry was 7-47 on threes in the playoffs before this. 
https://t.co/gMnOwt68ks <https://t.co/gMnOwt68ks> https://t.co/6fodzwT8sV 
<https://t.co/6fodzwT8sV>
 <https://twitter.com/SBNationNBA/status/727687842151927808> May 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SBNationNBA/status/727687842151927808> 
Unfortunately for Toronto, the Raptors just couldn’t make far more ordinary 
shots in overtime, and they ended up merely delaying a 102-96 Heat victory.

Yet, even if the Raptors had managed the victory, Lowry’s shot wouldn’t have 
counted as the biggest shock of the second round so far. The NBA world is still 
trying to piece together the series of events that unfolded on Monday when the 
Oklahoma City Thunder tied their series with the San Antonio Spurs. The Thunder 
managed to become just the second visiting team to win at AT&T Center all 
season long, emerging with a 98-97 victory after coming out the right side of 
maybe themost chaotic last 30 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/oklahoma-city-san-antonio-spurs-no-call-game-2>
 in NBA playoff history.

Even the Cleveland Cavaliers’ comparatively unmemorable game 1 win over the 
Atlanta Hawks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> wasn’t without 
intrigue, as it featured the Hawks making up an 18 point deficit and tying the 
game late in the fourth quarter. Perhaps if Atlanta completed the comeback, 
like the Warriors, or pulled off a shocking game-tying shot, like the Raptors, 
it would have fared better in our collective memory.

So the second round has been perhaps embarrassingly full of drama so far, 
despite starting out with relatively ho-hum victories by the Spurs and Warriors 
in their respective game 1s. Goodness knows the viewing audience deserved these 
last few nights after putting up with the dreadful first few weeks of the 
postseason.

The opening round of the Western Conference playoffs were particularly 
perfunctory. The Thunder barely gave the Dallas Mavericks a chance while the 
Spurs gave the poor, depleted Memphis Grizzlies no chance at all. Injuries to 
Chris Paul and Blake Griffin effectively ended the more competitive matchup 
between the Clippers and the Trail Blazers before it really began. Worst yet, 
the first round gave us five more games of the 2015-16 Houston Rockets, 
something that nobody wanted –not even the Rockets 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2016/04/houston-rockets-bench-dwight-howard-james-harden-reaction-video>
.

Meanwhile, although the results of the Eastern Conference playoffs were in 
greater doubt – well, for everybody but the Detroit Pistons, that is – it 
wasn’t particularly a lot of fun getting to them. Most notably, there were 
times when the Hawks were playing the Boston Celtics when it looked like 
players were purposely playing ugly offensive basketball to punish the viewing 
audience for unknown infractions.

Normally, it’s a good thing when a NBA postseason series goes seven games, but 
the one between the Raptors and the Indiana Pacers went didn’t last that long 
because it was highly contested and more because the teams took turns giving 
games away. The Heat and the Charlotte Hornets also gave us a peculiarly 
uninspired seven games, leading to a conclusion where, asDeadspin sharply noted 
<http://deadspin.com/the-streaky-ass-miami-heat-just-barely-won-a-series-the-1774138788>
, they “just barely won a series they dominated.”

Ultimately, 90% of the tension and drama in the first round lied in waiting 
for medical updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/20/stephen-curry-injury-nba-playoffs>
. While the rest of the second round can’t possibly keep up on this same pace 
as far as plot twists go, it certainly already a marked improvement on what’s 
gone on before.

Video of the week

OK, there’s no way that we can’t return to that wild finish to Monday’s Game 2 
between the Spurs and the Thunder. Here’s how it went down in real time, 
although honestly, one needs a slew of replays and multiple camera angles to 
fully get any sort of sense of what happened, exactly.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjG66E6G-2YQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjG66E6G-2YQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjG66E6G-2YQ&media=>
 Imagine trying to officiate this in real time. 
There’s just so much going on here – maybe too much for the brain to process. 
Obviously, the big scandal is that the Thunder’s Dion Waiters wasn’t called for 
an offensive foul after he elbowed Manu Ginobili while inbounding the ball. 
That’s pretty clear.

However, before that happens, Ginobili steps over the line, which he should 
have been called for a technical for stepping over the line. Obviously, that’s 
not as visible and egregious as Waiters’s shove, but already it’s easy to see 
how flat out impossible to officiate all of this is.

In fact, the NBA’s officiating report lists five fouls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/nba-playoffs-referee-errors-oklahoma-city-thunder-san-antonio-spurs>
 that were missed in the game’s final sequence. This might be a conservative 
accounting, given that this whole thing feels like one of those “how many 
things are wrong with this picture” exercises being played out in real-time.

For instance, somewhere in the mad scramble of bodies that occurs before time 
runs out on the Spurs, a fan actuallymade contact 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/steven-adams-forearm-grabbed-by-san-antonio-spurs-fan-2016-5?utm_campaign=Contact+SNS+For+More+Referrer&utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=snsanalytics>
 with Thunder center Steven Adams’ arm. There’s a new detail you discover every 
time you watch it, forcing the internet to reach outside of mere sports history 
to come up with a suitable comparison.
Marc Isenberg (@marcisenberg) 
This is the #Zapruder <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Zapruder?src=hash> of NBA 
games. Now we have video of a fan holding Steven Adams?!
 <https://twitter.com/marcisenberg/status/727359051202334720> May 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/marcisenberg/status/727359051202334720> 
Quote of the week

I’m in the game, man. I don’t really know what’s really going on.


– Dion Waiters 
<http://thebiglead.com/2016/05/03/dion-waiters-sums-up-dion-waiters-experience-i-dont-really-know-whats-really-going-on/>
 on that infamous final possession.


And that just about sums things up, doesn’t it?


How did LeBron carry the Cavaliers this week?

LeBron James had a team-high 25 points, nine assists and seven defensive 
rebounds in what ended up being a tough fought Game 1 victory over the Hawks. 
Still, as we pointed out, the team needed all that justto hang on 
<http://www.cleveland.com/cavs/index.ssf/2016/05/cleveland_cavaliers_20.html>, 
as they surrendered an 18-point lead during the game. Maybe while that was 
going on, James was just distracted by all of the breakingSpace Jam 2 news 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/space-jam-sequel-finds-director-834978>?


Power rankings

1) Golden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> (3)

If the Trail Blazers had won Game 2, the narrative almost certainly was going 
to be “now with the series potentially in real jeopardy, will Curry attempt to 
return in time for Saturday’s Game 3.” With a 2-0 cushion, don’t expect the 
Warriors to rush Curry, who hasresumed shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/golden-state-warriors-portland-trail-blazers-stephen-curry-injury-nba>
, back to the court.


2) Cleveland Cavaliers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-cavaliers> 
(2)

Here’s the other thing about the Cavaliers’ victory over the Hawks: the 
game-clinching play might have actually been courtesy of Kyrie Irving’s 
defense. Of all things.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0zErLyyaJY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0zErLyyaJY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ0zErLyyaJY&media=>
3) San Antonio Spurs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-antonio-spurs> (1)

If the Spurs had managed to pull off a victory in game 2, or at least lose in 
a less ridiculous manner, maybe more of us would remember the part of the game 
where Tony Parker made one of the most ridiculous passes ever:
RealGM (@RealGM) 
Circus spin and kick out by Parker to Aldridge. https://t.co/PlXyrW5lYC 
<https://t.co/PlXyrW5lYC>
 <https://twitter.com/RealGM/status/727346835979943936> May 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RealGM/status/727346835979943936> 
4) Oklahoma City Thunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/oklahoma-city-thunder> (4)

Even if more than a few calls went their way at the end of game 2, the Thunder 
had the better of the Spurs for almost all of the night, and absolutely looked 
like a team capable of beating them in a seven-game series.


5) Miami Heat <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/miami-heat> (5)

The Heat’s savvy probably helped the team shrug off Lowry’s ridiculous 
game-tying buzzer-beater, but the gaffes that made that shot possible are 
something they’re going to have to address. “We had to win the game twice 
tonight,”noted Dwyane Wade 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/wade-heat-beat-raptors-ot-lowrys-halfcourt-heave-031246164--nba.html?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
 after the game.

6) Toronto Raptors (8)

Well, listen: you guys forced overtime. That’s something to fight against the “
Toronto crumples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/03/toronto-raptors-nba-playoffs-canada>
 on the big stage” reputation. Yes, OK, it would have been helpful had you not 
crumpled in overtime, but it’s progress.


7) Atlanta Hawks (6)

Meanwhile, the Hawks didn’t even manage to push overtime. Can they even the 
series in tonight’s game 2?

8) Portland Trail Blazers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/portland-trail-blazers> (7)

Game 2 was their game to win to make this a series. They now have to win both 
at home and then hope that Curry either doesn’t return too soon or isn’t 
effective when he does return. It still might not matter.

 