
Before this NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> season began it looked 
like the Western Conference was stacked and the Eastern Conference would be a 
complete muddle. As the playoff picture starts to come in focus, those 
predictions are turning out to be, if anything, too conservative.


The Western Conference is almost set


On Monday night, the Portland Trail Blazers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/portland-trail-blazers> (48-25) defeated the 
Phoenix Suns 109-86, clinching a spot in the NBA playoffs while making it 
increasingly unlikely that the Suns (38-37) will make a push for the Western 
Conference’s eighth seed. They would have to leapfrog the New Orleans Pelicans 
(39-34) and the Oklahoma City Thunder (42-32) to make the playoffs.


One would think that the news that the Thunder would be losing Kevin Durant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/27/oklahoma-city-thunder-star-kevin-durant-to-have-season-ending-surgery>
 for four to six months following season-ending foot surgery would have given 
some life to either the Suns or Pelicans. Unfortunately for them 1) those two 
teams just don’t quite have enough to take advantage of this unexpected 
situation – perhaps things would have been different if Goran Dragic hadn’t 
forced his way out of Phoenix – and 2) even if they did, it might have only 
made Russell Westbrook more determined to drag Oklahoma City to the playoffs.


The Los Angeles Clippers (49-26) quietly secured a postseason spot 
<http://www.nba.com/clippers/recap-clippers-vs.-76ers-3/27/15> with a win over 
the Philadelphia 76ers on Friday. The Clippers, who currently occupy the No5 
seed, have been doing everything fairly quietly all this year, but perhaps they 
don’t mind the lack of media attention after last year’s Donald Sterling 
fiasco. The San Antonio Spurs (48-26) and Dallas Mavericks (45-29) have yet to 
officially lock down playoff berths, but it’s mostly a formality at this point.


The rest of the drama in the west comes down to teams jockeying for playoff 
position. There’s only a half game separating theMemphis Grizzlies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/memphis-grizzlies> (51-24) and Houston 
Rockets (50-24) from the No2 seed. The Trail Blazers, Clippers and Spurs all 
are in the race for the fourth seed, which would mean home-court advantage for 
at least the first round of the playoffs.


There is, however, no drama left for Steph Curry and the Golden State Warriors 
(61-13), who have already clinched the best record in the Western Conference 
and seem likely to end the season with the best record the NBA. It’s looking 
more and more likely that the Warriors-Thunderfirst-round matchup we all wanted 
<http://hardwoodparoxysm.com/2015/03/31/even-without-kevin-durant-thunder-warriors-should-be-one-for-the-ages/?utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=twitterfeed>
 is coming into fruition – it’s just sad that we won’t get to see Oklahoma City 
at full strength.


The Eastern Conference: not so much


After beating the Miami Heat on Friday 
<http://www.peachtreehoops.com/2015/3/27/8304299/atlanta-hawks-clinch-top-seed-in-eastern-conference>
, the Atlanta Hawks (56-19) clinched home-court advantage up until the NBA 
Finals, should they make it that far. That was a development we all clearly saw 
coming some time around early January. The rest of the Eastern Conference is a 
bit blurred.

The Toronto Raptors (44-30) clinched the Atlantic Division 
<http://www.foxsports.com/nba/story/toronto-raptors-beat-los-angeles-lakers-clinch-atlantic-title-032715>
, for just the third time in franchise history, after a 94-83 win over the Los 
Angeles Lakers. That’s good for fourth place in the East, although they could 
still scratch their way higher if they start playing much better thanthey have 
as late 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/sports/why-the-toronto-raptors-second-straight-division-title-feels-kind-of-empty/>
.


As it is, the Cleveland Cavaliers (48-27) have a two-and-a-half-game lead over 
the Chicago Bulls (45-29) for second place. The Bulls’ best hope to make up any 
ground would happen if the Cavaliers go the Spurs’ route and start resting 
LeBron James and other starters and with the (not incorrect) thought that 
having everyone fresh would give them more of an advantage than a higher seed.

On Monday, the Charlotte Hornets lost to the Boston Celtics. The win over the 
Hornets, playing without amysteriously DNP’d 
<http://www.charlotteobserver.com/sports/spt-columns-blogs/scott-fowler/article16975460.html>
 Lance Stephenson, solidified a playoff spot for the tumbling Washington 
Wizards (41-33), who have lost five of their last six games. The only win? 
Against those fading Hornets (31-42), whose season might be effectively over. 
Clearly, Wizards head coach Randy Wittman deserves to send the Charlotte a 
fruit basket at the very least.


The win also briefly put the Celtics (33-41) in the eighth seed in the Eastern 
Conference, thanks to the fact that the Celtics own the tiebreaker over the 
Brooklyn Nets. That lasted roughly 24 hours, until the Nets (33-40) defeated the
Indiana Pacers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indiana-pacers> 111-106 last 
night to take a half-game lead over Boston.

OK, yes, you may have thought the Nets had dropped off the postseason radar a 
few months ago. That’s alright, so did they, but they didn’t count on so many 
other teams being this bad. Not only will the final spots in the East be 
clinched by teams with losing records, they will likely be secured not by wins 
but with key losses by the other contenders. It’s a game of ‘let’s lose the 
least’.


Even the Milwaukee Bucks <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/milwaukee-bucks> 
(36-38), currently in line for the No6 seed, are stumbling and bumbling their 
way to the finish line. They’ve lost eight of their last 10. Indeed, this does 
sound awfully unfair to the bubble teams in the West. You have a right to be 
angry, Phoenix Suns fans.

At least the Miami Heat (34-40) are taking care of their business. After 
losing Chris Bosh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/25/chris-bosh-kevin-durantderrick-rose-among-nbas-latest-high-profile-disabled>
 for the season, less than 24 hours after making the biggest splash of the 
trade deadline by acquiring Dragic from Phoenix, it looked as if the Heat were 
in danger of falling out of playoff contention.

Then Dwyane Wade took over 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/30/five-things-we-learned-in-nba-sunday-dwyane-wade-is-going-to-will-heat-into-playoffs/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
. Miami pulled off back-to-back wins over the Cavaliers and Trail Blazers. 
Since then, besides an ill-timed loss to the Bucks, they have been beating the 
teams they are supposed to be beating. Given their competition, that should be 
enough to ensure that the Heat will, at worst, enter the postseason as a No7 
seed.


Houston Rockets regain Howard, lose Beverley

This has been an uncommonly punishing season as far as injuries go. Every item 
of potentially good news is almost inevitably followed by an update describing 
a freak accident, an unexpected setback or an ominous-sounding visit for a 
second opinion.


Take the Houston Rockets. As expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/25/oklahoma-city-thunder-shut-down-kevin-durant-and-face-an-uncertain-future>
, the Rockets welcomed back center Dwight Howard last Wednesday, but they 
received some brutal news soon after: point guard Patrick Beverley would need 
season-endingligament surgery 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12587854/patrick-beverley-houston-rockets-undergo-season-ending-wrist-surgery>
 on his left wrist. It’s unfortunate timing for a talented team hoping to 
survive the grueling gauntlet that will be the Western Conference playoffs.


Beverly’s injury is one of the few you’ll hear this time of year that’s 
actually as serious as it sounds. At this point in the regular season, nearly 
every significant injury could be called a season-ending injury, particularly 
if the playoffs aren’t in the cards. If you happen to be on the Philadelphia 
76ers,Los Angeles Lakers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-lakers> 
or the New York Knicks, a hangnail or slight sniffle might be sufficient.

The Sacramento Kings, for instance, are contemplating shutting down DeMarcus 
Cousins 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/31/kings-considering-shutting-down-demarcus-cousins-for-remainder-of-season/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
. The center has been playing hurt for weeks, it’s possible he’s never been 
healthy since his franchise-altering bout with meningitis. It makes no sense to 
keep Cousins out there if there’s anything even remotely wrong with him, but 
this would be an odd time for the Kings organization to suddenly start making 
sense.


Meanwhile, despite some teases, there’s still no official word on the return 
of the two players who could help their teams the most during this stretch,
Derrick Rose of the Chicago Bulls 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/basketball/bulls/chi-derrick-rose-scrimmages-20150331-story.html>
 andPaul George of the Indiana Pacers 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/25130234/pacers-roy-hibbert-on-paul-george-ive-seen-him-do-windmills>
. At this point, it feels like we’re going to be receiving nonstop “Rose/George 
could return shortly” news updates until their respective teams are eliminated.


The NBA’s respond to Indiana’s ‘religious freedom’ act

The fallout from Indiana passing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which 
many believe essentially makes it legal for businesses and organizations to 
discriminate against LGBT individuals, continues to be felt in the basketball 
world.


While at the moment the main focus is on the NCAA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/27/ncaa-to-monitor-indiana-religious-freedom-bill-as-final-four-draws-near>
, especially with this weekend’s Final Four taking place in Indianapolis, they 
aren’t the only sports organization concerned about the law’s potential 
consequences. Last week, the NBA, WNBA, Indiana Pacers and the Indiana Fever 
responded withthis statement 
<http://www.nba.com/2015/news/03/28/indiana-nba-statement/index.html>:

The game of basketball is grounded in long established principles of inclusion 
and mutual respect. We will continue to ensure that all fans, players and 
employees feel welcome at all NBA and WNBA events in Indiana and elsewhere.

While Herb Simon, owner of the Pacers and Fever, added the following:

The Indiana Pacers, Indiana Fever and Bankers Life Fieldhouse have the 
strongest possible commitment to inclusion and non-discrimination on any basis. 
Everyone is always welcome at Bankers Life Fieldhouse. That has always been the 
policy from the very beginning of the Simon family’s involvement and it always 
will be.

While, he’s not officially part of the Pacers organization, there may be no 
other athlete more strongly associated with the franchise than Reggie Miller. 
The former Indiana shooting guard and current TNT analyst took to Twitter to 
condemn the law:
Reggie Miller (@ReggieMillerTNT) 
pic.twitter.com/21LwD5Ie72 <http://t.co/21LwD5Ie72>
 <https://twitter.com/ReggieMillerTNT/status/581588511993659392> March 27, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/ReggieMillerTNT/status/581588511993659392> 
Fellow analyst Charles Barkley, no stranger to strong statements, also spoke up
 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2015/03/charles-barkley-indiana-religious-freedom-restoration-act>
 against it:


Discrimination in any form is unacceptable to me. As long as anti-gay 
legislation exists in any state, I strongly believe big events such as the 
Final Four and Super Bowl should not be held in those states’ cities.

Unlike the NCAA, the NBA does not have a marquee event happening in Indiana 
soon – although it’s at least mathematically possible that the Pacers could end 
up in the postseason – so they don’t have to make any strong statements about 
the law just yet.


Still, considering that the NBA became the first major American sports league 
to feature an openly gay playerin Jason Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/24/jason-collins-historic-return-nba-brooklyn-nets>
, and the sport’s deep roots in the state of Indiana, it’s hard to imagine that 
we won’t hear more from the world of professional basketball on this matter.
Jason Collins (@jasoncollins98) 
.@GovPenceIN <https://twitter.com/GovPenceIN>, is it going to be legal for 
someone to discriminate against me & others when we come to the#FinalFour 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FinalFour?src=hash>? http://t.co/uBlKbIf8YK 
<http://t.co/uBlKbIf8YK>
 <https://twitter.com/jasoncollins98/status/580145175726403584> March 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/jasoncollins98/status/580145175726403584> 
Other things we’ve learned


• How closed captioning 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2015/03/closed-captioning-error-gives-nik-stauskas-the-nickname-he-deserves-sauce-castillo>
 gave the Sacramento Kings’ Nik Stauskas the best nickname in the NBA:
#SauceCastillo 
<http://www.sportsonearth.com/article/114972604/closed-captioning-goes-wrong-sauce-castillo-nik-stauskas>
.

• Kareem Abdul-Jabbar explained 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2015/3/why-i-converted-to-islam.html> 
why he converted to Islam.

• Andrew Wiggins dunked on Rudy Gobert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VSsTKAoSI_0>. Twice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpynaCsKVo8>.


• Phil Jackson confidant Charley Rosen has this 
<http://nypost.com/2015/03/29/phil-jackson-pal-knicks-need-bigger-butt-than-kentuckys-towns>
 to say about the New York Knicks president’s offseason needs: “They need a 
center with a big butt to hold space. They didn’t have anybody like that.’’ 
Might I suggesta theme song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=84LUpG6ieis&list=RD84LUpG6ieis> for what will 
apparently be a colorful Knicks offseason?

• An absolutely soul-crushing overtime game-winner 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/lakers/la-sp-lakers-sixers-20150331-story.html> 
for the Los Angeles Lakers over the Philadelphia 76ers may have hurt their 
chances at keeping their top-five protected draft pick. The Lakers can’t even 
successfully lose this season – andfans are displeased 
<http://www.sbnation.com/nba/2015/3/30/8317335/the-lakers-won-at-the-buzzer-and-their-fans-are-furious>
.

• For those of you who might be in a ‘what is the most unexpected thing a 
player will get fined for this season’ pool: did anyone have ‘Glen Davis 
getting a $15,000 b for kicking a seat cushion into the stands’? If so, you won!

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daa03vi44xs4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daa03vi44xs4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daa03vi44xs4&media=>
• Just because the Golden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> have nothing left to 
prove, doesn’t mean that Steph Curry isn’t going to stop doing things like this:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLHdahxlUPac&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLHdahxlUPac>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLHdahxlUPac&media=> 