
This offseason was always going to hinge on what Kevin Durant would do when he 
hit free agency. Durant’ssurprise decision 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/kevin-durant-nba-free-agency-announcement/> 
to sign a two-year, $54.3m deal with the Golden State Warriors could end up 
altering the league just as much as LeBron James’s decision to join the Miami 
Heat back in 2010. Durant’s shocking announcement came while the league was 
still adjusting to the new realities brought about by a salary cap. Some have 
found their situations greatly improved by the events of the last few days. 
Others, particularly those who hail from the Oklahoma City area, not so much.


Winners

The Golden State Warriors

Kevin Durant joins Golden State Warriors and breaks Thunder hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/kevin-durant-golden-state-warriors-oklahoma-city-thunder-nba-free-agency>
So, last year they pulled off the best regular season in NBA history and were 
a win away from their second straight championship. While it’s not entirely 
certain how the Warriors will make their new roster work, we’re guessing that 
Andrew Bogut is heading elsewhere (he hastaken references to the Warriors 
<https://twitter.com/andrewbogut?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 off his Twitter profile). They’re essentially replacing Harrison Barnes, their 
weak point during the finals, with a guy who is either the second- or 
third-best player in the league. That just about edges the Warriors into the 
winners category.


Fans of cliffhangers 


You have to give credit to Kevin Durant’s desire to go at his own pace. While 
teams were hurrying to announce new deals at a frenzied pace all weekend long, 
Durant was calmly taking in long meetings with various interested parties, 
includinga sobbing Steve Ballmer 
<http://thebiglead.com/2016/07/02/clippers-owner-steve-ballmer-cried-during-an-emotional-meeting-with-kevin-durant/>
 and at least oneNFL superstar 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/tom-bradys-boston-legend-grows-with-kevin-durant-recruitment-044439658.html>
/ideal gas law enthusiast. Then on Sunday, after roughly 75% of major free 
agents were already under new contracts, there came the announcement that 
Durant was going to make his decision...

... But not until the next morning, where Durant made a mockery of anybody’s 
concerns that his decision would end up being anticlimactic.

Pretty much every player fortunate enough to be a free agent this year
SportsCenter (@SportsCenter) 
NBA = $$$$$$ pic.twitter.com/nGpdNa2fhp <https://t.co/nGpdNa2fhp>
 <https://twitter.com/SportsCenter/status/749958454119456768> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SportsCenter/status/749958454119456768> 
Durant aside, the biggest story in the NBA over the last few days has involved 
the rise of the salary cap to$94.1m 
<http://www.nba.com/2016/news/07/02/nba-salary-cap-set/>, which has given teams 
a lot more money to spend on what is a fairly weak free agent market. Heading 
into Friday, we all knew that this would result in teams offering cartoonishly 
large contracts to role players, bench guys and unproven talent.Having that 
knowledge 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/new-cap-inspires-free-agency-sticker-shock-no-matter-the-logic-001756873.html>
 didn’t make it any less shocking when the Portland Trail Blazers signed Evan 
Turner for a four-year deal worth $70m or when the Charlotte Hornets re-signed 
Nicolas Batum toa five-year, $120m 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/16664889/nicolas-batum-agrees-5-year-120-million-deal-stay-charlotte-hornets>
 contract.


And especially Mike Conley

It’s important to remember the rising salary cap when reading about the 
Memphis Grizzlies re-signing Mike Conley to what is, for the moment, the 
largest contract in NBA history. The Grizzlies handed Conley – who has never 
been named an All-Star – a five-year, $153m contract, putting himin a club 
<http://www.foxsports.com/nba/story/memphis-grizzlies-mike-conley-biggest-contract-nba-history-070316>
 that only includes Michael Jordan and Kobe Bryant as fellow members (although 
expect that fact to change sooner rather than later).


Boston Celtics

Besides Durant and LeBron James, who has made it 100% clear that he’s 
re-signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/lebron-james-contract-cleveland-cavaliers-nba-free-agency>
 with the Cleveland Cavaliers, versatile big man Al Horford might have been the 
most promising unrestricted free agent this summer. Horford was one of a 
handful of available players worthy of a maximum contract in any market. The 
Celticssigned Horford  
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/news/al-horford-celtics-agree-to-four-year-113-million-deal-five-things/>
to a four-year, $113m deal, adding an All-Star in his prime without having to 
trade away assets, while still maintaining enough financial flexibility that 
Celtics fans were able to temporarily delude themselves into thinking they had 
a shot at landing Durant.

Miami Heat

The Heat’s offseason won’t look quite as good should Dwyane Wade actually sign 
elsewhere, but it’s difficult to imagine Wade’s relationship with the only NBA 
team he’s ever known ending like this. Miami’s main goal heading into the 
offseason was to lock up Hassan Whiteside, which theypromptly did 
<https://theringer.com/the-heat-go-all-in-on-hassan-whiteside-d5f2db80b074#.2zuimv6s8>
 at the cost of four years and around $98m.

Losers

Oklahoma City Thunder


You just have to feel bad for Thunder fans. You could say this is the worst 
thing that can happen to a franchise, but a whole bunch of secretly gleeful 
basketball fans in Seattle would probably point out that it’s only the second 
worst.


Los Angeles Lakers

Does anybody have any clue about what exactly the Los Angeles Lakers are 
doing? The Lakers made the first big signing of free agency by handing Timofey 
Mozgov, last seen getting relegated to the Cleveland Cavaliers bench during the 
NBA Finals, to afour-year, $64m contract 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/lakers/2016/07/01/timofey-mozgov-agrees-to-contract-lakers/86587056/>
. Then they signed a semi-cooked Luol Deng for four years and $72m. It’s not so 
much that these are atrocious signings, although there’s no way Deng makes it 
to the end of that contract, it’s more that they seem utterly random.


Atlanta Hawks

Whichever team signed Dwight Howard during this offseason was probably going 
to get slotted into the loser’s column here. This may be unfair to the Hawks. 
Considering how much money teams have been throwing on relatively unproven 
talent, the three-year, $70.5m 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/sources--dwight-howard-214304623.html> contract 
they handed Howard was relatively reasonable, especially considering his 
struggles last year were at least partly due to him being a poor fit with James 
Harden and the Houston Rockets.

Here’s the thing, by signing Howard, the Hawks ruined any chance 
<http://www.foxsports.com/nba/story/al-horford-dwight-howard-boston-celtics-nba-free-agency-070316>
 they had of keeping Horford. Atlanta also traded away Jeff Teague and used 
that money to re-sign Kent Bazemore for four years and $70m. All of these moves 
are defensible on their own terms, but when put together they paint a picture 
of a team that has taken a decisive step backwards.


Dallas Mavericks

It’s looking like another offseason where Mark Cuban has cleared up space to 
sign star players to slot next to Dirk Nowitzki for one last championship run, 
but he just can’t find any takers. It’s looking increasingly likely that the 
Mavericks will be the team that bites the bullet andhands Harrison Barnes a max 
contract 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/16713144/harrison-barnes-dallas-mavericks-agree-max-deal>
. The good news it that it looks like the Warriors won’t be matching it.


Washington Wizards

The Wizards’ goal this year was to make a playoff push and hope to convince 
hometown hero Durant to join in. Instead, they missed the postseason entirely 
and couldn’t even get a meeting with Durant. Instead, the Wizards ended up 
spending the extra money on Ian Mahinmi, while hoping that Bradley Beal remains 
healthy long enough to justify the five-year,$128m 
<http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2016/07/01/sports/basketball/ap-bkn-wizards-beal.html?_r=0>
 contract they gave him.

Kevin Durant’s likeability

Remember that period where Durant was the good guy and LeBron James was the 
traitor who betrayed his city? We have officially entered the evil parallel 
universe version of that basketball reality.


New York Knicks

The Knicks are a Kirk Hinrich signing away from transitioning from a viable 
NBA team to a2011 Chicago Bulls 
<http://www.syracuse.com/ny-sports/index.ssf/2016/07/joakim_noah_set_to_join_carmelo_anthony_derrick_rose_on_ny_knicks.html>
 reunion tour.

Portland Trail Blazers

No, seriously, the Trail Blazers gave Evan Turner $70m 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/news/report-blazers-agree-with-evan-turner-on-70m-deal-things-to-know/>
. This is a thing that actually happened.

Really every team that has to play the Warriors


Their collapse at the hands of the Cavaliers didn’t end the Warriors, it only 
made them angrier. I don’t see how they could play better than they did last 
year, but it’s very possible that they could.

 