
The attorney for Atlanta Hawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> guard Thabo Sefolosha 
reportedly said his client will file a $50m lawsuit against the city of New 
York and eight police officers who arrested him in April. Sefolosha suffered a 
broken leg in the incident causing him to miss the remainder of the NBA season 
and the playoffs.

The New York Post reported 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/21/nbaer-plans-50m-lawsuit-against-city-over-broken-leg/>
 that Sefolosha filed a complaint with the city’s comptroller claiming his 
injuries suffered during the arrest are “permanent in nature and continuing 
into the future”.

“Unfortunately he may not be dunking as much as he was before this happened,” 
the guard’s attorney Alex Spiro told the Post.

The silence over the Thabo Sefolosha trial is deafening ... and mystifying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/12/the-silence-over-the-thabo-sefolosha-trial-is-deafening-and-mystifying>
On 9 October, a Manhattan court found Sefolosha not guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/atlanta-hawks-thabo-sefolosha-acquitted-of-all-charges-in-nypd-case>
 on three misdemeanor charges of obstructing government administration, 
disorderly conduct and resisting arrest. He had been arrested outside a New 
York nightclub 1Oak following a fight that left another NBA player Chris 
Copeland with stab wounds. Police said Sefolosha had resisted orders to move 
away from the crime scene. He testified that he had moved away after being 
ordered to do so and was arrested by an officer while he tried to give $20 to a 
man begging for money.

A scuffle ensued and Sefolosha was injured. His attorneys have said he was 
racially profiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/07/lawyer-says-police-targeted-nba-star-due-to-race-he-saw-a-black-man-in-a-hoodie>
 by police who were physically and verbally abusive.

Prosecutors offered a plea deal in which Sefolosha would spend one day doing 
community service, but the player demanded the trial.

Now he will reportedly sue, though it may be hard for him to prove permanent 
damage given he is playing again for the Hawks. In three pre-season games he 
has scored 18 points in 41 total minutes, statistics that are consistent with 
his career averages.
 