
Neil Gaiman, Alison Bechdel and Art Spiegelman have stepped forward to host 
tables at Tuesday’sPEN gala in New York <https://www.pen.org/> honouring the 
work of Charlie Hebdo, after writers including Peter Carey and Michael Ondaatje 
withdrew last week in protest.


Carey, Ondaatje and the authors Francine Prose, Teju Cole, Rachel Kushner and 
Taiye Selasi last week made public their concerns over PEN American Center’s 
decision to present the French satirical magazine with a “Freedom of Expression 
Courage award 
<http://www.pen.org/2015-pen-goodale-freedom-expression-courage-award>”. They 
had been set to host tables at tonight’s ceremony – which is also due to honour 
jailed Azerbaijani journalist Khadija Ismayilova witha Freedom to Write award 
<http://www.pen.org/2015-pen-goldsmith-freedom-write-award> – but pulled out, 
later adding their names to a letter now signed by more than 204 writers.

Charlie Hebdo row leads to Facebook fallout between Salman Rushdie and 
Francine Prose
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/30/charlie-hebdo-pen-award-salman-rushdie-twitter-scrap>
The letter, printed in full on The Intercept 
<https://firstlook.org/theintercept/2015/04/30/145-pen-writers-thus-far-objected-charlie-hedbo-award-6/>
 , says that by selecting Charlie Hebdo, PEN is “valorising selectively 
offensive material: material that intensifies the anti-Islamic, anti-Maghreb, 
anti-Arab sentiments already prevalent in the western world”.

Now award-winning fantasy novelist Gaiman, acclaimed cartoonist Bechdel, Maus 
creator Spiegelman, Reading Lolita in Tehran author Azar Nafisi and American 
author and journalist George Packer have been named as new hosts at the event, 
which PEN confirmed would have heightened security. French-Congolese novelist 
Alain Mabanckou, meanwhile, will present the award toJean-Baptiste Thoret 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2015/05/04/404215444/charlie-hebdo-staffer-pushes-back-against-writers-opposition-to-award>
, the Charlie Hebdo member of staff who arrived late to work on 7 January, 
missing the attack that killed 12 people.

Mabanckou told the Guardian he had decided to present the award because “I’m a 
big reader of Charlie Hebdo, because I know that it’s not a racist magazine. I 
decided to do it in memory of all journalists and cartoonists who die because 
they have the courage to pursue their work. Finally, I decided to do it because 
among the members ofCharlie Hebdo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlie-hebdo> who were massacred in January 
2015 was a friend of mine, the economist and journalist Bernard Maris, who was 
an extraordinary man.”

Gaiman tweeted: “I’ll be hosting a table at the PEN event because it’s 
important.” Hetold the Associated Press in an email 
<http://news.yahoo.com/gaiman-bechdel-among-table-hosts-pen-gala-150009484.html>
: “I was honoured to be invited to host a table. The Charlie Hebdo cartoonists 
are getting an award for courage: They continued putting out their magazine 
after the offices were firebombed, and the survivors have continued following 
the murders.”

“They died for their beliefs. The award is for courage that transcends our 
like or dislike of them,”Nafisi tweeted this weekend 
<https://twitter.com/azarnafisi/status/594546153334710272>. She also wrote: 
“PEN award to CH is recognition of the writers’ & artists’ rights to ‘disturb 
the peace,’ regardless of the price”.

Thoret, the film critic for Charlie Hebdo, told NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2015/05/04/404215444/charlie-hebdo-staffer-pushes-back-against-writers-opposition-to-award>
 that “if you’re standing for the freedom of expression, you can’t be at one 
moment for this freedom of expression, and two or three minutes later, against 
that. You know, you’re honouring a principle. You’re not honouring a specific 
content in a magazine. Even in Charlie Hebdo, we did not often agree.”

Other writers including Paul Auster, Siri Hustvedt, Simon Schama, Richard Ford 
and Sara Paretsky have also offered their support to PEN. The novelist Salman 
Rushdie, meanwhile, has been a particularly outspoken supporter of PEN’s 
decision to honour Charlie Hebdo, writing in a letter to the free speech 
organisation that by withdrawing, the six authors had “made themselves the 
fellow travellers” of “fanatical Islam, which is highly organised, well funded, 
and which seeks to terrify us all, Muslims as well as non-Muslims, into a cowed 
silence”.
 