
I’ll be honest. I didn’t see that one coming: the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra 
has announced 
<http://www.gewandhausorchester.de/media/detail/news/andris-nelsons-announced-as-21st-gewandhauskapellmeister-boston-leipzig-alliance/>
 thatAndris Nelsons will take over as their Music Director from 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/andris-nelsons-is-new-conductor-of-leipzigs-gewandhaus-orchestra>
. The news comes with astonishing speed - it’s not even a week sinceRiccardo 
Chailly’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/sep/07/hrusa-haitink-chailly-altinoglu-conductor-comings-goings>
 from the Leipzig job – four years earlier than his contract stipulated – was 
also announced.

Andris Nelsons is new conductor of Leipzig's Gewandhaus Orchestra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/andris-nelsons-is-new-conductor-of-leipzigs-gewandhaus-orchestra>
Confused? I’m not surprised: add to this mix of intra-conductorial 
coincidences the fact thatChailly is taking over the Lucerne Festival Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/14/riccardo-chailly-music-director-lucerne-festival-orchestra-abbado>
 from next year (admittedly, the Lucerne ensemble only performs in the summer), 
a job for which Nelsons was previously hotly tipped, and you have the makings 
of either a remarkable piece of maestro-swapping serendipity, or the fulfilment 
of a lot of behind-the-scenes bargaining that have clearly been a long time in 
the planning.

The Gewandhaus orchestra has simultaneously revealed an ambitious 
cross-continental collaboration with Nelsons’ other orchestra, the Boston 
Symphony,with whom he’s just extended his term until 2022 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/05/andris-nelsons-boston-symphony-2022-proms>
. Aside from a set of orchestral obligations on either side of the Atlantic 
that would tax evenWotan and his overloaded spear 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y3Ur-RzoNbw>, Nelsons says that Boston and 
Leipzig will work together in future seasons, presenting a week of each other’s 
repertoire in their respective cities and collaborating on co-commissions 
(they’ve already said they will perform a new work byJörg Widmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/08/jorg-widmann-contemporary-music-guide>
 in the 2017-18 season). Christoph Wolff of Harvard University has been 
appointed “artistic advisor to the new coalition”, as theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/10/arts/music/andris-nelsons-named-music-director-of-leipzig-gewandhaus-orchestra.html?_r=1>
 reports.

Being in charge of either one of these orchestras would be a dream come true 
for most conductors

Beyond the awesome (in both sense of the words) responsibilities that Nelsons 
now takes on his 36-year-old shoulders, while there are many precedents for the 
whole one-maestro, two-glamorous orchestras situation, what’s less common is 
having to lead such high-profile and high-pressure institutions at such an 
early stage in a career. Being in charge of either one of these orchestras at 
any point of your musical life would be a dream come true for most maestros, 
but running both at the same time risks turning potential collaboration into 
artistic dilution. Instead of distinctive and differently weighted projects 
with both orchestras, there’s the danger that Nelsons could end up working on 
the same ideas, making the same kind of sound in the same kind of repertoire, 
on both sides of the ocean.


Nelsons commits to Boston until 2022
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/05/andris-nelsons-boston-symphony-2022-proms>
There are also the brutalities of fact of being in a position of having to run 
frenetically hard just to catch up with your schedule, and the grim realities 
of jet-lag when you’re a servant to two orchestral masters, let alone focusing 
on your artistic development and immersion in new repertoire. Nelsons obviously 
feels he has the energy and the vision to “to pass a great heritage into the 
future, but also to create the future, to create the opportunity for composers 
to compose and to play their pieces, but not to lose, not to forget – which you 
can’t forget – [the] great masters”, as he tells the New York Times. His 
performances at this summer’s Proms convinced many of how powerful his 
leadership of theCity of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/20/prom-4-cbso-nelsons-review-royal-albert-hall-beethovens-ninth-blazingly-memorable-farewell>
 was, and how it could be with the Boston Symphony (althoughAndrew Clements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/23/boston-sonelsons-review-theres-work-to-do-for-nelsons-new-band>
 had doubts about the success of his Boston project so far). Only time and 
trans-continental connections will tell if this is an inspired appointment, or 
an orchestra too far.
 