
After only a year as their Music Director, Andris Nelsons  
<http://www.bso.org/>has confirmed this week that he is extending his contract 
with theBoston Symphony Orchestra  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwN-uo1HIfI>
until 2022. In the wake of his name being linked with key posts at Amsterdam’s 
Concertgebouw and the Berliner Philharmoniker (whatever the truth there was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/11/the-berlin-phil-votes-but-who-might-be-their-next-chief-conductor-is-far-from-clear>
), Boston’s strategy is clear: to put similar speculation to bed for any other 
jobs that may come up in the next few years.

There are the usual bouquets of musical mutuality. Nelsons said he “felt 
immediately that we understand each other, and respect each other. . . . . If 
you have only a few years, it’s not enough at all. And of course, hopefully 
2022 will also not be final”, and the orchestra’s Managing Director Mark Volpe 
agreed that “we’re poised on the threshold of something quite special.” 

British audiences have the chance to make up their own minds about the 
strength of this special orchestral relationship when Nelsons brings his Boston 
players to the Proms on the22 and 23 of August 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/performers/128>, with programmes centred on 
Mahler’s 6th Symphony andShostakovich’s 10th 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WSHKmcadNM>, the piece they have just 
recorded -spectacularly 
<http://www.gramophone.co.uk/review/shostakovich-symphony-no-10> - for Deutsche 
Grammophon as the start of what could be a cycle of all 15 Shostakovich 
symphonies.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WSHKmcadNM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WSHKmcadNM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2WSHKmcadNM&media=>
In Boston at least, Nelsons is already credited with having “energized the 
BSO’s local audiences and restored momentum for the orchestra after several 
years of drift without a music director”, asJeremy Eichler writes in the Boston 
Globe 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/arts/music/2015/08/03/andris-nelsons-extends-contract-with-bso-music-director/7HsSkzP0qhVP1KbQNxa4sO/story.html>
. Along with the Latvian-born conductor’s seemingly impregnable and burgeoning 
international reputation, the orchestra’s distribution deal with Google Play 
Music, and their Deutsche Grammophon project, the Nelsons era has already 
brought visible dividends for the Boston Symphony.

Prom 4: CBSO/Nelsons review – a blazingly memorable farewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/20/prom-4-cbso-nelsons-review-royal-albert-hall-beethovens-ninth-blazingly-memorable-farewell>
But Nelsons has a lot to live up to at next week’s Proms: on the opening 
weekend he gave ablazing performance of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/20/prom-4-cbso-nelsons-review-royal-albert-hall-beethovens-ninth-blazingly-memorable-farewell>
 with the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra - his final concert in charge 
there. Can Boston outdo Birmingham? We’ll find out soon enough.
 