
One of the most experienced expedition leaders at Everest base camp has told 
how a member of his team was swept to his death in the avalanche that followed 
the earthquake inNepal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nepal>, leaving his 
camp looking like “it had been flattened by a bomb”.

David Hamilton, 54, a Glaswegian who has climbed Everest seven times, is the 
leader of Jagged Globe, a Sheffield-based adventure company that announced on 
Saturday that it had lost one of its team members, Dan Fredinburg, a senior 
Google executive.

Speaking by phone from base camp, Hamilton said he was “a little shocked and 
shaken” after an intense 24 hours helping coordinate the rescue mission for 
what has become Everest’s deadliest ever day.

Aftershock sends fresh avalanches down Everest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/aftershock-sends-fresh-avalanches-down-everest>
He was just below base camp at the time and arrived where his camp had been to 
find a scene of utter devastation. “It looked [like] somebody had put a bomb in 
the middle of it. A huge area had just been completely wiped out. The large 
structures – the dining tent and so on – had just been completely flattened and 
stuff had been thrown hundreds of metres away.”

It wasn’t the kind of avalanche “that you’ve seen pictures of in the Alps”, he 
said. “It wasn’t the fluffy kind of white-powder avalanche. It was a shattered 
ice cliff with massive blocks of ice and rock that swept through the centre of 
base camp.

“There are ice cliffs on three sides and small bits fall off them every year. 
But this was on a completely different scale. It took the force of the 
earthquake to dislodge what must have been thousands of tonnes of rock and ice. 
It was not like anything anyone had ever seen before.”

The topography of the mountains, he said, meant “there was a concentrated 
blast zone that we were right in the middle of”. The team had seen it coming 
but it was only at the last minute, he said, that they realised that the full 
force of it was coming directly at them.

“Some people were able to run for it and others were able to shelter but Dan 
was caught out in the open when the blast hit him and swept 30 or 40 metres and 
smashed into a large rock. A couple of other team members [Dubliner Paul 
Greenan, and British-born but Sydney-based Richard Brooks] were injured but the 
majority were almost completely unharmed.

“They had a very, very lucky escape. Some of our tents were blown more than 50 
metres away. If it happened a few hours earlier when people were in their tents 
or sleeping it would have been much worse. There would easily have been another 
40 or 50 fatalities.”

Aftershocks hinder rescue efforts as Nepal quake death toll passes 2,500
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/aftershocks-hinder-rescue-efforts-as-nepal-quake-death-toll-passes-2000>
George Foulsham, 38, an Australian marine biologist who lives in Singapore, 
was another member of the Jagged Globe team who was caught by the avalanche. He 
described it as a “50-storey building of white”.

“I ran and it just flattened me. I tried to get up and it flattened me again. 
I couldn’t breathe. I thought I was dead. When I finally stood up, I couldn’t 
believe it passed me over and I was almost untouched.”

Like Fredinburg and the majority of the rest of the team, he had also been in 
camp a year agowhen a cliff on the Khumbu icefall collapsed, killing 16 Sherpas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/18/everest-climbers-to-follow-new-route-after-last-years-disaster>
. He had saved for years to pursue his dream but said it felt as if the 
mountain was “saying it’s not meant to be climbed for now”.

Hamilton said it was uncanny to find themselves in another desperate emergency 
situation almost exactly one year on. “What was so weird was that the emergency 
response jumped into action and it was the same half-dozen expedition leaders 
helping the doctors that did exactly the same job last year.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F26%2F1430066952067%2F61535879-bd7d-4f27-99f9-8fc9c9a0c907-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nepal%20quake%3A%20Everest%20base%20camp%20'looked%20like%20it%20had%20been%20flattened%20by%20bomb'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nepal%20quake%3A%20Everest%20base%20camp%20%27looked%20like%20it%20had%20been%20flattened%20by%20bomb%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F26%2F1430066952067%2F61535879-bd7d-4f27-99f9-8fc9c9a0c907-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Injured Sherpa guides sit inside a bus in Kathmandu after they were evacuated 
from Everest base camp. Photograph: Bikram Rai/AP 
The Himalayan Rescue Association maintains a medical tent at base camp and 
Hamilton said that the British doctor, Rachel Tullet, and her Nepalese and 
American colleague “did an amazing job” in extreme circumstances.

“The medical tent was quite damaged and they were having to treat critically 
injured patients who maybe had a 50% chance of survival in a well-equipped 
western hospital in very challenging conditions, cutting off clothing etc 
outside. Luckily, two of the major camps were not damaged and we were able to 
carry all the patients out to there.”

It was also incredible fortunate, he said, that the other big camps that 
suffered a direct hit had only a few people in them. A team of serving Gurkhas 
and British officers who had hoped to be the first Gurkha team to climb Everest 
in their 200th anniversary year and who were camped next to Jagged Globe were 
up the mountain at the time and just a few kitchen staff had been left behind.


Snow has hampered the rescue mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/aftershock-sends-fresh-avalanches-down-everest>
 but a window of clearer weather enabled the injured to be evacuated further 
down the mountain to a slightly better equipped clinic in the tiny mountain 
village of Pheriche. Hamilton feared there would be further fatalities, however.

“There are undoubtedly a number of them in a very critical condition. Because 
people had been blasted across the camp by the force of the avalanche there 
were a lot of quite serious head injuries.”

A Chinese camp close by had also suffered fatalities, he said, but like last 
year “the vast majority of the people killed were Sherpas. There was a 
relatively small number of western climbers injured.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F26%2F1430067170893%2F3cca4cfe-b75b-47a2-8040-24d193af685e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nepal%20quake%3A%20Everest%20base%20camp%20'looked%20like%20it%20had%20been%20flattened%20by%20bomb'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nepal%20quake%3A%20Everest%20base%20camp%20%27looked%20like%20it%20had%20been%20flattened%20by%20bomb%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fnepal-quake-everest-base-camp-looked-like-it-had-been-flattened-by-bomb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F26%2F1430067170893%2F3cca4cfe-b75b-47a2-8040-24d193af685e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A small avalanche on Pumori as seen from Everest base camp on Sunday. 
Aftershocks have sent further avalanches streaming around the base camps. 
Photograph: Azim Afif/AP 
There was still the question of what would happen to the nearly 100 climbers 
still stranded up the mountain at camps 1 and 2 and currently unable to descend 
because of damage to the route through the Khumbu icefall.

“The priority was taking care of the injured but the route is badly damaged 
and the SPCC, the so-called icefall doctors, are, as I understand, no longer in 
camp. Their camp was totally destroyed. There are 50 or 60 people at camp 1 who 
are starting to work their way down rebuilding the route.

“It’s unclear what will happen but they have very experienced expedition 
leaders with them and for the moment they have enough food and fuel.”

The difficulty, he suggested, was that “the Sherpas are very superstitious and 
I can’t see any of them wanting to go back up the mountain after this. They 
didn’t want to stay in base camp last night and went down to Gorak Shep [a 
couple of miles further down] to sleep there. They had returned after last 
year’s avalanche and were prepared to put it behind them but for this to happen 
again … it’s just too much of a coincidence for most of them.”

Fears are now growing for another Jagged Globe team of 13 trekkers who are 
still unaccounted for.

Simon Lowe, the managing director of Jagged Globe, said the group was in the 
Dhaulagiri region and had yet to call in. “We have another group in the area 
and they rang to say that they’d been unaffected so we’re very hopeful that it 
simply hasn’t occurred to them to call.”

He said the group had a satellite phone but may not have been able to get a 
signal. “We had four groups still unaccounted for yesterday and it may be their 
priority is simply to get away from where they are.”
 