
Amanda Knox will be the subject of a new Netflix documentary exploring the 
notoriousMeredith Kercher <https://www.theguardian.com/world/meredithkercher> 
murder case.

The US student was convicted and imprisoned with Raffaele Sollecito for the 
2007 murder of Kercher, but after appeals and retrials they were acquitted last 
year by Italy’s highest court.

Titled Amanda Knox <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox>, the 
documentary will premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival next month 
before a global launch on 30 September.


Stranger Things: Netflix boss says it would be 'dumb' not to do season two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/05/stranger-things-netflix-season-two-winona-ryder-us>
The case, which made headlines around the world, has previously been the 
subject of the documentary A Long Way From Home and TV movie Amanda Knox: 
Murder On Trial In Italy, with Hayden Panettiere in the title role.

Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> is planning to unveil 
three other non-fiction titles at TIFF before making them available to 
subscribers online in the autumn.

Leonardo DiCaprio is executive producing “thriller” documentary The Ivory 
Game, which take viewers to the front lines of the fight to save the African 
elephant from extinction.

It was filmed undercover for 16 months with the help of a team of intelligence 
operatives, undercover activists, rangers and conservationists, infiltrating 
the global ivory trafficking network.

Werner Herzog and volcanologist Clive Oppenheimer’s Into The Inferno will look 
at volcanoes across the world to understand their relationship with humankind, 
while The White Helmets follows three volunteer rescue workers in Syria and 
Turkey in early 2016 as they try to save civilians affected by the war.

Lisa Nishimura, Netflix vice-president of original documentary programming, 
said: “The breadth of our slate at the Toronto International Film Festival 
speaks to Netflix’s continued celebration of diverse voices and styles in the 
world of non-fiction.

“We are committed to pushing the boundaries of the documentary form, and our 
films screening at Toronto represent both emerging talent and iconic 
film-makers during a thrilling time for documentaries.”
 