
I enjoyed reading the novelist Amit Chaudhuri reminiscing in Saturday’s 
Guardian aboutthe publishing world of the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/06/the-nearest-thing-to-life-james-wood-review-memoir-literary-criticism>
. “You suddenly had an inexhaustible run of first novels that were astonishing 
successes,” he writes, “something unknown in other historical epochs, in which 
reputations were achieved over time.” I found it fascinating to imagine a time 
when novelty had zero currency, and it made me think about comedy today, 
particularly on the Fringe, where novelty is easier to sell (and to write 
about) than the difficult business of getting better one show at a time.

I’m feeling that keenly, because I’ve seen a handful of second shows over the 
Fringe’s opening weekend that didn’t quite deliver on the promise of their 
predecessors. Of course, that’s a phenomenon – “difficult second album syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/sep/19/3>” – that recurs well beyond 
comedy, and which forms the self-reflexive theme ofAdrienne Truscott’s current 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/08/adrienne-truscott-edinburgh-festival-review-standup-gilded-balloon>
. It’s about dealing with expectation, whereas your first show/album/whatever 
was created without pressure. It’s about weighing up whether to deliver more of 
the same (not least for all those people who missed you first time round) or 
something new to keep last year’s audience on its toes. It’s about having to 
hastily assemble something, after years putting together its predecessor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fnevermind-newbies-second-edinburgh-fringe-adrienne-truscott-liam-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439214909568%2Fdcc802fb-00e1-499d-b15b-b568ceecec6e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nevermind%20the%20comedy%20newbies%20%E2%80%93%20let's%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20difficult%20second%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fnevermind-newbies-second-edinburgh-fringe-adrienne-truscott-liam-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nevermind%20the%20comedy%20newbies%20%E2%80%93%20let%27s%20hear%20it%20for%20the%20difficult%20second%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fnevermind-newbies-second-edinburgh-fringe-adrienne-truscott-liam-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439214909568%2Fdcc802fb-00e1-499d-b15b-b568ceecec6e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Liam Williams’s Capitalism show at Edinburgh 2014 was an example of getting 
better second time around 
The problem may be keener in comedy than in other artforms, because so much of 
comedy boils down to the personality of the performers on stage. First shows 
can make a vivid impression by dint of a never-before-encountered charisma 
alone – and when the novelty of that wears off, it leaves a big gap for 
material to fill. Maybe, on some level, I responded excitedly to the first 
shows of (for example)Truscott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/14/adrienne-truscott-asking-for-it-review-comedy>
,Massive Dad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/13/massive-dad-review-sketch-trio-pleasance>
 andAisling Bea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/05/aisling-bea-review> because I 
was excited to “meet” vivid and funny people I hadn’t met before. By their 
second shows, I’m taking that for granted while still demanding an exciting 
experience.

That’s a difficult expectation to fulfil, particularly at a festival where all 
comedy-watchers have infinite opportunities to experience the thrill of the 
new. That’s where Chaudhuri’s 80s nostalgia came in handy, because it reminded 
me – notwithstanding the loads of terrific first-timers I’ll see this and every 
year – that while some may be born funny, real skill at standup (and sketch) is 
usually acquired over time. I remember my frustration at the early work of
Pappy’s Fun Club <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/nov/06/theatre3> 
(couldn’t stand it), Sara Pascoe (“tapering waffle” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/09/sara-pascoe-review>, I wrote) 
and James Acaster (“man-childish and underpowered” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/19/james-acaster-review>) – all 
of whom went on to bona fide comedy greatness. That wasn’t just me being blind 
to new talent, it was – as I think those artists would admit – that they’d yet 
to find their voice or hone their craft.

 So, resisting the temptation to splurge on newcomers, I’ll be paying just as 
much attention to second shows on the Fringe, bearing in mind their particular 
difficulties, and hoping to see those difficulties audaciously overcome. Liam 
Williams offers one recent template (followed to some extent byDane Baptiste 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/dane-baptiste-edinburgh-festival-review>
), returning after a promising, personal debut witha (ridiculously) ambitious 
follow-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/10/liam-williams-review-edinburgh-festival-2014-capitalism>
 about the state of the nation/economy/the world. They will continue to 
improve, as will those acts who’ve had sophomore-show wobbles. We should resist 
neophilia, and enjoy watching them do so.
 