
While India celebrated <https://www.theguardian.com/india/0,,821007,00.html> 
its independence on August 15, as the world's largest democracy - with its 
democratic credentials untarnished except for a year-and-a-half emergency in 
1975-76 - Pakistanis have to face the unpalatable fact that their country has 
been ruled by military dictators for two-thirds of its existence.

Why have the twins born of the British India grown so far apart? The short 
answer is "nature and nurture". India and Pakistan inherited different genes, 
and they have grown up in different environments. Though religion was the basis 
for the partition, the Muslim majority parts that came to constitute East and
Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> were agrarian and lacked 
industry.

For instance, the Sind province (later to become part of West Pakistan) 
produced cotton, but did not have a single textile factory. Its cotton was 
shipped to the mills in (then) Bombay and Ahmedabad. Similarly jute grew in 
East Bengal (later to become East Pakistan) but jute factories were in Calcutta.

The size of the middle class - equipped to provide leadership for political 
parties with a mass appeal - in the Muslim-majority areas was small. The Muslim 
League, the governing party in Pakistan, lacked a long-established existence, 
having raised the idea of partitioning the sub-continent in 1940.

By contrast, the Indian National Congress (popularly called Congress party), 
the ruling party inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, was 
established in 1885 and demanded full independence in 1930. Over the decades, 
it had acquired a mass base.

India had a large middle class in its urban areas that was well versed in 
providing political leadership. It also had substantial industry, ranging from 
textiles to steel and coal mining, and plenty of commercial and finance capital.

Moreover, independent India had the advantage of the leadership of Jawaharlal 
Nehru. A Cambridge-educated lawyer, he was a committed democrat and secularist. 
He served as India's prime minister until his death in 1964. Deploying his 
charisma and popular appeal, and using the Congress party as a vehicle for 
political education of the masses, he established a solid foundation of 
democracy andsecularism in India 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Rough-Guide-History-India/dp/1858288428/ref=sr_1_3/026-0486588-2499639?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1187267702&sr=1-3>
.

Unluckily for Pakistan, its strong-willed founder, Muhammad Ali Jinnah 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/sarfraz_manzoor/2007/08/in_jinnahs_footsteps.html>
, died within a year of its establishment. A London-trained barrister with a 
taste for ham sandwiches, he declared at the inauguration of Pakistan that 
religion was to be a personal matter for a citizen, and that all Pakistani 
nationals, irrespective of their religious affiliation, were equal.

Several events during the 1970s led Pakistanis to turn westward and drift away 
from their sub-continental roots. These were the secession of East Pakistan in 
1971; the sudden enrichment of the oil-rich Arab states due to the quadrupling 
of oil prices in 1973-74, causing an influx of Pakistanis into the region where 
Islam originated; and the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 which turned 
Pakistan into a base for jihadists, both Afghan and Pakistanis.

Jinnah's vision has little in common with the reality of today's Pakistan 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/stephen_kinzer/2007/08/the_experiment_that_failed.html>
. Its military ruler General Pervez Musharraf is caught between the rising 
power of Islamist groups, entrenched in the provinces bordering Afghanistan, 
and the secular, democratic parties popular in the remaining two provinces.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 