
A New York Post reporter, Amber Jamieson, paraded semi-naked in Times Square 
wearing only body paint to mask her nudity 
<http://nypost.com/2015/08/30/i-went-undercover-as-a-topless-performer-in-times-square/>
.

It was a piece of “undercover journalism” aimed at ridiculing a decision by 
the city’s mayor,Bill de Blasio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio>, and state governor, 
Andrew Cuomo, to crack down on the so-called “painted ladies” who wander the 
square and receive tips for posing with tourists.

The New York police department has created a 47-person taskforce of “impact 
officers” 
<http://nypost.com/2015/08/26/nypd-creates-task-force-to-clean-up-unruly-times-square/>
supposedly to bring order to the city’s tourist mecca.

Police chief James O’Neill explained that “there are many issues in Times 
Square” due to the performers who congregate there, including costumed 
characters and the painted women (also known by the Spanish moniker, desnudas).

So Jamieson’s response was a journalistic stunt that her editors were 
delighted to feature on the front page with the headine: “The naked truth: 
reporter goes incog-nude-o in Times Square.” Her breasts were covered with a 
panel saying “Censored by Mayor de Blasio.”

She had her body painted and then, wearing only a thong and a striking 
feathered headpiece, joined the regular retinue of nearly naked “performers.”

On her chest was a heart-shaped American flag with the stripes running down 
her legs and the letters “NY” “on my butt in red and white.”

As passers-by gawked at her and took photos, she reported that the experience 
was “scary, but also kind of liberating”, which left her “feeling full of girl 
power.”

Performers are not allowed to ask for money but can, and do, accept tips. 
Jamieson was given $20 by “some tall, male tourists from eastern Europe” after 
she had posed with her arm around the waist of one. Another picture was snapped 
“with me flashing my booty to the camera.”
 New York Post front page Photograph: Public domain 
According to her report, lots of women stopped to offer encouragement during 
her seven-hour stint as a painted lady. And she made $286 in all.

She wrote: “I realise the fight against the painted ladies is deeply sexist.” 
In her view the women were “exercising their ­legal right to be topless and 
hustle for money in the world’s centre of capitalism.”

And she concluded: “Of all the issues to dedicate task forces and extra cops, 
­going after painted ladies seems like naked politics.”

Unsurprisingly, there was some criticism of Jamieson’s stunt. One writer on 
the Gothamist news blog 
<http://gothamist.com/2015/08/30/ny_post_writer_goes_undercover_as_t.php>, 
called it “well-intentioned” but complained that there were “no substantive 
quotes or interviews” with the female performers.

It meant that there was no exploration of the women’s reason for their nude 
performances. The writer quoted one, Saira Nicole, as saying:

“A woman’s body is always going to be commercialised. But as soon as a woman 
takes control and says I’m going to commercialise myself, that’s a problem.”

He also thought the fact that many of the women are Latinas suggested “a 
racial component” to the Post’s article that went “completely unexamined.”

In a tweet, Jamieson sportingly called it “a valid piece of criticism of my 
painted lady piece.”

Sources: New York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2015/08/30/i-went-undercover-as-a-topless-performer-in-times-square/>
/Gothamist 
<http://gothamist.com/2015/08/30/ny_post_writer_goes_undercover_as_t.php>

 