
The New York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> has 
issued a correction after its television writer panned a show for being 
confusing when he watched the first two episodes in the wrong order.

Mike Hale, the Times’ television critic, had criticised the “split 
personality” and “needlessly complicated structure” of the initial episodes of 
Amazon’s new legal drama Goliath.

The noirish series is co-created by David E Kelley – the producer behind 
Boston Legal and Ally McBeal – and starsBilly Bob Thornton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/billy-bob-thornton> as Billy McBride, a 
down-and-out lawyer.

Though Hale praised the “promising” opening episode as “quick, textured, with 
a sense of place” in the review, published in print and online on 14 October, 
he noted the show had an “odd, bordering-on-bizarre split personality”.

“The nature of the case McBride has taken on ... is revealed slowly and 
cryptically, a bit of writerly delayed gratification that keeps your attention 
but isn’t particularly rewarding,” wrote Hale, according to a screenshot of the 
original reviewarchived by the Wayback Machine 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20161014170852/http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/arts/television/review-in-goliath-billy-bob-thornton-plays-a-down-and-out-david.html>
.

“Then, presumably because the first episode leaves so much unanswered, the 
next jumps back in time to fill in the history of the case — and when the 
second episode ends, the story hasn’t even caught up to where it started.

Goliath review – another legal drama? Billy Bob Thornton makes a good case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/14/goliath-review-billy-bob-thornton-legal-drama-amazon>
“The narrative juggling has the feel of stretching — of starting with a story 
suited for an episode of traditional TV or maybe a feature film and extending 
it to more than nine hours. Final judgment on that will have to wait until all 
10 episodes are available.”

The NYT issued a correction on 18 October.

A television review on Friday about the new Amazon series Goliath included an 
inaccurate discussion of the show’s plot structure. The critic mistakenly 
watched the first two episodes out of order.

The online review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/arts/television/review-in-goliath-billy-bob-thornton-plays-a-down-and-out-david.html>
 has had the above paragraphs removed. NewsDiffs, a site that collates 
corrections to online news article,has compared it with the original 
<http://newsdiffs.org/diff/1273869/1276002/www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/arts/television/review-in-goliath-billy-bob-thornton-plays-a-down-and-out-david.html>
.

The Guardian has attempted to contact Hale for comment.
 