
Adam Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-scott> insists he wasn’t 
surprised to do so well using a short putter for the first time in four years 
and 82 tournaments.

Preparing for the end-of-year ban on anchored putting strokes, former world 
No.1 Scott ditched the trusty broomstick blade that brought so much success and 
shot a two-under-par 70 to be tied eighth after the first round of the WorldGolf
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Championships-Cadillac Championship.

Making his first start of the year, the new father was eight shots behind 
runaway leader JB Holmes but well satisfied with his effort on the tough Blue 
Monster course in blustery conditions at the Trump Doral resort in Florida.

The 2013 Masters champion’s effort was in marked contrast to that of playing 
partner, countryman and world No.4 Jason Day who had a shocker, dumping four 
balls in the water on the way to a 76.

The most impressive part of Scott’s performance was his putting as he finished 
ranked fourth in the category across the 74-man field. Using a “claw’ grip, 
Scott made five birdie putts of 18, 17, 15, 13 and seven feet in his round and 
missed just one putt out of 17 from inside 15-feet all day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fnew-putter-short-game-shines-adam-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b35328824723aaa89000198b6850ac8ef11924d%2F26_0_2333_3500%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20putter%2C%20no%20worries%20for%20Adam%20Scott&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fnew-putter-short-game-shines-adam-scott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20putter%2C%20no%20worries%20for%20Adam%20Scott&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fnew-putter-short-game-shines-adam-scott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b35328824723aaa89000198b6850ac8ef11924d%2F26_0_2333_3500%2F1333.jpg>
 Adam Scott using a standard length putter with a conventional grip for a long 
putt as a preview for the Cadillac Championship held on the Blue Monster Course 
at Trump National Doral, Florida. Photograph: David Cannon/Getty Images 
“I putted really good today,” said Scott.

“Not that I’m surprised but I’m pleased that it was good.

Golf’s two governing bodies, the United States Golf Association and the R&A, 
made the announcement inMay of 2013 <http://www.bbc.com/sport/0/golf/22610307> 
to ban the use of the anchoring technique of putting, popularised by the ‘broom 
handle’ and ‘belly’ putters. The putters were seen to give a slight advantage 
to players in creating a smoother, more controlled putting stroke.

The USGA and the R&A have set a deadline for 2016 for all players to stop 
using the controversial technique, with Scott, one of many who’s had to change 
his ways.

“It really isn’t that big a deal. It just takes a little while to adjust and 
change a couple muscle memory things that happened in different styles of 
putting,” added Scott.

“It felt a lot like when I switched to the longer putter. It was a really 
different, fresh feel.

“Hopefully some improvement to come but I’m trying not to clutter my head with 
too much thought.”

Meanwhile, recent winner Day’s 76 was just his second over-par round of the 
year and worst effort since a 77 in the second round of the AT&T Pebble Beach 
Pro-am in February 2014.

Day headed immediately to the range to work out the kinks after his first 
round with three double bogeys since a blowout 80 in the 2012 US PGA 
Championship.

Holmes defied the conditions with a 10-under-62, opening up a four-shot buffer 
to fellow American Ryan Moore (66).

Frenchman Alexander Levy and Americans Rickie Fowler and Dustin Johnson share 
third just a few shots clear of Scott at four-under.
 