
New York City squeezes 8.5 million people into a land mass of 300 square 
miles, split by rivers and cluttered with airports, railroads, bridges and 
tunnels. The state ofNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
runs those bridges and tunnels, maintains those ports, governs the housing, 
education and daily transportation of those people and sends tax dollars to 
keep it all humming.

Two elected officials are in charge. They are the mayor of New York City, Bill 
de Blasio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio>, and the 
governor of New York state, Andrew Cuomo.

And right now those two men are embroiled in a very big, very public, very 
ugly fight.

Little matter that they are both Democrats. Their shared history as rising 
stars in the Clinton political machine is now irrelevant. Their declarations of 
deep friendship mere months ago – those don’t count, either.

What does matter now is that the two most powerful politicians in the Empire 
State have let slip the last veil obscuring a struggle of intense personal 
acrimony, with the wellbeing of many New Yorkers – people who depend on school 
reform, rent subsidies, a living wage and a working subway – in the balance.

Before the veil finally fell in an astonishingly frank interview on Tuesday by 
De Blasio, it had worn increasingly thin. The mayor – who assumed office at the 
beginning of last year – had become the target of attacks in the media 
delivered by an anonymous, source in the Cuomo administration. The source was 
so well-placed, and so brazenly opinionated, that many believed it to be Cuomo 
himself, who has been governor since 2011.

“What we’re dealing with is a mayor who is universally acknowledged to be 
bumbling and incompetent,” the source told the Wall Street Journala week ago 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/new-york-city-mayor-bill-de-blasio-is-handed-political-defeats-by-city-council-and-albany-1435109433>
, in a remark whose purported anonymity was met with gleeful derision by 
political insiders.

“New idea for an Albany blind source,” tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/anthonyweiner/status/613869721281261568> Anthony Weiner, 
the husband of top Hillary Clinton aide Huma Abedin and a former congressman 
for New York’s ninth district. “An official so senior in the Cuomo 
administration that he literally can’t be fired.”

For De Blasio, the quote – and the governor’s refusal 
<http://observer.com/2015/06/is-andrew-cuomo-the-administration-official-bashing-bill-de-blasio-in-the-press/>
 to disclaim it when reporters asked – was apparently the last straw. On 
Tuesday morning, before a scheduled week-long vacation, he arranged a sit-down 
interview with Errol Louis, the top political host in local TV news. Louis did 
not have to ask many questions.

“There was some interesting back-and-forth last week, and some unnamed sources 
well-placed in the Cuomo administration had a few things to say. I’m here in 
front of you on record saying what I believe,” De Blasiotold 
<http://www.ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2015/06/30/de-blasio-slams-cuomo-for--lack-of-leadership-.html#>
 Louis.

“What I found was, he [Cuomo] engaged in his own sense of strategies, his own 
political machinations, and what we’ve often seen is, if someone disagrees with 
him openly, some kind of revenge or vendetta follows.”

The use of the word “vendetta” was a particularly sharp choice, given the 
men’s shared Italian heritage. But there was a lot more where that came from. 
De Blasio accused Cuomo of a “lack of leadership”; of favoring a “transactional 
model” of politics over the work of the people; and of trashing Democratic 
priorities in Albany, the state capital, to curry favor with the Republican-led 
state senate.

“I started a year and a half ago with a hope of a very strong partnership,” De 
Blasio told reporters in a news conference after the Louis interview. “I have 
been disappointed at every turn.”

The excitement the next morning in the tabloid press was unconstrained. 
“Raging Bill: Shocking attack at ‘vendetta’ gov,”blared 
<http://nypost.com/cover/> the New York Post, with a Photoshopped illustration 
of two boxers. “Vendetta: Mayor releases rapid-fire tirade vs. ex-pal Andy,”
shouted <http://www.nydailynews.com/news/the-week?pdate=20150701> the Daily 
News, which opted for Photoshopped gangsters.

“Why did Bill de Blasio do it – putting aside that venting was emotionally 
satisfying?” saidradio host <http://bothsidesradio.com/> Mark Green in an 
interview with the Guardian. Green is the only politician to have run against 
both men and was the city’s first public advocate, the job De Blasio held 
before becoming mayor. “Well, he didn’t want to play by Andrew’s rules, which 
is, the governor can bully the mayor, but the mayor can’t say that. De Blasio 
made a play hoping that the only way to deal with a bully is to stand up to 
him, so that in the future Cuomo will think twice before sabotaging the city.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fnew-york-mayor-bill-de-blasio-andrew-cuomo-battle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56acd4a102989309cea737dde72f016e15144da%2F0_64_5022_3013%2F5022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York's%20mayor%20and%20governor%20embroiled%20in%20big%2C%20ugly%2C%20public%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fnew-york-mayor-bill-de-blasio-andrew-cuomo-battle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%27s%20mayor%20and%20governor%20embroiled%20in%20big%2C%20ugly%2C%20public%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fnew-york-mayor-bill-de-blasio-andrew-cuomo-battle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56acd4a102989309cea737dde72f016e15144da%2F0_64_5022_3013%2F5022.jpg>
 The governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, speaks at a news conference on Friday. 
Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP 
The nature of the policy conflict between the two men is as complicated as 
their personal story, and the two are inextricably intertwined. De Blasio once 
worked for Cuomo, as a New York lieutenant when Cuomo was housing secretary in 
Bill Clinton’s cabinet. Now De Blasio, as a young mayor who took office on the 
first day of 2014, is eager to make his own mark as a progressive leader. But 
to get anything done, he needs the backing of Cuomo, a divisive figure who is 
not known for giving out free favors.

Cuomo, meanwhile, has seen his greatest, if unstated, ambition – to reach the 
White House – stymied by the presence in national Democratic politics of a 
superior force: Hillary Clinton.

And lately even his hold on state politics – he is the two-term governor son 
of a three-term governor – has shown signs of slipping, with sagging poll 
numbers and a surprisingly robust primary challenge during his re-election bid 
last year.

Repairing the relationship may yet be possible. On Wednesday night, Cuomo made 
an effort to do so, telling a reporter with a straight face that his affection 
for De Blasio was undiminished. “You know what – I’ve known Bill, the mayor, a 
long time,” Cuomotold NY1 
<http://www.capitalnewyork.com/article/city-hall/2015/07/8571393/far-cuomo-concerned-de-blasio-still-friend>
 news. “I consider him a friend. He says what he says. I say what I say. And 
I’ll let him speak for himself.”

But one major impediment to a successful working relationship between the two 
men, close observers say, is that De Blasio is not imagining things when he 
accuses Cuomo of blocking his agenda.

The mayor has floated two major affordable housing initiatives for New York 
City that the governor has summarily nixed.

The governor, for his part, expanded a program of charter schools – privately 
managed schools that operate like but compete with public schools – in the city 
over the mayor’s passionate objections. And Cuomo has repeatedly failed to 
consult the mayor on major decisions affecting the city, from the handling of 
an Ebola case to the closing of the subways in advance of a recent winter storm.

“To Cuomo, politics is a bloodsport,” Bill Lipton, director of the New York 
Working Families Party, told the Guardian. “Winning is about pleasing donors 
and inflicting damage on political rivals. Unless there’s an upside for Cuomo, 
New York’s working families basically don’t matter.”

The governor’s obstruction of the mayor was seen as culminating with a refusal 
to pressure the state senate this spring to renew mayoral control of New York 
City public schools for longer than one year – after the previous mayor, 
Michael Bloomberg, who served as a Republican and then as an independent, had 
enjoyed such control for six-year stretches.

“That really was a knife in De Blasio’s back,” said Bob Port, a longtime 
investigative journalist in the state capital and a former professor of 
journalism at Columbia University. “There isn’t anyone who seriously thinks it 
makes any sense to return New York City to the earlier system of education. 
That was the senate majority leader andAndrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> inserting that, in the final 
bills, to essentially screw Bill de Blasio. That’s what it was. I don’t know 
anyone who sees it any other way up here in Albany.”

Port ascribed the open warfare between Cuomo and De Blasio as a difference in 
politics that has been fatally compounded by a difference in personalities.

“What you saw [Tuesday] was extremely rare, and it illustrates a division of 
personalities, and it’s really a story about Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New 
York, and his personal style in politics,” said Port.

“I first met Bill de Blasio 15 years ago, when he was running [Hillary] 
Clinton’s Senate campaign. Bill is a really honest guy. He’s a really 
straightforward, honest broker.

“Andrew Cuomo is a vindictive, manipulative, secretive politician who pursues 
his political goals through force, through bullying and intimidation.”

Green used the same three words, in different order, to describe him.

“Cuomo’s strength is that he is so vindictive, secretive and manipulative that 
it’s hard to predict what he’ll do, which is an asset,” Green said.

Cuomo’s defenders say that De Blasio can afford to present himself as a 
white-knight progressive because he is the mayor of a city in which it is 
impossible to be too far to the left. The same is not true in Albany, where a 
more moderate political approach – and wilier, perhaps rougher tactics – are 
required.

“For those new to the process, it takes coalition building and compromise to 
get things done in government,” Cuomo’s spokeswoman, Melissa DeRosa, said in 
response to the De Blasio interview. “We wish the mayor well on his vacation.”

Things were not always so sour between the two leaders. “I think I have seen 
every city and state administration going back 40, 50 years and this will be 
the best relationship between a mayor and governor in modern political history 
when all is said and done,” the governorpredicted 
<http://observer.com/2015/02/cuomo-says-his-relationship-with-de-blasio-will-be-best-in-modern-history/#ixzz3efs50O4E>
 earlier this year.

That didn’t happen.

“There’s an exhaustion and sense of betrayal in a superficial, false politics 
that doesn’t represent the real conflicts,” said Zephyr Teachout, a law 
professor at Fordham University who made a splash in state politics when she 
challenged Cuomo for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in 2014 andcaptured
 
<http://elections.nytimes.com/2014/results/primaries/new-york-state?smid=tw-nytmetro>
 34% of the vote. “So I think there’s a genuine sense of relief, above all, in 
De Blasio acknowledging what all reporters already know, which is that he and 
the governor have profoundly different approaches.”

Green suggested that the two leaders could meet for a summit over Chobani, the 
widely distributed yogurt produced upstate.

“But it’s hard to reconcile with someone who, you don’t really trust them the 
next day,” said Green. “We’ll find out.”
 