
New York state has reopened the window for workers and volunteers seeking 
compensation for lost wages and medical benefits arising from their involvement 
in therescue, recovery and clean-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/9-11-illnesses-death-toll> at 
the World Trade Center after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001.

9/11 health crisis: death toll from illness nears number killed on day of 
attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/9-11-illnesses-death-toll> 
A law signed by the Democratic governor, Andrew Cuomo, on Sunday, the 15th 
anniversary of the attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-9-11-anniversary-ceremony-obama>
 that caused the collapse of the twin towers in lower Manhattan, extends the 
claims filing deadline until 11 September 2018. It lapsed two years ago.

“We still feel the pain and the loss like it was yesterday, and the thousands 
of brave men and women who stepped up in our darkest hour are still grappling 
with the after-effects,” Cuomo said at the signing in Manhattan.

The law also authorizes new claims for related injuries and illnesses since 
the attacks through this year’s anniversary for workers’ compensation, 
disability and accidental death benefits that were disallowed because of late 
filing.

This weekend, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at the 
time of 9/11, former New Jersey governorChristine Todd Whitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/epa-head-wrong-911-air-safe-new-york-christine-todd-whitman>
, told the Guardian she was sorry for the agency’s advice in the aftermath of 
the attacks that the air around Ground Zero in New York was safe to breathe.

“Whatever we got wrong, we should acknowledge and people should be helped,” 
she said, adding that she still “feels awful” about the tragedy and its 
aftermath.

“I’m very sorry that people are sick,” she said. “I’m very sorry that people 
are dying and if the EPA and I in any way contributed to that, I’m sorry. We 
did the very best we could at the time with the knowledge we had.”

Dr Jim Melius, a member of the advocacy group 9/11 Health Watch 
<http://www.911healthwatch.org/>, said: “Within the next five years we will be 
at the point where more people have died from World Trade Center-related 
illnesses than died from the immediate impact of the attacks.”

Almost 3,000 people were killed on 9/11 in attacks on the World Trade Center 
and the Pentagon outside Washington, and in the crash of a fourth hijacked 
airliner in a field in Pennsylvania.

Melius, who is also a doctor at the New York State Laborers Union 
<http://www.nysliuna.org/>, an adviser to the White House on worker health and 
chair of the steering committee overseeing the government health program for 
9/11 responders, added: “There are a lot of people who are very, very ill with 
lung disease who will see at least 10 years taken from their normal life span.

“We are already seeing many more premature deaths occurring, and among younger 
people, from the cancers. There is going to be a new generation of widows and 
widowers.”

Former EPA head admits she was wrong to tell New Yorkers post-9/11 air was safe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/epa-head-wrong-911-air-safe-new-york-christine-todd-whitman>
At the bill signing on Sunday, Sal Turturici, who attended in a wheelchair, 
said of the extension: “It’s going to help a lot of people who are in harm’s 
way right now. They’re on the end of losing their benefits because they’re 
running out of time or running out of any grants or any kind of time to get to 
extend their pay, so they’re falling off the payroll.”

Turturici’s wife, a fire department paramedic like her husband, said he was 
diagnosed on 4 October with terminal cancer. Wendi Turturici said Cuomo had 
given her hope that she can take care of their three young children and give 
her husband peace.

Thousands of people who aided in the rescue and recovery effort were found to 
have respiratory ailments and other health problems in the years after the 
attacks.Cancer has remained the biggest fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/911-health-crisis-a-new-york-cleaner-fights-cancer-15-years-later>
 for people exposed to the gritty soot at the site.
 