
11.04am BST 

Right that's that

I reckon we can wrap this up now. Stick around for all the reports, features, 
comment and whatnot that are on their way. Thanks for all your comments, 
apologies I couldn't use them all. Bye!

11.00am BST 

Quite...
Vithushan (@Vitu_E) 
To be honest, how different was that going to be? Best of luck, Peter.
 <https://twitter.com/Vitu_E/statuses/457457181663985665> April 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Vitu_E/statuses/457457181663985665> 
10.59am BST 

"That was terribly depressing," reckons Oliver Smiddy. "Cook continued to look 
deeply uncomfortable. Downton admits KP did nothing to warrant his dismissal. 
'We had strong leadership that could accommodate Kevin. The balance has 
shifted, and we can't accommodate him anymore.' The implication is that the 
current leadership is weak..."

I didn't find it that depressing; nothing particularly exciting but then what 
did we expect? It'd take a mean, mean heart not to wish Moores well anyhow. 
You're right that the quotes about leadership seem poorly worded mind. I 
imagine that what Downton mean is that the current England side lacks 
experience, which is something he felt was important to "accommodate" 
Pietersen. I'm not convinced by the argument, I'll admit, but I'm pretty 
certain he didn't mean "I'm flanked by a pair of wimps here."

10.55am BST 

"Moores left me cold during his first stint because of his management speak," 
writes Ian Copestake once again. "It was the first time I had encountered what 
now is almost par for the course. Brendan Rodgers was similar but he has 
'delivered' 'going forward' and so all is forgiven. But all this euphemistic 
talk of 'connection' brought my fear back."

Granted, this didn't feel that much like a "new era", as far as such a feeling 
can be gleaned from the language used at a press conference. But in Moores' 
defence, he came across as bright, breezy and genuinely excited, which are 
three adjectives you certainly wouldn't have associated with English cricket up 
to this point since November. He also handled the KP questions with diplomacy, 
although I imagine Paul Downton's revelation that he hadn't really done 
anything wrong won't impress a few people.

10.51am BST 

"A good tweet" is how Moores described this:
Kevin Pietersen (@KP24) 
Everyone deserves a 2nd chance! ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜ƒðŸ˜ƒðŸ˜ƒðŸ˜ƒðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚ðŸ˜‚
 <https://twitter.com/KP24/statuses/457426739354808320> April 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/KP24/statuses/457426739354808320> 
10.50am BST 

No announcement is to be made on the assistant coach today. Advanced 
negotiations are underway but no announcement "out of respect to his current 
employers." I reckon it's safe to assume that'll be Paul Farbrace.

Also it's confirmed that the experiment with split coaches over the different 
formats is being brought to an end. And with that, coverage of the press 
conference on Sky has ended. So time for a bit of reaction now I feel.

10.46am BST 

What did Kevin Pietersen do wrong?

"There were no specific issues ... the balance had shifted ... over ten years 
we could accommodate Kevin ... the new side couldn't do that."

Moores: "I never fell out with Kevin, Kevin fell out with me, there's a noble 
difference in that ... I have no blame."


10.44am BST 

Is his job easier or harder without Kevin Pietersen?

[QUESTION OBVIOUSLY DODGED] "It's impossible to say."

Is there a way back for Kevin?
Downton interjects here. "There were two major issues [when he met Flower] ... 
the second was What Do We Do About Kevin? ... There was a senior player who had 
become disconnected from the team ... I spoke to all the coaches ... We had to 
make a decision ... we hadn't replaced Strauss, Swann retired, Trott went home 
... We had to build a new team with some core values and that wouldn't happen 
with Kevin in the team ... the team you see either side of me is the future of 
England cricket ... I don't see a way of going back."

10.41am BST 

Did Moores have any doubts about taking the job?
"No. It was a really robust process ... I wanted to make sure I was the main 
man and wanted by England ... It's a good match."

10.40am BST 

We're getting questions about players with uniqueness and Moores is talking 
about a "connected" team. Oh go on, just say his name.

10.40am BST 

Cook

"I've been a bit in limbo since Andy Flower stepped down ... It's going to be 
small steps and take time to rebuild ... There's a huge amount of talent in the 
country ... There are Test and One Day places up for grabs."

10.39am BST 

How can he begin to lift the players after THAT winter?
"If it's not very special then you shouldn't be playing for England. If it 
becomes a normal day we've picked the wrong person ... The job of the coach and 
the captain is to connect them."

What's his biggest challenge?
[QUESTION DODGED] "The first thing is to sit down with Alastair."

10.37am BST 

Does Moores feel this is "justice" after the way things ended last time?
"I don't think anyone has a right to the job."

What is his vision?
"It's not my vision ... It's crucial to sit down with Alastair and connect ... 
It has to connect with the media and be open."

What lessons has he learned since last time?
"You learn from mistakes and you learn from being successful ... I'm proud of 
some of the things from last time ... It's important to help players have their 
own uniqueness ... That's something I've got better at."

10.35am BST 

Moores:

"It's great to be back ... To work with an outstanding player and person in a 
time of change ... It's a great opportunity."

10.34am BST 

Downton:

"Today is the culmination of three months' work ... In that time we've spoken 
to pretty much every leading coach in the world ... We've got down to five 
outstanding candidates ... One stood out as the outstanding candidate ... This 
is his time ... You can look on either side of me and this is the future of 
England cricket."

10.32am BST 

Here we go

Moores is on the left as we face them, Downton in the middle and Cook on the 
right. Downton is going first.

10.32am BST 

Peter Moores has been unveiled

At least in press release form. Here's what the ECB has to say:

Peter Moores <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/peter-moores> was today 
unveiled as the new England head coach by Paul Downton, the Managing Director 
England Cricket, at Lordâ€™s Cricket Ground.

Moores, 51, returns for his second stint as England coach â€“ having held the 
post between April 2007 and January 2009 after succeeding Duncan Fletcher. 
Peter Moores has been head coach atLancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lancashire> since February 2009.

Paul Downton said: â€˜ Peter has a great reputation around the world as an 
outstanding coach and he will return to the role as England head coach with a 
great deal more experience and understanding of the challenges that the role 
presents. There is no doubt that he is the leading English coach of his 
generation and I believe that this is his time.

â€˜His domestic credentials are beyond reproach having won the County 
Championship at Sussex and then repeating the feat at Lancashire, whose 2011 
triumph was their first for 77 years. He was also the lead at the National
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Performance Centre at 
Loughborough between 2005 and his appointment as England coach in 2007.

â€˜In his time with England he gave Test debuts to Stuart Broad, Matt Prior and 
Graeme Swann as well as helping to further the international careers of players 
like the current England captain Alastair Cook and James Anderson. He also 
brought Andy Flower into the England set-up as well as influential individuals 
like Mushtaq Ahmed as spin bowling coach.

â€˜I was hugely impressed by his vision for the future of the England team and I 
am looking forward to working with him in the years to come.

â€˜I would personally like to thank Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> for the job he did with the 
limited overs squads in the last 18 months. It was a really difficult decision 
to make as we had an outstanding field but the panel were unanimous in the 
choice of Peter and I know that support will be echoed around the counties.â€™

Peter Moores, England Head Coach, said: â€˜I am very excited about the prospect 
of returning to a role I have done before and to building a strong relationship 
with Alastair Cook and the rest of the players and staff. In any time of change 
there comes opportunity and this is one I canâ€™t wait to get stuck into.â€™

Paul Downton was joined on the interview panel by England and Wales Cricket 
Board (ECB) Head of Elite Coach Development Gordon Lord and ECB Chief Executive 
David Collier who said: â€˜Paul Downton conducted a thorough and far-reaching 
recruitment process. He has canvassed opinion worldwide resulting in the 
recommendation of Peter Moores. The Board unanimously endorsed the 
recommendation and have every confidence in the choice of Peter. We wish Peter 
every success in the future.

â€˜I would like to thank all the other candidates who made up what was an 
extremely impressive shortlist and in particular I would like to acknowledge 
the work of Ashley Giles, who has made a major contribution to cricket in 
England and Wales .'

10.31am BST 

Moores smear campaign

This isn't, in case my preamble came across as slightly biased. I'm happy to 
give Moores another go, but my instinct â€“ and I'll let you choose how much 
weight you give that â€“ is that I'm not that excited by an appointment from 
within the existing ECB structure, as Moores kind of is. I'd have preferred 
someone who has more of a connection with the innovative side of the game. Yes, 
I do mean by that someone who has embraced the IPL and Big Bash a little more.

Then again, in the interest of balance, here's Graem Peters: "Darren Pattinson 
in that Test squad by a decision of the selection committee. Moores would have 
relied on those who had watched county cricket that season. Once in the squad, 
he was the obvious choice in the conditions, as Vaughan the captain realised. 
Moores backed Vaughan's decision."

Fair enough, I probably was being a bit harsh there. Rather than blame Moores, 
I meant that it was this kind of thing his previous tenure was remembered for 
and that as such the public might not be that excited.

10.26am BST 

The real journalists are assembling at Lord's now, where Moores is set to be 
flanked by Alastair Cook and Paul Downton.

"Morning, Dan," writes Ian Copestake. "Has KP's twitter feed been checked for 
reaction? The equivalent of doorstepping in this day and age. I guess though 
he's got other rich fish to fry at the moment."

Yes I have it up and running. "Everyone deserves a second chance," he recently 
tweeted.

10.19am BST 

As I suspected, Lancashire fans are going to miss Moores.
Andy Shaw (@RedAndy54) 
@DanLucas86 <https://twitter.com/DanLucas86> Morning Dan! As a Lancs fan I'll 
be sad to see Moores go, but I suspect England's needs are greater. KP 
conspiracists aside...
 <https://twitter.com/RedAndy54/statuses/457447908867321856> April 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/RedAndy54/statuses/457447908867321856> 
I can understand this, given the success he brought to the county after so 
long without a title, but does the relegation not mitigate that to an extent? 
Similar to Mancini's City's lame title defence last season?

10.15am BST 
Sachin Nakrani (@SachinNakrani) 
Ahead of today's ECB press conference, a big shout for @andywiz 
<https://twitter.com/andywiz>, who has covered the England coaching story 
superbly for@guardian_sport <https://twitter.com/guardian_sport>.
 <https://twitter.com/SachinNakrani/statuses/457445619746234368> April 19, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/SachinNakrani/statuses/457445619746234368> 
10.15am BST 

On Sky Sports Bob Willis is saying that he feels sorry for Ashley Giles, who 
is likely to be out of a job by lunchtime. I can understand where he's coming 
from, as Giles seems like a decent bloke, but can anyone think of anything 
England have done under his tenure that has really earned any sympathy?

9.51am BST 

Preamble

Morning folks. Five years ago or so, Andrew Flintoff ended a career that had 
seen him lauded as one of England's most successful ever all-round cricketers. 
Thus followed the inevitable speculation over who would take his role in the 
side and your MBMer was surprised to read the name of Luke Wright being bandied 
about by a select few. Wright was, at the time, seen as an option for the 
limited overs side, but someone whose achievements were too sporadic and 
uninspiring for him to be a serious contender to succeed someone with 
achievements in the game as outstanding as Flintoff's.

Now we find ourselves in another post-Andy era. Under Andy Flower, England won 
three Ashes series, their first ever ICC trophy and, arguably most impressive 
of all, won a series in India. With Flower now but a memory fading into the 
memory of the darkest of winters, England are set to turn to Peter Moores for 
the second time in the past decade. The initial reaction among many fans is 
similar to that when they considered Luke Wright playing Test cricket.

On the face of it Moores isn't a name to stoke the fires of England's jaded 
fans â€“ certainly this isn't the news I'd have chosen to alleviate my 
post-holiday blues. His first tenure is notable for not containing a series win 
that really sticks in the memory the way so many did under Fletcher and Flower 
either side of him. This is the man who was sacked after a KP-led coup, 
infamously selected Darren Pattinson and Amjad Khan, and got the County 
Champions Lancashire relegated in 2012.

But then just maybe this isn't as bad a choice as all those carefully selected 
points suggest. For one thing Mike Selvey, a man to whom you should listen over 
me every time,reckons that the 2014 Peter Moores model is a very different one 
to that which left so many mediocre memories in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/12/lancashire-peter-moores-replace-andy-flower-england-coach>
. After all, he did take unfancied Lancashire to a first title in 6,945 years 
in 2011 and, despite that blip a year later, laid all to waste in Division 2 
last season. Judging by the comments of many Lancs fans, they'd be very sorry 
to lose him. He's also not Ashley Giles.

The press conference gets underway at 10.30am. Do get in touch and let me know 
your thoughts in the meantime.
 