
New York’s governor has joined calls by Mayor Bill de Blasio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio> for a crackdown on topless 
women who work in Times Square.


Governor Andrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> on 
Wednesday said that he opposes the activities of the group of women – known as 
“desnudas”, the Spanish word for nude – who pose for photos while covered in 
little more than red, white and blue paint.

“I believe it is infringing on legitimate businesses,” Cuomo told local news 
station NY1. “I think it is infringing on the investment that the state and the 
city made in the 42nd Street area, and I think it has to be stopped.”

His comments echoed those of De Blasio, who said on Tuesday that he thought 
the activity was wrong and needed to be regulated.

“We are going to look for every appropriate way to regulate all activity that 
involves either begging, or asking people for a contribution based on, you 
know, the opportunity to take a picture, for example,” De Blasio said at a news 
conference. “I don’t like the situation in Times Square, and we’re going to 
address it in a very aggressive manner.”

Women have been allowed to go topless in New York since 1992, and these 
particular performers have been in Times Squaresince at least 2013 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/nyregion/the-desnudas-of-times-square-topless-but-for-the-paint.html>
. They may also be protected under the first amendment’s free speech provisions.

“That doesn’t mean we can’t find legislative and regulatory solutions that 
still fall within constitutional protections,” De Blasio said.

On Wednesday afternoon, one woman clad in a red and blue lace-trimmed thong 
ignored questions from the Guardian, while media and public cameras, primarily 
operated by men, swarmed around her. One man approached her from behind, took a 
close-up photo of her backside, which was painted with the letters “NY”, and 
abruptly walked away.

A man sitting nearby, protecting her belongings, repeatedly said she would not 
do interviews.

'Welcome to Fear City' – the inside story of New York's civil war, 40 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/18/welcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on>
Cuomo said that the scene of topless women reminds him of the “bad old Times 
Square”, which was home toporn shops 
<http://gothamist.com/2013/03/27/photos_of_times_square_in_the_1970s.php#photo-7>
 and drug dealers, instead of the bright advertisements and throngs of tourists 
that now dominate the area.

On Wednesday, however, there were far more costumed street performers than 
topless women. The collection of superheroes and Elmos have been subject to 
increased scrutiny in recent years after a spate ofaggressive incidents 
directed at tourists and police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/30/new-york-times-square-elmo-cookie-monster>
.

Tim Tompkins, president of the Times Square Alliance, told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/19/nyregion/times-squares-topless-women-should-be-regulated-mayor-says.html>
 that these characters frequently harass tourists in an effort to make money.

“This is happening thousands of times a week,” Tompkins said. “If I spend 10 
minutes in Times Square, I will witness someone being deeply upset.”
 