
Alex Ovechkin rebounded from a rare zero-shot performance by scoring after 88 
seconds Wednesday and Braden Holtby made 30 saves as theWashington Capitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-capitals> recovered from a 
potentially devastating loss by beating the top-seeded New York Rangers 2-1 to 
force a Game 7 in the Eastern Conference semifinal.

Two nights after blowing a lead in the last 10 seconds of regulation and 
losing in overtime, the No. 7-seeded Capitals showed immediately they were over 
it. Ovechkin's early power-play goal and Jason Chimera's second-period score 
were just enough for the unflappable playoff rookie Holtby.

The teams meet in New York on Saturday night to determine who will face the 
New Jersey Devils <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-jersey-devils> in the 
conference finals.

Less than 90 seconds after the opening faceoff, Ovechkin's dropped to a knee 
as he powered a slap shot just inside the right post from about 30 feet in 
front of goalie Henrik Lundqvist.

It was Ovechkin's 30th career playoff goal, equaling the franchise record held 
by Peter Bondra, and came 15 seconds after Rangers defenseman Anton Stralman 
was sent to the penalty box for tripping Chimera.

Another miscue followed: Defenseman Ryan McDonagh wasted a chance to clear the 
puck, instead sending it along the boards right to a Capitals player. That 
giveaway led to a series of crisp passes by the Capitals Nicklas Backstrom and 
Mike Green were credited with assists and an animated earful for McDonagh from 
Rangers coach John Tortorella.

Washington's rookie goaltender Braden Holtby further enhanced his reputation 
in a remarkable postseason campaign, making 30 saves to keep New York at bay 
until the closing seconds.

He was less than a minute away from his first postseason shutout when Gaborik 
sneaked a puck in off the back of a Capitals defender to set up a tense finale.

Neither team are strangers to pressure-packed Game Sevens as both needed 
deciders to win their opening series, the Rangers eliminating Ottawa while the 
Caps ended Boston's hopes of defending their Stanley Cup title.

The Rangers, top seeds in the East, are looking to advance to their first 
conference final since 1997 while Washington has not been there since 1998.

Colin Horgan: five things we learned in the playoffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/may/08/phoenix-st-louis-rangers-nhl>

Playoff scores and schedule 
<http://www.nhl.com/ice/schedulebymonth.htm#?navid=nav-sch-month>
 