
New York governor Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> on Sunday signed an order 
allowing communities statewide to take homeless people from the streets and 
into shelters when temperatures reach freezing.

Cuomo said he does not want to “argue an individual’s right to freeze to 
death” by staying out on the streets and defying his order. He added that he 
was prepared for any legal challenge over “a civil right to sleep on the street 
and freeze”.

The legality of the order was questioned by Karen Hinton, a spokeswoman for the
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City mayor, Bill de 
Blasio. De Blasio and Cuomo have clashed on a number of issues, including city 
transportation and schools.

New York abandons plan to clear subways of sleeping homeless people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/new-york-subways-sleeping-homeless-people>
“We support the intent of the executive order, but to forcibly remove all 
homeless individuals in freezing weather, as the governor has ordered, will 
require him to pass state law,” Hinton said in a statement.

“This executive order adds no legal or financial resources to New York City’s 
programs to assist the homeless and merely requires all New York state 
localities follow many of the same requirements as New York City to shelter 
families and individuals in need in freezing temperatures.”

Cuomo said the executive order, which takes effect on Tuesday, would protect 
the state’s growinghomeless population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/21/new-york-homeless-shelters-cold-weather>
.

On Sunday, temperatures in parts of New York state were dipping below 32F 
(0C). The order calls for police departments and social services agencies to 
move people into shelters, including those reluctant to go.

Nearly 60,000 homeless people live in New York, according to the Coalition for 
the Homeless 
<http://www.coalitionforthehomeless.org/basic-facts-about-homelessness-new-york-city/>
, which counted more than 109,000 people using the city’s shelter system last 
year. According to the coalition, 86% more people sleep in municipal shelters 
than they did a decade ago.

'To your bone you’re cold': New York homeless shelters filled to capacity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/21/new-york-homeless-shelters-cold-weather>
In an interview with WCBS-AM, Cuomo said he was ready to go to court, if 
necessary, to defend his order against any constitutional challenges.

“I want this done statewide,” Cuomo said. “By the way, there is a philosophy 
out there that says people have a civil right to sleep on the street and freeze 
to death if they want to.”

He said he believed the law was on his side.

“I’m not going to argue an individual’s right to freeze to death,” Cuomo told 
WCBS. “I want to argue an individual’s human right to housing and services and 
shelter.”

The governor said the order, requiring homeless shelters to extend hours if 
necessary, was to protect people from hypothermia and potential death.

'I thought it would be easy': one New York family's search for a home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/17/new-york-family-searches-for-apartment-homeless-population-city-subsidies-landlords>
Last fall, Cuomo and De Blasio failed to negotiate an agreement about how to 
build new housing for the city’s homeless population. In November, the mayor 
said the city would fund the project for the next 15 years without the state’s 
assistance.

Speaking on local NY1 television, Cuomo declined to say whether his aides had 
told De Blasio’s office about the executive order. “I think it is a fact that 
homelessness is on the increase in New York City,” he said. “I think everybody 
recognizes that and I think everybody recognizes that that is a significant 
problem.”

 * The language in this article has been updated to better reflect the content 
of the executive order issued by the governor.  