
New York governor Andrew Cuomo was set on Saturday to announce a ban on public 
and private health insurers paying for “conversion therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/18/gay-conversion-therapy-provider-jonah-ordered-to-shut-down-lawsuit>
” – designed to alter sexual orientation or gender identity – and prohibiting 
state mental health facilities from conducting the controversial practice on 
minors.

Landmark ruling finds 'gay conversion therapy' broke consumer fraud law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/landmark-ruling-gay-conversion-therapy-broke-consumer-law>
The executive action, which the governor was to announce on receiving a 
National Equality Award from the Human Rights Campaign on Saturday night, will 
make it illegal for any organization licensed or funded by the state to offer 
such “therapy”.

New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> has long been at the 
forefront of gay rights movement, Cuomo said in a statement. He called 
conversion therapy a “hateful and fundamentally flawed practice that is counter 
to everything this state stands for”.

Conversion therapies have long been opposed by the American Psychiatric 
Association; a recent federal report concluded they were “inappropriate and 
reinforce harmful gender stereotypes”.

Measures to prevent licensed professionals from using conversion therapy on 
minors are already in place in California,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/21/new-jersey-outlaw-gay-conversion-therapy>
 and Washington DC. States including Oregon and Illinois have introduced 
similar legislation.

The announcement of the executive action – taken after a bill to outlaw the 
practice last yearstalled in the Republican-controlled state senate 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/07/nyregion/cuomo-moves-against-therapy-that-claims-to-make-gay-children-straight.html>
 – was not universally approved.

Gay conversion therapy court case begins: 'Jonah lied – they made it worse'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/03/gay-conversion-therapy-jonah-new-jersey>
Jason McGuire, executive director of New Yorkers for Constitutional Freedoms, 
told the New York Daily News 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/cuomo-announce-ban-conversion-therapy-lgbt-youths-article-1.2522458>
: “We have supported, and continue to support, the rights of people who have 
unwanted same sex attractions to seek the counselling they desire.”

Human Rights Campaign president Chad Griffin said he welcomed Cuomo’s decision.

“No young person should be coerced or subjected to this dangerous so-called 
therapy, which has been linked to youth substance abuse, depression, 
homelessness, and even suicide,” he said.
 