
New laws to clamp down on anti-social behaviour will "promote intolerance of 
youth" and damage the relationship between young people and the police, the 
children's commissioner and leading organisations representing young people 
warn today.

In a letter to the Observer Dr Maggie Atkinson, children's commissioner f in 
the Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Bill going through parliament.

They say the proposed clampdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/07/charities-condemn-asbo-rebrand>
 on unruly behaviour will "punish children over the age of 10 simply for being 
children" by widening the definition of antisocial behaviour and reducing the 
burden of proof so sharply that the effect could be to "outlaw everyday 
activities" such as skateboarding or ball games. The Home Office argues that 
the measures will deliver speedier and more effective curbs on unruly activity.

Under the proposals antisocial behaviour orders (asbos) will be replaced by 
new Injunctions to Prevent Nuisance and Annoyance (ipnas).Currently, to be 
given an asbo a person must have behaved in a way that "caused or was likely to 
cause harassment, alarm or distress". But under the new law, a person would 
have to have behaved only in a way that is "capable of causing nuisance or 
annoyance" to get an injunction.

For a court to grant an asbo <https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos>, it 
must be satisfied "beyond reasonable doubt" that a person has behaved 
antisocially and conclude that an asbo is necessary to protect others from 
further antisocial acts.

But to grant one of the new injunctions, the court would have to believe only 
that "on the balance of probabilities" a person had behaved antisocially and to 
conclude that it is "just and convenient" to grant an injunction to stop their 
antisocial behaviour.

Opponents say that under the new law, if the police or local council believe 
that "on the balance of probabilities" a weekly basketball game is capable of 
annoying residents and that an injunction would be a convenient way to stop the 
game, they could ask the court to issue an injunction against the players. This 
would restrict where the players could go and what they could do. If the 
players were over 14 and they flouted the injunction, they could be imprisoned 
for up to three months.

Signatories to the letter, who also include the chief executive of the 
National Children's Bureau, Dr Hilary Emery, say that the measures amount to an 
overreaction which is particularly unfortunate at a time when youth services 
are being cut across the country.

They write: "We acknowledge that antisocial behaviour can blight the lives of 
individuals and communities, but this bill is not the answer. It promotes 
intolerance of youth, is a blow for civil liberties and will damage children's 
relationship with the police.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> learn the importance of right 
and wrong from their parents, teachers and communities. We do not need to 
create more laws to do it."

Last week the human rights joint committee of both houses of parliament also 
called on government to amend the Bill "to make the test for anti-social 
behaviour more precise".

Penelope Gibbs, chair of the Standing Committee for Youth Justice, said:"It's 
hard to believe that the government is planning to outlaw teenagers just for 
being annoying â€“ unopposed by Labour. Many teenagers already feel they are 
pariahs in their communities. What are teenagers supposed to do? Youth services 
have been cut, they are told not to spend too much time indoors playing 
computer games. Yet this law means they may be afraid to skateboard on the 
street or just hang out with their friends."
 