
The political year is over, but some major law changes will kick in on New 
Year’s Day which will directly affect pensioners, students, parents and 
backpackers, among others.

Pensions

When Scott Morrison was social services minister in 2015, he announced an 
overhaul to the pension 
<http://www.formerministers.dss.gov.au/15866/fairer-access-to-a-more-sustainable-pension/>
. From 1 January, more than 170,000 part-rate assets-tested pensioners will 
receive an extra $30 a fortnight on average, and 50,000 of those pensioners 
will qualify for the full pension.

The value of assets you can own, excluding your family home, to qualify for a 
full pension will increase –from $209,000 to $250,000 for single home owners 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/enablers/assets#assetstestlimits>, 
and from $296,500 to $375,000 for couples.

But the maximum value of assets you can hold to qualify for a part pension 
will fall. For couples the threshold is currently $1.18m (excluding the family 
home). That will fall to $816,000. For single homeowners the threshold is 
currently $793,750. That will fall to $542,500.

Greens support 15% backpacker tax in return for $100m for Landcare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
About 91,000 current part-pensioners will no longer qualify for the pension, 
while 235,000 will have their part pension reduced. The government says the 
changes are necessary to redirect pension payments to those most in need.

Backpacker tax

The backpacker tax was passed by the Senate in the final week of parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
, ending a bruising few months for the government.

Working holiday-makers will now have to pay 15% tax from the first dollar they 
earn, and forego 65% of any superannuation earned when they leave the country. 
They will no longer be allowed to claim a tax-free threshold.

Education

A new VET student loan program <https://www.education.gov.au/vet-student-loans>
 begins, replacing the VET FEE-HELP scheme. Students will be able to get loans 
up to $5,000, $10,000 or $15,000, depending on costs, for a limited range of 
vocational courses.

The Industry Skills Fund, which offers grants to help small businesses train 
staff,will close 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/myefo/download/10-Appendix-A-Expense.pdf>
. The period that students from regional and remote areas will have to work to 
get the Youth Allowance and Abstudy Living Allowance will be cut from18 months 
to 14 months 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/myefo/download/10-Appendix-A-Expense.pdf>
.


Six research block grant schemes for universities will be consolidated into 
two simpler programs <https://education.gov.au/research-block-grants>. The 
changes are in response to thereview of research policy and funding arrangements
 
<https://www.education.gov.au/review-research-policy-and-funding-arrangements-0>
.

Welfare

Tougher compliance measures come into force for people receiving welfare 
payments, and the six-year statutory limit on retrieving overpayments will be 
removed. Automated data matching introduced in July for retrieving welfare 
debts hascome under attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/government-confident-in-centrelink-debt-compliance-system-despite-reported-errors>
 in recent weeks for its alleged unfairness and inaccuracy.

Centrelink debt notices based on 'idiotic' faith in big data, IT expert says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
Prohibition orders are introduced to stop some welfare debtors leaving the 
country.

All new migrants will have to wait two years before becoming eligible for a 
range of welfare payments, even if they are family of Australian citizens or 
permanent residents.

Passports

The cost of each new passport will increase by $20 for adults and $10 for 
children and seniors, and the fee for priority processing of passport 
applications will increase by $54.

From 1 January the following fees will apply 
<https://www.passports.gov.au/news/Pages/passport-fees-2017.aspx>:


 * 10-year passport for people aged 16 and over: $277 
 * 5-year passport for children under 16 years: $139 
 * 5-year passport option for people aged 75 and over: $139 
 * emergency passport overseas: $175 
 * priority processing fee  
<https://www.passports.gov.au/urgentapplications/Pages/default.aspx>$183 
Health


Mepolizumab (trade name: Nucala) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/20/treatments-cancers-alzheimers-verge-breakthrough>
 for the treatment of severe asthma will be listed on thePharmaceutical 
Benefits Scheme 
<https://www.nationalasthma.org.au/news/2016/australians-with-severe-asthma-to-benefit-from-new-pbs-treatment-options>
. There will be a price cut for PBS prescriptions of Thiamine hydrochloride, 
used for treating vitamin B1 deficiency.

Changes to the child dental benefits schedule will give children aged between 
two and 17 access to basic dental services, capped at $700 over two years. 
Rural pharmacists will be paid $7 to dispense medicine to patients in remote 
areaAboriginal Medical Services 
<http://www.guild.org.au/vic_branch/news-and-events/victorian-news/2016/11/22/remote-dispensing-equity>
.

Childcare

A trial program offering subsidies on nanny fees closes to new applications 
<https://www.education.gov.au/nannypilot>. The program will run until 30 June 
2018.

Agriculture

There are changes to the way levies for cattle, goat, lamb and sheep slaughters
 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/myefo/download/2016-17-MYEFO-combined.pdf>
 are split between R&D and marketing.

A melon levy of $0.004 per kilo for R&D and Plant Health Australia membership 
comes into force.

Environment

Tony Abbott’s controversial Green Army program will end in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/turnbull-terminates-abbott-era-programs-to-prop-up-midyear-economic-forecast>
, with no new projects accepted. New grants become available for councils, 
community and environmental groups to improve local parks.

Aged care

Changes to aged-care provider funding come in, including increasing 
supplements for rural, remote and specialty services.

The government will establish 31 specialist dementia care units 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/myefo/download/2016-17-MYEFO-combined.pdf>
 across the country for people who experience very severe behavioural and 
psychological symptoms of dementia and are unable to be supported in a 
mainstream aged care service.

Rental income from the former family home of aged-care residents will be 
treated the same as pension income tests and the aged-care means test.

Housing

The Western Australian government will increase the first home-buyers grant, 
for new homes up to a value of $750,000,from $10,000 to $15,000 for one year 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-27/first-home-buyers-grant-boost-met-with-concern-from-sector/8150000>
.
 