
I have been conducting fieldwork for 20 years, mostly in low- and 
middle-income countries. My research has taken place under the auspices of 
universities in three countries and, so far, the worst thing that has happened 
to me was a heavy load of intestinal parasites that wiped me out for a week.

Universities must protect PhDs doing risky fieldwork. Here’s how
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/19/universities-must-do-more-to-protect-phds-doing-risky-fieldwork-heres-how>
This happened in a country that I can’t name here because I am writing 
anonymously. I am doing this to protect myself from institutional and 
bureaucratic hassles related to my future research. I am also a woman. 
Theoretically, that should not make any difference. In practical terms, it 
matters a great deal.

I am grateful that parasites are the worst thing I have had to deal with. The 
countries I work in are the kind where drugs and arms dealers are not shy about 
making themselves known and where the police forces brag about the size of 
their guns.

The universities conduct risk assessments of my research proposals, of course. 
The ones that involve human participants undergo extensive scrutiny from 
ethical advisory boards before fieldwork starts. And, in my area at least, we 
create local advisory boards composed of members of the community, to maximise 
goodwill and minimise culture shock. It’s a time-consuming process that 
requires a lot of work, but, on the whole, we don’t complain. The better a 
study is refined and questioned beforehand, the more successful and safe it is 
likely to be.

And so I welcomed my university’s announcement that it was introducing 
additional procedures to protect researchers in the field. It didn’t take long 
to realise that these innovations didn’t actually make us any safer – and could 
seriously hamper our work.

Two colleagues of mine, let’s call them John and Mary, recently made plans to 
travel to ahigh-risk country <https://www.world-aware.com/>. Both have been 
conducting long-term research there, they have both lived in the country, and 
usually return once a year. To maximise their time, they decided to visit 
different sites for part of this trip and would therefore stay in different 
hotels. John’s plans were approved immediately. Mary’s were rejected.

I don’t think they realise how much damage bureacracy can do to our research

When asked about the gender disparity, the administrative team replied that 
they needed to protect female researchers – for insurance purposes.

Mary was asked to sign a document stating that she would return to the hotel 
before dark every day. John was not. Mary was also required to book her taxi 
between the airport and the hotel through a designated university travel 
agency. She was not allowed to make the booking in the usual way, which had 
always been affordable, reliable, and safe. The taxi booked by the university 
travel agent was more expensive and, on the day, it never showed up. She 
eventually had to take one of the taxis parked outside the airport which, in 
that particular country, is risky.

I have experienced similar issues. I recently travelled to a similarly 
dangerous country and was advised by my local colleagues to stay at a specific 
hotel, in a safe area of the town. According to them – the people with insight 
and local knowledge – that hotel would be ideal in terms of mobility and 
safety. But the daily rate was over the limit stipulated by the university and 
my request was denied. It took me a full morning of phone calls to convince the 
finance office that this was the safest option.

I don’t deny that we live in a world where basic safety is challenged every 
day. I know that a great deal of fieldwork happens in countries that are rife 
with instability and a huge variety of troubles. But we, the researchers (of 
both genders), know more about these dangers than the administration staff. And 
that’s because, we, the researchers, are the ones who keep the connections 
open, the ones who maintain contact and nurture networks in the field on a 
daily basis. Our research wouldn’t happen otherwise.

I fled Syria for Kent - and regained my life as an academic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/15/i-fled-syria-for-kent-and-regained-my-life-as-an-academic>
I know that the people behind this bureaucracy are not evil. I’m sure they 
don’t mean to be biased against female researchers and I don’t think they 
realise how much damage they can do to our research. But they need to realise 
that the solution is not to wrap us up in red tape.

The steps forward are many, and they will require efforts at numerous levels 
of power. Effective training inunconscious bias 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/gender-equality-in-science-will-require-a-culture-shift/>
 is paramount. Initiatives such as theAthena Swan Charter 
<http://www.ecu.ac.uk/equality-charters/athena-swan/> should be prioritised in 
terms of resources. Country-specific experts should be consulted before 
administrative decisions are made in the name of protecting female staff.

Women need to be empowered to do the research that matters, where it matters – 
and not be hampered by inappropriate, restrictive rules.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 