
The legacy of Michael Jackson is in the safe hands of 50 Cent, Lenny Kravitz 
and Akon. All three have been announced as special guests on Michael, the late 
singer's forthcoming,controversial LP of unreleased music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ 
2010/nov/12/michael-jackson-album-fake-claims>. However, not everyone is happy 
that the album is seeing the light of day, with Will.I.Am branding the project 
"disrespectful".

Recently, every day seems to bring either a new piece of information – or a 
new murmur of dissatisfaction – about the new Jackson compilation. First came 
thealbum title, cover art and release date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/05/new-michael-jackson-album>. Then 
came rumours about"fake" tracks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/08/new-michael-jackson-songs>, from 
the singer's family. Epic releasedBreaking News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/nov/08/michael-jackson-breaking-news>
, a "teaser" from the new album, in an attempt to hush critics; but the talk of 
soundalikes continued,forcing the estate into damage control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/12/michael-jackson-album-fake-claims>
. On top of this, Prince asked for his symbol to be removed from theMichael 
album cover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/08/new-michael-jackson-songs>, and 
Ubisoft revealed new details about theirMichael Jackson game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2010/nov/11/games>. Now, 
Jackson's label has announced the tracklist for the first posthumous album of 
original material by the world's biggest pop star, who could have worked with 
almost any artist under the sun – and it's Akon, 50 Cent and Lenny Kravitz who 
apparently got the calls.

"I'm so proud to have had the chance to work with Michael, one of my all time 
idols," Akon said. His Auto-Tune duet with Jackson,Hold My Hand 
<http://www.vii.sk/video/304xcmpjw/michael-jackson-feat-akon-hold-my-hand-2008>
, leaked in 2008, but Jackson's estate claims the singer left a handwritten 
note asking for this to be the album's first official single: it will be 
released later today. Although Hold My Hand sounded half-baked in 2008, Akon 
insists the track has improved: "In its final state, it has become an 
incredible, beautiful, anthemic song," he said. Meanwhile, Lenny Kravitz 
appears on a song called (I Can't Make It) Another Day, while 50 Cent 
contributes to Monster. "Michael reached out to me to do this song before he 
passed," Fiddy said on Twitter. "[It's] going to be the biggest thing ever."

But not everyone is so enthusiastic about the forthcoming Michael Jackson 
album. This weekendBlack Eyed Peas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/black-eyed-peas> frontman Will.I.Am, one of 
the producers often associated with Jackson's late material, called the 
compilation "disrespectful". "Whoever put it out and is profiting off of it, I 
want to see how cold they are," he told Entertainment Weekly. "Michael Jackson 
songs are finished when Michael says they're finished. Maybe if I never worked 
with him I wouldn't have this perspective. [But] he was very particular about 
how he wanted his vocals, the reverb he used ... He was that hands-on."

Will.I.Am recorded at least three songs with Jackson: Dreaming, Still the King 
and a James Brown tribute called I Will Miss You. But the Black Eyed Peas 
leader said that without Jackson's permission, they will never be released. "He 
kept his vocals and I kept the music," he said. "We had that understanding."

Michael is released on 14 December.
 