
In taking action to tackle income inequality, lawmakers must attempt to close 
the income gap by lifting up the bottom, the New York governor wrote inan op-ed 
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/07/opinion/andrew-m-cuomo-fast-food-workers-deserve-a-raise.html?ref=opinion>
for the New York Times on Thursday.

To do so in New York, Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> said, he will ask the labor 
commissioner to convene a panel to determine whether fast-food workers should 
be paid more than $8.75, the current minimum wage in the state.

Fight for $15 swells into largest protest by low-wage workers in US history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/15/fight-for-15-minimum-wage-protests-new-york-los-angeles-atlanta-boston>
“On Thursday I am directing the [labor] commissioner to impanel such a board, 
to examine the minimum wage in the fast-food industry. The board will return in 
about three months with its recommendations, which do not require legislative 
approval,”Cuomo wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/07/opinion/andrew-m-cuomo-fast-food-workers-deserve-a-raise.html?ref=opinion>
.

His announcement comes after the state legislature rejected his proposal to 
raise minimum wage to $11.50 inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City and to $10.50 elsewhere in 
the state.

Cuomo has previously used similar approach to increase minimum wage for tipped 
workers like bartenders and servers to $7.50 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/25/nyregion/minimum-wage-for-new-york-citys-tipped-workers-will-increase-to-7-50.html>
, which will go into effect at the end of this year.The federal tipped minimum 
wage is still $2.13 <http://www.dol.gov/whd/state/tipped.htm#NewYork>. 

It didn’t take long for state Republicans to express their displeasure. 
Assemblyman Brian M Kolb, the minority leader, compared Cuomo to Obama,telling 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/07/nyregion/cuomo-moves-to-raise-wages-for-new-york-fast-food-workers.html>
that “trying to govern by executive order is the same type of misguided 
approach that President Obama has proven to be ill advised and ineffective”.

Fast-food employers say Cuomo has singled them out from among all of the 
industries that rely on low-wage workers.

“Singling out a sector of one industry to have a higher minimum wage than all 
other occupations is unfair and arbitrary,” said Melissa Fleischut, president 
and chief executive of the New York State Restaurant Association. “The minimum 
wage is rightfully set by the legislature and should affect all business 
equally.”

“While this proposal covers fast-food workers from the Bronx to Buffalo, it 
will create waves in other low-wage industries, such as retail, home care and 
childcare, where workers are also badly underpaid,” said Christine Owens, 
executive director of National Employment Law Project.


One of the reasons he had chosen to address wages in the fast-food industry is 
its “extreme and obnoxious” income gap, Cuomo said. He pointed out that the 
average fast-food CEO made $23.8m in 2013, while entry-level food-service 
workers in New York earn about $16,920 a year. He added that most of these 
workers aren’t teenagers, but adult women who rely on this income to feed their 
families.

Flavia Cabral, 53, is one of those women. 

“People thought we had no chance to win when we first started calling for $15 
here in New York City. But today, $15 is the new baseline for service jobs in 
all kinds of industries all over the US. Seattle passed 415, San Francisco 
passed $15, and now New York is going to be next,” said Cabral, who works at 
McDonald’s.

It is premature to say if in three months’ time the board will raise the wages 
of fast-food workers to $15 an hour or select a lower amount as an appropriate 
wage, but workers like Cabral remain hopeful. According to her, raising wages 
to $15 an hour is a “winning political issue” because it helps more workers 
achieve the American dream of belonging to the middle class.

“The fact that savvy politicians like Governor Cuomo are answering the 
[fast-food workers’] call confirms that raising wages is a winning political 
issue. It also happens to be the right thing to do,” said Owens. She called the 
announcement “an incredible victory for the courageous fast-food workers who 
began taking to the streets less than thee years ago in their Fight for $15 
campaign”.

The Fight for $15 campaign has gained support of other politicians, including 
2016 presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and Massachusetts senator Elizabeth 
Warren. On 15 April, the movementorganized the largest protest by low-wage 
workers in US history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/15/fight-for-15-minimum-wage-protests-new-york-los-angeles-atlanta-boston>
.
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
Every American deserves a fair shot at success. Fast food & child care workers 
shouldn't have to march in streets for living wages. -H
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/588513047653801984> April 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/588513047653801984> 
Cabral herself has gone on strike nine times. A mother of two, she said that 
all she wants is a fair shot at the middle class and a chance to provide for 
her family. Earning $8.75 an hour, she relies on food stamps to feed her family.


“Through the wage board, New York can set fast-food workers on a path of 
poverty, ease the burden on taxpayers and create a new national standard,” 
Cuomo wrote in his op-ed. According to him, public assistance spending per 
fast-food worker is $6,800 a year.

“That’s a $700m annual cost to taxpayers,” he said. 

Leaders of the Fight for $15 campaign are expected to join Cuomo when he 
publicly announces his decision to convene the wage board.

“Today, Governor Cuomo heard us – and soon, I know we’re going to get to $15,” 
said Cabral. “I am inspired today because $15 an hour would completely change 
my family’s life.”
 