
It is a title sequence as resplendent as the royalty that follows. Shadowy 
glints of gold and molten metal curling from the darkness, at first menacing 
and slow, entwine to form a single, sinister crown. The opening credits of 
eagerly awaited royal drama The Crown, which arrived onNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> this week, are undoubtedly an 
extravagant sequence, scored by Oscar-winning film composer Hans Zimmer and 
more than a minute long.

It used to be that the opening credits were the most disposable moments of 
television, an ungratifying delay to our favourite drama or a useful 30 seconds 
to make the trip between kettle and sofa. Yet as television has entered its new 
golden age, helped by the funding and creative ambition of Amazon, Netflix and
HBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo>, the title sequence has emerged as 
an art form in its own right.

The Crown, which arrived on Netflix last week, was the online service’s most 
expensive drama to date, costing upwards of $100m. But even before the drama 
kicked off, audiences were treated to a sumptuous opening sequence of a kind 
that has become increasingly common in the age of binge-watching television.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fnew-drama-the-crown-launches-with-a-title-sequence-fit-for-a-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a6fc9fb420277f8537692836636689ce86163e5%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20drama%20The%20Crown%20launches%20with%20a%20title%20sequence%20fit%20for%20a%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fnew-drama-the-crown-launches-with-a-title-sequence-fit-for-a-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20drama%20The%20Crown%20launches%20with%20a%20title%20sequence%20fit%20for%20a%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fnew-drama-the-crown-launches-with-a-title-sequence-fit-for-a-queen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a6fc9fb420277f8537692836636689ce86163e5%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 The Crown, Netflix’s new $100m drama, launched last week. Photograph: Alex 
Bailey/Netflix 
The titles were the work of Patrick Clair, the director who over the past few 
years has been redefining how the television industry approaches the 
much-maligned opening sequence. It was Clair who created the polluted, 
sepia-tinted titles of True Detective that became as much of a talking point as 
the show itself, Clair who directed the James Bond-esque sequence of jewels and 
missiles for The Night Manager, and Clair who oversaw the haunting, milky 
skeleton that opens up HBO’s recent acclaimed sci-fi series Westworld.

Clair said that as budgets and ambition for television shows now matched 
films, and as the boundaries between the two forms had “disappeared almost 
entirely”, networks were willing to invest in opening sequences that rivalled 
those seen in cinemas.

“I think what we are seeing now is the latest wave in something that 
originated at the turn of the century, when American networks like HBO were 
trying to make television something it hadn’t been before, that was a little 
bit more elevated, which extended to the title sequences,” he said. “They’ve 
become something where showrunners these days really feel emboldened to take 
creative risks. We are really encouraged to push our concept as far as we can 
and to really come up with something that is as original and creative as we can 
make it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXyu_MdKBXic&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXyu_MdKBXic>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXyu_MdKBXic&media=>
In previous years, when networks had been keen to optimise time for adverts, 
opening sequences had become truncated to as little as 10 seconds. However, 
Clair said television executives had increasingly realised how these titles 
could become key to drawing people into a series, giving shows a “distinctive 
visual identity”, and were willing to invest months of time and millions of 
pounds in these one-minute sequences.

In an age of Amazon and Netflix, where streaming platforms are unconstrained 
by time or commercial demands, “There’s so much enthusiasm these days for us to 
come up with the most bizarre and visually distinctive ideas,” added Clair.

The wealth of talent willing to lend their names to these sequences is also a 
testament to their quality. As well as Zimmer’s original score for The Crown, 
Leonard Cohen re-recorded his track Nevermind especially for the season two 
True Detective opening titles. For Netflix drama Orange is the New Black, 
Regina Spektor recorded the original track You’ve Got Time, while for The 
Affair, Grammy award-winning Fiona Apple wrote a new song, Container.

They are also now seen as a way to enhance the drama. For HBO’s most popular 
series, Game of Thrones, the now-beloved opening credits change slightly from 
episode to episode, focusing in on different parts of the map of Westeros 
depending on where the drama will be happening. And for the opening titles of 
Orange Is the New Black, Netflix’s comedy-drama based in a women’s prison, it 
flashes through the faces of real-life women who have been incarcerated, a 
deliberate move by the show’s creator, Jenji Kohan, to emphasise how her series 
speaks to real-life issues affecting female prisoners.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfBITGyJynfA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfBITGyJynfA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfBITGyJynfA&media=>
In an age of binge-watching television, Clair said the pressure on opening 
sequences to be compelling and atmospheric was greater than ever. The 
sequences, which now go on one and a half minutes, have also inadvertently 
become small breathers in between drama as people sit through eight hours of a 
single series in one go.

“The biggest compliment you can pay a title designer is to say I didn’t skip 
your sequence,” said Clair. “Especially in an era of binge-viewing, we are very 
aware that people might watch your sequence eight times in one weekend so it’s 
got to be a visual poem of the show but also something a little bit deeper as 
well, that speaks to the journey the characters were going on and that takes on 
a greater meaning and a greater weight for people as they get deeper into the 
series.”

Clair, who cites series such as Mad Men, Six Feet Under and Dexter as pioneers 
in terms of breaking down what an opening sequence could do for a television 
show, said The Crown has been one of the most challenging projects to take on.

“Honestly, The Crown was daunting because there was enough material when we 
came on board to see that the show was going to be something pretty exquisite,” 
he said. “We couldn’t do something like True Detective where we broke the 
characters up on screen – you don’t want to see Queen Elizabeth graphically 
torn apart at the opener of the show – so it was a matter of capturing 
something that could speak to the depth and complexity of the story but also 
being respectful.”

The final design, which was created in collaboration with Zimmer as he 
composed the music, captured the simplicity that Clair believes makes for the 
most successful TV opening sequences.

“It was about looking so closely at the crown that you start to see the rough 
edges, the rough beginnings, the rich histories of all the various minerals and 
metals and jewels that have gone into it,” he said. “And ultimately a crown 
carries a very heavy symbolic weight for the person who wears it which can be 
very isolating and destructive. So I hope it also captures some of that 
darkness.”
 