
Craig Spencer, declared free of Ebola, says he is 'living example' of how 
virus protocols worked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/11/no-ebola-america-craig-spencer-leaves-hospital>
Craig Spencer, the doctor who was found to have Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/01/ebola-patient-craig-spencer-condition-stable-new-york>
 days after returning to New York City from Guinea,wrote in an essay published 
on Wednesday <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1501355> that he was 
mistakenly cast as a “fraud, a hipster, and a hero” by the media as he fought 
for his life from a hospital bed.

“The truth is I am none of those things,” Spencer wrote in the New England 
Journal of Medicine <http://www.nejm.org/>. “I’m just someone who answered a 
call for help and was lucky enough to survive.”

In the essay, Spencer details how his diagnosis and illness affected him 
physically and psychologically during the 19 days he spent recovering at New 
York’s Bellevue hospital.

“Though I didn’t know it then – I had no television and was too weak to read 
the news – during the first few days of my hospitalization, I was being 
vilified in the media even as my liver was failing and my fiancée was 
quarantined in our apartment,” he wrote.

Spencer said he lost 20lbs, “was febrile for two weeks, and struggled to the 
bathroom up to a dozen times a day”.

Spencer said he felt as if his illness was being used by politicians “caught 
up in the election season” as a political prop, helping to make them appear 
presidential in the face of a deadly, foreign disease.

Kaci Hickox accuses governors of exploiting Ebola fears for political gain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/17/kaci-hickox-ebola-accuses-chris-christe-paul-lepage>
In the controversy that followed his diagnosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/25/obama-facts-not-fear-public-response-ebola-usa>
, New York governor Andrew Cuomo and New Jersey governor Chris Christie 
introduced tougher procedures for people returning from west Africa, resulting 
in the detention of a Médecins Sans Frontières nurse at Newark airport in New 
Jersey. The nurse, Kaci Hickox,forcefully criticised her treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/17/stop-calling-me-ebola-nurse-kaci-hickox>
, saying it would prevent more volunteers going to west Africa to help fight 
the disease.

On 23 October, Spencer was taken to Bellevue hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/doctor-tests-positive-for-ebola-at-new-york-hospital>
 after reporting a slightly elevated fever. An official told the public he 
began feeling fatigue two days prior, which prompted widespread speculation 
that he could have infected New Yorkers during one of his well-documented 
outings, which included several trips on the subway, a visit to the Gutter 
bowling alley in the Williamsburg area of Brooklyn and a ride in an Uber cab.

Stop calling me 'the Ebola nurse' | Kaci Hickox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/17/stop-calling-me-ebola-nurse-kaci-hickox>
“The whole country soon knew where I like to walk, eat, and unwind,” he wrote. 
“People excoriated me for going out in the city when I was symptomatic, but I 
hadn’t been symptomatic – just sad.”

Upon his return from Guinea, Spencer never veered from the guidelines set by 
MSF: he monitored his health every day and at the first sign of an elevated 
temperature he called officials. Within hours, he had been transferred to 
Bellevue by medical staff wearing full protective gear, under the city’s 
procedures to deal with a potentialEbola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> infection.

“The media and politicians could have educated the public about Ebola,” he 
wrote. “Instead, they spent hours retracing my steps throughNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and debating whether Ebola can 
be transmitted through a bowling ball.”

He added: “Instead of being welcomed as respected humanitarians, my US 
colleagues who have returned home from battlingEbola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> have been treated as pariahs.”
 A biohazard crew cleans Spencer’s apartment in New York. Photograph: EDUARDO 
MUNOZ/Reuters 
In the essay, Spencer also recounts his time spent in Guinea fighting the 
Ebola outbreak, which has claimed 9,500 lives in west Africa since December 
2013. He urged the public and the media not to turn away from the epidemic that 
is still claiming lives in the region, even though the outbreak has stabilized 
in some areas.

“Every day, I looked forward to putting on the personal protective equipment 
and entering the treatment center,” he wrote. “No matter how exhausted I felt 
when I woke up, an hour of profuse sweating in the suit and the satisfaction I 
got from treating ill patients washed away my fear and made me feel new again.”
 