
Before we get carried away with the idea of a new Bretton Woods conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/brettonwoods> to remake the global 
economy, it is worth recalling four facts about what made the original 
gathering a success.

First, the original agreement 
<http://www.polsci.ucsb.edu/faculty/cohen/inpress/bretton.html> was a response 
to the shock of the Great Depression and the second world war. Thecurrent shock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditcrunch> is severe, to be sure, but 
not that severe. Even the most pessimistic observers expect "only" the deepest 
recession since the early 1980s, when unemployment in the United States reached 
10%, not a depression like that which raised US unemployment to 24% in 1933. 
And while economic crisis may yet fan geopolitical tensions, no one anticipates 
repercussions tantamount to the second world war. This crisis has created a 
willingness to contemplate significant reform, but it is unlikely to support 
reforms as radical as those reached in 1944.

Second, the conference held in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire in that year took 
place after three years of extensive planning under the intellectual leadership 
of Harry Dexter White and John Maynard Keynes in the US and British treasuries. 
This time, in contrast, treasuries on both sides of the Atlantic have been 
behind the curve. Advance planning, such as it is, has anticipated events by at 
most a matter of days.

Third, the Bretton Woods conference was a meeting of finance and treasury 
officials, not heads of state. Heads of state are prone to grand statements, 
not detailed proposals for economic and financial reform â€“ Gordon Brown being a 
rare exception. For substance, as opposed to posturing, we will have to wait 
for the follow-up conferences attended by specialists.

Finally, the conference took place at a time of unquestioned US hegemony over 
the western alliance and the global economy. America had the intellectual and 
financial resources with which to drive the reform process. Now it lacks both. 
In Europe, France and Germany are squabbling over the form and extent of state 
intervention in the post-crisis world. In Asia, China and Japan are vying 
uncooperatively for leadership. Beijing responded favourably to Korea's 
proposal for a regional bail-out fund, but Tokyo deferred, fearing that this 
would be dominated by China, given that country's immense dollar reserves. 
Tokyo then proposed funneling Asian reserves through the IMF, but China 
deferred, fearing that this initiative would be dominated by Japan, which has 
long participated in IMF deliberations. Financial diplomacy is evidently more 
difficult than in 1944.

So what to do? Countries participating in the series of summits starting on 
November 15 should concentrate on stabilising financial markets, which is the 
immediate problem to be solved. There are other pressing global problems, from 
climate change to poverty and underdevelopment, but adding them to this agenda 
will only make deliberations wordier and less productive. It is far from clear, 
for example, that the US will agree to a new international agreement if it has 
to compromise not just on financial regulation but on global warming, foreign 
aid, and sundry other issues.

Next, move quickly from the leaders' meeting, which is largely about the 
photo-ops, to the meeting of finance ministers, where the real business will 
occur. And once there, focus on pragmatic reforms. Clamp down on regulatory
arbitrage <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbitrage>. Raise capital requirements. 
Make the regulatory regime lessprocyclical 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procyclical>. Use taxes and regulation to drive 
transactions in credit default swaps and other derivative instruments into an 
organised exchange.

This modest approach will not be hailed as a New World Financial Order. But it 
will be a useful first step toward making the world a safer financial place. 
And it will minimise the danger that the new Bretton Woods conference will go 
down in history as a failure.
 