
Massive snowstorms such as the one sweeping into the US north-east on Monday 
are “part of the changing climate”, New York’s governor,Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo>, declared at a press 
conference announcing a state of emergency.

Cuomo said on Monday that “there is a pattern of extreme weather that we’ve 
never seen before” – reiterating his comments in the wake of hurricane Sandy,
when he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/30/sandy-superstorm-flooding-power-cuts#block-508ff732b57986a0fe1d4966>
 that “anyone who says there’s not a dramatic change in weather patterns is 
probably denying reality.”

“We have to find ways to build this city back stronger and better than every 
before,” the governor said in 2012.

Despite the protestations of climate change deniers that extreme cold weather 
must mean global warming is not real, a single storm cannot be taken as 
evidence of anything with regard to climate:weather is not the climate 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/cold-weather-doesnt-discredit-climate-change-2014-11>
.

But Cuomo was referring to how increasingly intense storms fit “a pattern of 
extreme weather” – andthat pattern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2013/nov/29/climate-change-extreme-weather-philippines-typhoon-haiyan>
 evincesthe reality of climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/dec/17/2014-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record>
. As the globe continues to heat up over the long term – 2014 wasthe hottest 
year on earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/dec/17/2014-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record>
 since human beings started keeping records – more and more energy enters the 
atmosphere, charging it for extreme events.

The atmosphere’s qualities vary hugely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/23/climate-change-carbon-emissions-ipcc-extreme-weather>
 around the world – depending on geography, weather events like El Niño and the 
interaction of other factors. So the outcome of what all that charged energy 
actually does can vary from year to year, too. Butone of the most likely 
consequences of this buildup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/18/extreme-weather-climate-change-ipcc>
 of energy is a pattern of extreme weather events: not necessarily more storms, 
hurricanes, droughts and blizzards, but a pattern of increasingly dangerous and 
intense weather events.

Climate change could actually lead to more blizzards and less snow 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/weather/2013/02/18/climate-contradiction-less-snow-more-blizzards/1927893/>
, since a warm atmosphere – full of energy and moisture soaked up by all that 
charged air – dumps more snow in brief, severe bursts. So while overall 
accumulation of snow may decrease, the frequency of intense storms may 
increase. This looks especially likely to happen as areas where snow should 
fall, in places like the Arctic, Andes glaciers and mountains around the world,
rapidly lose snow due to global warming 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/05/world/americas/1600-years-of-ice-in-perus-andes-melted-in-25-years-scientists-say.html?_r=0>
; and then that same snow deluges another part of the world as a brutal rain or 
snowstorm.

Like a broken pendulum swinging from one extreme to another, faster each year 
and increasingly threatening to break off on the hot side of the continuum, 
climate change could produce increasingly severe weather events every year: not 
just hurricanes and droughts but unstable polar wind systems let loose on the 
east coast <http://content.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,2039777,00.html> 
by heat, cold “bomb cyclones 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/bomb-cyclone-crazy-weather-november-2014-11>” 
striking Texas, andtorrential rain 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/extreme-rainfall-events-like-pensacolas-on-the-rise-17373>
 in the south-east whileCalifornia dries out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/14/-sp-american-drought-california-crisis>
 completely.

Extreme precipitation – a weather event – is hard to link directly to climate 
change 
<http://www.climatecentral.org/news/climate-change-evolving-role-in-extreme-weather-18501>
, but Cuomo has a viable point: cold weather records decrease every year, even 
as evidence quickly mounts that the heat in the atmosphere is making storms 
more intense and making both the climate and the weather more chaotic.
 