
My daughter, Olive, was born 7lb, 9oz, with a thick head of dark hair. I 
didn’t know she would be a girl, nor how large she’d be (despite the ultrasound 
technician warning me, in a thick accent, that I was going to have a “beeg 
baby”).
So when, a day or so after she was born, it came time to awkwardly bend her 
tiny arms and legs into clothing, I’d brought 15 options to choose from. 
Onesies in preemie sizes, sleepers big enough to fit three-to-six-month-olds, 
and even a few ridiculously impractical “real clothing” outfits that first-time 
parents get suckered into buying and then never ever use, becausezippered 
sleepers. She wore exactly one of these options before we left the hospital.

All of this is to say that there is nothing you will ever be less prepared for 
than becoming a parent, and the clothes are the very least of it. Nonetheless, 
we try. We fill dressers with impossibly small, immaculately folded clothes. We 
baby-proof and install car seats. We decorate nurseries and find rocking chairs 
and debate the merits of wipe warmers. We read books and maybe take a course or 
two, but most of the preparing is, in fact, buying.

The average UK mother spends £1,000 preparing for a baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/22/new-mums-baby-average-spend-cost>
, with 5% of mums spending over £3,000, and studies estimate that US parents 
will spend roughly $12,000 onbaby-related expenses 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi_0fKpkKLKAhUD3WMKHVv6AWYQFggbMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.parenting.com%2Farticle%2Fthe-cost-of-raising-a-baby&usg=AFQjCNEyGcOaU-jL2TVm48vvc0eF7op1fw&sig2=WqqPfR9Q7VOmjmi0XqyUbA&bvm=bv.111396085,d.cGc>
 in their child’s first year alone. For many parents, these numbers will be 
infinitely more terrifying than the prospect of lost sleep, the daunting 
challenge of keeping a tiny human alive or even the horrifying advice to “rough 
up” one’s nipples with a towel to prepare for breastfeeding.

New Year resolutions to do more with less – and to make do with more money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/05/all-you-need-is-less-new-years-resolutions-do-good-save-money>
Babies do, of course, need clothing and somewhere safe to sleep, a way of 
being nourished and a way to be safely transported from A to B. But if we’re 
being perfectly honest, in terms ofneeds, it pretty much ends there. 

The rest of our buy-buy-baby list can be broken down into wants or unnecessary 
fluff. Everything about post-baby life exists in a grey, murky sort of unknown 
and we arm ourselves withstuff so that we feel more prepared for the chaos 
about to besiege our lives.

Well, because I had exactly one child three years ago, I think you’ll agree 
that I am expertly qualified to tell everyone how to do everything. (My way, 
obviously. Theright way!) Thus, I’ve put together a few lists for you panicked 
parents-to-be out there.


Things that you will need and should buy new

Car seats should always be purchased new, unless you know the seller, the car 
seat hasn’t expired, and you implicitly trust the assertion that the seat 
hasn’t been in any accidents. This is a simple safety issue (car seats can also 
be recycled in many communities, so when yours expires, do a little research 
before chucking it in the bin).

Hygiene items such as nail clippers, those weird snot-sucker things, 
thermometers, etc: anything that will ever goinside your baby should be bought 
new unless it can be thoroughly disinfected.
And that’s about it. Absolutely everything else for your little bundle of joy 
can – and I’d argueshould – be found secondhand. 

Things that you will need and should buy secondhand

Clothing, cribs, crib mattresses, nursery furniture, toys, books, and even 
cloth diapers – basicallyeverything else that a baby needs can be found in 
near-perfect condition by lurking on buy and sell sites, canvassing friends 
with kids, or checking out kids consignment stores.

The reasons for doing so are obvious. One, you’re reducing the obvious 
environmental impact of buying brand new. There were almost 700,000 livebirths 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob1/birth-summary-tables--england-and-wales/2013/stb-births-in-england-and-wales-2013.html>
 in the UK in 2013 and a further3.9 million 
<https://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjr9eaIjqLKAhVC2mMKHUwVDeoQFggeMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.calculatedriskblog.com%2F2014%2F08%2Fus-births-increased-in-2013-after.html&usg=AFQjCNGdMAttKA82rb5gKP2d01ON30swtw&sig2=7k0TIaC2SskJwu8qS-v4HQ&bvm=bv.111396085,d.cGc>
 in the US. Imagine if each and every one of these babies came home to a brand 
new crib, mattress, wardrobe, stroller, library, etc? The redundancy is 
overwhelming and completely unnecessary, even if you cut the numbers by 50% and 
assume that half may not be first children and thus will have hand me down 
items.

That’s simply too much waste – too much unnecessary waste and expense for 
items which will be used for so little time. A crib will be used for one to two 
years and cost anywhere between $150-$750, not including the mattress, whereas 
you can easily pick up a secondhand one in mint condition for $10-$40.

That’s a big chunk of change left in your pocket for dill pickle soup, 
milkshakes and other strange pregnancy cravings, and also a great deal less 
manufacturing, packaging, transport, and waste for the environment.

Wants and unnecessary fluff which you really shouldn’t buy but probably will 
anyway

This category is for things that I like to call “what-if’s”. What-if’s 
endlessly plague parents to be. What if the baby won’t ever sleep and the only 
thing that saves us is a $300 oscillating swing with rainforest sounds?

What if the baby has extremely sensitive skin and the only way they’ll 
tolerate a diaper change without screaming bloody murder is if we use 
pre-warmed wipes?

What if my posh friends come over and see that the baby doesn’t have a 
meticulously designed Pinterest-worthy nursery, abandon me to become a social 
pariah and the baby never has any friends ever?

What-if’s are irrational, and nothing quells them quite like buying. It’s far 
easier to give in to buying things “just in case” than to feel confident that 
you are well prepared - especially as a rookie parent who has no idea what to 
preparefor. There’s no doubt you’ll get suckered into buying some fluff, and 
that’s ok, but remind yourself that many of these “must have” items are 
“wouldn’t miss” items - in that if you never purchased them, you’d never miss 
their presence.

And don’t forget that in the apocalyptic world that is your post-baby 
existence, stores and secondhand shops will indeed continue to exist. If 
there’s something essential that you’ve truly forgotten, you can always get it 
then.

Extra credit

Finally, I’m going to throw out a few other ideas to make welcoming your 
little one as eco-friendly as possible.
Consider cloth diapers: They’re eco-friendly, cute as all hell, easy to use, 
and will save money, too. If the initial cash investment is turning you off, 
try asking baby shower attendees to each bring a diaper as their gift. This 
strategy will do double duty: stocking your stashand eliminating unwanted baby 
things.

Skip pre-made baby food: When she is six months old, begin offering your child 
small pieces of steamed vegetables, cheese, meat, or whatever else you’re 
eating (as long as it’s paediatrician approved, of course). They’ll be grabbing 
things off your plate anyway, so as long as it’s soft enough and small enough, 
you may as well share. It’s great to have them trying new things without a 
sweetened applesauce base, as many pre-made baby foods contain, and they’ll be 
exposed to dozens of different textures, too.

Finally, focus on the doing, not the having: Your baby does not care what 
brand his clothes are or what stroller she’s being rolled around in, and he
needs infinitely fewer toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/sep/01/depriving-your-kids-of-toys-great-idea>
 than you think he does. Babies are devious little creatures, so destroying 
your sleep, covering your clothing with hidden spots of spit-up, and devising 
clever new ways to explode poop up their backs is truly all the entertainment 
they need.
 