
“The nightmare is finally over,” was the refrain from police, New Yorkers and 
GovernorAndrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> after a 
three-week manhunt for two escaped criminals ended this weekend. But the 
reckoning continues for the surviving convict, the prison community and the 
state.

David Sweat, the 35-year-old convicted murderer who was shot and captured on 
Sunday, was in “critical but stable” condition at the Albany Medical Center, a 
hospital spokesperson said.

Richard Matt, 49, was shot dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/new-york-manhunt-richard-matt-david-sweat>
 by a border patrol agent on Friday afternoon.

New York prison escape: how a bullet hole and grape gin led to Richard Matt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/new-york-manhunt-richard-matt-david-sweat>
Sweat was apprehended by 21-year police veteran Jay Cook, less than two miles 
from the Canadian border, by a rural road where the sergeant was alone on 
patrol, away from the hundreds of other investigators. Cook thought the man 
walking along the road was suspicious, and shouted at him to stop. Sweat took 
off running into a field.

“At some point in the pursuit Cook realized Sweat was going to make it to a 
treeline and potentially disappear, so he shot him two times with his handgun,” 
state police superintendent Joseph D’Amico told reporters.

“I can only assume he was going for the border.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8e0b4e92196c5e6a5452968fe4db58e7dd4f27a%2F32_0_647_388%2F647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20prison%20escape%3A%20three-week%20'nightmare'%20ended%20in%20police%20swarm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20prison%20escape%3A%20three-week%20%27nightmare%27%20ended%20in%20police%20swarm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8e0b4e92196c5e6a5452968fe4db58e7dd4f27a%2F32_0_647_388%2F647.jpg>
 David Sweat, left, and Richard Matt. Photograph: Getty Images 
Officers, emergency services and journalists swarmed down on Sweat, who took 
both gunshots to his torso. At a camp not far away, searchers found black 
pepper shakers with Sweat’s DNA, which D’Amico said he and Matt may have used 
to mask their scent from the noses of police dogs.

“We did have difficulty tracking, so, you know, it was fairly effective in 
that respect,” D’Amico said.

Sweat had no weapon, police said. Cuomo told CNN he was dressed in camouflage 
gear and carrying maps, tools, bug repellent and Pop-Tarts.

Cook shot Sweat a little more than a dozen miles from where officers hunted 
down Matt. A tactical team found Matt on Friday after two tips from civilians 
helped them home in on the convicted murderer near the town of Malone.

First, the driver of a recreational camper called police when he discovered 
that what he thought was the sound of a tire going flat was in fact the pop of 
gunfire that put a bullet hole in his vehicle. Around the same time, the owner 
of a hunting cabin called police when henoticed details amiss in the lodging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/new-york-manhunt-richard-matt-david-sweat>
: a bottle of grape gin open on the kitchen table, evidence someone had gone 
through the back door, an acrid scent that police later identified as gunpowder.

A tactical team from border patrol noticed movement in the brush, D’Amico 
said, as they searched through a dense and soggy thicket. They heard what 
sounded like a cough andfound Matt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/new-york-prison-break-convict-richard-matt-shot-wounded>
, armed with a 20-gauge shotgun. Police said Matt said nothing when officers 
confronted him, and that he refused to drop the gun or put up his hands. They 
shot him three times in the head.

An autopsy of Matt showed bug bites, “blisters and minor abrasions consistent 
with living in the woods for three weeks”, police said in astatement 
<https://www.nyspnews.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=46384>. The coroner 
was awaiting toxicology results, which may confirm reports that Matt was
intoxicated 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/report-escaped-convict-richard-matt-was-drunk-when-gunned-down/>
 when discovered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435599625744%2Fae12780d-00e7-4fd7-8301-4ba7640f17a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York%20prison%20escape%3A%20three-week%20'nightmare'%20ended%20in%20police%20swarm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%20prison%20escape%3A%20three-week%20%27nightmare%27%20ended%20in%20police%20swarm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F29%2Fnew-york-prison-escape-david-sweat-richard-matt-capture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435599625744%2Fae12780d-00e7-4fd7-8301-4ba7640f17a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Seth Lockwood, 10, and his sister Riley, 12, give thanks to law enforcement 
officials following the capture of convicted murderer David Sweat. Photograph: 
Scott Olson/Getty Images 
Matt and Sweat are believed to have hidden in and stolen from cabins in the 
rocky woods, and to have scavenged supplies as they traveled.

The discovery of Matt brought search teams, numbering more than 1,000 people 
in total, into a tight and shrinking perimeter, on the premise that he had been 
traveling with Sweat for at least most of their escape.

Law enforcement officials present and past praised the manhunt as a testament 
to the tenacity of investigators in swampy and forested terrain that spanned 
mountains hundreds of miles, and despite frequent bursts of driving rain and 
lightning. Cuomo congratulated Cook on his police work, saying he would be a 
hero to his daughters.

Martin Horn <http://icl.nd.edu/events/human-dignity-lecture--2014/>, executive 
director of the New York state sentencing commission, told the Guardian: “The 
proof of the manhunt is in its ultimate success. This was tracking two devious 
and determined people, in extraordinarily difficult terrain and under terrible 
weather conditions.”

Horn said: “As expected, there’s no pattern” for prison escapes, most of which 
are mundane walk-offs from probation or work programs and few of which involve
clambering through catwalks and sewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/08/new-york-prison-break-richard-matt-david-sweat-hollywood-shawshank-redemption>
 out of maximum-security prisons, as Matt and Sweat did on 6 June.


“Some of these guys are found after a day or two, and some within a few weeks, 
so this was certainly within the normal range under extremely difficult 
circumstances,” he said.

New York prison break: a Hollywood fugitive fantasy unlike most escapes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/08/new-york-prison-break-richard-matt-david-sweat-hollywood-shawshank-redemption>
Horn noted that the investigation still faced “a lot of open questions that 
need to be answered”, even as it hammers out clues to how exactly Matt and 
Sweat executed their spectacular escape from the 19th-century fortress that is 
the Clinton Correctional Facility, in Dannemora.

Cuomo has promised a review of the prison’s operations, which Horn said should 
help the investigation. “And you know, it’s probably something we should do 
every 150 years.”

Sweat, who was serving a life sentence for the 2002 murder of a sheriff’s 
deputy, will be charged for escape and burglary, district attorney Andrew Wylie 
said.

Matt was serving 25 years to life for the murder and dismemberment of a former 
employer, and had previously servedtime in prison for a murder in Mexico 
<http://www.buffalonews.com/city-region/richard-matt-claimed-he-was-beaten-tortured-in-mexican-prison-20150626>
.

Sweat also faces decades of administrative segregation and the loathing of 
other inmates whose lives he has changed by prompting prison reviews.

Prisoners likely “despise” Matt and Sweat “because they’re going to change 
their lives”, saidMarty Tankleff 
<https://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Pages/casedetail.aspx?caseid=3675>
, a former inmate who was wrongfully imprisoned at Clinton Correctional and 
whom the state eventually gave $3.4m in a settlement.

Procedures and protocol will likely change at the prison, especially on the 
“honor block” where Matt and Sweat received special privileges such as the 
right to cook their own food and to work on special work crews. Wylie has said 
that tools were smuggled in hamburger meat to the prisoners,perhaps unwittingly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/25/second-new-york-prison-worker-charged-over-prisoners-escape>
, by prison employee Gene Palmer.

A civilian employee, Joyce Mitchell, befriended the inmates in the prison’s 
tailor shop andallegedly brought them tools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/17/prison-worker-discussed-plot-murder-husband-escapees-da-alleges>
 and planned to act as their getaway driver before she panicked on the night of 
the escape. Palmer and Mitchell have been charged with promoting prison 
contraband and abetting the escape.

Mitchell, whom Matt and Sweat apparently wooed, has pleaded not guilty. Palmer 
is expected to do the same. The inmates alsothreatened to kill Mitchell’s 
husband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/23/new-york-prison-escapees-planned-kill-me-husband-accomplice>
, her spouse said last week.

“I was in over my head,” she said, according to her husband.

“Now that we have Mr Sweat, it gives us the opportunity to have some more 
questions and provide more facts on the overall situation,” Cuomo said. “Anyone 
who we find who was culpable and guilty of cooperating in the escape will be 
fully prosecuted.”

New York prison break - how two murderers escaped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/08/new-york-prison-break-clinton-dannemora-matt-sweat>
The inmates also appear to have checked out tools available to work crews and 
simply checked them back into the inventory each morning to prevent anything 
looking amiss, asTankleff suspected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/12/staff-who-helped-new-york-prison-break-face-stiff-punishment-says-cuomo>
.

Officials have declined to provide estimates about the cost of the three-week 
manhunt, or of the prison review and internal investigation. On 15 June, Wylie 
said that the manhunt hascost about $1m a day 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/06/15/414704539/n-y-prison-break-update-search-is-costing-1-million-a-day>
, which would place its total around $22m.

On Friday Cuomo declined to provide any estimates, saying only that the hunt 
was “expensive” and that there was “no doubt in my opinion that it’s worth it”.

“These were really dangerous, dangerous men,” he said. “We couldn’t be more 
happy that we apprehended him. It’s been a long three weeks,” D’Amico added.

The relief that marked Cuomo and D’Amico’s comments was echoed by those who 
knew Matt and Sweat, and by the residents of sleepy mountain towns who for 22 
days lived in fear and worry.

“I was in a way hoping this was the outcome,” Matt’s half-brother, Wayne 
Schimpf, told ABC’s Buffalo affiliateWKBW 
<http://www.wkbw.com/news/brother-of-richard-matt-shares-chilling-insight-into-the-mind-of-the-killer>
. “Thank God this can finally end for me and my family. The next thought was: 
‘That’s my brother.’”

Sweat’s mother, Pamela, later told CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/06/27/us/new-york-prison-break/index.html>: “If he 
would’ve came here, I would’ve knocked him out and had them guys take him to 
jail themselves.”

Police received more than 2,000 tips from locals who spent the last three 
weeks locking and relocking their doors, inspecting cabins of the kind thatMatt 
and Sweat sheltered in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/22/dna-trace-new-york-prison-escapees>
, and anxiously watching out for suspicious characters.
Map - New York state 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/06/dannemora_prison_escape_sweat/giv-21277Lw4psdo7Xy2D>
“I feel like I can sleep tonight,” Cathy Leffler told the Associated Press in 
Malone. “Life can go back to normal. It’s over now.”

Residents had to endure police suddenly erecting ersatz headquarters on their 
properties and variously described the experience as “nerve-racking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/10/new-york-prison-break-richard-matt-david-sweat-search>
” and “unnerving 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/officers-floodlights-checkpoints-hunt-escapee-32079441?singlePage=true>
”.

For the Amish family on whose farm Sweat was captured, the episode was 
distressing for adults and children alike.

“I think it’s kind of hard for them to go back to bed and sleep because of 
everything that went on,” Verba Bontrager told the AP. “We’re all kind of 
scared, I guess.”

Nearly everyone remarked on the audacity of the escape, during which the 
prisoners left a sticky note that read “Have a nice day! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/08/new-york-prison-break-clinton-dannemora-matt-sweat>
”, and on the surreality of an investigation that spanned thousands of acres 
and involved a lonely tailor and hacksaw smuggling by hamburger.

Even Cuomo expressed surprise. “If you were writing a movie plot,” he said, 
“they would say that this was overdone.”
 