
The New York governor, Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo>, announced his support for a 
statewide minimum wage of $15 an hour on Thursday, backed by Vice-President Joe 
Biden and high-profile labor leaders. “Is labor in the house today?” Cuomo 
asked to cheers from the crowd and cries of “Yes we can!” and “Sí se puede!”

“The greatest feast has the most people at the table,” Cuomo told the audience 
of union workers atNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
City’s Javits Center convention hall, walking on and off the stage to Bon 
Jovi’s Work for the Working Man.

In July, the Cuomo-appointed Fast Food Wage Board recommended chain 
restaurants in New York City with more than 30 locations nationwideincrease 
wages to at least $15 an hour by 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/22/new-york-fast-food-workers-15-an-hour>
; restaurants in the rest of the state will reach that level in 2021. Cuomo 
announced on Thursday that “the state of New York’s labor department has 
accepted the recommendation of the wage board in full”.

“When the minimum wage becomes $15 an hour [in New York] – you know what the 
total of that raise is? The governor knows: $1.8bn,” Cuomo said. “That’s not 
only the difference between living in poverty and having a chance; that $1.8bn 
gets spent. It has to get spent to keep up. If you give that in a tax break to 
the wealthy, they don’t spend it, they put it in a bank account. You spend it.”

George Gresham, head of the largest local union of the Service Employees 
International Union (SEUI), 1199 SEIU, introduced Cuomo and Biden, praising the 
governor and calling the program “an exciting announcement for all working 
people in our state”.


Gresham further said that the program ought to be called the Mario Cuomo 
Campaign for Economic Justice, after Cuomo’s father, also a governor of New 
York, who died on 1 January 2015.

The speeches were unabashedly political: “Unlike an idiot who’s running for 
president of the United States, whose name rhymes with ‘chump’ [a reference to 
Donald Trump] we believe that diversity is proud,” said Gresham, “and we are 
happy to say ‘yes we can’ and ‘sí se puede’.”

“We have a Congress in Washington that has worked to stymie the president and 
the vice-president in every way they could,” said Cuomo. “In gridlock, 
everybody loses.” But New York, he said, would lead by example: “We chose a 
different path, we rejected the extremists, we rejected the zealots. We believe 
it’s better to light a candle than to curse the darkness.”

Republicans in the New York legislature are upset that Cuomo effectively 
bypassed review of the fast food workers wage hike by the state senate and 
assembly: “I find it disturbing that they would decline the legislature’s 
request to provide insight and clarity, as well as answer questions about this 
process,” the New York senate labor committee chairman, Jack Martins (a 
Republican from Nassau County, part of Long Island), said in comments tolocal 
political blog Politics on the Hudson 
<http://polhudson.lohudblogs.com/2015/09/10/senate-republicans-rip-wage-increase-for-fast-food-workers/>
. “It’s even more troubling that given one of the major concerns about this 
process is that it circumvented the legislature.”

The Fight for $15 movement has been successful in several municipalities 
across the country, from St Louis to Los Angeles. But no state has yet adopted 
the plan, with Washington state’s $9.47 an hour the highest in the nation. 
Biden touted President Barack Obama’s plan for a $12-an-hour national minimum 
wage, in addition to praising Cuomo’s proposed program.

“Raising [the minimum wage] to $12 nationally means 35 million people, many of 
whom are living on the edge or in poverty, will have a chance,” Biden said. 
“And in higher-wage states, like when you do it here, you raise everybody up.”

There was praise for Gresham as well: the SEIU president, Mary Kay Henry, 
called Gresham her brother, and Cuomo called him “my political godfather”. “You 
thought godfathers have to be Italian? They don’t have to be Italian. 1199 got 
me started in this state.”


Henry made sure to call attention to Alvin Major, a KFC employee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/23/fast-food-workers-fair-pay> 
whose story of low-wage employment is a particularly extreme one: “He struck 12 
times before this wage board recommendation that the governor is accepting 
today,” Henry said. “He has children and a wife who is being treated for 
cancer, and the way he stitched together money for her care was by working 
three jobs that totaled between 80 and 100 hours a week.”
 