
The recent spread of Gentlemen’s Days at British tracks gathers pace on Friday 
when a well-known champagne firm sponsors a male fashion event during the 
second day of Newmarket’s big July meeting. Many of the Turf’s more traditional 
racing enthusiasts will therefore welcome the news that a stylish French filly 
named Usherette is expected to gatecrash the afternoon.

Usherette, whose dam is Monday Show, is trained at Chantilly by André Fabre 
and is already the odds-on favourite for Friday’s main feature at Newmarket, 
the Group One Falmouth Stakes.

Fabre’s filly is attempting to lift a hat-trick of major prizes in England 
this season – having already won the Dahlia Stakes at Newmarket and the Duke of 
Cambridge Stakes at Royal Ascot. Those were Group Two contests but Fabre has 
long believed his remarkable miler can reach the very top.

Usherette, a four-year-old, has had seven races and won six of them, mostly 
with give in the ground. Her one defeat was on good going in a Group One race 
at Deauville last August. The winner then was Amazing Maria, who three weeks 
earlier had won the 2015 Falmouth. Usherette, however, made the score 1-1 when 
winning the Dahlia, with Amazing Maria back in third.

David O’Meara, the trainer of Amazing Maria, said on Sunday he is hopeful of 
his filly regaining the lead on Friday – as long as substantial rain stays 
away. “The faster the ground the better for our filly,” he reported.

Amazing Maria ends Ervedya’s unbeaten record in Prix Rothschild
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/02/amazing-maria-ervedya-prix-rothschild-deauville>
But, the North Yorkshire-based trainer warned, the Falmouth has shaped up as a 
hot race all round. Aidan O’Brien will run Alice Springs and possibly 
Ballydoyle, who are among the 12 entries. Godolphin could have other runners 
apart from Usherette. Jeremy Noseda’s Nemoralia, second in the Coronation 
Stakes at Royal Ascot, may also line up.

O’Meara will trust that forecasts of a dry week building up to and during the 
July meeting hold fast. So will Marco Botti, who trains another serious 
contender for the Falmouth,Euro Charline. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/ryan-moore-arlington-adelaide-euro-d>
 “She is very well and in fine form ,” Botti said. “A sound surface is what she 
is best on. She has plenty of speed, that’s what makes her special.” He expects 
either Frankie Dettori or Andrea Atzeni to partner his filly.

Dermot Weld said at Naas on Sunday that his dual Derby hero Harzand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/harzand-irish-derby-dermot-weld-curragh-aidan-obrien-horse-racing>
 was enjoying a mid-term break before being prepared for an autumn campaign.

The Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe at Chantilly in October, for which Harzand is 
second-favourite at around 6-1, is the long-term objective for the Aga 
Khan-owned colt, winner of the Epsom and Irish Derbies.

“Harzand has enjoyed an easy week and was ridden out yesterday for the first 
time,” Weld said. “He’s on his holidays and it’s onwards and upwards.”

The son of Sea The Stars, who was the conqueror of US Army Ranger at Epsom, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/harzand-wins-derby-after-late-call-epsom-classic>
 became the 18th horse to win both races when seeing off Idaho (third at Epsom) 
at The Curragh. He is the fifth horse to win the two Classics for the Aga Khan 
after Shergar (1981), Shahrastani (1986), Kahyasi (1989) and Sinndar (2000).
 