
News International is to pull its content for all their UK titles from the 
aggregation and archive service Nexis <http:>, including the Times and the 
Sunday Times, the Sun and News of the World.

NI content will stay on the related B2B platform, Lexis. It is understood that 
the decision has been made for commercial reasons and is not directly related 
to today's announcement that the Times papers will start charging for content 
online from June.

An exact date hasn't been confirmed, but it was made clear that there will be 
no access to the content of these papers on Nexis from around the time the 
paywall goes up.

The LexisNexis director of news and business, Bob De Laney, said: "At 
LexisNexis we are always supportive of publishers' quests for new and 
sustainable business models to ensure a thriving publishing industry for the 
future. This decision is consistent with Rupert Murdoch's well documented 
strategy. We continue to provide the largest collection of news, company, 
executive and regulatory information through our Nexis service, incorporating 
24,000 global sources. This includes UK national coverage from the other major 
daily newspapers and the largest collection of UK regional titles in one 
service."

LexisNexis specialises in legal documents, and works closely with the The 
Times regarding their daily law reports 
<http://www1.lexisnexis.co.uk/timesreports/> as an ideal reference source for 
practitioners because they may be cited in court. It is unclear if this 
association is affected by News Corp's decision.

News Corp will still keep contracts with other news aggregators, among them 
Factiva, the competitor of LexisNexis that was developed by Dow Jones and 
acquired by Rupert Murdoch in 2007. The monitoring service which up till now 
provided mainly research information for business, already exclusively hosts 
the Murdoch owned Wall Street Journal.

Recently, Times Online, the Sunday Times, the News of The World and the Sun 
started to block news aggregators 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/jan/12/news-international-newsnow-sun-news-of-the-world>
 such as NewsNow andMeltwater from crawling their content 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/mar/17/times-online-blocks-meltwater>.

Even as the likes of the New York Times are trying to spread their content as 
widely as possible with Twitter and Facebook, Murdoch is removing more and more 
of his material from the open net.

While this move appears to be commercial reasons, it might be fit well with a 
long-term plan to erect a paywall around the whole Murdoch empire, which would 
push charging for content to a whole new level.
 