
News software specialists Daylife <http://www.daylife.com/> rolled out a 
recession-friendly service today that will help publishers aggregate relevant 
content from the rest of the web.Daylife Select provides one central management 
page that lets publishers choose relevantYouTube videos, Twitter conversations, 
Flickr photos and text news stories to supplement their own content.

Daylife's own site claims around 3m unique users each month, but the real 
value is in its technology. Daylife has its own database of content, all 
classified by genre and keyword, and uses this to feed content through to its 
partner sites. The benefit for publishers is that they don't need any 
development skills to use Daylife Select - so that elusive and expensive good 
developer talent is provided by Daylife.

Publishers can customise the appearance of their aggregation pages with their 
own site design, and cut and add types of content as appropriate. The portal is 
hosted by Daylife, which again means less technical responsibility for the 
publisher. The cost is bundled with Daylife's API, ranging from $4-$5,000 per 
month for a smaller publishers and smaller implementation to $20,000 for a 
larger site.

Daylife has been quick to pitch its products as way to help fight the 
recession, saying staff can be more productively employed on original content 
rather than aggregating by hand. For a struggling news industry, this kind of 
automation will be very appealing but it has to be combined with human 
editorial judgement.

Daylife is very highly regarded in the industry, creating some extremely 
compelling and well-executed products in the often conservative space between 
news content and technology. Backers includeCraig Newmark 
<http://www.daylife.com/topic/Craig_Newmark> and Jeff Jarvis 
<http://www.daylife.com/topic/Jeff_Jarvis/quotes>, and current clients include 
Telegraph.co.uk <http://www.daylife.com/source/The_Telegraph>, Huffington Post 
<http://www.daylife.com/source/Huffington_Post> and Washington Post 
<http://www.daylife.com/source/The_Washington_Post>.

The Daylife Enterprise API launched two weeks ago does a similar thing but for 
an API. The white-label service does the 'heavy lifting' in converting content 
into standardised feeds and formats that can be used either by external or 
internal developers to build new features and applications around that site.

I interviewed chief executive Upendra Shardanand recently and asked him to 
explain what the Daylife Enterprise API offers and how news publishers will be 
able to differentiate themselves in a world where everyone aggregates 
everything:
 