
Alexander Litvinenko’s widow, Marina, has called on Britain to act following 
the public inquiry which found thatVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> and his spy chief had 
“probably approved” her husband’s murder.

She wants further economic sanctions against Russia and for all of its 
intelligence agents to be thrown out of the UK.It would be unthinkable, she 
said, for the government to ignore the inquiry’s findings. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/widow-alexander-litvinenko-calls-for-further-sanctions-russia>

She may well have been bolstered by the home secretary’s statement in 
parliament.Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
described the assassination as a “blatant, unacceptable breach of the 
fundamental tenets of international law.”

But, aside for sympathy, what support does Mrs Litvinenko have from Britain’s 
national press for political action by Westminster against Moscow?

The Guardian, which led its front page with the story, believes a price must 
be paid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/the-guardian-view-on-the-litvinenko-inquiry-a-price-must-be-paid-in-moscow>
. It thought May’s statement was “welcome - but not enough” because the 
government “has made plain that diplomatic relations with Russia will not be 
affected.” It said:

“Insisting there should be no diplomatic fallout amounts to an admission that 
Britain can be cowed. The claimed constraints - especially the need for 
cooperation in the Middle East - are not especially convincing.

Russia’s policies in Syria have, by aiding the Assad regime, contributed to 
strengthening Islamic State rather than defeating it...

The same applies to the Iran nuclear deal, or Ukraine: to say a strong British 
reaction will derail international diplomacy is to overstate British influence.

On the contrary, putting some pressure on senior Russian officials would 
enhance British credibility.”

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> argued that the 
most efficient response should “involve Europeanising the issue” with common 
sanctions agreed by European governments and the targeting of culpable Russian 
officials.

“Nothing”, said the paper, “will make Russian officials pay attention like 
being banned from the European mansions and resorts.” But it conceded that any 
measures against Putin “would come up against a head of state’s immunity.”

The Times said that the conclusions drawn by Sir Robert Owen’s inquiry, which 
declared the assassination of Litvinenko to be a case of“state-sponsored 
nuclear terrorism on the streets of London... cannot be ignored.” 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/leaders/article4671446.ece>

It thought the “predictable formalities” - Russia’s ambassador being summoned 
for a dressing down, the asset freezes on the two chief suspects, and a file on 
the case being sent to the director of public prosecutions - “will have little 
impact on the suspects or the behaviour of the Russian state.”

Instead, said the Times, harsher treatment was necessary to deal with Putin’s 
“gangster state” which has “graduated from murder to the brazen violation of 
international law in Crimea and eastern Ukraine.” It contended:

“There can be no pretence of business as usual. The government should give 
serious consideration to the idea of a BritishMagnitsky Act  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnitsky_Act>on the American model, which would 
enshrine in law sanctions against named individuals...

Diplomats will argue that British-Russian relations are too complex to be 
subordinated to a single dispute, but the Litvinenko case and the broader 
relationship are linked.

Mr Putin and his proxies have been emboldened to invade foreign countries in 
no small part because they have been allowed to act with impunity to settle 
personal vendettas in foreign capitals. London is one of their favourites... 

Yet there is still no justice for Mrs Litvinenko because Moscow refuses to 
extradite the suspects in her husband’s murder. There can be no normalisation 
of relations between Britain andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> until it does so.”

The Daily Telegraph, which also regarded the killing as “state-sponsored 
assassination carried out on British soil against a UK citizen”argued that such 
an “outrageous act” requires a response “proportionate to the offence.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/12113650/Alexander-Litvinenko-report-Russian-spies-must-be-expelled.html>

“Since there is no prospect of trying the two alleged killers, the espionage 
apparatus of the Russian state must be targeted. Moscow’s spy network in London 
is as extensive today as it was in the dark days of the Cold War...

For reasons of realpolitik - from Moscow’s power play in the Middle East to 
Europe’s dependency on Russian gas - the government is reluctant to fracture 
relations irrevocably. Yet now...David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> must act decisively.

Not only should he widen sanctions against named Russians but he should 
emulate [Edward] Heath’s example by expelling all the diplomats in London 
suspected of working for the FSB. Anything less will be seen as weak in Moscow.”

The Independent, which splashed on the story (as did its stablemate, i), 
demanded “a clear, strong and effective response”  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/litvinenko-inquiry-britain-cannot-let-russia-get-away-with-murder-a6826356.html>
that “may, in the short term, put Moscow in the diplomatic deep freeze.”

The paper accepted that international relations “carry a heavy dose of 
pragmatism” but argued that “they lose all meaning if particular states refuse 
to play by the rules.”

It thought prime minister David Cameron “appeared apprehensive of going too 
far, citing the need to find some solution to the Syria crisis, in which Russia 
has assumed a key role.” The Indy said:

“This is hardly an acceptable reason to go easy on punishing a murder: 
Litvinenko’s death cannot be treated in isolation, but cannot be forgiven, 
either.

Cameron is right, however, that new economic sanctions would only further 
distance a diplomatic path to peace... The wider picture is of an already 
strained bilateral relationship that is now broken, and will take years to 
rebuild.

We have seen the worst of Russia in this saga. Now we must both hope for the 
best, and hope that the best is good enough. On yesterday’s evidence, we may be 
hoping for some time.”

Some newspapers make their views clear in news page headlines. The Daily 
Mirror’s called Putin “the killer in the Kremlin 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/vladmir-putin-killer-kremlin-inquiry-7223277>
”; the Sun’s said “‘Paedo’ Putin ordered hit 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/6876192/Putin-probably-approved-murder-of-Russian-ex-spy.html>
” and the Daily Mail, taking Cameron to task, said: “Craven! PM is accused over 
‘Putin’s killing’ of dissident.”

The Mail also carried a piece by the Economist’s Edward Lucas who argued that 
it was “abundantly clear... thatthe British Government is not going to respond 
properly 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3411169/Russia-murdered-British-citizen-streets-London-s-just-cowardly-folly-appease-thug-Putin-writes-EDWARD-LUCAS.html>
”.

We “should be launching major money-laundering investigations into the tide of 
dirty Russian cash which swills through our financial system”, he wrote.

“We should be expelling Russian spies from London... And we should be urging 
our Nato and European Union allies to join us in fighting back against all 
forms of Russian subversion, mischief-making and influence-peddling.”.

Another Russian expert, Angus Roxburgh - a former consultant to Putin’s press 
secretary, Dmitry Peskov - told in the Mirror of Putin’s fury at Litvinenko’s 
deathbed claim that the Russian president had ordered his killing.

The murder was not supposed to have been found out, wrote Roxburgh. “As a 
ruthless KGB professional he [Putin] would have expected operatives to carry 
out murder faultlessly. 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/not-once-vladmir-putin-expressed-7222691> 
Polonium-210 was supposed to be undetectable.” He continued:

“Putin remains a secret agent in mentality. He longed to join the KGB even as 
a child, when - in his own words - he was a street thug in Leningrad. He 
learned the dark arts of the KGB during the tense days of the Cold War.

Just days before being appointed president, Putin addressed an annual 
gathering of secret agents at which he told them (it was his idea of a joke) 
that an FSB mission to infiltrate the Russian government had been successful.

Ever since Russia has been living with the dire consequences of allowing a 
career KGB man to run the country.”

So there is plenty of newspaper sympathy for Marina Litvinenko, and editors 
clearly believe that Something Must Be Done. But will the government take heed 
of such demands? Realpolitik suggests not.
 