
Should Google do big media a big favour? 


Help! Photograph: D3 San Francisco 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/dimi3/3096166092/>/Flickr/Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>

The way that New York Times senior vice president for digital Martin Nisenholtz
 sees it, it would be perfectly fair for the search engine to prioritise 
results from newspapers' sites above other sources, saving his site the trouble 
and expense of all that search engine optimisation and giving readers better 
information.

He's not alone. For some time, Google has been hosting regular closed-door 
meetings with big media in the guise of theGoogle Publishers Advisory Council, 
presumably some attempt to play nicely with the other children and persuade 
them thatGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> isn't really 
eating their lunch after all.

Nisenholtz told the Online Publishers Association conference (always for the 
big old media boys, that one) in January that a search for 'Gaza' had produced 
links toWikipedia, old BBC stories and an anti-Semitic YouTube video. 

An unnamed executive reported by AdAge 
<http://adage.com/mediaworks/article?article_id=135433> concurred, saying: "You 
should not have a system," one content executive said, "where those who are 
essentially parasites off the true producers of content benefit 
disproportionately."

And ESPN's senior vice president of digital media John Kosner was just one who 
brought the issue up again at the most recent PAC meeting.

So are they right?

What isn't right is the timing; most of big media - particularly the grey lady 
- is up that familiar but particulalrly treacherous creek right now, and 
wailing to Google for help looks rather pathetic.

The request to have their sites prioritised also overlooks the fact that 
Google's main search is not a news search, so there's no reason why the first 
few results should be the most recent; there's a whole specialist news search 
for that, after all.

And there's also something clumsy, heavy-handed and un-internet about this 
proposal because the internet is, largely, democratic and gives as much 
opportunity to the little guy as it does The Man.

The next meeting is on 30 April, though it's not quite clear exactly what 
bargaining power news publishers have. If things get nasty, maybe Google will 
even apply itshardball PRS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/mar/09/digital-music-and-audio-youtube>
negotiating tactics and start omitting results from news sites entirely. Now 
let's see themreally beg...

Â 
 