
Complaints are multiplying online about quality issues with the new Google 
Nexus 7 tablet, with a number of people complaining about "loose screens" which 
bleed light from the edges or move when touched. Some of those who have had 
problems sayGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has been 
slow to respond to their concerns.

Reports of "loose screens" have begun occurring almost since the devices first 
arrived. Some users have complained that the touchscreen glass is slightly 
lifted around the edge of the device. In some cases that means that light seems 
to "bleed" into the display of a page, while others have said it means the 
screen actually moves.

In a post 
<http://forums.androidcentral.com/google-nexus-7-tablet-forum/189933-nexus-7-glass-seperation.html>
 on the Android Central forums, a user called psycho9x reported that "Just got 
[my] N7 yesterday and I love it BUT I have noticed that the glass on the left 
side is separating from the case… When you look at it from the side you can see 
the glass sticking up a bit and when you push it back down you can hear the 
adhesive grab on then it lets go. I haven't even had it for 12 hours yet."

Similar problems have been echoed by a number of people in the same and 
similar threads 
<http://forums.androidcentral.com/google-nexus-7-tablet-forum/190183-anyone-else-having-problem-their-nexus-7-a.html>
.

Other users have reported "stuck" pixels on the 1280x800 screen. Others have 
said that it is unresponsive to some touchscreen input.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2Pb4p6vIUdM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2Pb4p6vIUdM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2Pb4p6vIUdM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Other reports show "phantom" typing because of uneven screen attachment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRa6BQ8xT8ko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRa6BQ8xT8ko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRa6BQ8xT8ko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It is impossible to say whether the number of people reporting problems are a 
significant number of those who have received the device. Google has not 
offered shipment figures, although it hasstopped taking orders for the 16GB 
version 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/jul/22/google-nexus-7-16-surprise> 
of the device through its Google Play store, suggesting very heavy demand for 
the £199 version of the device. The £159 8GB version is shown as still in stock.

The suspension of new orders for the 16GB version has worried users who are 
hoping for a replacement, since it indicates that Google's hardware partner for 
the Nexus 7,Asus <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/asus>, has not been 
able yet to meet demand. That in turn implies a longer time waiting for a 
replacement to be shipped.

Users have also complained that it has been hard to contact Google to complain 
about problems. Matt Jukes, based in Bristol, found that his Nexus 7 which 
arrived on Wednesdaywould not power on 
<http://digitalbydefault.com/2012/07/21/nexus7-nightmare/>. He tried emailing 
and then ringing Google to complain on the helpline provided - but despite 
calling nine times and holding for 10 minutes, at 14p per minute from his 
mobile provider, was not able to get answered.

Jon Silk, another early purchaser via Google, had problems with the screen 
<http://www.prgeek.net/2012/07/the-nexus-7-experience-so-far.html> - noting 
that it kept popping out, but also that many others had reported the same 
problems online - and was unable to make contact with Google's helplines. He 
has called Asus and Google but been unable to get an answer.

Google has had similar problems with a previous venture into providing 
hardware, when inJanuary 2010 it tried to sell the Nexus One in the US by itself
 <http://news.cnet.com/8301-30684_3-10430720-265.html> rather than through 
carriers. It was overwhelmed with customer support requests and complaints, and 
eventually stopped selling the device itself, leaving it to carriers to sell it.

People who buy the tablet from physical outlets such as Carphone Warehouse, 
Currys Digital or PC World should be able to return the item if they find its 
quality unsatisfactory.
 