
Having trouble dealing with an infuriating boss? Want advice on how to deal 
with loneliness in the field, or get help with trauma once you’ve returned home?

As part of our ongoing aid worker wellbeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
 series, we are now running a regular advice column for professionals in our 
community. No matter how big or small, if you have an issue that you would like 
guidance on, send your question anonymously to globaldevpros@theguardian.com 
with “NGO Agony Aunt” in the subject line.

The Panel

Lucy Heaven Taylor, accountability specialist

Lucy is a specialist in accountability and PSEA (protection from sexual 
exploitation and abuse), with 19 years experience in the humanitarian and 
development sector. She supports a range of NGOs such as Oxfam, World Vision 
and the CHS Alliance to develop policies and build capacity.

Catherine Plumridge, director, Humanitrain  <http://humanitrain.com/>

Catherine has 15 years experience with non-government organisations, the UN 
and the International Committee of the Red Cross. As the director of 
Humanitrain she has trained national and international staff in trauma first 
aid and security (risk management). While her main focus is on trauma, she has 
written and developed courses on subjects such as resilience-building and 
stress management, wellbeing in the field, and sexual aggression awareness.

Kate Denman, training coordinator, REDR <http://www.redr.org.uk/>

Kate is involved with several courses at REDR including “So you think you want 
to be a relief worker?”, and “Managing people and projects in emergencies”. 
Over the last 11 years, Kate has worked with international organisations such 
as Unicef, UNRWA and the British Council in locations such as Syria, Lebanon, 
Venezuela, India, Vietnam and most recently Tanzania.

Shana Montesol Johnson, certified executive, leadership and career coach 
<http://developmentcrossroads.com/about-shana/>

Shana is a certified executive, leadership and career coach who works with 
international development professionals who want careers they love, that make 
an impact, and allow them to have a life outside of work. She has coached 
clients working for such organisations as the WHO, World Bank, Asian 
Development Bank, United Nations Population Fund, World Vision, Plan 
International, USAid and Peace Corps.

Maia Gedde, author of Working in International Development and Humanitarian 
Assistance: A career guide 
<https://www.routledge.com/products/9780415698351?utm_source=www.routledge.com&utm_medium=cms&utm_campaign=sbu3_mbs_2pr_8cm_2dev_nba15_x_x>

While researching her book, Maia interviewed more than 100 professionals about 
getting their first job, advancing their career, and finding a specialism. She 
is currently country manager ofSpark  <http://www.spark-online.org/>in Rwanda, 
a Dutch NGO focused on private sector development, which supports young people 
in post-conflict countries to become entrepreneurs and job creators.

Jo Goldsmith, operations and security specialist, Safer Edge Team 
<http://saferedge.com/about/safer-edge-team/>

Jo is an experienced humanitarian and security specialist, with a broad 
knowledge and expertise in complex working environments such as Pakistan, 
Sudan, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad, Myanmar and North Korea. Jo has 
a strong understanding of the current security requirements and likely future 
challenges facing relief and development organisations. She has worked closely 
alongside a wide variety of humanitarian, development, UN and governmental 
organisations.

Catarina Andrade, leadership and wellness coach 
<http://www.CatarinaAndrade.com>

Catarina helps change-makers who feel overwhelmed balancing work with their 
own health and happiness. She supports them to create more time and energy – 
and reduce stress and burnout – so they can make a bigger impact doing what 
they love while living a balanced and fulfilling life. Prior to this Catarina 
spent over a decade leading global health programmes in Africa.


Headington Institute <http://www.headington-institute.org/> experts (on a 
rotation)

Donald Bosch, director of clinical services 

Donald oversees all training and counselling work. As a licensed clinical 
psychologist and psychoanalyst with 35 years of experience, Don is often in the 
field doing debriefs, working with global response teams, and providing 
psychological support for security trainings.

Lisa Finlay, consulting psychologist 

Lisa is a licensed clinical psychologist with experience in trauma treatment, 
relationship counselling, and group work. Her interest in resilience and 
international development began with volunteer service in the Peace Corps in 
Mozambique.


Rick Williamson, clinical training director and consulting psychologist

Rick provides training, counselling, and consulting services with a special 
focus on cross-cultural psychotherapy and assessment. As a licensed clinical 
psychologist with a decade of experience working in government, academic, and 
community mental health settings, Rick is frequently invited to speak and 
consult on the issue of cultural dynamics in mental health.

We are still looking for HR experts and those with a background in employment 
law to join our panel. Get in touch if you have a recommendation to 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 