
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> has approved the creation of 
chains of hospitals for the first time in its history in a bid to tackle its 
deep financial problems and to allow more patients to be cared for by leading 
doctors in their fields.

It will see highly respected institutions, such as Moorfields eye hospital in 
London and Manchester’s Christie cancer centre, providing specialist services 
to patients potentially many miles away in another part of England. Moorfields 
already runs services in 22 other locations and was partly the model for the 
new plans.


But the move has prompted fears that it will lead to the running down, and 
even closure, of small local hospitals which are highly valued by patients as a 
result of mergers and takeovers.

Simon Stevens, the chief executive of NHS England, will announce the dramatic 
step in a speech to the CBI on Friday in which he will hail it as part of the 
“radical reform” the health service must undergo if it is to remain viable. He 
has pledged to transform the way theNHS in England works by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/18/nhs-short-target-22bn-savings> 
so it can withstand the huge pressures caused by the growing and ageing 
population, growth in the number of people with long-term conditions such as 
diabetes and dementia, and tight budgets expected for years to come.


He will announce the formation of 13 “new hospital vanguards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/26/vanguard-sites-integration-health-social-care>
”, nine of them chains, which will work together to an unprecedented degree. 
For example, specialist orthopaedic hospitals in London, Birmingham and 
Oswestry are forming the National Orthopaedic Alliance. They “aim to create a 
UK-wide franchise or chain of orthpaedic providers to deliver outstanding and 
consistent care in more areas”.


Three centres of outstanding care – Manchester’s Christie hospital, and the 
Royal Marsden and University College hospital, both in London – are also 
banding together to extend their work across England.


Likewise, Northumbria healthcare NHS foundation trust sees its new Northumbria 
foundation group as a way of “acquiring and/or merging [with] other hospital 
trusts”. It has already taken overNorth Cumbria University hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/feb/01/northumbria-foundation-trust-wins-bid>
 NHS trust.

The plan will benefit patients, according to Stevens, because it will see some 
of the NHS’s best hospitals delivering services inside others, with highly 
skilled doctors working at several places across a week.

Moorfields already runs services in 22 different locations in and around 
London, including a clinic at the Dartford and Gravesham trust in Kent. The 
Royal Marsden cancer hospital uses its expertise to provide cancer services at 
Kingston and Queen Mary’s hospitals in greater London.

Stevens will say that it is time for hospitals that are separate or even rival 
organisations to start working closely together because they are better at 
providing many types of care than some existing hospitals, many of which are 
struggling.

“We’ve got some of the world’s best hospitals and specialists in this country, 
and it’s right they should be able to extend their reach more widely, as the 
vanguard programme will now allow them to do,” he will tell the CBI conference.

“The era of go-it-alone individual hospitals is now being superseded by more 
integrated care partnerships, both within local areas and across different 
parts of the country. Our new approach to hospital partnerships will help 
sustain the viability of local hospitals, share clinical and management 
expertise across geographies, and drive efficiencies beyond the walls of 
individual institutions.”

The decision to permit hospitals to band together into chains, which are 
common in many other countries, overturns 67 years of NHS history. Ed Smith, 
the chair of NHS financial regulator Monitor, said the era of standalone 
hospitals such as thefoundation trust hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/19/private-patient-income-soars-nhs-privatisation>
 introduced by the last Labour government, was dead. Smith said: “These were 
right at the time, but the economic and clinical circumstances facing the NHS 
are now different, and our response needs to evolve.”

Stevens’s move, which the government welcomed, sweeps away several decades of 
NHS policy by replacing competition between separate hospital trusts – which 
was pushed by Tony Blair and Gordon Brown’s administrations and extended 
further still by the coalition through Andrew Lansley’s unpopularHealth and 
Social Care Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/30/health-act-means-death-of-nhs>
 2012 – with what he hopes will become widespread collaboration.

While hospitals would still retain their separate identities for the time 
being, NHS sources admitted it could lead to big or high-performing hospitals 
taking over smaller district general hospitals, many of which are increasingly 
in the red and struggling to provide high-class care, especially with a growing 
shortage of many types of health professionals.

However, Labour warned that the move could result in smaller local hospitals 
ultimately reducing the services they offered. “People will be suspicious at 
talk of ‘hospital chains’ given this government’s track record on the NHS. 
These plans for collaboration must not become an excuse to make cuts or close 
services,” saidHeidi Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/17/nhs-failed-collect-data-1bn-cancer-treatment-outcome-rejected-drugs-health>
, the shadow health secretary.

Dr Clive Peedell, an oncologist who co-chairs the National Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Action party, said: “The history 
of mergers in the NHS, and in the wider world of industry, is by no means one 
of predictable success. The danger would be that smaller trusts are gobbled up 
by larger ones in the name of efficiency, leaving services much less accessible 
for local people. And the evidence from America shows that chains end up 
squeezing out competition and care is compromised in the quest to maximise 
profit.”

A spokesman for the Department of Health said: “This is an important 
initiative to link the best performing hospitals with networks of others to 
help raise standards and demonstrates the NHS is finding new and innovative 
solutions.”
 