
The first hospital I visited as a health journalist was billed as an exemplar 
of patient safety. Standing in the melee outside the operating theatres I 
learned that one of their procedures was ensuring everyone on the operating 
team knew everyone else's name before opening up the patient. Nothing about 
their strengths and weaknesses as a clinician; nothing about their experience; 
no understanding of how they would react in an emergency. Just their name. That 
was "safe surgery".

Since the review of the NHS led by eminent surgeon Lord Darzi 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_085825>
 in 2008 the NHS has made strong progress on improving safety. But too many 
trusts still mouth the words "patient safety is our top priority" without 
demonstrating it in their care.

Yesterday's revelation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/15/hospitals-nhs-patient-safety-orders>
 by the campaign groupAction Against Medical Accidents <http://www.avma.org.uk/>
 that scores of trusts are routinely failing to comply with safety alerts 
issued by the National Patient Safety Agency exposes significant system 
failures. It indicates poor collaboration between managers and clinicians to 
ensure alerts are propagated and systems overhauled. It shows a corporate 
inability to distinguish between yet another bureaucratic instruction from the 
Department of Health and a clinical imperative that will save lives. It 
uncovers complacent clinicians who are not keeping pace with the latest 
procedures. Above all it exposes a failure to put the patient at the centre of 
everything the NHS does.

It is important to recognise that the improvements being made in safety are 
deep and widespread. Walk into hospitals such asSalford Royal 
<http://www.srht.nhs.uk/> and you will see organisations imbued with a safety 
culture. But elsewhere there is still arrogance and complacency. Some surgeons 
have objected to complying with standardised operating procedures on the 
grounds it compromises their freedom, as if the prostrate body before them is 
simply a canvas waiting for the artist's scalpel.

Safety alerts are not a blizzard of paper; there were just 53 in the six years 
covered by the study, affecting both hospitals and primary care. They highlight 
risks across the spectrum of treatments, from drug doses to feeding tube 
insertions.

Safety standards will be raised by transparency, enforcement and 
patient-centred care. Action Against Medical Accidents should not have needed 
to exploit theFreedom of Information Act  
<http://www.ico.gov.uk/what_we_cover/freedom_of_information.aspx>to get this 
data into public view; NHS organisations should be compelled to publish their 
failure or success in compliance. Exposure to the ire of the local press gets 
results.

The regulator – the Care Quality Commission <http://www.cqc.org.uk/> – should 
monitor compliance and have the power to force action. But the key is centring 
care on the patient. The greatest weakness in the health service is that, 
nearly 62 years after its creation, patient-centred care is still an 
aspiration. To give this failure a sense of scale, the Department of Health 
believes up to 25,000 hospital patients' lives could be saved each year if they 
were risk-assessed and treated forvenous thromboembolism 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publichealth/Healthprotection/Bloodsafety/VenousThromboembolismVTE/DH_102>
. Clinicians and managers still have a long way to go to deliver a world-class 
healthcare system.
 