
There is an anecdote that Sir Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nicholasserota> told in a lecture he gave 
in November 2000, almost exactly six months after the triumphant opening, in 
the gargantuan chambers of the Bankside power station in London, ofTate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern>. It concerned a civil service 
inquiry into the salary of the director of the Tate Gallery conducted in 1987, 
the year before Serota took up the post. The director’s pay, it was concluded, 
ought to be raised to match that of the directors of theVictoria and Albert 
Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/v-and-a> and the National 
Gallery <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-gallery>. Not 
because the Tate was intrinsically as important as these venerable 
institutions, but rather because “the director of the Tate has to deal with the 
very difficult problem of modern art”. The Tate director, in short, was due 
danger money for having to cope with the inexplicable, the unpopular, the 
controversial and the bewildering.

Serota's proposition that art made today might have something important or 
enriching to say to us has won out

It would be difficult, now, for even the most out-of-touch Whitehall mandarin 
to argue that modern art was “a very difficult problem” in British culture. 
Though many would argue that Britain’s relationship with contemporary culture 
remains unevolved compared with that of its European neighbours, there has been 
a vast and (it feels) irreversible change over the past 30 years. Contemporary 
art is no longer an embarrassment. It is completely mainstream. Serota’s simple 
proposition that the art being made today might have something important, 
enriching, surprising, disturbing, or joyful to say to us, has won out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febc6e5dc615075dbbe7537bf51fd875a9caf41e3%2F0_0_3075_2062%2F3075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20art's%20modern%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20art%27s%20modern%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febc6e5dc615075dbbe7537bf51fd875a9caf41e3%2F0_0_3075_2062%2F3075.jpg>
 Nicholas Serota wheels Roy Lichtenstein’s painting entitled Whaam! out of 
storage for a Tate Modern’ rehang in 2006. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the 
Guardian 
Politicians talk, unabashed, about the importance of Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> and Frieze art fair. 
London has a contemporary-art economy that supports hundreds of commercial 
galleries and thousands of artists. Towns that could not have dreamed of 
supporting a modern art gallery in 1987 – fromGateshead 
<http://www.balticmill.com/> and Wakefield <http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/> 
toMargate <https://www.turnercontemporary.org/> and Middlesbrough 
<http://www.visitmima.com/> – now do so. Parts of the press still, it is true, 
make hay with the annual Turner prize shortlist, finding controversy where they 
can. But perhaps, now, with a tone more of sport and playfulness than loathing. 
Not all of this transformation is down to the single figure of Serota. But a 
lot of it is.


He is an old-fashioned public servant: he believes in culture as a civic 
right, art a precious resource held in common

Serota is a man who can often seem forbidding, with his poker-straight 
backbone, firmly clenched jaw and penetrating gaze. He is, of course, ambitious 
and wildly determined, as you would have to be, to lead a team to open first 
Tate Modern and then, earlier this year, the gallery’s huge expansion. A large 
part of his skill has been political and diplomatic: he has persuaded 
successive culture ministers and chancellors he is a serious-minded, effective 
leader who, given just enough government support, is capable of creating 
something in the reflected glory of which they could bask. This skill has 
benefited others beyond Tate; he isone of a very few top cultural leaders who 
have been able to temper the severity of government cuts on the arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/04/blitzkrieg-on-the-arts> 
in general. And he has used similar resources of charm, argument and persuasion 
to open the wallets of legions of private donors.


Behind the skill comes the moral backbone. For all that Whitehall decided to 
raise his pay, his salary still hovers around the £170,000 mark. His 
counterpart at the Museum of Modern Art in New York,Glenn Lowry 
<https://www.moma.org/about/senior_staff/glenn_lowry>, was paid $2.1m in 2013. 
Clearly, Serota could be making a great deal of money elsewhere, if he so 
wished. But he is an old-fashioned public servant. He believes in culture as a 
civic right; in the importance of art as a precious resource to be held in 
common by the nation as a whole. And he has taken Tate’s responsibility as the 
dominant institution in Britain’s art world seriously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7d0b8c984ecec1dd512171e6cb27052691480a%2F0_0_4320_3399%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20art's%20modern%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Serota%3A%20art%27s%20modern%20champion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7d0b8c984ecec1dd512171e6cb27052691480a%2F0_0_4320_3399%2F4320.jpg>
 Rachel Whiteread’s 2005 installatio in Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall. Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
While London is overmighty in terms of the resources it receives to fund 
culture, Serota has always been a quiet but effective supporter of colleagues 
running poorer, less glamorous institutions around the country. For which 
reason, his nextmove to be chair of Arts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
, bodes well. The arts in England could not hope for a more effective advocate 
at the head of its most significant funding body.

Six candidates who could be up for the top job at Tate galleries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/six-leading-candidates-nicholas-serota-director-tate-galleries>
Of course, over a long career, there have been some slips, some ups and downs. 
There was akerfuffle over Tate’s 2005 purchase of Chris Ofili’s installation 
The Upper Room <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/jul/19/topstories3.arts> 
while the artist was a trustee, leading to accusations of a conflict of 
interest. The Tate Modernextension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/23/first-look-inside-tate-moderns-power-pyramid>
, planned to coincide with the London Olympics, has in fact coordinated nicely 
with Rio, four years later. In 2015, he lost two directors – one ofTate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/24/tate-modern-boss-chris-dercon-berlin-volksbuhne-theatre>
,one of Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/31/tate-britain-director-penelope-curtis-to-depart>
 – amid accusations that the latter gallery had lost its way.

In the end, these will be seen as small beer compared to his achievements. It 
all comes back to the art. A patient and wily administrator, he is, above all, 
a man who knows and loves art, a man who is curious about artists, a man who 
has curated great shows, from the hugely significantA New Spirit in Painting 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/online-resources/glossary/n/new-spirit-painting> 
(1981) withNorman Rosenthal 
<http://www.artinamericamagazine.com/news-features/interviews/norman-rosenthal/>
 at the Royal Academy of Arts, to theglorious Cy Twombly exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2008/jun/03/twombly> (with 
Nicholas Cullinan) in 2008 at Tate Modern. Tate’s next director may be a great 
curator, a great administrator, or a great diplomat. They will be lucky if they 
can find all three qualities in one person.
 