
Nicki Minaj has accused Steven Tyler of racism in a spat involving Bob Dylan, 
American Idol and an imaginary cornfield. Aerosmith singer Tyler, a judge on 
the show in 2011 and 2012,told MTV news 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1697899/steven-tyler-slams-american-idol-judges.jhtml>
 that Minaj, who will join the show for the forthcoming 12th season, would send 
Dylan "to the cornfield" if he were a contestant.

"You assume that I wouldn't have liked Bob Dylan???" Minaj responded via 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/>. "Why? black? rapper? what? go fuck 
yourself and worry about yourself babe."

"I understand you really wanted to keep your job [on Idol] but take that up 
with the producers," she continued. "I would have sent Bob Dylan to a 
cornfield??? Steven, you haven't seen me judge one single solitary contestant 
yet! … That's a racist comment … Lets make [Steven] a shirt that says 'No 
Coloreds Allowed' then escort him down 2Barbara Walters 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barbara_Walters> so he can tell [her] how he was 
threatened w/guns."

Tyler told MTV News. "If it was Bob Dylan, Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> would have had him sent to the 
cornfield! These [contestants], they just got out of a car from the midwest 
somewhere, and they're in New York City, they're scared to death … [They need] 
to be judged by people that [are] honest, true."

While Minaj would have sent a young Dylan back to Minnesota, Tyler said, 
previousAmerican Idol <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> 
judges would have recognised his gift. "If it was Bob Dylan with us, we would 
have brought the best of him out, as we did with [2012 winner] Phillip 
Phillips. Just saying."

Minaj's outcry follows her row last month with fellow judge Mariah Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/05/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-american-idol>
. TV host Barbara Walters said she had been told by Carey that Minaj had 
threatened to shoot her. "Lets just say nicki said smthn about a gun," Minaj 
snorted. "ppl will believe it cuz she's a black rapper. Lmao. I'll then hit up 
Barbara n milk it."

The next season of American Idol will begin on 16 January. In addition to 
Minaj and Carey, its judging panel includes Randy Jackson and country singer 
Keith Urban.
 