
A new song by Jessie J has given rapper Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> her first UK No 1. Bang Bang, 
recorded by Jessie J but with Minaj and Ariana Grande as guests, becomes the 
American’s most successful appearance in the singles chart.

Oddly, Bang Bang isn’t as big of a milestone for either of Minaj’s co-stars. 
Grande’s Problem hit the top spot earlier this year, andJessie J 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jessie-j> has had two prior No 1s. Minaj has 
never before charted higher than No 2, despite two platinum-certified singles 
and the biggest international profile of the three. In some ways, Bang Bang may 
be an advance agent for Minaj’s song Anaconda, which gets its British release 
in October.

Sigma’s Changing has fallen one place to No 2, followed by Taylor Swift’s 
rising Shake It Off and Calvin Harris’s Blame, which was the most-streamed song 
of the week.

Another song benefited even more from services like Spotify and Deezer. Meghan 
Trainor’s All About That Bass has become the first song to reach the top 40 
without selling a single copy. The song reached No 33 solely on the basis of 
digital streaming; it is not technically released here until next week. 
Streaming servicesstarted counting toward chart results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/23/music-streaming-spotify-dictate-official-singles-chart>
 in July. While All About That Bass is widely described as a “body positive” 
anthem, Trainor has also been accused of shaming certain body types. Last week, 
the Massachusetts-born singer saidshe does not consider herself a feminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/23/meghan-trainor-i-dont-consider-myself-a-feminist-all-about-that-bass>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7PCkvCPvDXk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7PCkvCPvDXk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7PCkvCPvDXk&media=>
 Meghan Trainor’s single hasn’t sold a single copy, but enters the chart due to 
digital streaming alone. 
On the albums chart, Alt-J’s This Is All Yours becomes the group’s first-ever 
No 1. Despite winning the Mercury prize, 2012’s An Awesome Wave never reached 
any higher than No 13. “[This is] never something we thought we’d achieve,” Gus 
Unger-Hamilton told the Official Charts Company. The group managed to outsell
Barbra Streisand <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/barbra-streisand>, Sam 
Smith, George Ezra, Leonard Cohen and even Aphex Twin, whose comeback LP debuts 
at a career-high No 8.

Official singles chart top five:

1. Jessie J ft Nicki Minaj and Ariana Grande – Bang Bang

2. Sigma ft Paloma Faith – Changing

3. Taylor Swift <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> – Shake It Off

4. Calvin Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/music/calvin-harris> ft John 
Newman – Blame

5. Lilly Wood and Robin Schulz – Prayer In C

Official albums chart top five:

1. Alt-J <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alt-j> – This Is All Yours

2. Barbra Streisand – Partners

3. Sam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sam-smith> – In the Lonely Hour

4. George Ezra – Wanted On Voyage

5. Leonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> – Popular 
Problems
 