
Nicole Kidman has taken aim at sexism in Hollywood 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/06/17/us-film-women-idUKKBN0OX14Q20150617>, 
claiming the film industry does not represent an “even playing field” for women.

Speaking at the Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards in Los Angeles, the 
Oscar-winning Australian actor praised the organisation for its pioneering work 
supporting female actors and film-makers.

“Obviously we need to create more opportunities; it’s not an even playing 
field,” said Kidman, who picked up the Crystal award for excellence in film at 
the ceremony. “We’re all working and banding together and trying to change that 
and that’s what’s needed. We also need to put cameras in little girls’ hands 
and get them to tell stories and increase their confidence so that they can 
feel powerful.”

Ava DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay>, whose Martin 
Luther King biopic Selma won plaudits from critics earlier this year, said 
talented women were often overlooked by the film industry.

Carey Mulligan: film industry is 'massively sexist'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/22/carey-mulligan-film-industry-is-massively-sexist-far-from-the-madding-crowd>
“Hollywood is like the boyfriend who doesn’t call you as often, that’s kind of 
like what Hollywood is to women film-makers,” said DuVernay, who received the 
Dorothy Arzner directors award. “[There is] a little a bit of neglect in terms 
of recognising the imagination and talent women film-makers have ... of older 
actresses who might be past the window of when the industry says they’re 
valuable. There’s so much of that going on so it’s certainly something we all 
have to work to correct.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fnicole-kidman-hollywood-is-not-an-even-playing-field-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434614252281%2Fff42fc95-9043-4ce8-87b0-07cac2cf0479-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicole%20Kidman%3A%20Hollywood%20is%20'not%20an%20even%20playing%20field'%20for%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fnicole-kidman-hollywood-is-not-an-even-playing-field-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicole%20Kidman%3A%20Hollywood%20is%20%27not%20an%20even%20playing%20field%27%20for%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fnicole-kidman-hollywood-is-not-an-even-playing-field-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434614252281%2Fff42fc95-9043-4ce8-87b0-07cac2cf0479-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ava DuVernay at the Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards in Los Angeles. 
Photograph: Paul A. Hebert/Invision/AP 
Elsewhere, Avatar star Zoe Saldana described her disgust at being written off 
by some Hollywood producers after she became pregnant last year, and called for 
studios to provide childcare for mothers.

“Let me tell you something: it will never be the right time for anybody in 
your life that you get pregnant,”she told USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/people/2015/06/16/zoe-saldana-infinitely-polar-bear-star-trek-child-care-in-hollywood/71257096/>
 at the premiere of comic drama Infinitely Polar Bear. “The productions I was 
slated to work on sort of had a panic. I heard through the grapevine there was 
even a conversation of me being written off of one of the projects.

“I was like, ‘Oh, my God, are you kidding me? It’s this bad?’ Right when I 
just feel super-duper happy, is that inconvenient for you? That me, as a woman 
in my 30s, I finally am in love and I am finally starting my life? And it’s 
[screwing] your schedule up? Really?”

Saldana said she had to fight hard to have child care for her six-month twin 
sons Cy and Bowie included in film deals, and contrasted studios’ attitude 
towards mothers with their approach to male stars.

Helen Mirren: ageism in Hollywood is 'outrageous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/helen-mirren-ageism-hollywood-women>
“They spend more money sometimes ‘perking’ up male superstars in a movie,” she 
said, citing private jets, assistants and bodyguards as well as “a really phat 
penthouse or them staying in a yacht instead of them staying on land” as 
typical incentives.

“But then a woman comes in going, ‘OK, I have a child. You’re taking me away 
from my home. You’re taking my children away from their home. And you’re going 
to make me work a lot more hours than I usually would if I was home. Therefore, 
I would have to pay for this nanny for more hours – so I kind of need that.’ 
And they go: ‘Nope, we don’t pay for nannies.’”
 