Tim Davies-Pugh (@tdaviespugh) 
@GdnVoluntary <https://twitter.com/GdnVoluntary> really useful guide to Social 
Investmenthttp://t.co/Xg6yDCSkYc <http://t.co/Xg6yDCSkYc> #twittertips 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/twittertips?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/tdaviespugh/status/522269140820967424> October 15, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/tdaviespugh/status/522269140820967424> 
Lisa Stonestreet, programme director – UK Sustainable Investment and Finance 
Association <http://uksif.org/>

 * It is important to make sure you know what you are buying/investing in. A 
certain amount of due diligence should be conducted: ask questions and check 
the credentials of the organisation or project you are investing in. Make sure 
you understand the exact nature of what you are investing in so you can make an 
informed choice about where your money goes. 
 * Start close to home. Knowing you are having a positive impact on your local 
community can be a great feeling and empower you to think about how your money 
is being used more widely. Community Shares has adirectory 
<http://communityshares.org.uk/directory> of enterprises considering or 
launching a community share offer.
OikocreditUK (@OikocreditUK) 
@GdnVoluntary <https://twitter.com/GdnVoluntary> another tip for investing: 
follow the money, because there are people and planet impacts in your 
investment decisions...
 <https://twitter.com/OikocreditUK/status/524865578574827521> October 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OikocreditUK/status/524865578574827521> 
Amir Rizwan, investment executive – CAF Venturesome 
<https://www.cafonline.org/charity-finance--fundraising/borrowing/social-investment.aspx>

 * Test every assumption. The due diligence process can be time consuming. 
Lenders will be assessing the management of your organisation, the strength of 
governance and the resilience of your financial projections in order to have 
confidence that an organisation will be able to repay the funds. Test every 
assumption and ask as many people to sense check your forecasts: beg, borrow 
and steal expertise! 
 * Demonstrate that investment fits with your overall strategy. Social 
investment might be used for multiple purposes: growth, working capital, 
investing in assets. You’ll need to demonstrate how funds fits in with your 
overall strategy. An investor will want to understand that the financing is 
perfectly aligned to your strategy and not fitting a square peg into a round 
hole. OikocreditUK (@OikocreditUK) 
@HobdayStevens <https://twitter.com/HobdayStevens> @GdnVoluntary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnVoluntary>. My tip: invest in something that's as good 
for people & planet as your pocket, & which MAKES SENSE to YOU...
 <https://twitter.com/OikocreditUK/status/524864095238238208> October 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OikocreditUK/status/524864095238238208> 
Jamie Hartzell, founder and chair – Ethex <https://www.ethex.org.uk/>

 * For investors: build a portfolio of positive investments instead of putting 
everything in one business. This reduces your financial risk, and means that 
you can meet a wider set of social objectives too. You can do this by buying 
into green and ethical funds or you can build your own portfolio with 
organisations like Ethex. 
 * For investees: think about what your investors want, not just what your 
business wants. Pitch your business at them, but don’t forget to pitch the 
investment products they are buying too. What is the return, what is the risk, 
and how can they exit when they want to? Investment is a long term 
relationship, so it has to be built on the right foundations. No matter how 
great they think your business is, the product is what the investor is buying. 
And offering the right investment product is crucial for the future success of 
your business too.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!

The charity money hub is funded by CAF. All content is editorially independent 
except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 