
The MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> season is upon us. In the 
run-up to the start, the Guardian explores questions that the upcoming marathon 
campaign will answer. Following ourpreview of the American League West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/mar/27/al-west-season-preview-rangers-set-for-texas-sized-suffering>
, here’s the NL West:

Will the Giants repeat?


I can answer that right now if you like.


No. 

At some point you have to start taking these patterns seriously. Since 2010, 
San Francisco have won it all in even years, and failed to make the postseason 
in odd seasons. Oh, these Giants will get to October alright - they host the 
Dodgers on the first, and finish their schedule with three home games against 
the Rockies.

After that it’s season over.

How the Giants tore through the post-season is well documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/30/madison-bumgarner-san-francisco-giants-world-series-title>
. It almost makes us forget that we’re talking about an 88-win team, one that 
put up a 45-53 record from 1 June. That’s a lot of season to be that ordinary, 
but for these otherworldly masters of the playoffs, it mattered little. 
Especially with spellbinding hurler Madison Bumgarner sucking the morale out of 
their opponents in the crisp autumn air.

So now they face a down year in order to recoup for their 2016 bid at a fourth 
title in seven seasons. Not that manager Bruce Bochy will ever buy into such 
proven data streams - he already kicked up a desert storm while watching his 
ballclub flutter in the pre-season.

“I know it’s spring training,” Bochy said earlier this March 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/mlb-big-league-stew/bruce-bochy-says-struggling-giants--not-even-close-to-being-ready--for-opening-day-234048959.html>
. “But this is as tough a stretch as I’ve seen, even in spring, in all facets 
of the game. We’re not doing anything very well right now, from pitching to 
swinging the bats, defense.”

You don’t usually hear managers utter such negativity this early, but Bochy 
has done enough to say anything he wants, and, well, he’s annoyed.

Wouldn’t you be edgy if your good luck charm third baseman took off for Boston 
for big bucks? Even better, Pablo Sandoval toldBleacher Report 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2389632-home-in-boston-pablo-sandoval-says-leaving-san-francisco-not-hard-at-all>
 that leaving San Francisco wasn’t “hard at all”. Even better than that, now 
playing third base for the San Francisco Giants: Casey McGehee.

McGehee, who was acquired from Miami, is no Kung Fu Panda (obviously), and his 
departure is a lot of starch to lose in a lineup. So is theloss of outfielder 
Mike Morse 
<http://www.sfgate.com/giants/article/Michael-Morse-signs-with-Miami-5960733.php>
, who has his issues both offensively and defensively, but is, or was, a nice 
power threat to have in the lineup. San Francisco will get a healthy Angel 
Pagan back in the outfield, and brought in Nori Aoki, the former Royals 
outfielder, who at times struggled defensively.

Losing the free-spirited Hunter Pence to a broken right ulna bone 
<http://fantasynews.cbssports.com/fantasybaseball/update/25118505/giants-hunter-pence-gets-cast-replaced>
 is a tough, but he’ll be back and ready to summon his special brand of 
baseball by May. The Giants will hope to get more from the rapidly improving 
Brandon Crawford and Joe Panik at shortstop and second base, while All-Star 
catcher Buster Posey will eventually snap out of his post-season slump and put 
up stellar all-around offensive numbers, one more time.

Pitching wise, the bullpen is still a strength, with unflappable Santiago 
Casilla as closer, Sergio Romo setting up and Jeremy Affeldt working the 
seventh.

The starting rotation is filled with a familiar cast of vets. The mere threat 
of Tim Lincecum snapping back into Cy Young form is enough to land him in the 
fifth spot (so is his wild $18m salary), meaning Ryan Vogelsong and Yusmeiro 
Petit, so crucial in relief last October, will head to the bullpen. Jake Peavy 
and Tim Hudson are back, and so isMatt Cain, who will also seek to find his 
old, dominant self 
<http://www.sfgate.com/giants/article/GIANTS-SPLASH-All-gain-no-pain-for-Cain-in-6156613.php>
 after coming back from August surgery on his right elbow. Bumgarner is the 
unchallenged ace, who after mastering the post-season, could potentially usurp 
Clayton Kershaw as the best lefty in the game.

Yes, Panda is gone, but there’s a lot to like about San Francisco. Regardless, 
with the Dodgers, and now the Padres, standing in the way, the Giants will, 
oddly enough, find themselves boxed out of the post-season.

Prediction: Cold summer in San Francisco - third place, NL West

Can the Padres reach the promised land?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fnl-west-season-preview-why-the-san-francisco-giants-wont-repeat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427318749228%2Fc0f0058d-7835-4d3e-8787-6993dfb1e8e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NL%20West%20season%20preview%3A%20why%20the%20San%20Francisco%20Giants%20won't%20repeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fnl-west-season-preview-why-the-san-francisco-giants-wont-repeat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NL%20West%20season%20preview%3A%20why%20the%20San%20Francisco%20Giants%20won%27t%20repeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fnl-west-season-preview-why-the-san-francisco-giants-wont-repeat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427318749228%2Fc0f0058d-7835-4d3e-8787-6993dfb1e8e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Matt Kemp and the San Diego Padres will NOT be boring in 2015. Photograph: 
Christian Petersen/Getty Images 
The San Diego Padres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-diego-padres> have 
never won a World Series title, but they sure are trying.

In 47 off-seasons <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/SDP/> we’ve not 
seen anything like this from the Pads - a flurry of headline grabbing moves 
that had the baseball community oooing and ahhing while curled up in front of 
the hot stove (admittedly they probably didn’t need the stove in San Diego). 
Yes indeed, the Padres - a bland, vanilla and completely ordinary organization 
with little history of spending big on free agentsare the champions of the 
offseason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/10/how-a-rapid-risky-rebuild-made-the-padres-the-nls-most-interesting-team>
.

What does that buy you? In San Diego, an awful lot. Heck, if it all implodes 
in Petco Park their fans will know that their team, led by new heroGeneral 
Manager AJ Preller 
<http://m.mlb.com/news/article/88158682/padres-choose-rangers-assistant-general-manager-aj-preller-to-be-their-gm>
, did absolutely everything they could to help propel an organization that has 
enjoyed just two winning seasons since 2005 to World Series bliss.

What’s to lose, really, when for so long their retro ballpark in the Gaslamp 
Quarter and the occasionalbench clearing brawl with their rivals to el norte 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Xw2BqT2NpM> have been the most intriguing 
part of all things Padres. Now their fans, who have rushed to the box office in 
response, have slugging right fielder Matt Kemp and his contentious clubhouse 
conduct to chew on. Justin Upton, who spent two seasons rotting in the high 
humidity of Hotlanta, ready to break out in left field underneath those picture 
perfect blue skies. And Wil Myers, one-time Royals and Rays super-prospect, 
ready to bloom on the best coast while roaming the SD’s spacey center field. A 
sparkling trio - one to rival the Tony Gwynn, Greg Vaughn and Steve Finley set 
that propelled the Padres to withinfour wins of their maiden World Series title 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/SDP/1998.shtml> in 1998. 

Now plug in catcher Derek Norris, who brings that Oakland edginess 
<http://a.espncdn.com/combiner/i?img=/i/headshots/mlb/players/full/30608.png&w=350&h=254>
 to southern California, along with an OPS that ranked fourth best in MLB, and 
that my friends, is what you call, fun.

Even better, Preller signed James Shields for four years and $75m 
<http://chicago.suntimes.com/baseball/7/71/461978/big-game-james-shields-one-got-away-cubs-big-winter>
 in another positively un-Padre like pickup. Yes, he was spotty (less Big Game) 
in the World Series with KC, but he’s a decent bet to thrive in a pitcher’s 
haven, eat some innings and make everyone forget about his October. So now a 
pitching staff that ranked second in National League ERA in 2014 has a cherry 
on top. Ian Kennedy, Tyson Ross, Adam Cashner, make up a rotation that also 
features Odrisamer Despaigne, a righty who could break outfollowing a year of 
life-changing adjustments after leaving Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/19/omar-minaya-on-cuba-its-almost-like-an-oil-well>
. The closer is solid - Joaquín Benoit took over the role in late July and was 
lights out, while the pen that put up an NL best 2.73 ERA looks similar in make 
up.

Now, I know what you’re thinking - the infield stinks. Well, let’s just say 
this - third baseman Yonder Alonso, shortstop Alexi Amarista, second baseman 
Jedd Gyorko, and third baseman Yangervis Solarte didn’t post OPS’s above .700, 
meaning yes, their offensive production was pretty damn awful. The glass 
half-full approach is that the presence of four biggish bats will lead to the 
rest seeing some better pitches to hit. And who knows, maybe theonce touted 
third baseman Will Middlebrooks 
<http://www.utsandiego.com/news/2015/mar/21/padres-middlebrooks-solarte-competition-still-open/>
 finds his game in the San Diego sun. Maybe outfielder Carlos Quentin stays 
healthy and contributes. Maybe Cameron Maybin ... well, let’s just leave it 
there.

Whatever happens in San Diego, it’ll be a story, and considering the Padres 
recent history, that’s more than enough.

Prediction: Padres push for playoffs - second in NL West. 

Can the Dodgers get over the hump?

 Will Clayton Kershaw turn that frown upside down in the 2015 post-season? 
Photograph: Joe Skipper/Reuters 
It hurt. A lot. Think paper cut and lemon juice. The Los Angeles Dodgers, 
ousted from the playoffs yet again by the St Louis Cardinals, after anotherpair 
of post-season implosions from Clayton Kershaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/oct/07/los-angeles-dodgers-vs-st-louis-cardinals-national-league-division-series-live>
. After watching the lefty put together two regular seasons featuring sub-2.00 
earned run averages and a grand total of 471 strikeouts, we’re all still trying 
to figure out just how the Redbirds roasted him four times in four starts. I’d 
imagine Clayton is in the same boat, considering he lost just three games all 
of last season.

Life goes on however, especially in La La Land, where the reaction from the 
front office was to change leadership at the top and freshen up a Dodgers team 
that had won 94 games. Andrew Friedman, the boy genius who helped the Tampa Bay 
Rays compete with a pittance of a payroll,was brought in as Head of Baseball 
Operations to help the Dodgers 
<http://www.mlbtraderumors.com/2014/10/andrew-friedman-to-leave-rays-join-dodgers.html>
 take that next step. LA get a great executive, (Billy Beane disciple Farhan 
Zaida joined him as General Manager) while we get to watch what Friedman, who 
is accustomed to robbing Peter to pay Paul, does when he gets the keys to a 
Maserati.

Friedman began by attacking the poisonous clubhouse atmosphere, one in which 
the Dodgers managed to win consistently in spite of themselves. Enigmatic 
shortstop Hanley Ramirez, who plays hard when he feels like it, finally became 
someone else’s problem. Friedman also managed to ship Matt Kemp -who was 
confused by the implication that he was a bad team-mate 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-dodgers-matt-kemp-confused-20150314-story.html>
 - and his arthritic hip to San Diego, helping thin out a clogged outfield that 
was blessed with depth but besieged by egos. Plug in a talented, athletic 
rookie prospect in Joc Pederson to play center in between Carl Crawford in left 
field and the mercurial and hopefully more consistent Yasiel Puig in right, 
trade for Jimmy Rollins as a veteran shortstop placeholder, and potentially, we 
have a bit more peace in our time. I say potentially because outfielderAndre 
Ethier is still chirping about not starting 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/12374530/andre-ethier-wants-trade-not-starting-los-angeles-dodgers>
, but the $50m-plus he’s owed makes him difficult to deal.

Friedman also dealt speedy second baseman Dee Gordon for a Marlins prospect 
while his value was high and acquired a slower but steadier fielder in Howie 
Kendrick. LA re-signed third baseman Juan Uribe, but he could see less time 
with fiery Cuban prospect Alex Guerrero, signed for $28m last season, planning 
to exercise a clause in his deal thatallows him to reject an assignment to the 
minors 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/la-sp-0308-dodgers-20150308-story.html>. 
At catcher, the defensively minded AJ Ellis will share time with Yasmani 
Grandal, acquired in the Kemp deal for his power bat. Slugging first baseman 
Adrian Gonzalez returns in his role of a calming, stable force in the infield.

Friedman’s biggest splash came in the late-Spring signing of 29-year-old Cuban 
infielder Hector Olivera to a six-year contract worth $62.5m. It’s a move he 
never could’ve even thought of pulling off while managing the Rays, especially 
when you consider the reports that he actuallyhas a a partial tear in the ulnar 
collateral ligament of his right elbow 
<http://www.truebluela.com/2015/3/24/8286929/hector-olivera-ucl-tear-dodgers-contract-protection>
. Despite the threat of injury, considering that Uribe, Kendrick and Rollins 
will be free-agents in 2016, the crowded Dodgers infield will look a lot more 
sensible this time next year.

Friedman brought in Brandon McCarthy to replace the departed Dan Haren. The 
veteran hurler was reborn in the Bronx last season and should benefit from the 
spacious Dodger Stadium. The rotation of Kershaw, Zack Grienke, Hyun-Jin, Ryu (
although he is out for at least two weeks) 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/12551721/los-angeles-dodgers-rest-hyun-jin-ryu-mri-left-shoulder>
, McCarthy and Brett Anderson is a strength as usual, but the bullpen remains 
an issue. Kenley Jansen is out until late April after foot surgery.Brandon 
League is 20lbs. lighter after dropping drinking 
<http://www.dailynews.com/sports/20150301/los-angeles-dodgers-reliever-brandon-league-credits-giving-up-alcohol-to-boost-in-energy>
 and taking up a paleo diet. Good stuff except he’s now out for two months with 
a right shoulder setback. The bridge between middle relief and the closer was a 
major issue in the post-season, and needless to say, LA have been holding 
auditions all spring - give them a holler if you’re interested.


Overall, the Dodgers should be a more cohesive unit for manager Don Mattingly 
to operate in 2015. Friedman already has a top-six minor league farm system to 
work with, one that includes super-prospectCorey Seager 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/minors/player.cgi?id=seager001cor>, who 
could arrive in this season.


Prediction: Dodger (regular season) domination - first place, NL West

Will Tulo stay or go or will he go?
 How much longer will Troy Tulowitzki be a member of the Colorado Rockies? 
Photograph: Chris Humphreys/USA Today Sports 
Remember the days of being over at your friend’s house and seeing all these 
toys you wished your parents bought you? Then, remember the immense 
disappointment of discovering that they were all either broken or had dead 
batteries?


Colorado Rockies <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colorado-rockies> fans 
know the feeling.


Troy Tulowitzki and Carlos Gonzalez are the Rox’s expensive, broken toys 
masking as franchise cornerstones. Tulo and Cargo combined to play just 151 
games <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/COL/2014.shtml>, while Michael 
Cuddyer, now grazing in the Mets outfield also battled an injury, playing in 
just 49 games.


How much did that actually matter? Rather incredibly, very little. Coors Field 
was once again extremely generous as theRox piled up the most runs in Major 
League Baseball <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/COL/2014-batting.shtml>
. Outfielder Corey Dickenson broke out. Nolan Arenado’s bat nearly measured up 
to his phenomenal golden glove at third base. Center fielder Drew Stubbs hit. 
They almost all hit come to think of it - even the back-up catcher Michael 
McKennry put up a blazing OPS. I’m not going to list any of these ridiculous 
numbers because they’re all silly, pretend stats and I refuse. The only one you 
really need to know is 96, the number of games they lost.


The Rockies are an interesting organization, one with an offbeat owner in Dick 
Monfort, who saw fit to scold fans during email exchanges last season. 
Monfort’s gems include “maybe Denver doesn’t deserve a franchise 
<http://denver.cbslocal.com/2014/07/10/rockies-owner-maybe-denver-doesnt-deserve-a-franchise/>
,” and “if it’s that upsetting don’t come to the games.” Incredibly, average 
crowds of over 33,000 turned up to Coors Field to watch this mess, which once 
again lived up to its reputation as a graveyard for pitching. They finished 
dead last in NL staff ERA, and upheaval followed.


Monfort, to whom change is akin to open heart surgery without sedatives, 
promoted 37-year old Jeff Bridich as the new GM, after Dan O’Dowd either 
resigned or was pushed out after serving 15 years 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/rockies/2014/10/08/general-manager-jeff-bridich-replacing-dan-odowd-colorado-rockies/16907435/>
. The other co-GM, Bill Geivett, also took off for Houston.


So after flirting with the 100 loss mark, the kid has some work to do, and 
chances are 2015 will provide more lows in the Rocky Mountains. Bridich turned 
over the roster but the only real name acquisitions included Phillies hurler
Kyle Hendrick and catcher Nick Hundly 
<http://arizonasports.com/42/1818689/Kyle-Kendrick-sharp-as-Rockies-beat-Dbacks-60>
 from Baltimore. Actually, the best thing about their offseason was making a 
one-year qualifying offer to Cuddyer so that when the Mets signed him to a 
deal, the Rox would get their 2015 draft pick. That’s a win in Rockies land, 
but not one that will bring any to Denver this season.

Jon Gray can, and likely will bring some w’s this year. The Rockies top 
pitching prospect is a big part of their future, but on Sunday, he was crushed 
for six earned runs in just two-thirds of an inning, and then came up limping 
after straining his groin, a sore sight for Rockies fans.


Best case scenario is that Tulowitzki and Gonzalez 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/12223429/troy-tulowitzki-carlos-gonzalez-healthy-committed-colorado-rockies>
 come out blazing, and Birdich trades them to stockpile prospects for the 
future. They’re expensive but valuable chips, and the key to kickstarting this 
inevitable rebuild. If that’s going to happen anytime this century, the faster 
they ship them off the better.


Prediction: Rockies roll downhill - fourth place, NL West


Can the Diamondbacks rebuild in a watchable way?
 Paul Goldschmidt is the best reason to watch the Arizona Diamondbacks. 
Photograph: Ben Margot/AP Photo 
Let’s start with the good news - when Dave Stewart was hired as general 
manager this offseason by his former manager and current Arizona D’Backs chief 
baseball officer Tony La Russa, it reversed one of the more curious minority 
hiring cases in the sport.Back in 2001, JP Riccardi was hired ahead of Stewart 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/15/sports/on-baseball-stewart-passed-over-by-the-blue-jays.html>
, who had been acting as the Toronto Blue Jays’ assistant GM for three seasons. 
Riccardi had yet to cut his chops performing many of the roles general managers 
are expected to be proficient in, and Stewart, who is black, resigned andcited 
race as the reason for being passed over 
<http://articles.philly.com/2001-11-15/sports/25322163_1_minority-candidates-front-office-gord-ash>
. Now, after a 14 years as a pitching coach and then as an agent representing 
players such as Matt Kemp, Stewart, who was a ferocious competitor on the mound 
and won three World Series rings with Los Angeles, Oakland (where Tony La Russa 
was his manager) and Toronto, finally gets his shot.


Now, for Stewart, it could be a question of don’t wish too hard for something, 
you might actually get it. He takes over a messy Diamondbacks outfit that lost 
98 games, many of which came in the form of excruciating blown late leads - 
their eighth inning ERA was 4.11 and their ninth inning ERA was 4.85. Gulp.


La Russa quickly began his clear out last September, firing GM Kevin Towers 
and, somewhat humorously, manager Kirk Gibson. As Gibsongot the ball rolling in 
the Dodgers 1988 World Series upset victory over La Russa’s heavily favored 
Athletics 
<http://www.athleticsnation.com/2014/9/27/6855241/diamondbacks-athletics-tony-la-russa-kirk-gibson-fired-lol>
, the move provided a chuckle for many, probably not Gibson.


Knowing that the D-Backs were already capable of finishing last with 
established players such as pitcher Wade Miley, shortstop Didi Gregorius and 
catcher Miguel Montero, Stewart dealt them away for a whole mess of unproven 
current pitchers such as Detroit’s Robbie Ray, Boston’s Rubby De La Rosa and 
Allen Webster, and a pair of Cubs pitching prospects that we likely won’t see 
this season. So Stewart the former pitcher made it clear straight away that 
he’s looking to replenish a broken staff with arms he hopes have a reasonable 
amount of upside. Jeremy Hellickson is a riskier acquisition -as a flyball 
pitcher working in a hitters park 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24808185/jeremy-hellickson-not-a-good-fit-for-arizonas-chase-field>
, Stewart is hoping he and his staff can help a hurler that lost his way in 
Tampa.


Hellickson was not the riskiest buy of the offseason - that title goes to 
Yasmany Tomas, whose Spring Training performance has scared the heck out of 
D-Backs fans who’ve been watching the 24-year-old Cuban closely.The chatter is 
that the outfielder turned infielder isn’t close to capable of handling the hot 
corner 
<http://nypost.com/2015/03/23/are-dbacks-in-denial-about-68-5m-phenom-or-are-harsh-scouts-wrong/>
. If he can’t, Thomas could head down to the minors to start the season, always 
a possibility regardless, to work on his third base play. With their outfield 
full of relatively solid pieces including Mark Trumbo in right field, AJ 
Pollock in center field, and young David Peralta, there’s not a whole lot of 
room for Thomas, who signed a six-year $68m deal.


If Thomas can field his position while providing the advertised pop, and first 
baseman Paul Goldschmidt returns to his thumping old self 
<http://arizonasports.com/42/1811415/Breathe-easy-Dbacks-fansPaul-Goldschmidt-is-100percent-healthy>
 following an injury riddled 2014, there Diamondbacks will improve on their 
fourth from worst run total of a season ago. That’s not saying much of course, 
and either is starting 30-year-old catcher Tuffy Gosewisch, whose name is 
better than his upside.


Even if the offense is potentially better, the pitching remains a major issue. 
If there’s going to be any kind of hanging around in the standings, Trevor 
Cahill, who ismostly persona non-grata to D-Backs fans 
<http://insidethezona.com/2015/03/trevor-cahill-changeup-diamondbacks/> thanks 
to his colossal 2014 collapse, a plump figure, and, of course, his team high 
$12m salary, he’ll need to remember how to pitch. Even so, the bullpen is still 
nasty, and not in that fun, baseball sort of way.


Prediction: It gets late early in Phoenix - fifth place, NL West
 