
There has been a lot of buzz about the quarrel between the Newspaper Licensing 
Agency (NLA) andthe aggregator and news monitoring agency NewsNow 
<http://newsnow.co.uk/>. Now, another opponent joins the dispute as the 
Meltwater Group decided to take the case to court asking it to review the plans 
of the Newspaper Licensing Agency 
<http://meltwater.com/en/meltwater-takes-nla-uk-copyright-tribunal-over-proposed-hyperlink-tax>
.

The NLA has threatened to sue services making money from linking to its 
members' content for free and has demanded compensation in terms of a "web 
database licence fee".

Some British news monitoring agencies have signed the terms, but the Norwegian 
software company Meltwater and the British news aggregator NewsNow disagreed 
with the terms stating that the NLA lacks a legal basis.This week NewsNow 
pulled the links from its subscription-based monitoring service 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2009/dec/15/digital-media-aggregators-newsnow-pulls-links>
, and yesterday Meltwater decided to challenge the NLA's claim to be able to 
license hyperlinking as its service is mainly based on search algorithms.

The NLA was created in 1996 to license and collect revenue from the copying 
and clipping of print media. Today it covers 18 publishers, including the 
Guardian. In its eyes, the NLA is just extending paid media monitoring from 
print content to the web.

Meltwater disagrees. 

The question lying at the heart of this dispute is whether aggregation or news 
monitoring services are search services or content copying. The UK's existing 
copyright law does not cover aggregation.

"The creation of an index requires copying, as is providing headlines and 
extracts. Newspapers' terms and conditions are clear on this issue, and copying 
is not allowed under these terms," says the NLA commercial director, Andrew J 
Hughes.

"The vast majority of aggregators and cuttings agencies agree and that's why 
they have signed up. We are confident that the copyright tribunal will 
recognise that our approach has been measured and reasonable and therefore the 
licensing scheme will proceed as planned from 1 January 2010."

The Public Relations Consultants Association director general, Francis Ingham, 
said: "This is an absurd tax which we believe has no legal justification. 
Meltwater will be the toast of the PR industry for taking a stand against the 
NLA. It is ludicrous for organisations to need a licence to receive links to 
coverage that is freely available to view online."

NewsNow said it is "not in a position on our own to fund an extremely costly 
legal case", butstarted a Right2Link campaign <http://www.right2link.org/>. 

The copyright tribunal is likely to take up to 12 months to reach its decision.

 