
For the five years I spent as a youth worker, I spent my days playing pool and 
handing out condoms, functioning as an advocate and running a gardening program 
called Grow. Grow was designed to reconnect kids with the process of planting, 
growing and harvesting organic fruits and vegetables.

While bribing teenage boys to care about organic gardening was challenging, it 
also had unique rewards. I witnessed a 17-year-old kid discover how broccoli 
grows and watched as he idly picked snap peas right off the vine and declared 
with shock that they actually tasted good. These discoveries underlined for me 
how disconnected many of us have become from our food.

Today, the farm-to-table movement has made many of us consider the origins of 
what we eat at restaurants. But at home it can be difficult to stay mindful. 
The simplest way to take on a proactive relationship with what you eat is to 
grow some of it yourself. It’s a trend that seems to be taking off.

In 2011, the UK reported that 5%  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2255043/Homegrown-fruit-veg-menu-Britons-turn-allotments-save-money-struggling-economy.html>
of fruits and vegetables consumed were home-grown, up from 2.9% in 2008. As of 
2014, the US, boasted35% of households 
<http://www.garden.org/about/press/press.php?q=show&id=3819&pr=pr_nga>, or 42m, 
growing food at home or in a community garden, up 17% in five years.

The internet offers a wealth of resource guides distinct to your region’s soil 
makeup, climate and growing season, making planting and troubleshooting a snap. 
So there’s just not much standing in between you and your future garden.

How to grow your own vegetables in a flat, condo or studio apartment

If you live in a flat or a condo and lack the space for a garden of your own, 
you may still be able to access a plot of land through a community garden. Ask 
around to see if one exists near you.

When you do get started, veggies such as kale, peas and zucchini are easy to 
grow and can offer a confidence boost to novice gardeners, but the best guide 
for what to plant should be what you love to eat. Browse through a seed 
catalogue and see what makes your mouth water – I’ve always lovedWest Coast 
Seeds <https://www.westcoastseeds.com/> for unique heritage seed varieties, but 
finding a seed supplier local to you will give you your best chance of success.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7e74222dc061ca2e3cc42c910b4fafa360c4574%2F0_181_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20backyard%2C%20no%20problem%3A%20how%20to%20grow%20your%20own%20vegetables%20in%20an%20apartment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20backyard%2C%20no%20problem%3A%20how%20to%20grow%20your%20own%20vegetables%20in%20an%20apartment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7e74222dc061ca2e3cc42c910b4fafa360c4574%2F0_181_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The start of something special. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Fill the garden plot with your favourite veggies or those that tend to be more 
expensive to buy in grocery stores, such as cauliflower. Staggering the 
planting of one-time harvest veggies such as broccoli or radishes by planting 
their seeds in several batches a few weeks apart means they won’t ripen all at 
once and overload your garden (or your capacity to eat them).

Planting a few varieties of squash or pumpkin means you’ll enjoy harvests all 
the way into late fall but make sure you have plenty of room for them, as their 
vines do like to wander.


If a ground-level garden is out of your reach, you can still tackle gardening 
on a much smaller scale. Growing herbs on your countertop or windowsill allows 
you to replace dried old pantry staples with the real thing, and growing salad 
greens instead of succulents means you can enjoy a fresh salad every day, 
without the plastic packaging or the cost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F167a7b773993533c8fd23365b32c011297ea8a21%2F0_169_5000_2997%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20backyard%2C%20no%20problem%3A%20how%20to%20grow%20your%20own%20vegetables%20in%20an%20apartment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20backyard%2C%20no%20problem%3A%20how%20to%20grow%20your%20own%20vegetables%20in%20an%20apartment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fhow-to-grow-your-own-vegetables-herbs-apartment-flat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F167a7b773993533c8fd23365b32c011297ea8a21%2F0_169_5000_2997%2F5000.jpg>
 This could be the fruits of your labor. Photograph: Igor Golovniov/Zuma 
Press/Corbis 
Secondhand stores often have plant pots for just a few dollars; fill them with 
spinach, arugula, radicchio and romaine lettuce for a great salad mix you can 
harvest as needed. Old teacups are the perfect size to hold a handful of herb 
staples such as basil, cilantro, oregano, and parsley (but unless you’re 
experienced in drilling ceramics, the cups won’t have drainage, so be careful 
not to overwater).

Don’t get suckered into buying a whole bunch of specialized gardening gear – 
you can do this on a fairly barebones budget and with repurposed items too. As 
long as it’s not leaching anything toxic, your carrots aren’t going to care 
what they grow in, promise.

It’s incredible how much you can grow on a balcony: things such as chard, 
tomatoes and strawberries can thrive in container gardens, depending on your 
growing season and the amount of light you get. You can even regrow some 
veggies right from the cuttings,without starting over 
<http://foodrevolution.org/blog/reduce-food-waste-regrow-from-scraps/> from 
seed.

Finding a way to grow your own food connects you with what you’re eating, and 
it also offers massive nutritional benefits too. Nutrient degradation occurs 
rapidly between when produce is picked and when it is eaten – green beans, for 
example, lose77% of their vitamin C 
<http://www.fruitandvegetable.ucdavis.edu/files/197179.pdf> after seven days. 
The quicker you can eat your produce after it’s been harvested, the better. 
Having a backyard or balcony full of fruits and veggies is a great reminder to 
do so.

Nutrient degradation occurs rapidly – green beans, for example, lose 77% of 
their vitamin C after seven days

But what of those who haven’t the time, the space or, frankly, the inclination 
to grow their own food? It needn’t be all or nothing, a choice between a 
backyard garden or a sprawling supermarket.

Farmers’ markets offer a fantastic in-between option for those who want to 
close the gap between field and table without getting their hands dirty. Food 
in the US travels an average of 1,500 miles to get to your plate, but shopping 
at a farmers’ market allows you to buy the freshest and in-season produce, 
absent long-distance shipping or artificial ripening. In the UK,this 
<http://www.findlocalproduce.co.uk/Farmers_Markets> site gives a great listing 
of local farmers’ markets;this 
<https://www.ams.usda.gov/local-food-directories/farmersmarkets> site does the 
same via a zip code search for the US.

At the heart of it, this is about more than carrots or kale. When I speak 
about being disconnected, it’s more than kumbaya hippy nonsense. We are 
increasingly living at arm’s length from what we eat and wear, from our 
communities and those we love. This detachment is having a profound impact on 
our social, emotional and psychological health and although growing veggies in 
your backyard isn’t a cure, it’s a damn good start. It closes the gap between 
us and the food we eat, it reminds us that food doesn’t come from the 
supermarket shelves, cleaned, trimmed and packaged.
 