
Two of Hollywood’s major studios, 20th Century Fox and Paramount, have no 
films at all by female directors coming out between now and 2018. All of the 22 
movies being released by Fox and the 25 by Paramount will be directed by men.

An investigation by Hollywood industry site the Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/20th-century-fox-paramount-have-no-female-directors-through-2018/>
 also revealed that Fox has not released a single film directed by a woman 
since Elizabeth Allen Rosenbaum’s Ramona and Beezus in 2010. Paramount’s last 
film with a female director was 2014’s Selma, directed by Ava DuVernay, an 
outspoken advocate for the need to increase diversity behind the lens.

Women are 'directors on just 7% of top Hollywood films'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/27/women-directors-hollywood-female-filmmakers-gender-bias>
This news comes in the wake of a recent report from the Center for the Study 
of Women in Television and Film at San Diego State University 
<http://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/files/2014_Celluloid_Ceiling_Report.pdf>, which 
found that women directed just 7% of Hollywood’s top 250 films in 2014, while 
men were in charge of 85% of all US movies. The film industry is under intense 
pressure to deal with allegations of gender discrimination. Shortly before the 
study was released,US equal opportunities officials vowed to interview dozens 
of female film-makers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/us-hollywood-discrimination-prejudice-female-directors-equal-opportunities>
 as part of a historic inquiry into gender discrimination in Hollywood.

Many of the film industry’s major female players have spoken out about 
Hollywood’s problem with gender. Jessica Chastain published a widely circulated
essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/09/jessica-chastain-opportunities-female-directors>
 in which she relayed the positive experience of working on her upcoming film, 
The Zookeeper’s Wife, because it boasted a largely female crew. In a reference 
to Viola Davis’s Emmy awards speech, during which her co-star from The Help 
said, “The only thing that separates women of color from anyone else is 
opportunity,” Chastain wrote: “It’s the same situation with female directors 
versus male directors – they are not given the same opportunity.”

Keira Knightley also addressed the issue in an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/31/keira-knightley-where-are-female-directors-writers-feminism>
 last year, asking: “Where are the female stories?” She added:“I think the pay 
[gap in the entertainment business] is a huge thing, but I’m actually more 
concerned over the lack of our voices being heard.”

On a more hopeful note, The Wrap found that other major studios are making 
films with women directors. Disney recently hired DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/23/ava-duvernay-to-direct-disney-fantasy-a-wrinkle-in-time-from-frozen-writers-script>
 to direct their highly anticipated adaptation of the popular children’s novel 
A Wrinkle in Time. The studio is also working with Mira Nair on her upcoming 
Queen of Katwe <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4341582/reference>, set for release 
later this year, as well as Jennifer Lee, who is returning to co-direct Frozen 
2.

Hollywood prejudice against female directors to have US equal opportunity 
inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/us-hollywood-discrimination-prejudice-female-directors-equal-opportunities>
Universal’s upcoming Bridge Jones sequel, Bridget Jones’s Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/27/bridget-jones-no-longer-everywoman>
, is directed by Sharon Maguire. The studio also has an upcoming live-action 
adaptation of The Little Mermaid in the pipeline, directed by Rebecca Thomas, 
while Pitch Perfect 3 will see Elizabeth Banks return to the director’s chair 
following the blockbuster success of the previous film in the series.

At Sony, Banks is developing a new take on Charlie’s Angels. The studio also 
currently has Patricia Riggen’s successful religious drama Miracles From Heaven 
out in theaters, while its TriStar label is releasing Jodie Foster’s 
Cannes-bound thriller Money Monster in May.

Warner Bros, Hollywood’s most prolific studio, is expected to release three 
films directed by women over the next few years: this June’s romance Me Before 
You from Thea Sharrock, the much-hypedWonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/wonder-woman-gal-gadot-batman-v-superman>
 from Monster director Patty Jenkins, and Unforgettable, directed by the 
studio’s longtime producer Denise Di Novi.
 