
The opening shots in the awards campaigns are now being fired, with The Hurt 
Locker taking the New York Film Critics Circle and LA Film Critics Association 
awards, and Up in the Air being named the National Board of Review's best film 
of 2009.

Both also feature prominently in the Golden Globes nominations, announced today
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/15/up-in-the-air-golden-globe>, 
which is where the race starts to get serious. Some contend that Up in the Air, 
Nine and Inglourious Basterds won't last the pace, that the Globes have been 
suckered by superficial flashiness.

I can't say I actively want certain films to lose, but the Globes have made 
two appalling misses, that I can't believe won't be there come Oscar time. To 
wit: where are the two "Man" films – the Coen brothers'A Serious Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-serious-man> and Tom Ford's A Single Man? 
They are far and away the two best American films I saw this year.

The only explanation I can think of is that the Coens are victims of awards 
fatigue, with No Country for Old Men cleaning up two years ago, and Burn
After Reading close but no cigar last time out. Given that the Globes are 
bracketing A Serious Man in the "musical or comedy" sector – its lead actor, 
Michael Stuhlbarg, gets a nom there – it's frankly inexplicable that their 
voters can put it behind Julie & Julia, Nine and – gah! – It's Complicated.

A Single Man, the film debut by fashion designer Tom Ford, is a slightly more 
complex case. Colin Firth rightly gets a nod for his lead performance, and we 
can see that the film is competing (unsurprisingly) for the "drama" categories. 
That means much tougher opposition, but Ford's film is so confident, measured 
and beautifully crafted that surely – surely – it ought to have bested the 
shrill raucousness ofInglourious Basterds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inglourious-basterds>, or the effects-laden 
bombast of Avatar.

I'm trying hard not to conclude that the openly gay theme of the story counted 
against it. If so, the Globe people should hang their heads in shame. Whatever 
the case, a bit of bravery was required – the Globes, I'm afraid, blew it.
 