
'Am I still a feminist if I watch porn?' Meet Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the 
British Lena Dunham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
In the final minutes of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s BBC3 series Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
, the young female protagonist delivers a tearful monologue about her 
self-loathing and isolation. It provides a coda to the show’s disturbing 
portrait of a lonely, tormented woman, something that – as the eponymous 
anti-hero is at pains to point out between sobs – “isn’t fucking funny”.

And it isn’t. But with an attitude like that, how did Fleabag end up becoming 
one of the most successful British sitcoms of 2016? Unlike, say, the goings-on 
at a hotel run by a furious man who loathes the public, or the japes that ensue 
when a group of freakish priests are banished to a lonely island, this isn’t a 
premise teeming with side-splitting potential. Fleabag took the genre’s tropes 
– the half-hour format, the eccentric characters, the silliness and the 
boundary-pushing humour – and used them to make serious subjects accessible and 
engaging. It’s a trend that’s produced a raft of moving, disturbing and 
insightful comedies that have irrevocably changed the TV landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd379c2d7f1b1f62f04c7665ddfe5e893fa884c%2F0_174_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20'sadcom'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20%27sadcom%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd379c2d7f1b1f62f04c7665ddfe5e893fa884c%2F0_174_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Transparent. Photograph: Merie Wallace/PR 
Transparent review – the best thing on TV at the moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
The catch? Most of the time, they won’t have you doubled up with laughter. By 
unshackling themselves from the promise of gag after gag, they are free to be 
as interesting and progressive as they like. Amazon’sTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent> is primarily concerned 
with being a groundbreaking, nuanced and naturalistic exploration of one 
family’s relationships with gender, sexuality and Judaism; that didn’t stop it 
being nominated in eight comedy categories at this year’s Emmys. How did we get 
to the point where comedy could get away with ditching its most essential 
quality?

The seeds of the unfunny comedy trend – dubbed, in the US, the sadcom – can 
probably be traced back tothe original Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/01/favourite-tv-show-the-office-ricky-gervais-david-brent>
’s 2003 Christmas specials. But the phenomenon really gained traction in 2010, 
whenFX began airing Louis CK’s autobiographical comedy Louie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/24/louie-box-set-review-louis-ck>
, a show that channelled the realism ofSeinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> but left out the synthetic 
sitcom set-up – and most of the jokes. While an early review complained that 
“laughs come only intermittently”, it soon became clear the show was more 
interested in ruthlessly sifting through the comedian’s psyche in a series of 
scenarios both nightmarish and real. That this unfunniness was deliberate 
seemed clear from CK’s reputation as one of the most hilarious stand-ups on the 
circuit; sitcom, it seemed, could be a home for something more sombre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f627fd87af65cede773ad75b4a566f2b4e116fb%2F0_140_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20'sadcom'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20%27sadcom%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f627fd87af65cede773ad75b4a566f2b4e116fb%2F0_140_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Aziz Ansari and Noel Wells in Master Of None. Photograph: KC Bailey/AP 
Louie was followed in 2012 by Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/20/girls-season-five-premiere-best-lena-dunham>
: notable for drawing its occasional laughs from uncomfortable topics such as 
mental health and objectification. Importantly, it demonstrated that comedy’s 
inbuilt irreverence meant it could discuss identity politics – one of the most 
important ideas of the decade – without preaching. Shows such asTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
 andAziz Ansari’s Master Of None 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/06/aziz-ansari-master-of-none-netflix>
, which dealt with racial stereotyping and the lived experience of immigrants 
and their children, followed suit.

Combine this with the Netflixication of TV – which favours shows with a strong 
narrative arc and scope for emotional investment – and society has created the 
perfect environment for this new strain of comedy. NewNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> series Easy, Tig Notaro’s One 
Mississippi and Donald Glover’s forthcoming Atlanta – which meditates on the US 
police system as well as the nature of fame – add to a trend that is only 
gathering steam.

Many of these shows are the semi-autobiographical vehicles of US standup 
comedians, indicating how the status of comic has become elevated: they are now 
more akin to metaphysical gurus than clowns. That’s partly because humour has a 
very high value in modern culture: not only is the news increasingly consumed 
through a prism of humour – thanks in part to social media and memes – but we 
live in an age of complicated theoretical ideas, such as gender, sexuality and 
latent institutional racism and sexism, and we need comedy to make them easily 
digestible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc61da4daf45f1b1d6fe5998aa5042453ecfebfc6%2F0_55_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20'sadcom'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20laughing%20matter%3A%20the%20rise%20of%20the%20TV%20%27sadcom%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbbc3-fleabag-louie-girls-transparent-master-of-none-sadcom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc61da4daf45f1b1d6fe5998aa5042453ecfebfc6%2F0_55_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
 Anna Chancellor and Olivia Colman in Flowers. Photograph: Des Willie/Channel 4 
Flowers: Olivia Colman and Julian Barratt come together to fall apart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/25/flowers-olivia-colman-julian-baratt>
It’s important to note that unfunny comedy is not the same as comedy-drama – 
an often schmaltzy and generally regressive genre that sprinkles laughs on top 
of a dramatic conceit. The difference can besummed up best in Channel 4’s 
Flowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/25/flowers-olivia-colman-julian-baratt>
, a comedy about a severely depressed patriarch and his family’s deep-seated 
unhappiness. By commandeering the irreverence and dark absurdity of sitcoms 
like Nighty Night and The League Of Gentlemen, Flowers was able to generate 
humour from its subject – mental health – rather than diffusing the tension 
with trite jokes about something incidental. Fusing laughter and pain felt 
healing rather than controversial, and a real step forward for television as a 
medium.

Ultimately, these shows are so absorbing because life really is an unfunny 
comedy. Like the siblings from Transparent cackling at the fallout from their 
father’s gender transition, traumatic events usually generate the best 
laugh-out-loud moments. This life-long dance between comedy and tragedy is 
summed up perfectly by that final scene of Fleabag, which ends with the 
protagonist’s companion, played by Hugh Dennis, cracking a pre-discussed joke. 
Still tear-stained, Fleabag can’t help but burst out laughing. “Told you it was 
funny,” he says.

Atlanta is on Fox in November
 