
This week, world leaders are meeting in Paris to reach a new climate agreement 
to keep global temperature rise to no more than2C above pre-industrial levels 
<http://www.climatecouncil.org.au/why-does-2-degrees-c-matter>. Yet the 
responsibility for tackling climate change, and sustainability issues more 
broadly, does not rest on the shoulders of politicians and diplomats alone.

Australian business also has an important role to play and there are two 
reasons they should care: risk and opportunity.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is a massive risk to 
the business community. Every industry must consider its specific risk to 
income and expenses but most commonly these will include physical impacts, 
regulation, competition, insurance, changing markets, investment, energy 
infrastructure and litigation.

Lost productivity and absenteeism due to extreme heat is costing the 
Australian economy almost $8bn a year
Amanda McKenzie, Climate Council 
For Australian businesses, the risks around extreme weather are particularly 
high. More than half of the world’s natural disasters occurred in the Asia 
Pacific in 2014 and Australia is the most vulnerable advanced economy to the 
impacts of climate change. More than $226bn in commercial, industrial, road, 
rail and residential assets around Australia’s coast are potentially exposed to 
flooding and erosion hazards at a sea level rise of 1.1 m – a high end but 
quite plausible scenario for 2100. There’s also a growingbody of research 
<http://www.climateinstitute.org.au/verve/_resources/FinancialSystemsRiskPolicyBrief.pdf>
 which looks at the possible ways in which our financial systems themselves may 
be vulnerable to climate risk.

Consider the physical impacts alone: so far global temperatures have increased 
nearly 1C. That may not sound like much, but in the past 50 years heatwaves have
become hotter <https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/heatwaves-report>, last longer 
andoccur more often 
<https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/heatwaves-that-occurred-once-every-3-years-are-now-happening-every-200-days-2>
. The increase in hot weather observed in the decade between 2000 and 2009 has 
already reached the best estimate projected for 2030.

How the US started to break its fossil fuel addiction – 12 steps in 50 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/how-us-started-to-break-its-fossil-fuel-addiction-12-steps-in-50-years>
In the summer of 2013/14 – known as the “angry summer” – 156 records were 
broken in 90 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/10/climate-action-call-as-another-angry-summer-breaks-156-heat-records>
. Similarly 2015 is likely to surpass 2014 as the hottest year on record, while 
October was the hottest October on record for Australia.Recent research 
<http://theconversation.com/its-been-australias-hottest-ever-october-and-thats-no-coincidence-49941>
 by David Karoly and colleagues from the University of Melbourne shows that 
human-driven climate change made this new record at least six times more likely 
than it would otherwise have been. October’s temperature was also the most
above-normal month 
<http://www.thestar.com/news/world/2015/11/18/earth-smashes-monthly-heat-record-with-october-as-hottest-month-of-the-year.html>
 globally in history and was the eighth month this year to set a new heat 
record.

These impacts have many consequences for business. Lost productivity and 
absenteeism due to extreme heat is costing the Australian economy almost$8bn a 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/heatwaves-impact-on-workplaces-costing-australia-792bn-a-year>
. Recently a study 
<http://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/publications/sustainable-finance-publications/unhedgeable-risk>
 from the University of Cambridge described how, as awareness of 
climate-related risks grows, climate–smart businesses are beginning to question 
how global environmental trends – such as increasing pressure on agricultural 
land, food security, soil degradation, local water stress and extreme weather 
events – will affect financial markets. This builds on the work 
<http://www.garnautreview.org.au/> of leading economists such as Nicholas Stern 
in the UK and Ross Garnaut here in Australia, who argue the benefits of early 
action lead to significantly higher economic growth rates and returns over the 
long run, especially when compared to a worst-case scenario of climate 
inaction. Simply put, inaction is a risky business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fno-more-business-as-usual-for-australia-as-climate-change-hits-economy-for-8bn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fd66f1eb682c3145078072c9d18bc36bf6162d7%2F0_183_2090_1255%2F2090.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20more%20'business%20as%20usual'%20for%20Australia%20as%20climate%20change%20hits%20economy%20for%20%248bn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fno-more-business-as-usual-for-australia-as-climate-change-hits-economy-for-8bn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20more%20%27business%20as%20usual%27%20for%20Australia%20as%20climate%20change%20hits%20economy%20for%20%248bn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fno-more-business-as-usual-for-australia-as-climate-change-hits-economy-for-8bn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fd66f1eb682c3145078072c9d18bc36bf6162d7%2F0_183_2090_1255%2F2090.jpg>
 US President Barack Obama at the Apec summit in Manila, Philippines on 18 
November 2015, where he said bold climate action will mean a business boom in 
Asia and around the world. Photograph: Aaron Favila/EPA 
Of course business is also about creating opportunities and there will be 
plenty as humanity weans itself off fossil fuels and creates a clean, healthy 
and vibrant economy. Backin 2007 
<http://www.climateinstitute.org.au/articles/publications/leader,-follower-or-free-rider.html/section/478>
, the Climate Institute described how the move to a carbon-constrained global 
economy could deliver strategic opportunities, such as building new markets, 
corporate positioning, gaining regulatory intelligence and competitive 
advantage. “Business as usual” is no longer an option and that change is 
inevitable.

A recent New Climate Economy report <http://newclimateeconomy.report/> 
contends it is possible to have more equitable, more sustainable and more 
resilient economies. An exciting area is the rapid innovation and declining 
costs of clean energy technologies. The price of solar photovoltaic (PV) 
modules, for example, has dropped 75% and onshore wind power has fallen 30% 
over the last five years. More than 7.7 million people are now employedglobally 
<http://www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/REN21_press-release-GSR-2015_ENGLISH.pdf>
 in the renewable energy sector. Last year for the first time,global emissions 
shrank 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2015/03/13/3633362/iea-co2-emissions-decouple-growth/>
 while the economy grew. This was driven primarily by clean energy solutions.

The United States has witnessed a swathe of corporate giants sign up to the 
White House’s AmericanBusiness Act on Climate Pledge 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/10/19/fact-sheet-white-house-announces-commitments-american-business-act>
. The pledge recognised that delaying action on climate change will be costly 
in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon 
economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic 
growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters and the health of the 
global environment. General Mills, a global food company and recent signatory, 
said addressing climate change was imperative to its long-term viability as 
climate change places significant pressure on vulnerable growing regions that 
produce many important crops.

Zuckerberg, Gates and other tech titans form clean energy investment coalition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/bill-gates-breakthrough-energy-coalition-mark-zuckerberg-facebook-microsoft-amazon>
In Australia, the most significant business announcement to date arrived from 
Commonwealth Bank and NAB. 
<https://newmatilda.com/2015/11/06/banking-on-climate-action-nab-and-commonwealth-bank-move-to-support-paris-talks/>
 Both banks have made overarching commitments to the 2C goal. Although they are 
still working out the finer detail, these commitments are significant because 
they inherently require the banks to transition funding away from fossil fuels 
that drive climate change.

So what can all Australian businesses do?

First, they must make their voices heard on climate change. Business is a 
powerful advocate for policy change and has been largely silent in the climate 
debate in Australia until recently.



Second, business should be powered with renewable energy. Ten percent of all 
emissions are created by commercial buildings and addressing this is a prudent 
business decision as well as beneficial to the environment.

Finally there is huge scope to invest in energy efficiency in Australia, which 
will also impact the bottom line. These investments will provide a competitive 
edge as information on energy and greenhouse gas management practices are 
increasingly requested by customers and are required in tender documents.

In a recent blog 
<http://www.kpmg.com/au/en/beyond/new-thinking/pages/climate-change-road-to-paris-cop-21.aspx>
, KPMG’s Adrian King discussed what a climate deal in Paris might mean for 
businesses, stressing that high-carbon activities would be costlier and 
businesses would face tighter regulation, carbon pricing and more stringent 
targets for emissions cutting. On the up side, this means the case for becoming 
a low-carbon business will be stronger (and more profitable) than ever before.

When it comes to such opportunities, the adage “first in, best dressed” holds 
true. While there is still time to act, the window of opportunity is finite and 
shrinking. Those who are nimble and forward-looking enough to act first will be 
in the best position to benefit from what US President Barack Obamareferred to 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/11/18/in_asia_obama_says_climate_action_will_be_good_for_business/>
 at the Asia-Pacific Forum on Economic Cooperation to as a “business boom”.
 