
This week's Remembrance Day is almost superfluous. British writers and readers 
just can't stop fighting the second world war. It ended nearly 70 years ago, 
but it's as though the guns have just fallen silent.

There are several strands to the British book trade's preoccupation with this 
war. First, there's the appalling fascination of the Nazis, who remain a 
literary and artistic obsession. This was satirised by the late Alan Coren in
Golfing for Cats 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Golfing-Cats-Alan-Coren/dp/0903895544/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1320144179&sr=8-2>
, a slim volume of comic pieces adorned with a lurid swastika. After golf and 
cats, said Coren, the Third Reich was one subject that never failed to 
exhilarate the British book buyer.

There's also a treasure trove of incredible stories, narrative bullion, locked 
up in the years 1939-45. As the Great War fades from living memory and becomes 
part of history, its successor takes its place. The conflicts of 1914-18 were 
largely European. A genuinely global struggle, the second world war satisfies 
an international appetite for war stories, some of them now coming to light for 
the first time.

Finally, where the "war to end all wars" was a traditional great power 
slugfest, the contemplation of the second world war allows the British reader 
to occupy the moral high ground. Churchill's instinct to fight Hitler to the 
death was belligerent, but morally right. Britain's sacrifice was indeed our 
"finest hour". Internationally, we have traded on it ever since.

In the aftermath of 1945, there have been at least three phases of literary 
response and each one of them has been pure box office. At first, the 
celebration of the stiff upper lip insisted that the war should be remembered 
for itsBoy's Own adventures in books such as Ill Met By Moonlight 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ill_Met_by_Moonlight>, The Man Who Never Was 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Man_Who_Never_Was> and Appointment with Venus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appointment_with_Venus>. These postwar 
bestsellers were interspersed with grittier exploits such asThe Dam Busters and 
The Wooden Horse.

When the appetite for these entertainments ran out, there were two decades of 
memoirs and biographies recycling the myth of the conflict. Now, for the first 
time, the true story of the camps began to be told, though the full horror of 
the Holocaust was not popularised in book form until the late 60s.

The end of the cold war inspired a new surge of second world war 
historiography, the discovery by English and American readers of the Eastern 
Front, based on Soviet archives hitherto inaccessible to scholars.Stalingrad by 
Antony Beevor is the emblematic bestseller from this third phase. Nonetheless, 
the latest generation of second world war historians is finding that, despite 
these myriad volumes, in many languages, there is still more to say or another 
thrilling episode to investigate. This season has seen the publication ofThe End
 by Ian Kershaw (the death throes of the Third Reich),All Hell Let Loose by Max 
Hastings (the horrors of total war, described by ordinary people),D-Day by 
Antony Beevor (once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more) and, perhaps 
most harrowing of all,Leningrad: Tragedy of a City under Siege 1941-44 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/25/leningrad-city-under-siege-review>
 by Anna Reid.

Rather more interesting, to me, are two books that open up the secret side of 
the second world war.Spies in the Sky by Taylor Downing tells the story of the 
reconnaissance pilots who photographed occupied Europe and interpreted these 
images in a country house at Medmenham in the Thames Valley. This work, says 
Downing, was arguably more important to the outcome of the war than the more 
famous Bletchley Park code-breakers.Spies in the Sky gives a new perspective to 
some of the most famous moments of the conflict, from the sinking of the 
Bismarck to the landings in Normandy.

If there was one man who knew the secrets of this secret war, it was probably 
Lieutenant-CommanderIan Fleming <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ian-fleming>
. The tale of Fleming's posse of authorised looters and thrill-seekers, 30 
Assault Unit, is told inIan Fleming's Commandos by Nicholas Rankin.

This absorbing yarn has the added literary virtue of identifying the 
inspiration for James Bond, licensed to kill.Casino Royale, 007's debut, was 
not published until 1953, but the seeds of the character, and some of his 
exploits, had been sown in the Admiralty's Room 39, Whitehall, during the 
darkest days of the war, under the watchful eye of that supreme national 
storyteller, Winston Churchill.

Where there's a Will, there's a way to flog a dodgy book

Anonymous is a very silly film about William Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> or should I say Edward de 
Vere, Earl of Oxford? Worse, it gives publicity to an international fraternity 
of Shakespeare denialists. So Californian writer Dan Walker has denounced 
Roland Emmerich's "fairytale" while simultaneously claiming that Shakespeare 
"did not write the literary works commonly attributed to him". Walker – 
surprise, surprise – has a self-promotional interest in joining this ludicrous 
controversy. His novel,My Dark Lady, which explores the authorship question 
from the perspective of the "dark lady" of the sonnets, has just been published 
by Amazon. Walker claims special insight into Shakespeare because, he says, he 
was educated "at a grammar school in Warwickshire". Oh, really? As the old 
aphorism has it, being born in a stable doesn't make you a horse.

So that's bah humbug to online publishing

In February this year, I wrote that writers in search of readers should 
consider "experimenting with social media" and explore the possibilities of 
giving new titles a dedicated website. Tom Garbutt, a former primary school 
teacher, has taken me at my word, developed the concept of "reader 
participation" and launched anew platform <http://anyonesanauthor.co.uk/> 
that's "lighthearted, expansive and universal". Garbutt has plans to develop a 
partnership with Waterstone's. However, when I attended Waterstone's 
pre-Christmas celebration of new management at its flagship store in London's 
Piccadilly, no one seemed terribly interested in social media or online 
publishing. "Right now," said one senior executive, "what we are worrying about 
is Christmas."
 