
Noel Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/noel-pearson> has 
launched a scathing attack on the ABC, describing it as the “miserable, racist 
national broadcaster” and accusing it of engaging in the “soft bigotry of low 
expectations”.

The prominent Indigenous leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/noel-pearson-hits-out-at-political-parties-for-welfare-reform-failure>
 made the remarks while delivering a tribute to Paul Keating during the launch 
of a new biography of the former Labor leader in Sydney on Monday.

Pearson spoke of the strength of Keating’s leadership, which he said was 
underpinned by an ability to blend imagination, rhetoric and power.

Noel Pearson pulls education group out of Aurukun school in Queensland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/noel-pearson-pulls-education-group-out-of-aurukun-school-in-queensland>
 “No Australian politician brought these three together like the subject of 
this biography,” he said.

Pearson attacked Labor for repudiating Keating’s legacy following his 1996 
election defeat, something he described as Labor’s “most diabolical stupidity”.

“They ended up disowning their own achievement and handed to their opponents 
credit for the growth and opportunity of the new century,” he said. “It took 
Howard’s 13-year tenure to come to an end before Labor started invoking that 
legacy. But, even today, that legacy may be embraced but its masterful model is 
still found wanting in its current permutation.”

Pearson, while lamenting the lack of political will for reforms, attacked the 
media for what he described as a “mutual racism”, be it from left or right.

Pearson described the ABC as the “miserable, racist national broadcaster”, 
which was “willing the wretched to fail”.

“They need blacks to remain alien from mothers’ bosoms, carceral in legions, 
living short lives of grief and tribulation,” he said. “Because, if it was not 
so, against whom could they direct their soft bigotry of low expectations, 
about whom could they report misery and bleeding tragedy?

“Between Quadrant’s hard bigotry of prejudice from the right, and the ABC’s 
soft bigotry of low expectations on the left, lies this common ground of mutual 
racism.”


ABC chief Michelle Guthrie: women should demand equal pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/abc-chief-michelle-guthrie-women-should-demand-equal-pay>
The ABC rejected Mr Pearson’s accusations, saying it provided more coverage of 
Indigenous issues and had a broader Indigenous staffing profile than any other
Australian media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media> outlet.

“It has given an extended platform and broad audiences to a range of 
Indigenous commentators including Noel Pearson, Josephine Cashman, Marcia 
Langton and others to canvass issues like welfare dependency, alcohol abuse and 
violence against women,” he said.

The spokesman said the ABC had set up units within its radio, television, and 
news divisions to better reflect Indigenous culture in staffing and 
storytelling.


“These initiatives have delivered programs including the award-winning series 
Redfern Now and Gods of Wheat Street and the recent hiring of journalist Stan 
Grant, whom Mr Pearson has described as ‘speaking for black Australia’.”


Pearson also spoke briefly of the treatment of the human rights commissioner, 
Gillian Triggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/gillian-triggs-i-wont-be-cowered-by-political-attacks>
, saying Keating would never have abandoned her like the current government.


He said Keating’s loyalty, borne of courage and partisanship, often came 
despite it being to his own political cost.


“Whatever one thinks of the besieged head of the human rights commission, 
Keating would never abandon Triggs, or indeed[WikiLeaks founder Julian] Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/14/julian-assange-to-face-swedish-prosecutors-over-accusation>
, to suffer alone,” he said.


“I think he stood by my mob for too long for his own good. His opponent sought 
to cast us as a black albatross around his electoral throat.


“But his advocacy for reconciliation and Mabo never wavered, because it was 
the right thing for the nation.”


Keating was present at the launch and praised Pearson, saying he had always 
thought him to be “Australia’s Obama”.


Keating appeared to again implore Pearson to enter politics for Labor, almost 
two decades after he was reportedly first offered a safe Labor seat.

“Noel has got to learn one thing in life, like we all have to learn. You have 
to make commitments,” Keating said. “I made a commitment to theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>.

Noel Pearson: Indigenous people need to take responsibility over youth 
incarceration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/noel-pearson-indigenous-people-need-to-take-responsibility-over-youth-incarceration>
“You’ve got to think, which party has the best path, and can do the tricks, if 
you show it how to do them.”

Keating also urged Labor to shift back to what he and others have described as 
the “radical centre” and warned that the pace of change in the information age 
would cause complex challenges for societies across the globe.

“You have to wonder whether we’re in the last throes of the old world,” he 
said. “That is, a property developer with no deep political commitments becomes 
the president of the United States in a very divided economic and political 
society.

“Europe, in its sort of corset, its straightjacket of a one-size-fits-all 
monetary policy, and the peripheral space around the Mediterranean of 25% youth 
unemployment.

“Or the Chinese Communist party trying to consolidate power in the face of the 
massive transference of wealth and growth of wealth among 1.25bn people.”

Keating rarely agrees to involvement in biographies but was interviewed for 
Troy Bramston’s Paul Keating: The Big-Picture Leader and described it as the 
best to date.

Bramston said the words of Keating before publication still rang in his ears. 

“‘Troy’, he said. ‘Don’t fuck it up,’” Bramston said. 
 