
Are you bored by the idea of politics in theatre? Many people seem to be. Even 
Athol Fugard, in arecent interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/30/fugard-attacks-modern-dramatists>
, appeared to contrast theatre that aimed to be political and that which aimed 
to entertain. He argued that writers were increasingly being pressured to write 
for audiences that only had "attention spans of 10 minutes between adverts".

But do these two elements of politics and entertainment have to be mutually 
exclusive? Of course not. Isaac Butler of theParabasis blog 
<http://parabasis.typepad.com/blog/2010/09/yet-even-more-on-politics-and-art.html>
 makes this point in response to Emma Adams'sblog on this site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2010/sep/02/playwrights-political>
 last week, writing that "the most successful works of political art also 
function as quality pieces of entertainment (or are very short)". He goes on to 
cite a whole range of plays that prove his point – from Beckett's Catastrophe 
and Pinter's One for the Road to Tony Kushner's Angels in America – before 
adding that he has "recently gotten into mysteries and thrillers in both book 
and cinema form [because] they seem to be the one area where authors can 
deliberately insert their own politics and get away with it". "There's no 
reason you can't give the audience a thrilling ride and some deeper politics at 
the same time," he concludes.

James Carter on the Full of IT blog 
<http://nyitawards.blogspot.com/2010/09/public-enemy.html> has a different take 
on Fugard's comments. He disputes the claim that there is a current lack of 
political work, but asks: "Do political plays become irrelevant when they 
continually preach to the choir?" Carter recounts that, at a festival of 
political drama at New York'sOhio Theatre <http://www.sohothinktank.org/> he 
attended a few years ago, it was the few shows from a rightwing perspective 
that provoked the most discussion and debate among the predominantly liberal 
audiences. While he does not suggest "everyone go out and write plays 
supporting the Republicans", he does think that for work to have real value it 
needs to find a way of genuinely provoking its audience. "If you have a play 
about the economy, figure a way to do it on the steps of The Federal Reserve or 
in front of the bull statue on Wall Street," he writes. "A play about war? Find 
a way to do it next to an Army recruiting centre ... "

Of course, on a more fundamental level, the trouble with talking about 
"political theatre" is that it implies that there is such a thing as 
non-political theatre. All art exists within some kind of social context and is 
therefore intrinsically politicised; a failure to recognise this fact can lead 
to hypocrisy. Look, for example, at thecontroversy surrounding Peter Wyer's new 
ballet, The Far Shore 
<http://sierz.blogspot.com/2010/09/censorship-in-singapore.html>, which was 
meant to be performed by the English National Ballet at theShanghai Expo 
<http://en.expo2010.cn/>. Wyer dedicated the piece to "the people of Tibet", 
and as a result the British Council have pulled it, saying that it has become 
"a political vehicle". This act of censorship is itself highly political, aimed 
as it is at placating the Chinese government.

The trouble is that we tend to think of things as being non-political only 
because we have imbibed a particular set of values so deeply it does not occur 
to us to question them. BloggerChris Goode 
<http://beescope.blogspot.com/2010/09/on-politically-motivated-work.html> cites 
Haskell Wexler <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell_Wexler> to illustrate this:
 Suppose a guy says, "I make films where I make the best bucks ... I'm most 
interested in entertainment and screw all this ideology stuff." Now you 
couldn't find a stronger political statement than that – yet no one says that's 
a political statement. Whereas if I say, "I make films that I feel are positive 
human statements that enlighten or enlarge man's view of life and of the earth 
and of one another," well, that becomes a political statement. Now that's 
because our culture has adapted itself to accept consumerism, to accept the 
profit motive, to accept the personal selfish attitude as "non-political" ... 
Perhaps the best way for a piece of art to be political, then, is for it to 
interrogate values we take for granted – whatever those values happen to be.
 