
The law professor and barrister Norman Palmer, who has died of motor neurone 
disease aged 68, used his expertise in common law and what he called “legal 
ingenuity” to help foreign clients as diverse as the Tasmanian Aboriginal 
Centre and the government of Iran claim back important cultural objects and 
remains that had ended up on British soil.

In 2007 the Islamic Republic of Iran was attempting to appeal aginst an 
unfavourable high court decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/mar/29/artnews.iran> over the recovery 
of 18 bronze age bowls, jars and cups found in the possession of the Barakat 
Gallery in Mayfair, London. The exquisitely carved objects offered a window on 
to a hitherto little-known period in human history about 4,500 years ago, but 
had been illegally excavated in Iran after flooding in theJiroft area 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiroft_culture> a few years before and spirited 
out of the country without an export licence. Iran wanted them back, and its 
solicitors recruited Palmer tohelp with the case 
<http://www.bailii.org/cgi-bin/format.cgi?doc=/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2007/1374.html&query=(iran)+AND+(barakat)>
.

The issue was not whether the Barakat Gallery was innocent in all of this: the 
gallery had bought the objects in Europe on the open market and claimed good 
title to them; the question was instead whether Iran had an enforceable legal 
claim to recover its artefacts once they had left its territory. Employing a 
series of creative property and tort-based arguments, and working alongsideSir 
Sydney Kentridge <http://www.sahistory.org.za/people/sir-sydney-kentridge> and 
others, Palmer was able to advance the claim that Iran maintained ownership of 
the artefacts through a 1979 cultural heritage law, despite never having come 
into possession of them. On this crucial point, the court of appeal decided in 
Iran’s favour. Following negotiations with the gallery, the objects were 
returned to their homeland.

Palmer was more recently asked to provide a legal opinion for the Greek 
government with Geoffrey Robertson QC andAmal Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> on the position of the 
Parthenon marbles in international and British law, a document that was 
delivered in the summer of 2015. “I didn’t quite see why it was worthy of all 
that press coverage,” he said wryly at the time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fnorman-palmer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89026f6a6ece624c793e4c305688fceb7e714709%2F0_142_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Norman%20Palmer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fnorman-palmer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Norman%20Palmer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fnorman-palmer-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89026f6a6ece624c793e4c305688fceb7e714709%2F0_142_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Lawyer Amal Clooney is guided by the director of the Acropolis Museum, 
Dimitris Pantermalis, left, during a visit with Norman Palmer (second left) to 
advise the Greek government. Photograph: Yorgos Karahalis/AP 
Like all good barristers, he would argue his client’s case in the most 
convincing of ways. However, he remained motivated by the search for an 
amicable resolution – not one fought out in court, but one resulting from the 
parties sitting round the table and seeing eye to eye. In his lectures, he 
often quoted a line associated with a 17th-century peace treaty: “One peace is 
worth countless victories.” The titles of some of his recent law journal 
publications – Waging and Engaging: Reflections on the Mediation of Art and 
Antiquity Claims; The Best We Can Do? Exploring a Collegiate Approach to 
Holocaust-related Claims – indicate that he took this saying to heart. He 
believed that a resolution was always possible, and one in which both sides 
could be satisfied.

Nowhere was this more clear than when he worked for the Indigenous Australians 
of the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre, who were looking to claim back the bones of 
their ancestors that had been taken by explorers and settlers and later donated 
to the Natural History Museum in London. Palmer advised the group to obtain 
court permission to bury the remains in Tasmania, then bring the court order to 
Britain, thus putting pressure on the museum to negotiate. The legal ingenuity 
worked. The parties entered a mediation that led to asuccessful settlement 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/6157572.stm>, whereby the remains 
were returned to Tasmania and met with a traditional ceremony of welcome by the 
group.

Born in Grays, Essex, the son of Muriel (nee Walker) and Norman Palmer, he 
went to Palmer’s Endowed school, then won a scholarship to read law at Magdalen 
College, Oxford, eventually becoming professor of law at Reading, then Essex 
and Southampton universities, and from 1991 at University College London. In 
1979 he wrote his landmark legal tome, Palmer on Bailment, seen by many in the 
legal profession as a work of peerless scholarship. Following his retirement 
from institutional academia in 2002, as professor of commercial law at UCL (he 
became emeritus professor after retirement), he decided to focus on his 
practice as a barrister, and the cultural heritage briefs started to flow in.

Palmer chaired a number of government-appointed cultural heritage bodies, such 
as the advisory panel on illicit trade (2000-05), on which he succeeded in 
obtaining unanimity for the recommendation that the UK join the 1970 Unesco 
convention <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2001/mar/15/arttheft.art>, 
which aims to curb the illicit trade in looted antiquities (the UK acceded to 
the convention in 2002). He sat on the UK’s spoliation advisory panel, which 
hears claims involving Holocaust-era art kept at British institutions, from its 
inception in 2000 until last year.

He married Ruth Redmond-Cooper, his second wife, in 1994 and a year later they 
set up theInstitute of Art and Law <http://www.ial.uk.com/>, an independent 
educational organisation.

He is survived by Ruth and their daughter Lilian, his daughter, Victoria, from 
his first marriage to Judith Weeks, which ended in divorce, and three 
grandchildren.

• Norman Ernest Palmer, barrister and law professor, born 16 August 1948; died 
3 October 2016
 