
Academic researchers into the effectiveness or otherwise of anti-social 
behaviour orders <http://www.asbos.co.uk/AboutASBOs.aspx>will no doubt want to 
have this one in their data.

Dexter Ferguson, who made headlines briefly by being the first person in the 
north east of England to be given an Asbo, has just gone to prison after his 
116th conviction.

That was in 1999, the year after Tony Blair introduced the new penalty as a 
swift but immediately controversial way of handing down a penalty for 
relatively minor offences. It was the most eye-catching measure in his campaign 
to be "tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime," the sixth of New 
Labour's 1997general election manifesto's ten commitments.
 <http://www.labour-party.org.uk/manifestos/1997/1997-labour-manifesto.shtml>
Subsequent audits have cast doubt on its effectiveness  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2009/sep/29/asbo-brown-crime-crackdown>and 
there has beenmuch mockery of asbo detail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2148059/Asbos-axed-The-ridiculous-legacy-Labours-beloved-Asbo.html>
 which ranges from a ban on wearing one golf glove (the mark of a Manchester 
gang) to guarantees of good behaviour by the owner of an accident-prone herd of 
escaping pigs. Ferguson does not appear to give any encouragement for remaining 
supporters of the penalty, whoseeventual doom was signalled 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/jul/28/asbos-theresa-may-home-secretary> in 
2010 by the Home Secretary Theresa May.

He has appeared in court every year since 1992, with his asbos leaving no 
discernable trace on this record. Only last month,he was given a 'lifetime asbo'
 
<http://www.sunderlandecho.com/news/crime/historic-asbo-man-gets-lifelong-banning-orders-after-more-than-100-crimes-1-4906019>
whose survival beyond any action taken to abolish the measure by May could in 
futureprove an interesting legal case.
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/2012/may/22/may-tougher-antisocial-behaviour-laws>
Recorder Jonathan Sandiford issued the order at Newcastle-upon-Tyne Crown 
court, saying:

I am satisfied that it is necessary in particular to protect people in the 
area ofSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sunderland> where the 
defendant ordinarily lives.

Ferguson had to sign agreement to five behaviour rules before leaving court, 
but he was soon back in front of a judge, down the coast in Sunderland. This 
time, he was charged with communicating false information by 'phoning police to 
say that there was a bomb on a Stagecoach bus travelling between Durham and 
Sunderland.

He has been jailed for eight days, which comes on top of several previous 
terms for drunkenness and violence, 130 arrests, the lifelong asbo and other 
orders which ban him from every pub in Sunderland's city centre and east end.
 