
Boardroom bosses have been put on alert that their pay has moved beyond being 
a focus for UK investors after the biggest wealth fund in the world said it was 
scrutinising pay deals.

At a time when the amount of revolts in this year’s annual general meeting 
season are coming thicker and faster than those in recent years, theNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> oil fund has revealed it is 
preparing to target high pay.

Yngve Slyngstad, chief executive of the fund, told the Financial Times 
<https://next.ft.com/content/aeb270ec-0f63-11e6-bb40-c30e3bfcf63b> that the 
absolute level of pay – not just the way deals were structured – was becoming 
an issue. “We have so far looked at this in a way that has focused on pay 
structures rather than pay levels. We think, due to the way the issue of 
executive remuneration has developed, that we will have to look at what an 
appropriate level of executive remuneration is as well,” said Slyngstad.

The Norges Bank Investment Management is so large that it holds stakes in most 
major companies. It supported the controversial pay deal for BP’s chief 
executive, Bob Dudley, which was voted against by a majority of investors but, 
according to the FT, the fund voted against pay at Anglo American and also at
Weir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/weirgroup>.

Weir has faced the largest rebellion of this AGM season and was forced to 
abandon potential share awards for its top management team, after72.4% of 
shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/shareholder-rebellions-shire-pay-agm-ceo-investor-anger>
voted against its pay policies.

“We are looking at how to approach this issue in the public space. We will 
choose the right instance for the right case of voting,” Slyngstad said.

The remarks by Slyngstad come as a long list of London-listed companies 
prepare to hold their AGMs over the coming days, including Reckitt Benckiser,
whose chief executive was paid £23m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/reckitt-benckise-paid-chief-executive-23m-last-year-rakesh-kapoor-share>
 in 2015, double the amount the year before. Two banks, Standard Chartered and 
bailed-out Royal Bank of Scotland, along with Rolls-Royce, GlaxoSmithKline and 
hedge fund Man Group, are also holding meetings.

Data compiled by the corporate governance consultancy ISS Corporate Solutions 
(ICS) shows that two pay deals have already secured “no” votes – those atBP and 
Smith & Nephew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
– compared with none by this stage over the previous three years.

“The average level of dissent for advisory remuneration report resolutions 
across the FTSE All Share continues to outpace that evidenced in recent years,” 
said Stephan Costa, executive director at ICS.


“More critically, we are seeing companies failing to secure majority support 
with others narrowly passing, thereby underscoring the depth and breadth of 
investor sentiments on pay this annual meeting season,” Costa said.

The AGM season continues for a number of more weeks yet, when major companies 
hold their investor meetings, including WPP, the advertising company which 
confirmed last weekthat its chief executive, Sir Martin Sorrell, had been paid 
£70.4m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/sir-martin-sorrell-70m-in-2015-pay-deal-wpp>
in 2015.


• This article was amended on 3 May 2016 to give the full name of ISS 
Corporate Solutions
 