
Here we go again... now it's Kate, Duchess of Cambridge, getting the paparazzi 
treatment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/sep/14/kate-william-furious-topless-photographs>
, just as her late mother-in-law did 15 years ago and her brother-in-law did 
just a couple of weeks ago.

No wonder the Duchess and her husband, Prince William, are reported to be 
furious. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-19595221> With memories of Princess 
Diana in mind, they must feel history is repeating itself.

The statement issued by the Palace this morning, calling the privacy intrusion 
"grotesque and totally unjustifiable", makes an explicit reference to Diana:

"The incident is reminiscent of the worst excesses of the press and paparazzi 
during the life ofDiana, Princess of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/diana>, and all the more upsetting to The Duke 
and Duchess for being so."

Clearly, British newspapers and magazines refused to publish the topless 
pictures of Kate because it would be a blatant breach of the editors' code of 
practice to do so.

The photos were obviously taken without the Duchess's consent, and they were 
snapped in a place where she and her husband had, to quote the code, "a 
reasonable expectation of privacy."

As for "the public interest", there is no earthly way of constructing an 
argument to justify publication on such grounds.

The Kate pictures are different from those involving Prince Harry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry>, who was pictured last month 
while naked in a Las Vegas hotel.

Though The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> advanced a public 
interest defence for publishing the Harry picture, it was very specific to the 
circumstances.

Aside from its argument that the pictures were "in the public domain" by 
virtue of having been published on many websites, the paper claimed there were 
security implications and questions about his position in the army."We believe 
Harry has compromised his own privacy," 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/article4502239.ece> it said.

That paper thin argument to justify publication would not be possible in 
relation to the Kate pictures.

Nor is it a matter of newspapers giving special privileges to royalty. One key 
decision taken by thePress Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> about sneak pictures of people in a 
private place dates back to 2001 and involved the DJ Sara Cox. She was pictured 
nude on a private beach on an island in the Seychelles.

The PCC did not adjudicate because it convinced the offending paper, The 
People, to apologise 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2002/feb/25/thepeople.mondaymediasection>, and 
Cox went on to sue the paper, which eventually paid her and her husband £50,000 
in an out-of-court settlement. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2003/jun/07/pressandpublishing.privacy> 

Similarly, Amanda Holden and her then husband, Les Dennis, were paid £40,000 
in an out-of-court settlement 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2001/dec/21/pressandpublishing.humanrights>
after the Daily Star published sneak photographs of them. Neither were legal 
precedents, because they didn't go to trial.

The editors' code certainly did draw a line between public places and private 
places, offering a large measure of protection for the latter.

It is interesting that the pictures of Kate and William are appearing in a 
French magazine becauseFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has 
very strict privacy laws. Presumably the magazine, Closer, is willing to take 
the legal heat should the prince and his wife decide to sue.

It is also sobering to recall that Diana's death in 1997 occurred in France 
when she was being pursued by the paparazzi. (Incidentally, she was not 
pictured topless. She was pictured in a bikini while pregnant - by newspaper 
staff photographers - and there were many other bikini shots taken by paparazzi 
over the years).

Finally, some callers to radio phone-in programmes this morning have indicated 
that there could be a public backlash should any British publication dare to 
publish sneak pictures of the Duchess. I would doubt that. Hypocrisy in this 
matter runs deep.

But the British-based version of Closer - published by Bauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> Media - had better watch out. Despite 
its French namesake being owned by a different company - Silvio Berlusconi's 
Mondadori - it could just find itself being punished by a boycott.
 