
Good news: Blaenavon has a new postman. Bad news: by the time the Left Bank 
bookshop opens, at around 10am every morning, the owner is absolutely 
knackered. Good news: the owner has taken on his extra job because he's 
thinking of investing in another property in the town. Bad news: Postman Mark 
could be getting up at 5am and chuffing up and down the steep streets of the 
town for a long time.

Over the hills and not so very far away from Blaenavon, the original booktown 
of Hay-on-Wye is heaving with cafes, delicatessens, smart restaurants, interior 
design shops, antique dealers, and chic clothes shops. There are still 
booksellers, but they only survive where they have bought their premises or got 
long cheap leases on them: no small secondhand book dealer could afford to buy 
into the booktown miracle now.

A year ago anyone who suggested that the same thing could happen in Blaenavon, 
valley of the squinting plywood, would have been laughed all the way back down 
the mountain to the M4. Property in the town was in terrible condition, but 
cheap as chips. Now much of it is still in terrible condition, but you get far 
fewer chips to the pound. Local people stand in front of the estate agents, 
staring at the photographs, their jaws dropping. Only two months ago a woman 
beside me in the butcher's told, in stunned tones as if reporting a Martian had 
moved in next door, that a house near her had sold for over Â£100,000. Her 
astounding news is already well out of date: nobody would turn a hair now.

From the car park beside the library, you can see the roof tops all along the 
street, and the backs of all the buildings on one side. The shiny shop fronts 
are smiles concealing a mouth full of rotting cavities. In heavy rain - what 
would be heavy rain to wimps in the south-east is a mere dampness in Blaenavon: 
heavy rain is like standing under one of those saucepan-sized power shower 
heads - you can admire the water features. The rain sloshes down green stained 
walls from broken or missing gutters, and cascades through roofs where some of 
the slates are just clinging on until the next gale, and others have been 
replaced by tarred canvas. In Kevin Satchwell's tea rooms/antique shop/laundry 
water poured in, not even through the ceiling but through the top of a window 
frame: a handsome Victorian wash basin was set beneath the water spout, but 
kept filling up.

 Good news: the council is planning a major assault on the worst of the 
properties, with 100% loans available to owners and new roofs for the ones it 
owns itself. Bad news: Jo Wyborn, twice gazumped, has concluded that she is 
just not going to be able to afford to buy a house in the town. Good news: she 
does have somewhere to stay in the town, in the bedsit flat upstairs, which she 
rents along with Chatterton's bookshop. Bad news: the attractively sloping roof 
over her head is in shreds. Good news: the council is going to replace it. Bad 
news: but told her she'd have to get out of her barely launched business for 
three months while the work was done. These alternating blows of fate were 
coming so thick and fast at one stage that she felt she was spinning like a 
weather vane in a mild Blaenavon breeze. Good news: the council has now decided 
that she can stay after all and will do the work around her. Bad news: but that 
will of course increase the value of the property. It seems wildly unlikely 
that she'll ever be able, as she was promised originally, to afford to buy it. 
She wonders, between laughing like a cracked drain and feeling slightly sick, 
if all she's been doing for the last year is keeping the building warm for 
somebody richer.

 Good news: the scaffolding below the crossroads has finally gone, so you can 
finally look down the hill and see light shining out through the handsome curve 
of Broadleaf Books' windows. Bad news: at Broadleaf Joanna and Lata aren't 
earning remotely enough to pay both the rent and their wages. Good news: they 
don't actually have to pay any rent to the council until April. Bad news: 
they're saving up to pay the rent so they're not paying themselves any wages 
either. Joanna is still working part of the week on the chilly market stall in 
Abergavenny, which she moved into a shop to escape. Lata has two part-time jobs 
to pay the bills. One is as a consultant. If asked for advice by her clients, 
her professional advice would be not to take two demanding part-time jobs to 
subsidise one unpaid full-time job.
 