
Moving from primary to secondary school, I remember being encouraged to soak 
up as much canonical children's fantasy (Susan Cooper, Alan Garner, Penelope 
Lively) as I liked, and to make the salmon-leap to grownup books by reading 
classic titles – Jane Eyre, Pride and Prejudice, a bit of Steinbeck, a bit of 
Golding. While I was delighted to find fantasy topping the menu, and didn't 
object to taking on more challenging adult fiction, I also remember an unvoiced 
but distinct disapproval – a strong hint of arched eyebrow and indrawn breath – 
if you were caught readingJudy Blume <http://www.judyblume.com/> or Paula 
Danziger. <http://www.scholastic.com/titles/paula/> There was a sense of: "It's 
all very well, but it's teen fiction." There was even a hint of, "You've taken 
the easy option there, haven't you?"

At 11, it didn't occur to me to take issue with my teachers' characterisation 
of Blume and Danziger as "easy reading"; literary muzak. (I was a pusillanimous 
child.) The echoes of mild pedagogical sarcasm continued to ring faintly in my 
ears for years to come, with the result that when I recently went on a 
library-fuelled Judy and Paula binge, I felt like a guilty homework-dodger. But 
rereadingThe Cat Ate My Gymsuit 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Cat_Ate_My_Gymsuit>, I suddenly felt a rush 
of long-overdue indignation on the book's behalf.

Danziger's prose may not be Nabokovian – although it's certainly welcoming to 
the reader – but the subject matter is anything but facile. Marcy, the 
overweight, painfully shy, very clever heroine of Gymsuit, has a stinker of a 
dad to deal with – a patriarchal oppressor of the old school – as well as 
compulsory PE, which forces her to come up with a series of excuses to avoid 
baring all to her classmates (hence the title). Her hot-faced agony at the 
prospect of revealing herself in body or soul transported me instantly back to 
the miseries of early adolescence, when I was never going to be thin enough or 
have the right jeans; when I imagined I'd live in a limbo of never belonging, 
sans boyfriend or courage to leave the house, for the rest of my life. Judy 
Blume'sAre You There, God? It's Me, Margaret 
<http://judyblume.com/books/middle/margaret.php> similarly distils the 
impatience felt by just-pubescent girls waiting for the physical markers of 
adulthood – menstruation and breasts – to show up. This isnot junk fiction 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/aug/11/bad-bad-books>.

Possibly because I'd subconsciously acquired a sense that books for teens were 
infra dig, I held out against Jacqueline Wilson, sometimes called the UK's Judy 
Blume, until last week. (It might also have had something to do with the 
incrediblygarish covers 
<http://www.jacquelinewilson.co.uk/the-books/books-12/girls-in-love/>. If only 
publishers wouldn't assume that all girls love pink: the odd boy might pick one 
up if they looked less candy-coated.) Realising, after my nostalgic orgy, that 
I'd succumbed to a silly, snobbish prejudice, I began to set matters straight. 
Three books later, I'm convulsed with envy for the lucky lasses allowed – nay, 
encouraged – to read Wilson's work.

Her subject matter, again, tends to be challenging with a capital C – my lucky 
dip revealed a burgeoning relationship between girl (14) andmarried male art 
teacher <http://www.jacquelinewilson.co.uk/the-books/books-12/love-lessons/>, a 
dysfunctional,masochistic mum 
<http://www.jacquelinewilson.co.uk/the-books/books-9-11/lolarose/> with a taste 
for liquor, and a good dose of homophobia andheartbreak 
<http://www.jacquelinewilson.co.uk/the-books/books-12/kiss/>. I actually had to 
put Lola Rose down several times when it became too distressing, and think 
merry thoughts of brownies and pixie rings before returning to it. But I found 
the books completely compelling. Like Gymsuit and Are You There, God, they 
fling wide the windows into the dark, smelly bedroom of adolescence, revealing 
to cowering little aliens everywhere that They Are Not Alone.

I wonder how many children are put off reading altogether because the 
canonical and the "worthwhile" are trumpeted as the only books worth the time 
it takes to read them. As the recent (non-exhaustive) G2 list of thebest 
children's books ever 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/may/12/best-childrens-books-ever>
suggests, reading should, by all means, be educational and challenging, but it 
should be pleasurable too. If I have a daughter – or a brave and unconventional 
son – Wilson's books will be made welcome on our shelves. Although, I draw the 
line at queuing for eight hours for an autograph 
<http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/news/4650948.Tickets_to_Jacqueline_Wilson_booksigning_in_Bournemouth/>
.
 