
The show opened and then it closed. Or closed and then opened.

At 6pm on 23 April, following a day-long crowded symposium in the otherwise 
emptyChisenhale Gallery <http://www.chisenhale.org.uk/> in London, the doors 
and gates were locked, and a sign affixed to the railings. And that was it. Or 
rather, not it at all.


Maria Eichhorn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ucSJFAvEAiQ>’s 5 weeks, 25 
days, 175 hours presents visitors with a closed and unoccupied gallery. The 
staff, including gallery director Polly Staple, will be on free time and full 
pay until 29 May. Phones will not be answered, emails to gallery addresses will 
be deleted, except for a dedicated account that will be checked every 
Wednesday. There’s nothing to see, but lots to think about. Who is paying for 
this time? What does this withdrawal from work and suspension of the gallery’s 
activities mean? It is not a strike or boycott, nor a protest in any obvious 
way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fnothing-to-see-here-maria-eichhorn-chisenhale-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc691f1860a66fbb3cf9346ab20310bf8487bc2de%2F0_366_1502_1329%2F1502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nothing%20to%20see%20here%3A%20the%20artist%20giving%20gallery%20staff%20a%20month%20off%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fnothing-to-see-here-maria-eichhorn-chisenhale-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nothing%20to%20see%20here%3A%20the%20artist%20giving%20gallery%20staff%20a%20month%20off%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fnothing-to-see-here-maria-eichhorn-chisenhale-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc691f1860a66fbb3cf9346ab20310bf8487bc2de%2F0_366_1502_1329%2F1502.jpg>
 Signing off ... Maria Eichhorn’s 5 weeks, 25 days, 175 hours (2016). 
Photograph: Andy Keate/Chisenhale Gallery /Courtesy of the artist 
The artist says she has not assigned Chisenhale’s employees any tasks other 
thannot to work for the gallery. “The institution itself and the actual 
exhibition are not closed, but rather displaced into the public sphere and 
society,” she says. “[And] when the gallery’s employees come back to work, 
there will not be a great deal of emails waiting to be dealt with, thankfully.”

She has also stipulated Chisenhale should not be used for other purposes 
during its closure – not rented for profit or otherwise capitalised, nor turned 
over for socially engaged good works. The lights are off and – as one angry 
contributor remarked during Saturday’s symposium – “the walls as bare as a 
speculator’s unoccupied loft apartment on the Thames”. It is a caesura, a 
break, an interruption.

How will Eichhorn, born in southern Germany and now living in Berlin, know if 
her artwork has succeeded? “This is not for me to say,” she told me after the 
symposium. Only in its afterlife, she believes, can the exhibition be 
understood. That, too, is where meaning will be generated.

She has previous form. In 2011, Eichhorn used her budget for an exhibition at 
the Kunsthalle Bern <http://frieze.com/article/maria-eichhorn?language=de>, in 
Switzerland, to pay for much-needed renovations to the building, leaving the 
galleries themselves empty. What we might call her work was delegated to the 
builders who completed the renovations. “It’s not easy,” she remarked at the 
symposium, “to distinguish what is part of the work and what is not.” The less 
there is to see, the more there is to say, runs the critical adage. Some 
galleries might close and you wouldn’t even notice, remarked Liverpool Biennial 
director Sally Tallant from the floor.

Paris hosts new exhibition of nothing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/mar/02/pompidou-centre-vides-exhibition>
The artistic gesture of closing a gallery also has a history. In 1969, 
conceptual artistRobert Barry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZG4mShu3RH4> 
left a sign on the door of Art + Project Gallery in Amsterdam, telling visitors 
it would be closed for the duration of his exhibition.Michael Asher 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2012/oct/16/entertainment/la-et-cm-artist-michael-asher-dies-69-20121016>
 removed a partition wall in an LA commercial gallery in 1974, to reveal the 
work that goes on behind the scenes. Like those restaurants where the kitchen 
is visible to diners as they eat, this is a risky move. Abominable chefs and 
gallerists who behave like martinets beware this sort of exposure: it puts 
people off their food, and the art.


But Eichhorn exposes very little. Instead she has sent everyone home, having 
already interviewed all the staff about the pleasures and pressures of their 
jobs – interviews written up ina publication 
<http://chisenhale.org.uk/downloads/Maria_Eichhorn_5_weeks%2C_25_days%2C_175_hours_Chisenhale_Gallery_2016.pdf>
 on the gallery’s website, along withan audio recording 
<http://chisenhale.org.uk/audio_video/media.php?id=87> of the symposium and the 
speakers’ papers. There’s an extreme balance here between closure and exposure, 
withholding and negation. The closure might also aggravate the vulnerable 
relationships a mid-sized, nominally public gallery has with its audience, 
stakeholders, funders, trustees and private and corporate patrons. Chisenhale 
is part publicly funded, but Staple told Eichhorn in her interview that she 
spends 75% of her time fundraising.

Non-shows like this can reveal the cracks; they can also widen them. Spanish 
artistSantiago Sierra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2002/oct/11/art.artsfeatures> sealed 
off the entrance to his show at Lisson Gallery in 2002 with a barricade of 
corrugated metal, and, for his official exhibition in the Spanish Pavilion at 
the 2003Venice Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale>, posted guards at 
the entrance. Entry was allowed only to Spanish passport holders, who found the 
interior unrefurbished and unlit, with leftover rubbish from the previous 
architectural biennale strewn on the floor.

I can think of many exhibitions, filled with objects and art, that offer far 
less

Is Eichhorn making just another futile art gesture to resist consumption or 
marketability? As the closed sign was being screwed to the Chisenhale gate, a 
collector was trying to negotiate purchase of the work. Someone else suggested 
the show might go on tour. Such provocations can be empty, nihilistic, 
annoying. Withdrawal can act as a passive-aggressive slight, the effect one of 
alienation. But Eichhorn’s purpose is, I think, more generative.

At the core of her latest work is the idea she is gifting the gallery and 
staff some time, as much as a break. The concept of free time and our striving 
for a mythic “work-life balance” are worth consideration. When working life is 
so precarious and borderless, frequently conducted on short term or zero-hours 
contracts, and our social lives become ever more instrumentalised in the 
service of it, balance goes out the window.

How to deal with email overload | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/15/how-to-deal-with-email-overload>
Our unpaid hours are filled with “networking”, fielding emails, constructing 
work-related online identities, boosting our professional affiliations and 
always being available in nebulous ways. As we nurture the professional 
relationships that substitute for friendships, our lives become ever more 
hijacked by employers, and a sense of vulnerability and guilt about our 
productivity.

Robert Rauschenberg once said he wanted to work in the gap between art and life
 
<http://www.artnews.com/2014/03/26/how-rauschenberg-foundation-is-bridging-the-gap-between-art-life/>
. He could not have known the ramifications of his words today. Caring for 
ourselves and others – children, parents, colleagues, lovers, work contacts and 
the unseen and unknowable members of our wider professional circle – entails an 
expenditure of feelings and affects, in an attempt to balance a debt that can 
never be paid. We must always beon, even when we are off. 

Who, you may ask, is Maria Eichhorn to give anyone permission to stop working, 
or even to demand they do? But I can think of many art exhibitions, filled with 
objects, hours of video, images and signs, that offer less; whose satisfactions 
are more meagre and arcane; whose purposes are less graspable and concrete, 
their impact dissipating the moment you leave.

Eichhorn’s project is as much situational as it is institutional critique 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/online-resources/glossary/i/institutional-critique>
 – a way of treating the institution itself as the subject of the work. Those 
of us who are not the beneficiaries of the free time given to Chisenhale’s 
staff might ask what, if anything, is in it for us? Our freedom is to go and do 
something else, to withdraw, to work precariously, or to do nothing – the 
greatest gift of all.

• 5 weeks, 25 days, 175 hours 
<http://chisenhale.org.uk/exhibitions/current_exhibition.php> is at Chisenhale 
Gallery, London, until 29 May.
 