
Indian novelist Amitav Ghosh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/amitav-ghosh> 
has withdrawn his book from the Commonwealth Writers competition because he 
objects to the idea of his work being classified as "commonwealth literature" 
when the prize is only open to books written in English.

Ghosh announced his decision yesterday in a letter to The Times of India, in 
which he argued that the name "Commonwealth" for a literary or cultural 
grouping could "only be a misnomer" so long as it excluded the many languages 
that sustained the cultural and literary lives of those countries.

The writer, whose book The Glass Palace was picked as the Eurasia regional 
winner and was eligible for the main Â£10,000 prize, to be awarded in Ghana next 
month, said he had been unaware his work had been submitted for the competition 
by his publishers.

"So far as I can determine, The Glass Palace is eligible for the commonwealth 
prize partly because it was written in English and partly because
 I happen to belong to a region that was once conquered and ruled by imperial 
Britain. Of the many reasons why a book's merits may be recognised, these seem 
to be the least persuasive," he said.

Ghosh, author of best-selling English novels including The Circle of Reason 
and The Shadow Lines, said he would be betraying the spirit of his latest work 
if he allowed it to become a part of "that particular memorialisation of empire 
that passes under the rubric of the commonwealth".

While he was gratified that the jury had liked the book, an epic novel dealing 
with colonial rule in Burma and Britain, he was strongly opposed to being 
entered in the first place.

Publisher HarperCollins UK admitted it was unaware of his views when it 
recommended the book for the prize.

Diana Bailey, programme manager for the Commonwealth Foundation, said she felt 
Ghosh's view was a "misunderstanding of what the modern Commonwealth prize 
meant". But she added discussions were going on about including works not in 
English.
 