
Do we know – or sufficiently value – what the UK gains from its relationship 
with Saudi Arabia? This is the questionposed here recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/defence-ties-saudi-arabia-yemen-british-cluster-bombs>
 by Professor Rosemary Hollis after the revelations thatUK-made cluster bombs 
were used in Yemen by the Saudi-led coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/uk-cluster-bombs-used-in-yemen-by-saudi-arabia-finds-research>
.

We know, more or less, what we get in the way of defence contracts and jobs, 
but what we get fromintelligence cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2015/oct/07/uk-saudi-arabia-the-new-special-relationship>
 is less clear. It always is, because intelligence experts have a way of saying 
loftily that the intelligence is more important than our need to know.

That is an effective argument, and in principle often a valid one. But, like 
other arguments that pre-empt debate, it is too effective, and perhaps in 
consequence gets used too often.

It is, of course, also the case that it is the Saudi state and its 
relationship withWahhabi <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wahhabism> and Salafi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salafi_movement> Islam that is a major 
contributory factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/29/islamic-state-saudi-arabia-rethink-extremism>
 in the rise of the Islamic terrorism that Saudi intelligence cooperation is 
supposed to be helping us to resist. It’s bit like whacking someone on the leg 
and then offering a bandage to make it better.

Eleven years ago, after the London bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/july7>, I wrote an article for Prospect magazine
 <http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/thelossoffaith> where I argued 
that the battle of ideas urged by Tony Blair at the time, which he claimed 
needed to take place within the Muslim community, needed to be fought on a 
wider field. As much as succumbing to Islamic extremism, the homegrown bombers 
of 7 July 2005 had perpetrated their killings because we had failed to convince 
them of the free values that we claim our country stands for.

I said it was urgently necessary to reverse the hollowing out of those free 
values, and the laziness and complacency that permits it, and to reassert them 
as something worth standing up for against extremism, ignorance and intolerance 
of whatever kind. That task is no less urgent now, and we have to take it 
seriously.

It may seem arrogant to say that ideas matter and money and economics 
ultimately don’t, but it is actually true. A country or a political system has 
to be based on an idea. The fundamental question is whether the idea ofal-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> and Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, of intolerance and hatred, and their 
kind of justice, is superior to our idea of freedom, tolerance and justice. I 
don’t think so. But the 7/7 bombers, and too many others since then, did – and 
do.

Islamic extremists say their bodies are their cruise missiles and cluster 
bombs, and they are right. They have faith and belief, and if we don’t believe 
in what we stand for, they will win and we will lose. So it is important to say 
what we mean, and mean what we say.

Or, put another way, alongside what we get from our relationship with Saudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, we also have to try to 
calculate what we lose. If we lose some credibility, that is bad. But if we 
lose our own integrity, that is a great deal worse, and potentially disastrous.

We cannot say we abhor use of weapons against civilians in Aleppo, and supply 
such weapons for use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/saudis-dropped-british-cluster-bombs-in-yemen-fallon-tells-commons>
 against civilians in Yemen.

We are not, ultimately, being a good friend to Saudi Arabia or UAE or Bahrain 
if we simply take their money and tell them what, in their fear and paranoia 
about their region, andtheir own insecurity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/29/saudi-arabia-king-salman-spending-gulf>
 about their uneasy hold on their own rule, we think they want to hear. The 
Saudis are in a difficult position, and their war in Yemen is not making things 
better. They need to hear some hard messages, and it is our job to tell them. 
We are in a rather good place to do it.

Cutting defence ties with Saudi Arabia would come at a price | Rosemary Hollis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/defence-ties-saudi-arabia-yemen-british-cluster-bombs>
Ideas matter. Religion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion> matters. 
And the sectarian confrontation between Sunni and Shia in the Middle East is 
only going to get worse if all do not make a concerted effort to put it right. 
It was a mistake for the UK to take sides in that confrontation (others, 
Germany for example, have rightly been more cautious).

British influence is not what it was, but the real question is whether, 
whatever its effectiveness, that influence is being applied in the right 
direction, to the right purpose. Is it currently being applied toward stability 
and long-term resolution of conflict, or towards the Treasury’s prosperity 
agenda? I think we know the answer.

Boris knew the answer, and recently suggested that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/boris-johnson-accuses-saudi-arabia-of-twisting-and-abusing-islam>
 in their proxy wars in the Middle East region, Saudi Arabia and Iran were 
equally to blame. He wasridiculed for a gaffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/boris-johnson-refuses-to-apologise-for-saudi-arabia-comments>
, because at around the same time Theresa Maywas on a trip to the Persian Gulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-calls-on-gulf-leaders-to-press-on-with-economic-reforms>
, among other things praising the Saudis for what she called their leadership.

Boris had some good moments in 2016, and some less good, notably around the 
Brexit referendum. But this supposed gaffe was nothing of the sort. We need to 
have the courage – like Boris, in this case – to tell the truth, and to tell it 
to the Saudis and their allies.

Because otherwise, some way down the road, Isis and its ilk may win.

We cannot say we abhor use of weapons against civilians in Aleppo, and supply 
such weapons for use against civilians in Yemen
 