
New South Wales is the worst Australian state at driving renewable energy, and 
South Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> 
and the ACT lead the pack, a report produced by the Climate Council has found.

The results came just weeks after South Australia closed its last coal power 
station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/24/port-augusta-busting-a-gut-to-reinvent-itself-as-a-solar-city-when-coal-fired-power-is-switched-off>
, and the ACT announced a target to source100% of its energy from renewable 
sources by 2020 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/act-lifts-2020-target-to-100-renewable-energy-as-australia-stalls-86177>
.

The report examined state and territory percentages of renewable electricity, 
the amount of large-scale renewable capacity per capita and the policy settings 
driving renewables.

NSW was bottom of the class in every category except rooftop solar. But it 
beat only Tasmania, which receivesless solar radiation 
<http://www.nationalmap.gov.au/renewables/#share=nvkwXk> than any state or 
territory.

Australian Climate Council calls for urgent action as records tumble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/20/australia-climate-council-urgent-action-temperature-records-summer-march>
The Climate Council gave South Australia the highest score; 40% of its 
electricity comes from renewables, and it has a 50% renewable energy target for 
2025 and a substantial large-scale renewable capacity.

Tasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> was ranked 
second, with 95% of its electricity coming from renewables, but a low level of 
large-scale renewables besides hydro and a low uptake of rooftop solar.

The territories had no comparable data for the percentage of their electricity 
that came from renewables, so they were scored separately. But the ACT was 
singled out as a leader for its 100% renewable energy target, which it will 
achieve using reverse auctions for large-scale renewable energy.

In the middle of the pack were Queensland, Western Australia and Victoria, 
althoughQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
recently overtook South Australia with rooftop solar, now at 29.6% of 
households.

NSW and Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> were 
the only states to have decreased the percentage of their electricity sourced 
from renewables. Between 2013 and 2014, NSW’s share of renewable energy dropped 
from 7% to 6% and Victoria’s from 12% to 10%.

The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> was highlighted 
as lagging, along with NSW, with no specific renewable energy targets or 
policies and a low uptake of rooftop solar.

Andrew Stock, a climate counsellor, energy expert and author of the report, 
said states could play a key role in driving the transition to renewable energy.

“Achieving 50% renewable energy by 2030 is a key, achievable step Australia 
must take to meet its share of the global commitment to keeping global 
temperature rise below 2C, and the states and territories have a crucial role 
to play in meeting that goal,” Stock said.

A key part of making space for renewable energy was shutting down coal-fired 
power stations.

“States need to start planning for an orderly closure of Australia’s most 
polluting coal-fired power plants which would reduce oversupply and eliminate 
one of the key barriers to renewables investment.”
 