
The proportion of black and minority ethnic people working in England’s 
subsidised arts and museums sector is increasing but more needs to be done to 
improve representation and employment of the disabled, a new report says.

I’m an actor with dwarfism, but I can do more than just appear in Snow White | 
Kiruna Stamell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/actor-dwarfism-snow-white-panto-disabilities>
The conclusions are made in the second annual diversity report released on 
Monday byArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> (ACE), and it 
presents a decidedly mixed picture. The proportion of black and minority ethnic 
(BME) people in the arts and museum workforce is going up, but the disabled 
workforce remains strikingly low. In terms of people enjoying the arts and 
museums, low income, BME and disabled audiences “continue to be 
underrepresented.”

An advance copy of a speech to be given in Manchester by ACE’s chief executive 
Darren Henley says: “For many children who have disabilities, who come from 
minority ethnic communities or from the least prosperous parts of our society, 
the arts still aren’t a part of life. I want us to do more to make sure that 
all children, no matter what their background, get involved in the arts.”

The report shows that 17% of the workforce in England’s 663 national portfolio 
organisations is BME. That is an increase on a figure last year of 13.9% and 
higher than the wider working population average of 15%. For major partner 
museums, the BME workforce is 7%, up from 2.3% in the last data.

Disabled people make up 4% of the workforce in NPOs – a long way off the 
figure of 19% in the working population who have a disability. In museums, the 
figure has gone down from 7.5% to 4%.

ACE’s diversity director, Abid Hussain, said more work needed to be done on 
the disabled issue and a report was due in the new year on the subject.

The Guardian view on Channel 4: it needs a diverse board | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/the-guardian-view-on-channel-4-it-needs-a-diverse-board>
The diversity report comes following a week in which it emerged that the 
former deputy chief executive of ACE, Althea Efunshile, a black woman, was 
blocked from becoming a non-executive director ofChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> by the culture secretary Karen 
Bradley. It means Channel 4’s board is all-white.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40fa6d1710225222db9f5b4c5224048e1fb60260%2F0_96_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Number%20of%20BAME%20arts%20workers%20must%20improve%2C%20says%20Arts%20Council%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Number%20of%20BAME%20arts%20workers%20must%20improve%2C%20says%20Arts%20Council%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40fa6d1710225222db9f5b4c5224048e1fb60260%2F0_96_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Althea Efunshile Photograph: Phillipa Gedge / Arts Council 
The Equality, Diversity and the Creative Case 2015/16 report also follows a 
theatre diversity report commissioned by Andrew Lloyd Webber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/01/andrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre>
 which warned that theatre risked being sidelined unless it better tackled the 
diversity issue. That report was welcomed by Hussain and by the actors’ union 
Equity.

The unionhad one quibble with the suggestion that commercial producers could 
not find enough black talent. “It is well documented that BAME performers from 
the UK are seeking work in the US due to the lack of opportunities at home.”

Hussain said the report was a blizzard of figures and, from them, change may 
comeadding: “It is about accountability and transparency. We need to be very 
open with the data we have. It is then, what does the data tell you? How do you 
use it to transform your policymaking?”

Some of the most pored over statistics will be those relating to every 
ACE-funded NPO and major museum with more than 50 staff.

Data published for the first time last year really “captured people’s 
imagination,” said Hussain and led to direct action. For example Hull Truck 
Theatre, which was listed as a 100% white workforce, and Sheffield Theatres, 
listed as 97%, entered the ACE’s newChange Makers programme 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/fund/changemakers> supporting BME and disabled 
leaders.

The organisations listed this year as having 100% white permanent staff are 
Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra and Cheltenham Festivals, whle a 99% figure is 
recorded by York Museums Trust, Ironbridge Gorge Museum, the De La Warr 
Pavilion and Colchester MercuryTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>.

The statistics are deliberately presented without commentary, leaving it up to 
readers of the report to interpret them.

The Southbank Centre in London has figures showing a workforce which is 56% 
women , 44% men, 75% white, 16% BME and 1% disabled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F083e74c7c91706698eba292006ee85ea40a1228b%2F0_398_4500_2370%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Number%20of%20BAME%20arts%20workers%20must%20improve%2C%20says%20Arts%20Council%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Number%20of%20BAME%20arts%20workers%20must%20improve%2C%20says%20Arts%20Council%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnumber-of-minority-arts-workers-must-improve-arts-council-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F083e74c7c91706698eba292006ee85ea40a1228b%2F0_398_4500_2370%2F4500.jpg>
 Arts Council England found the National Theatre workforce to be 10% BME and 3% 
disabled. Photograph: Jack Taylor/Getty Images 
It is one of the four arts organisations in the portfolio which get the most 
public money. The others are the Royal Opera House, which has a 50-50 gender 
split with 83% white, 7% BME and 1% disabled; the National Theatre, which has 
51-49 women to men, 78% white, 10% BME and 3% disabled; and the Royal 
Shakespeare Company, which has 57-43 women to men, 72% white, 8% BME and 2% 
disabled.

Hussain said the figures needed to be looked at through a number of lenses, 
including geography, but that the most important lesson was that organisations 
should take some action: “The key thing with the data is once you have it, you 
can do something in response to it.”

Chair of BAME prize slams UK publishers after lack of submissions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/19/bame-prize-slams-uk-publishers-sunny-singh-jhalak-diversity-britain>
Publicly subsidised arts organisations were told two years ago that diversity 
had to be a central part of their operations, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/08/arts-council-england-make-progress-diversity-funding-axed-bazalgette>
 in terms of audience and workforce, or they would face having their funding 
axed.

The report also includes new diversity data on leadership which reveals that 
women, and people who identified as BME or disabled, are underrepresented in 
boards and senior roles in arts and culture. It shows that 8% of chief 
executives, 10% of artistic directors and 9% of chairs are black, while 5% of 
chief executives, artistic directors and chairs have a disability.

Although well over half of the sector workforce is female, percentages are 
lower in the most senior positions: 43% of chief executives, 28% of artistic 
directors and 32% of chairs are women.
 