
If shopping online looks likely to play a bigger part in your Christmas than 
singing carols or eating mince pies, the Church of England has a plan to 
reclaim some of its territory – via your phone.

The C of E has launched a website, A Christmas Near You 
<https://www.achristmasnearyou.org/#map_scroll_target>, with details of more 
than 34,000 carol services across the country. Perhaps surmising that some 
possible attendees will not be motivated by faith alone, it includes full 
details of which services offer refreshments alongside O Come, All Ye Faithful 
– so that you can quickly find one of the 3,000 offering mulled wine, or 4,500 
offering mince pies. And you can tap in your postcode and find a service that 
suits you – traditional, contemporary, or child-friendly – near your home, add 
it to your calendar or share it with friends and family.

For people accustomed to using their phones and tablets to find the arrival 
time of the next bus, order sushi for home delivery, book cinema and theatre 
tickets and plan their next weekend break, this is not a big deal.


But for the Church of England, it is the latest stage of a digital revolution 
that it says is connecting it to a wider audience than ever before. In the past 
four years, the church has devoted significant resources to expanding and 
improving its websites and presence on social media, taking “steps in a 
paradigm shift”, according to the Rev Arun Arora, its director of 
communications.


The Church of England is not alone in recognising the power and reach of 
digital technology. “Trends in social media and apps are changing religion,” 
said Heidi Campbell, associate professor of communication at Texas A&M 
University and the author of DigitalReligion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion>. “For faith organisations and 
communities, lack of digital literacy these days means you don’t exist.”


Pope Francis <https://twitter.com/Pontifex> has attracted more than 10 million 
followers on Twitter in four years, posting messages in nine languages 
including Latin and Arabic and, according to a Vatican source, personally 
approving each tweet before it is launched. TheDalai Lama 
<https://twitter.com/DalaiLama> has 13.1 million followers; Justin Welby 
<https://twitter.com/JustinWelby>, the archbishop of Canterbury, clocks in at 
98,000.


Last month the Catholic church in Edinburgh and St Andrews announced it was 
launching aconfession finder app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/catholic-confession-finding-app-launched-by-scottish-church>
 allowing users to locate their nearest or soonest Mass. Christians all over 
the world can follow daily Bible readings and prayers online via services such 
asPray as You Go <http://www.pray-as-you-go.org/home/>, an app pioneered by the 
Jesuits 10 years ago.


Muslims have a huge range of apps to choose from, including quotations from 
the Qur’an, directories of halal restaurants and other businesses, prayer times 
and Mecca-finding apps.


Jews can watch videos about Judaism on YouTube’s TorahChannel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/TorahChannel> or play games set in biblical times 
<http://www.g-dcast.com/jonah-infinite-runner/>. Buddhists can perhaps achieve 
mindfulness more easily with the assistance of a wide range of meditation apps, 
such asBuddhify 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/buddhify-mindfulness-meditation/id687421118?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D8>
.

The C of E is targeting Facebook users who are posting about Christmas, 
pushing links to A Christmas Near You to people who would not naturally search 
for faith content online.


Partly as a result of this targeted promotional advertising, a video featuring 
Rose Hudson-Wilkin, the chaplain to the House of Commons Speaker, was viewed 
more than 130,000 times a week after its launch. The film isone of a series of 
four celebrating Christmas <https://www.achristmasnearyou.org/#videos>; the 
final one, featuring the Gogglebox vicar Kate Bottley,was launched on Monday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wmF3WF_HEqk>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwmF3WF_HEqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwmF3WF_HEqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwmF3WF_HEqk&media=>
Next year the church will relaunch its website 
<https://www.churchofengland.org/> to shift the focus from serving a core 
audience of clergy and churchgoers to the needs of the wider public, building 
it around the key life stages of birth, marriage, death, moving house, and 
young people going to school and leaving home. It plans to partner with 
Christian coders to set up an “innovations lab” for radical digital change.


According to Arora, the church has moved in the past few years from being 
fearful of digital communication to embracing it. “We recognised that digital 
offers the holy grail of unmediated communication with the world, whereas 
before we were dependent on the traditional media to get our message to the 
wider world. Everyone else had already figured that, but the church hadn’t seen 
digital as a priority. Now we can talk to the 97% of the population that aren’t 
regular churchgoers, as well as the committed 3%.”

Among the lessons the church had learned over the past four years, he said, 
was that there was much higher engagement with video than text among young 
people; that social networks were now an established and lasting form of 
communication; and that the model of communication was changing.


“For centuries, church leaders stood in a pulpit and preached at a 
congregation. Now it’s about relationship, conversation, dialogue,” said Arora.


In September the C of E appointed Adrian Harris as its head of digital 
communications to drive its strategy forward. Harris had previously led digital 
communications teams at Bupa, Tesco and the Conservative party. He said there 
was “a huge amount of untapped potential”.


Bex Lewis, senior lecturer in digital marketing at Manchester Metropolitan 
University, said she had “clapped my hands very loudly” at the appointment, but 
argued that the church was still slow to adapt to and embrace the digital age.


“At the top [of the church] it’s like trying to turn round an oil tanker,” she 
said, although theC of E’s engagement with Pokémon Go players 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-36806795> earlier this year had been encouraging. 
“But there’s some really interesting stuff happening at the bottom.”


Christian meme sites such as Anglican Memes 
<https://anglicanmemes.com/category/memes/> and Jesus Loves You 
<http://www.memecenter.com/search/jesus%20loves%20you> were popular, Lewis 
said. “Fun is important. The general perception of religion is that it’s overly 
judgmental, and we can show that’s not the case.”


The diocese of Lichfield appointed the church’s first online pastor 
<https://www.lichfield.anglican.org/online_pastor/> this year, a move that 
other dioceses were likely to follow, said Lewis.


Other denominations in the UK have also stepped up their digital games. The 
(Presbyterian) Church of Scotland this month launched anonline advent calendar 
<http://www.churchofscotland.org.uk/worship/advent_calendar> featuring a series 
of videos covering issues such as refugees and domestic violence. It expects 
250,000 viewers by Christmas Day.


Last month the Catholic church in England and Wales updated the medieval 
manuscript Ars Moriendi (The Art of Dying) for the digital age witha website 
<http://www.artofdyingwell.org> featuring animations and videos for people 
entering the final stages of life and their families.


In the US, Twitter has appointed a senior executive, Claire Diaz-Ortiz, to 
bring more religious leaders into its orbit, after discovering that tweets by 
some Christian evangelicals can outperform those of celebrities such as Lady 
Gaga. Diaz-Ortiz now travels across the US offering advice, training and 
analytics to church leaders,according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/02/technology/christian-leaders-are-powerhouses-on-twitter.html>
.


At the C of E, after four years of leading its communications team, Arora is 
returning to frontline ministry in 2017 as the vicar of St Nicholas in Durham, 
and will be employing his digital expertise on the ground.


“At its best, digital joins up physical and virtual communities. Social can 
bring people together and carry on the conversation outside the church walls,” 
he said. “Churches that use digital well and intentionally are churches that 
grow.”

 