
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> said on Friday 
the Syrian regime and its allies had “blood on their hands” as he reflected on 
eight years in office with a humbling admission about the limits of 
presidential power.

At his longest and probably last press conference at the White House before 
making way for Donald Trump, Obama became emotional as he spoke of feeling 
responsible when children inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> are 
killed by snipers or atrocities are committed around the world.

The president who began his tenure winning the Nobel peace prize ended it in a 
throwback to the cold war,condemning President Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/obama-presses-putin-on-syria-as-aleppo-bombed-by-regime-forces>
 not only over Russia’s aggression inAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/terrified-aleppo-residents-cram-on-buses-for-journey-into-the-unknown>
 but also regardingcyber-attacks on the US presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/qa-russian-hackers-vladimir-putin-donald-trump-us-presidential-election>
. Obama had personally told Putin to “cut it out”, he said.

Obama says he warned Russia to 'cut it out' over election hacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
The press briefing room at the White House was so crowded for Obama’s final 
end-of-year summation that one journalist fainted and required medical 
attention. Although the first African American president reeled off a list of 
achievements, from reducing unemployment to expanding healthcare to
rapprochement with Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/21/barack-obama-makes-historic-visit-to-cuba-video-report>
, as proof that the US is significantly better off than when he succeeded 
George W Bush in 2009, it has been increasingly evident Syria will cast a 
shadow on his legacy.

“The world as we speak is united in horror at the savage assaults by the 
Syrian regime and its Russian and Iranian allies on the city ofAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>,” he said. “We have seen a 
deliberate strategy of surrounding, besieging and starving innocent civilians. 
We’ve seen relentless targeting of humanitarian workers and medical personnel, 
[neighborhoods] reduced to rubble and dust. There are continuing reports of 
civilians being executed. These are all horrific violations of international 
law.”

He added forcefully: “Responsibility for this brutality lies in one place 
alone, with the Assad regime and its allies, Russia and Iran, and this blood 
and these atrocities are on their hands.”

The near six-year civil war in Syria has been an intractable problem for 
Obama, who was widely criticised for drawing a “red line” over the use of 
chemical weapons then failing to enforce it. The president called for an 
impartial international observer force in Aleppo, full access for humanitarian 
aid and a broad ceasefire.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Faleppo-syria-violence-un-secretary-ban-ki-moon-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20is%20now%20a%20synonym%20for%20hell%2C%20says%20UN%20secretary%20general%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Faleppo-syria-violence-un-secretary-ban-ki-moon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20is%20now%20a%20synonym%20for%20hell%2C%20says%20UN%20secretary%20general%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Faleppo-syria-violence-un-secretary-ban-ki-moon-video&media=>
Aleppo is now a synonym for hell, says UN secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/16/aleppo-syria-violence-un-secretary-ban-ki-moon-video>
He was asked if he felt any personal moral responsibility at the end of his 
presidency for the carnage of Aleppo. “I always feel responsible,” the 
president replied. “I felt responsible when kids were being shot by snipers. I 
felt responsible when millions of people had been displaced. I feel responsible 
for murder and slaughter that’s taken place in South Sudan that’s not being 
reported on, partly because there’s not as much social media being generated 
from there.

“There are places around the world where horrible things are happening and 
because of my office, because I’m president of the United States, I feel 
responsible. I ask myself every single day, is there something I could do that 
would save lives and make a difference and spare some child who doesn’t deserve 
to suffer? So that’s a starting point. There’s not a moment during the course 
of this presidency where I haven’t felt some responsibility.”

But weeks’ worth of meetings with military officials, aid agencies, diplomats 
and outside critics failed to find a solution, he confessed. There was no 
appetite for sending in large numbers of US troops without an international law 
mandate or support from Congress when there will still boots on the ground in 
Iraq after a decade of war that cost trillions of dollars. There would also be 
confrontation with “military superpower” in Russia and Iran.

There’s not a moment during the course of this presidency where I haven’t felt 
some responsibility.
Barack Obama 
“And in that circumstance, unless we were all in and willing to take over 
Syria, we were going to have problems. And everything else was tempting because 
we wanted to do something and it sounded like the right thing to do but it was 
going to be impossible to do this on the cheap. And in that circumstance, I 
have to make decision as president of the United States as to what is best. I’m 
sorry.”

Contrary to the claims of Russia and the Bashar al-Assad regime, he said, tens 
of thousands of people were still trapped in Aleppo and prepared to leave under 
any conditions. The US would continue to put pressure to get them out.


Trump, who will be inaugurated on 20 January, has called for the creation of 
“safe zones” in Syria. Asked for his view, Obama said: “I will help 
President-elect Trump with any advice, counsel, information that we can provide 
so that he, once he’s sworn in, can make a decision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7769520b3329f6534acdbc3c160a2443c9d19c77%2F0_212_4887_2932%2F4887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20reflects%20on%20Syria%20at%20farewell%20press%20conference%3A%20'I%20always%20feel%20responsible'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20reflects%20on%20Syria%20at%20farewell%20press%20conference%3A%20%27I%20always%20feel%20responsible%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fobama-syria-assad-aleppo-final-press-conference%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7769520b3329f6534acdbc3c160a2443c9d19c77%2F0_212_4887_2932%2F4887.jpg>
 Barack Obama takes questions at the year-end press conference at the White 
House in Washington. Photograph: Zach Gibson/AFP/Getty Images 
Putin also dominated Obama’s remarks about the US presidential election 
following reports that US intelligence agencies believe he personally directed 
the hacking of the Democratic National Committee and Hillary Clinton’s campaign 
chairperson, John Podesta.

He said he spoke with Putin in September and told him to “cut it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
”. It seemed to work, he added, but by then Podesta’s emails were already in 
the possession of WikiLeaks. He criticised Republicans for warming to Putin, 
suggesting that they were helping Russia undermine American democracy.

Although Russia, he said, was a weaker country that did not innovate, he noted 
frankly: “Mr Putin can weaken us just like he’s trying to weaken Europe if we 
start buying into notions that it’s OK to intimidate the press, or lock up 
dissidents, or discriminate against people because of their faith or what they 
look like.

Google, democracy and the truth about internet search
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/google-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook>
“What I worry about – more than anything – is the degree to which because of 
the fierceness, because of the partisan battle, you start to see certain folks 
in the Republican party and Republican voters suddenly finding a government and 
individuals who stand contrary to everything that we stand for as being OK, 
because that’s how much we dislike Democrats.”

Referring to a president revered by Republicans for winning the cold war, he 
added: “Ronald Reagan would roll over in his grave.”

And in one of several digs at the media, he remarked: “If fake news being 
released by some foreign government is almost identical to reports that are 
being issued through partisan news venues, then it’s not surprising that that 
foreign propaganda will have a greater effect, because it doesn’t seem so 
far-fetched.”

But throughout the press conference, Obama studiously avoided direct 
criticisms of Trump, describing him as “still in transition mode”. He said 
their telephone conversations were “cordial” and not “defensive in any way”.

He said he advised Trump to “think it through” before making any changes to the
“one-China” policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
. Trump has said he would not feel bound by the decades-old policy in which the 
US recognises Taiwan as part of China.

 