
More than a dozen times in his presidency, Barack Obama has appeared before 
television cameras and issued statements to express sorrow at a mass shooting 
event in America.

After Arizona, where congresswoman Gabby Giffords was shot in the head, he 
spoke of hope. After Newtown, where 20 children and six teachers were shot dead 
in their classrooms, he spoke of a nation’s broken heart. On Thursday, after 
nine people were shot dead in a church in Charleston, he spoke of despair.

There are other shootings where Obama has remained silent, or not engaged with 
issue of guns or the cause of an event. But when he has, the president’s 
responses have varied from anger to exasperation to sadness, nearly every time 
vowing that such events must not happen again.

During his presidency, most legislative efforts to reform America’s gun laws 
through universal background checks or restrictions on sales and magazines have 
failed.

On 3 April 2009, barely two months after Obama was sworn in, 13 people were 
killed and four wounded at a cultural center in Binghamton, New York.

Obama’s response was brief 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/statement-president-obama-tragic-shooting>
, and made no mention of gun violence. It was later revealed the shooterfired 
98 shots 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/04/08/jiverly-wong-fired-98-sho_n_184950.html>
 from two handguns in less than a minute:

Michelle and I were shocked and deeply saddened to learn about the act of 
senseless violence in Binghamton, NY, today. Our thoughts and prayers go out to 
the victims, their families and the people of Binghamton.

On 10 June 2009, a white supremacist and Holocaust denier killed a guard 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/On-the-Holocaust-Museum-Shooting/> at the US 
Holocaust memorial museum:

This outrageous act reminds us that we must remain vigilant against 
antisemitism and prejudice in all its forms. No American institution is more 
important to this effort than the Holocaust Museum, and no act of violence will 
diminish our determination to honor those who were lost by building a more 
peaceful and tolerant world.

On 5 November 2009, Nidal Malik Hasan killed 13 people 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-memorial-service-fort-hood>
 and wounded 31 more on the Fort Hood army base in Texas. Obama focused on the 
heroism of the soldiers killed on base:

We are a nation of laws whose commitment to justice is so enduring that we 
would treat a gunman and give him due process, just as surely as we will see 
that he pays for his crimes.

We’re a nation that guarantees the freedom to worship as one chooses. And 
instead of claiming God for our side, we remember Lincoln’s words, and always 
pray to be on the side of God.

We’re a nation that is dedicated to the proposition that all men and women are 
created equal.

On 12 January 2011, at a memorial service 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/01/12/remarks-president-barack-obama-memorial-service-victims-shooting-tucson>
 for the six people killed by Jared Lee Loughner at an event for congresswoman 
Gabrielle Giffords in Tucson, Arizona:

 You see, when a tragedy like this strikes, it is part of our nature to demand 
explanations – to try and pose some order on the chaos and make sense out of 
that which seems senseless. Already we’ve seen a national conversation 
commence, not only about the motivations behind these killings, but about 
everything from the merits of gun safety laws to the adequacy of our mental 
health system …

We cannot and will not be passive in the face of such violence. We should be 
willing to challenge old assumptions in order to lessen the prospects of such 
violence in the future. But what we cannot do is use this tragedy as one more 
occasion to turn on each other. That we cannot do. That we cannot do.

 As we discuss these issues, let each of us do so with a good dose of 
humility. Rather than pointing fingers or assigning blame, let’s use this 
occasion to expand our moral imaginations, to listen to each other more 
carefully, to sharpen our instincts for empathy and remind ourselves of all the 
ways that our hopes and dreams are bound together …

If this tragedy prompts reflection and debate – as it should – let’s make sure 
it’s worthy of those we have lost. Let’s make sure it’s not on the usual plane 
of politics and point-scoring and pettiness that drifts away in the next news 
cycle.

On 20 July 2012, James Holmes opened fire during a midnight screening of The 
Dark Knight Rises, killing 12. Obama was campaigning for re-election in Florida 
at the time, andkept his speech 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/07/20/remarks-president-shootings-aurora-colorado>
 sober and focused on the victims:

Now, even as we learn how this happened and who’s responsible, we may never 
understand what leads anybody to terrorize their fellow human beings like this. 
Such violence, such evil is senseless. It’s beyond reason. But while we will 
never know fully what causes somebody to take the life of another, we do know 
what makes life worth living

Two days later, after visiting the Colorado hospital where victims were 
recovering, hetouched vaguely 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/07/22/remarks-president-after-hospital-visit>
 on change:

And I hope that over the next several days, next several weeks, and next 
several months, we all reflect on how we can do something about some of the 
senseless violence that ends up marring this country, but also reflect on all 
the wonderful people who make this the greatest country on Earth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fobama-gun-violence-south-carolina-newtown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434666539666%2Fb1ba0b0a-82f3-42e3-9c26-522c1e0d2901-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20on%20gun%20violence%3A%20six%20years%20of%20statements%20but%20change%20remains%20elusive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fobama-gun-violence-south-carolina-newtown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20on%20gun%20violence%3A%20six%20years%20of%20statements%20but%20change%20remains%20elusive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Fobama-gun-violence-south-carolina-newtown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434666539666%2Fb1ba0b0a-82f3-42e3-9c26-522c1e0d2901-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An Aurora, Colorado, police officer visits the roadside memorial set up for 
victims of the theaters shooting massacre across the street from Century 16 
movie theater at sunrise. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images 
On 5 August 2012, after a gunman killed six people 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/08/06/president-obama-discusses-shooting-oak-creek-wisconsin>
 at a Sikh temple in Wisconsin:

If it turns out, as some early reports indicate, that it may have been 
motivated in some way by the ethnicity of those who were attending the temple.

I think the American people immediately recoil against those kinds of 
attitudes, and I think it will be very important for us to reaffirm once again 
that, in this country, regardless of what we look like, where we come from, who 
we worship, we are all one people, and we look after one another and we respect 
one another

On 12 December 2012, hours after Adam Lanza killed 20 children 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/12/14/statement-president-school-shooting-newtown-ct>
 and six teachers at the Newtown elementary school:

As a country, we have been through this too many times. Whether it’s an 
elementary school in Newtown, or a shopping mall in Oregon, or a temple in 
Wisconsin, or a movie theater in Aurora, or a street corner in Chicago – these 
neighborhoods are our neighborhoods, and these children are our children. And 
we’re going to have to come together and take meaningful action to prevent more 
tragedies like this, regardless of the politics.

This evening, Michelle and I will do what I know every parent in America will 
do, which is hug our children a little tighter and we’ll tell them that we love 
them, and we’ll remind each other how deeply we love one another. But there are 
families in Connecticut who cannot do that tonight. And they need all of us 
right now. In the hard days to come, that community needs us to be at our best 
as Americans. And I will do everything in my power as president to help.

On 4 February 2013, in Minneapolis, amid efforts 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/04/remarks-president-preventing-gun-violence-minneapolis-mn>
 to pass a package of gun-ownership reforms

Now, changing the status quo is never easy. This will be no exception. The 
only way we can reduce gun violence in this country is if the American people 
decide it’s important. If you decide it’s important. If parents and teachers, 
police officers and pastors, hunters and sportsmen, Americans of every 
background stand up and say this time it’s got to be different – we’ve suffered 
too much pain to stand by and do nothing.

On 28 March 2013, as Congress prepared to vote 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/03/28/remarks-president-gun-safety>
 on reforms:

As I said when I visited Newtown just over three months ago, if there is a 
step we can take that will save just one child, just one parent, just another 
town from experiencing the same grief that some of the moms and dads who are 
here have endured, then we should be doing it. We have an obligation to try.

There’s absolutely no reason why we can’t get this done. But the reason we’re 
talking about here today is because it’s not done until it’s done. And there 
are some powerful voices on the other side that are interested in running out 
the clock or changing the subject or drowning out the majority of the American 
people to prevent any of these reforms from happening at all. They’re doing 
everything they can to make all our progress collapse under the weight of fear 
and frustration, or their assumption is that people will just forget about it …

Tears aren’t enough. Expressions of sympathy aren’t enough. Speeches aren’t 
enough. We’ve cried enough. We’ve known enough heartbreak. What we’re proposing 
is not radical, it’s not taking away anybody’s gun rights. It’s something that 
if we are serious, we will do.

On 16 September 2013, after a lone gunman killed 12 people 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/09/22/remarks-president-memorial-service-victims-navy-yard-shooting>
 at the Washington Navy Yard, Obama spoke forcefully against the creeping 
normalcy of mass shootings in America:

As president, I have now grieved with five American communities ripped apart 
by mass violence. Fort Hood. Tucson. Aurora. Sandy Hook. And now, the 
Washington Navy Yard. And these mass shootings occur against a backdrop of 
daily tragedies, as an epidemic of gun violence tears apart communities across 
America – from the streets of Chicago to neighborhoods not far from here.

And so, once again, we remember our fellow Americans who were just going about 
their day doing their jobs, doing what they loved …

In the United Kingdom, in Australia, when just a single mass shooting occurred 
in those countries, they understood that there was nothing ordinary about this 
kind of carnage. They endured great heartbreak, but they also mobilized and 
they changed, and mass shootings became a great rarity.

 And yet, here in the United States, after the round-of-clock coverage on 
cable news, after the heartbreaking interviews with families, after all the 
speeches and all the punditry and all the commentary, nothing happens …

No other advanced nation endures this kind of violence – none.

On 2 April 2014, after a second shooting at Fort Hood, in which a soldier 
killed himself 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/04/02/remarks-president-shooting-fort-hood>
 and three others, wounding 14 more:

We are going to do everything we can to make sure that the community at Fort 
Hood has what it needs to deal with the current situation, but also any 
potential aftermath.

We’re heartbroken that something like this might have happened again. 


On 13 February 2015, after three Muslim students were killed 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/02/13/statement-president> by 
a neighbor in Chapel Hill, North Carolina:

No one in the United States of America should ever be targeted because of who 
they are, what they look like, or how they worship.

On Thursday, after nine people were killed 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2015/06/18/latest-president-obama-delivers-statement-shooting-charleston>
 in a Charleston, South Carolina, church:

At some point, we as a country will have to reckon with the fact that this 
type of mass violence does not happen in other advanced countries. It doesn’t 
happen in other places with this kind of frequency. And it is in our power to 
do something about it.

I say that recognizing the politics in this town foreclose a lot of those 
avenues right now. But it would be wrong for us not to acknowledge it. And at 
some point it’s going to be important for the American people to come to grips 
with it, and for us to be able to shift how we think about the issue of gun 
violence collectively.
 