
This is an exceptionally exciting time for sculpture. In the last few weeks, 
the Turner prize has given a platform to artists such as Michael Dean, whose 
installation at Tate Britain looks at modern poverty with the help of millions 
of pennies and a “family” made of corrugated iron. (The Guardian’s Adrian Searle
described it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/26/turner-prize-2016-review-tate-britain-micheal-dean-anthea-hamilton-helen-marten-josephine-pryde>
 as “a monument to bare life”.) This rising generation have themselves 
benefited from the prominence of works such as Antony Gormley’sAngel of the 
North, Artangel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/mar/21/artangel-whiteread-deller-landy>
’s extraordinary 30 years of commissions, including Rachel Whiteread’sHouse and 
Michael Landy’sBreak Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/07/how-we-made-break-down>, 
and the changing occupants of Trafalgar Square’s fourth plinth. Sculpture has 
become a significant part of public life in the UK – which is why the Hepworth 
Wakefield museum is launching a prize to celebrate it.

More than any other art form, sculpture engages and confronts us directly. We 
are obliged, in a way we are not with wall-based 2D work, to share our own 
space with it; we have to move around it, look over, through or into it. And 
since we negotiate an object-based physical world every day, we are already 
primed for the bodily experience of sculpture.

Phyllida Barlow on shortlist for Hepworth sculpture prize
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/21/phyllida-barlow-shortlist-hepworth-prize-sculpture>
There is a particular fascination with the way sculptures are created. These 
are works that are made with great intentionality, but their slippery lack of 
specific utility creates a form of mystery and sensual pleasure, where the 
worlds of physical experience and of the imagination become enmeshed. I can 
immediately conjure up the beautiful, rusted steel surfaces ofRichard Serra’s 
Fulcrum <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2008/aug/08/richard.serra> 
at Liverpool Street station, London; the exquisite crumpled and twistedJohn 
Chamberlain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/dec/22/john-chamberlain-sculptor-cars-dies>
pieces that use car parts; embroidered tapestry heads byLouise Bourgeois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/oct/14/art>; the glorious marble 
of Barbara Hepworth’sPierced Hemisphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/oct/14/art>; or Adrián Villar 
Rojas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/19/adrian-villar-rojas-studio>
’s extraordinary use of clay. The physical materiality of the work asserts 
itself, even before I make other associations and develop feelings that come 
from its specific form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9d80c116e6322c80c4269c5fd6f4141e16127d%2F0_244_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d9d80c116e6322c80c4269c5fd6f4141e16127d%2F0_244_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Steven Claydon,Animated Wavelength via Harald Bluetooth. Photograph: courtesy 
of the artist and Sadie Coles HQ 
It’s been a long time since sculptors limited themselves to stone, wood and 
bronze. You name it, from shit to diamonds, human blood to sharks, it’s almost 
certainly been used. Digital technologies and new materials allow us to 
manipulate physicality as never before.Cornelia Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/25/cornelia-parker-interview-i-dont-want-to-tick-anyone-elses-boxes-whitworth-retrospective>
 is among those who have begun to explore the possibilities of graphene, the 
sheet of flexible carbon that is transparent, stronger than steel and so thin 
it is effectively two-dimensional. 3D printing is already being used as a new 
way to create sculptural forms.

Such technical changes mirror an imaginative flux. Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> has a protean ability to 
reinvent itself. The early part of the 20th century saw Picasso’s radical 
experiments in sculpture escape the stifling confines of solid volumes to 
present shifting planes offering varied perspectives – providing the basis of 
cubism’s new multifaceted worldview. Marcel Duchamp’s notorious “readymade”
Fountain from 1917, which consisted of a standard urinal signed “R Mutt”, went 
further by changing the way an everyday object was experienced and used, while 
testing the meanings, values and beliefs associated with art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcfa6e4e15a5d6e86d2e7aa9e44ca969a4af48e2%2F0_547_4724_2834%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcfa6e4e15a5d6e86d2e7aa9e44ca969a4af48e2%2F0_547_4724_2834%2F4724.jpg>
 Helen Marten’sDrunk Brown House. Photograph: Annik Wetter 
Britain wasn’t left behind: leading European modernists such as Constantin 
Brancusi <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2004/jan/03/1>, Jean Arp and 
Alberto Giacometti proved hugely influential on two of our most important 
sculptors, Hepworth and Henry Moore, soon to be followed byAnthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/16/anthony-caro-in-yorkshire-review-sculpture-that-can-take-your-breath-away>
. Their use of abstraction and figuration, and, in Caro’s case, welded and 
painted steel, shaped and reflected the development of modernity in the 20th 
century.

Under art-historical banners such as the Geometry of Fear from the early 
1950s, the New Generation in the early 60s, New British Sculpture in the 80s 
and the Young British Artists from the 90s, highly individual artists were 
often unhelpfully corralled together. These group names were little more than 
shorthand for fascinating and quite disparate bodies of individual work. This 
naming of British groups also tended to disconnect them from their 
international peers, as though art were not a global phenomenon.

The surprising thing is that in spite of the strength and reputation of 
contemporary British sculpture, there has until now been no UK prize for 
sculptors. That is why the Hepworth Wakefield, of which I am director, has 
launched a £30,000 biennial award, theHepworth prize for sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/06/hepworth-prize-barbara-wakefield->
, that will recognise a British or UK-based artist of any age, at any stage in 
their career, who has made a significant contribution to the development of 
contemporary sculpture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce6c2458bd4f144e065d77c6fdedb17f008a4787%2F125_186_670_837%2F670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Object%20lessons%20at%20the%20Hepworth%20Wakefield%3A%20the%20importance%20of%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fobject-lessons-at-the-hepworth-wakefield-the-importance-of-sculpture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce6c2458bd4f144e065d77c6fdedb17f008a4787%2F125_186_670_837%2F670.jpg>
 David Medalla pictured with one of his ‘bubble machines’, 2012. Photograph: 
Hepworth Wakefield 
We have based the selection of our first four shortlisted artists on their 
contribution to sculpture in its broadest definition – hence the range in ages 
and approaches they represent. David Medalla rose to prominence in the 1960s 
with his development of kinetic sculpture and his performance group, the 
Exploding Galaxy. His work often engages with the rhythms and systems of the 
natural world.Phyllida Barlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/31/phyllida-barlow-sculptor-tate-britain-interview>
 has had an important career as a teacher at the Slade School of Art, and now 
concentrates on elaborate constructions that exploit everyday building 
materials to create sculptural installations that embody time, weight, balance 
and collapse.

Steven Claydon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/23/artist-of-week-steven-claydon>
 deploys light, smell and sound together with solid materials in sculptures and 
installations that use the forces of attraction and repulsion to enmesh the 
past and present.Helen Marten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/25/monkeys-mozart-helen-marten-artist>
, also exhibiting in this year’s Turner prize, creates intense, playful and 
highly detailed sculptures and installations that mix the readymade with the 
handmade, exploring how we build and use relationships with objects.

Together, these sculptors constitute a dialogue across the generations, 
between approaches to materials, different social attitudes and radically 
different aesthetics.

 * The Hepworth Prize for Sculpture is at the Hepworth Wakefield  
<http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/>until 19 February 2017.
 