
As anti-capitalism protests spread around the world, a growing group of almost 
1,200 authors includingMargaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>, Salman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie> and Neil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> has publicly announced its 
support for theOccupy movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy-movement>.

An online petition at occupywriters.com <http://occupywriters.com/> declaring 
the writers' backing for Occupy Wall Street and its sister movements in other 
countries, which have seen thousands of protesters marching against the global 
financial system, has been signed by 1,190 authors and counting, including the 
Pulitzer prize winners Jennifer Egan andMichael Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-cunningham> as well as Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker>, Naomi Klein, Naomi Wolf, 
Jonathan Lethem,Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett>, 
Noam Chomsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/noam-chomsky>, AL Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alkennedy>, Ursula K Le Guin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ursulakleguin> and Donna Tartt. "We, the 
undersigned writers and all who will join us, support Occupy Wall Street and 
the Occupy movement around the world," says the petition.

Author Jeff Sharlet and journalist Kiera Feldman created the website after 
Rushdie offered his support via Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/#!/JeffSharlet/status/123212243839102976>. Sharlet said the 
site was already "stunningly busy", with more than 100,000 visitors a day and a 
backlog of 1,000 writers to be vetted, "just to make sure they're real people".

The supporting writers are now starting to contribute "occupy writings" for 
the website, with Walker, winner of the Pulitzer for her novelThe Color Purple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780297858867/the-color-purple>
, writing a poem,"The World We Want Is Us" 
<http://occupywriters.com/by-alice-walker>. "Yes, we are the 99% / all of us / 
refusing to forget / each other / no matter, in our hunger, what crumbs / are 
dropped by / the 1%," she writes.

American author Francine Prose, in her contribution 
<http://occupywriters.com/list/prose.php>, explains how "since this movement 
started, I've been waking up in the morning without the dread (or at least 
without the total dread) with which I've woken every morning for so long, the 
vertiginous sense that we're all falling off a cliff and no one (or almost no 
one) is saying anything about it".

"In Zuccotti Park I felt a kind of lightening of a weight, a lessening of the 
awful isolation and powerlessness of knowing we're being lied to and robbed on 
a daily basis and that everyone knows it and keeps quiet and endures it; the 
terror of thinking that my own grandchildren will suffer for whatever has been 
paralysing us until just now," she writes. "I kept feeling these intense surges 
of emotion â€“ until I saw a placard with a quote from Walt Whitman'sSong of 
Myself <http://www.princeton.edu/~batke/logr/log_026.html>: 'I am large, I 
contain multitudes.' And that was when I just lost it and stood there and wept."
 