
Reuters caught a case of foot in mouth 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/business/2011/10/reuterss-dizzying-changes-its-soros-occupy-wall-street-story/43676/>
 disease when it ran an article last week claiming George Soros was secretly 
funding Occupy Wall Street via Adbusters. By the time the article had been 
denounced, the damage was already done. It went viral and the nutter multitudes 
discovered what they'd been looking for all along; an anti-capitalist 
conspiracy wrapped in astroturf hidden behind a mask of populist radicalism. 
And so forth.

In its defence, Adbusters stated that the Occupy Wall Street campaign was 
simply the organic product of a routine "brainstorming session 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/10/14/us-wallstreet-protests-funding-idUSTRE79D01Q20111014?feedType=RSS&feedName=domesticNews>
". As a former employee of Adbusters, I was privy to these sessions for over 
two years and find the notion that the magazine is "anti-capitalist" to be 
rather preposterous. MoreSugar Ape <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nathan_Barley> 
thanRamparts <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramparts_(magazine)>, it's a 
magazine that denounces Nike's neoliberalism on one page and thensells its own 
made-in-Pakistan sneakers <http://www.adbusters.org/campaigns/blackspot> on the 
next. At its best it works as an amusing d√©tournement but is more often than 
not just a bit of entertaining revolt-porn with nary a hint of intelligible 
politics.

Residents of Zuccoti Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/14/occupy-wall-street-protesters-zuccotti>
 inherited this muddled mix of nonsense and inspiration and transformed it into 
an easily reproduced cultural phenomenon, much to the chagrin of media pundits 
and other members of the peanut gallery who find the movement's political 
ambiguity to be maddening.

Those who frame the occupiers' lack of clear political objectives as a fault 
fail to see that the occupations are apolitical in nature. The desire for 
equality transcends not just political parties, but also politics as a whole. 
This was demonstrated when encampments spread to countries likeCanada 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/story/2011/10/17/occupy-canada-monday.html>
,Denmark 
<http://www.cphpost.dk/news/international/89-international/52336-protesters-voice-their-discontent-at-occupy-denmark.html>
 andJapan <http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20111015x1.html>, where the 
realpolitik of the US housing crash doesn't apply.

Among those who have voiced support for these new occupations are anarchists, 
liberals, libertarians, communists, conservatives, the disaffected, the enraged 
and even a fewcentral bankers 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/bank-of-canada-head-calls-occupy-protests-entirely-constructive/article2202064/?from=sec431>
. Ideologues who are typically at each other's rhetorical throats have been 
united the world under a blurred banner of contempt for those who would see 
disparity increase.

This ambiguity is precisely why the Zuccotti spin-offs 
<http://www.cnn.com/2011/10/15/world/occupy-goes-global/index.html?eref=rss_mostpopular&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+rss%2Fcnn_mostpopular+(RSS%3A+Most+Popular)>
 could become the most significant series of protests since the civil rights 
movement. They draw power from their indefinite status, bringing together those 
who would otherwise be divided by definitions. This apparent lack of cohesion 
has given birth to a monstrous public relations machine, that sends out just 
enough information to build solidarity while sufficiently scrambling the 
message so that it can't be shoehorned into a convenient narrative.

Now that the occupations have become a trend that can't be ignored, the 
pressure for more clarity is increasing rapidly. There are two very powerful 
forces at play here. One is the velocity of social media, which breeds 
impatience. The other is the cyclical nature of television news, which has 
become observably frustrated with the occupation story arc and is tired of 
giving status updates on something it doesn't understand or can't easily 
explain.

Of the new camps erected over the weekend, London Stock Exchange occupiers 
were among the first to issue an official statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/17/occupy-london-stock-exchange-occupylsx?CMP=twt_gu>
. Others should be cautious of doing the same as direct contact with 
policymakers will ultimately lead to decline. Those hoping for romantic 
upheaval will be disappointed, while any policy victories will be gradually 
refined from pragmatic to futile once they enter into the political process. 
But if the occupations can be maintained without ceding to external or internal 
pressures to clarify, they have the potential to gain a cultural foothold and 
evolve into something much bigger than a protest.

That something is a living, breathing alternative reality that contradicts its 
surroundings and serves as an ongoing experiment in democracy. A free zone in 
the heart of every city, competing with capital and the state in deciding how 
our societies are run. To have a message of equality constantly coursing 
through our daily lives and dominating headlines has far more long-term value 
than whatever might be gained by an official programme.

This geographical byproduct of the occupations, a renewed vision of the public 
sphere, is the first and most vital step in what should prove to be a long, 
drawn-out struggle. Instead of spending their energy on formulating proposals, 
occupiers should dig in and fortify their camps. Winter is coming.
 