
What happens in Vegas gets … recharged in Vegas?

Many people go to Las Vegas to soak up the 24/7 energy, only to find the 
biggest shock is to the wallet. But now it’s possible to fill up at least one 
thing: your electric car.

Caesars Entertainment now has nearly 50 free EV charging stations  
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/launch-of-new-electric-vehicle-charging-stations-at-caesars-resorts-revs-up-sustainable-experience-for-guests-268453572.html>
across all 13 of its Nevada casinos, and plans to roll out the program 
nationwide.

“We want to make it easy for our guests to continue their green habits while 
they stay and play at our resorts,“ said Eric Dominguez, corporate director of 
environmental affairs at Caesars.

Charging stations are proliferating in America’s sin city: MGM Resorts 
announced earlier this year that it too hasdozens of no-cost charging stations 
<http://earthtechling.com/2014/02/mgm-resorts-gambles-on-ev-chargers-in-las-vegas/>
 up and running for its guests and employees.

So now you can charge your plug-in car for free at the same time as you 
gamble, thus doing at least one sustainable thing for your financial health.

Cut calories, feed the poor

Perhaps you have childhood memories of your mother or father imploring you to 
finish all the food on your plate because somewhere far away a less fortunate 
child was starving.

That may not have made sense at the time, but now a new app named FoodTweeks 
is making a more direct connection 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/former-actress-kelly-le-brock-represents-foodtweeks-in-partnership-for-a-healthier-americas-twitter-chat-269391471.html>
 between food you don’t eat and the stomachs of those in need. The app helps 
you to trim your own intake while offering up the same number of calories to a 
food bank.

Say you plan to prepare a cheeseburger at home for dinner. Input that 
information into FoodTweek and the app will suggest a number of options on how 
to lighten the caloric load, such as skipping the top of the bun. Choose an 
action and presto: the ad-supported app makes an animated show of donating that 
uneaten food to a food bank.

“FoodTweeks makes it possible for weight-conscious consumers to serve their 
communities by feeding the hungry while also cutting calories from their 
favorite foods in an easy, enjoyable way,” claims Elisa Shannon, an executive 
vice president for the company.

The company – which has lined up 80s-era celebrity Kelly LeBrock as a 
spokesperson – said its growing nationwide network of food banks stretches from 
Massachusetts to California.

Maybe Obama should lobby CEOs 

President Obama has won grudging respect from environmentalists for his new 
push on climate change. But how is he doing with the CEO crowd? Better than you 
might think.

In a recent interview with the Economist, Obama said 
<http://ttp://grist.org/climate-energy/president-obama-is-beginning-to-make-climate-hawk-noises/?utm_source=syndication&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=feed_politics>
 he has discovered a disconnect between the top corporate chieftains and the 
lobbyists they pay to represent their business interests in Washington:

“When they come and they have lunch with me, which they do more often than 
they probably care to admit (laughter) – and they’ll say, you know what, we 
really care about the environment, and we really care about education, and we 
really care about getting immigration reform done – then my challenge to them 
consistently is, is your lobbyist working as hard on those issues as he or she 
is on preserving that tax break that you’ve got?”

Here is a suggestion for Obama: get those CEOs to take a confused lobbyist to 
lunch next.

Gingrich’s breakfast at Tiffany’s 

Remember when we learned during a previous presidential campaign that US 
Republican candidate Newt Gingrich had opened a credit line of $500,000 to $1m 
for his wife at Tiffany & Co? Would it have made a difference if he had been 
armed with the venerable jewelry company’slatest CSR report 
<http://www.sustainablebrands.com/news_and_views/supply_chain/mike_hower/tiffany_co_sourcing_100_diamonds_known_mines>
?

Probably not. Still, Tiffany says it is now sourcing all of its diamonds from 
known mines, a big deal in an industry whose reputation has been battered by 
the so-calledblood diamonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/05/blood-diamonds> believed to 
finance dodgy regimes.

In addition, the firm states that its iconic blue bags and boxes are now made 
from sustainable sources.

Now Gingrich can shop for luxe jewels with a clear conscience.

This is the third story in ‘Oddly Sustainable’, a new series. If you have any 
ideas for future blogposts, please leave them in the comments.

Read more Oddly Sustainable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/oddly-sustainable> 
posts:

 * Surprising solutions to environmental dilemmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/jul/25/solutions-elphant-poaching-ivory-contrails-rainforest-global-warming>
 * Rhino-saving drones, smashable coffee cups and more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/04/drones-amazon-rhinos-farmers-reusable-coffee-travel-mug-chicago-commercial-buildings-energy>
 * A gold-rush retailer’s thoroughly modern social impact move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/22/oddly-sustainable-a-gold-rush-retailers-thoroughly-modern-social-impact-move>
 * Powering your computer with cigarette butts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/18/oddly-sustainable-batteries-cigarette-butts-cardboard-box-recycling-smokey-bear-forest-fires-electrolytes-cars>
Russ Blinch is chief scribbler at CopyCarbon.com <http://copycarbon.com/> and 
a blogger for the Huffington Post.

The sustainable living hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-living> is funded 
by Unilever. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>. 
 