
Alison Dudley was 22 when a comment from a little boy at her local swimming 
pool sent her rushing off to the changing room in tears. It was the first time 
she had been swimming for as long as she could remember, and it had taken a 
great deal of courage to get her there.

Alison is one of millions of Britons who suffer from acne and, until that day, 
she had been too embarrassed to display the rash of angry spots that covered 
the whole of her back and chest.

"I couldn't do much to hide the spots on my face, which first erupted when I 
was 12 and became the bane of my life, though I never displayed the rest of my 
upper body in daylight," says Alison. "But when a couple of friends invited me 
along to the local pool I decided to take the plunge. I was sick of acne 
getting in the way of my enjoyment of life. Then, before I'd even got in, a 
little boy stared up at me and said to his mother: 'Mummy, look at that lady's 
back. What's wrong with it?'

"She tried to tell him as politely as possible that it was nothing and not to 
worry about it. But the damage had been done. I already felt self-conscious. 
After that, I wanted to die. I could have hit him for drawing attention to it.

"I should have been more grown- up about it. But at any age that sort of 
incident is very upsetting."

Twelve years later, after having finally found an effective treatment for the 
pimples that blighted her earlier life (the drug roaccutane), Alison is chief 
executive of the Middlesex-based nationalAcne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> Support Group. She has two 
daughters, Jessie, seven, and Lucy, two, and, as acne is often hereditary, it 
was for their sakes that she initially became involved in the organisation .

Around 90% of teenagers and adults have to contend with unsightly spots at 
some stage, and 15% require help from a doctor for clinical acne at some point. 
Even into their 40s, 5% of women and 1% of men still have big problems with 
spots.

Acne is a skin disorder affecting the tiny pores and grease glands (sebaceous 
glands) most common on the face, neck, back and chest. During adolescence, 
rising hormones - specifically, male hormones found in both men and women - 
cause the sebaceous glands to get bigger.

These glands make an oily substance called sebum, which reaches the skin by 
emptying through the openings of hair follicles. As a result the cells from the 
lining of the hair follicle shed more rapidly and stick together, forming a 
plug at the skin's surface.

The mixture of oil and cells also helps bacteria in the follicles to grow, and 
these create chemicals that can cause the wall of the follicles to break. At 
this stage, sebum, bacteria and shed skin cells spill into the skin causing 
redness, swelling and pus. In other words, spots.

Dr Tony Chu, a consultant dermatologist at Hammersmith hospital in London and 
one of the country's leading experts in acne, says that not enough people take 
the condition seriously. "Acne leaves scars on the skin and the psyche," he 
says. "And the psychological scars are as damaging as the physical.

"It usually strikes in puberty when children are just coming to terms with 
their sexuality and their physical appearance is very important. Along with the 
designer clothes they want a girlfriend or boyfriend but sadly acne very often 
results in poor body image and gets in the way of this natural development.

"I get lots of letters from people saying: 'Acne destroyed my life. I didn't 
achieve at school, I've never had a relationship and I can't get a job.' 
However sympathetic people might be, if it's a choice between dating or 
employing someone with acne and someone without most will opt for people with 
clear skin. Employers justify it because few people feel happy about being 
served in a restaurant or even being greeted by a receptionist with a face full 
of spots.

"And it's a disease we laugh at, many stand-up comedians have jokes in their 
routines about pizza faces or spotty dicks and this is very damaging for people 
who have acne. Although there are no hard figures, we know through experience 
that the suicide rate among acne sufferers is considerably higher than the 
population as a whole."

In Dr Chu's view the biggest tragedy is that so many people are troubled for 
years with a condition which is "totally treatable".

No treatment works for everybody, but there are hundreds available and it is 
simply a case of finding one that suits. Most take weeks or months to work.

 Anti-bacterial lightbox
 The latest treatment on the market is a lightbox, Dermalux, which kills the 
bacteria that cause acne. It sends out red and blue waves of light, which zap 
the spots and heal the skin by, in effect, exposing spots to extra oxygen.

The bacteria responsible for acne colonise in ducts in the skin. Because they 
are averse to oxygen, they breathe through a chemical, poryphyrin.

The lightbox works in two ways. The blue light activates the poryphyrin in the 
bacteria which, once stimulated by the light, produces oxygen that overwhelms 
the bacteria. At the same time, the red light stimulates the white blood cells, 
which then produce fibroblasts, the building blocks from which new tissue is 
created, which in turn heal any abrasions. The lights do not damage the skin 
because they are outside the UV spectrum.

In trials, the treatment worked for 75% of patients who, after 12 weeks, 
experienced a 76% decrease in the number of visible spots. There are also none 
of the side effects associated with some drugs traditionally used to treat 
spots.

The downside is that the box has to be used for 15 minutes every day and, as 
the treatment is not available on the national health service, it costs Â£200.

 Roaccutane 
 One of a group of medicines known as retinoids which are derived from vitamin 
A, roaccutane is taken in tablet form daily, usually for four months. It works 
by dramatically reducing the formation of sebum in the skin.

At the same time, it attacks blackheads and whiteheads, bacteria and 
inflammation. It can only be prescribed by a dermatologist, usually after 
several courses of antibiotics have failed to work.

While the treatment has a very high success rate, in the initial stages it can 
exacerbate acne. It can also cause an increase in liver enzymes - so 
pre-treatment and follow-up liver function tests to keep levels in check must 
be carried out on all patients.

As it can damage unborn children, roaccutane must not be taken in pregnancy. 

 Over the counter 
 Many non-prescription acne lotions and creams help milder cases of acne. 
However, many will also make the skin dry if used too often.

 Oral antibiotics 
 These drugs include erythromycin, minocycline and tetracycline. It may be up 
to six months before you see the full effects, although there will probably be 
some difference after about six weeks.

Oral antibiotics are effective in about two-thirds of cases of moderate to 
severe acne, and can safely be taken for a year or more.

 Topical antibiotics 
 Mild-to-moderate acne can often be controlled using antibiotics such as 
erythromycin applied directly to the skin. These treatments come in bottles 
with a special sponge applicator, and should be applied over all affected 
areas, not just individual spots. The treatment is not useful for treating 
blackheads or whiteheads.

 Peeling agents 
 Treatments such as benzoyl peroxide and tretinoin are effective against 
blackheads, unlike antibiotics, but can cause dryness and irritation.

 Hormones 
 Women with acne can be helped by taking Dianette. This contains the hormones 
oestrogen and cyproterone, which counteract the male hormone androgen. 
Over-production of this hormone is the main cause of excessively greasy skin in 
women, which can then lead to acne.

Dianette is very effective for many women, and can be taken for many years. It 
is also an effective contraceptive.

Some common myths about acne

 Junk food causes spots 

Acne is not caused by eating chocolate, chips, pizza or any other food. 
Opinions from dermatologists on the importance of diet in the management of 
acne vary, but all agree that a strict diet alone will not clear up spots.

 Too much sex causes acne 

While the sex hormone testosterone is the primary cause of acne, spots do not 
develop because you have too much of the hormone or are over-sexed. Neither sex 
not masturbation causes spots. In fact, as both are believed to reduce stress 
levels, they may also help alleviate the aggravating effect stress has on acne.

 Spots are caused by dirt 

Acne is not caused by dirt. The black of blackheads is due to the pigment or 
colouring of the plug of "sticky" cells blocking the hair duct. Most people 
with acne wash more often than those without to clear away excess oil produced 
by their skins.

 You should wash more with acne 

Over-washing can actually make acne worse by drying the skin and making it 
sore. Washing with mild soap twice a day is all that is needed.

 Pregnancy cures acne 

While some women's acne virtually disappears during pregnancy, in oth ers the 
change in hormones reactivates an old condition or worsens an existing one.

 Sun is great for spots 

Although sun may temporarily mask acne, tighten pores or dry up oil glands it 
also damages follicular walls, thereby clogging pores. This results in more 
acne which may not not surface for three to four weeks after exposure to the 
sun.

 Acne is curable 

There is no cure for acne. However, through consistent use of appropriate 
treatments and remedies, it can be controlled or prevented.

More Information

The Acne Support Group can be contacted by phone on 020-8841 4747, by post at 
First Floor, Howard House, The Runway, South Ruislip, Middlesex HA4 6SE or via 
its web site, The Acne Support Group <http://www.m2w3.com/acne>

 American Academy of Dermatology <http://www.aad.org> 
absoluteacneinfo.com <http://absoluteacneinfo.com>
 