
David Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidmiliband> is showing 
no sign of hankering for a return to the grind of British politics after being 
photographed with George and Amal Clooney outside a restaurant in Los Angeles.

The former foreign secretary – who was pipped to the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership by his younger 
brother, Ed, in 2010 – had been touted as a possible candidate in the 
forthcoming byelection prompted by the death of Michael Meacher on Wednesday.

David Miliband's heartache at leadership loss revealed in new Hillary Clinton 
emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/01/new-hillary-clinton-emails-reveal-david-milibands-heartache-at-leadership-loss>
Senior Blairite Labour figures are reported to have discussed Miliband 
standing in the safe Labour seat of Oldham West and Royton 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/londoners-diary/londoners-diary-meacher-s-seat-could-attract-david-miliband-a3096711.html>
. But rather than preparing to pound the pavements of Oldham, Miliband has been 
hobnobbing with the Clooneys at the Palm restaurant in Beverley Hills.

The actor and his wife, a prominent human rights lawyer, are supporters of the 
International Rescue Committee, the New York-based humanitarian agency Miliband 
runs.

The photographs come after newly released emails revealed that Miliband 
confided in another A-list celebrity friend, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/01/new-hillary-clinton-emails-reveal-david-milibands-heartache-at-leadership-loss>
, when he lost the Labour leadership race.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-miliband-george-amal-clooney-la-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c5132d59627b9042befaeb6b129f4423bb1dfa%2F327_262_1913_1147%2F1913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oh%20brother%2C%20where%20art%20thou%3F%20David%20Miliband%20mixes%20with%20Clooneys%20in%20LA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-miliband-george-amal-clooney-la-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oh%20brother%2C%20where%20art%20thou%3F%20David%20Miliband%20mixes%20with%20Clooneys%20in%20LA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-miliband-george-amal-clooney-la-hillary-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c5132d59627b9042befaeb6b129f4423bb1dfa%2F327_262_1913_1147%2F1913.jpg>
 George and Amal Clooney are supporters of the humanitarian agency headed by 
David Miliband. Photograph: BG/GoffPhotos.com 
He told the then secretary of state that losing the Labour leadership election 
was “tough” and that doing so having won the support of the party members and 
MPs made it “doubly so”, adding ruefully: “When it’s your brother …”

Following Labour’s election defeat in May, Miliband criticised his brother’s 
leadership of the party. He said: “UnlessLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is able to embrace a politics of 
aspiration and inclusion, a politics that defies some of the traditional labels 
that have dogged politics for so long, then it’s not going to win.”

But he has played down speculation that he plans to return to British politics.
 