
You wouldn’t necessarily expect an event <https://membership.theguardian.com/> 
involvingfour politicians discussing the future of Britain’s relationship with 
the EU 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-eu-referendum-debate-20860699915>
 to make for raucous entertainment.

So perhaps it was the atmosphere of a big West End venue more used to live 
music and theatre. Or perhaps Britain hasn’t yet got the hang of the new 
politics, where everyone listens to the full spectrum of arguments before 
calmly making up their mind.

Then again, is it ever going to be possible for Britain’s Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> debate, informed by at least 30 
years of sustained distortion about the supposed evils of “Brussels”, to be 
anything but partisan and emotional?

Guardian EU referendum debate: the verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/15/guardian-eu-referendum-debate-the-verdict>
In any event, the 2,000 people who packed out the London Palladium for the 
Guardian’s firstlive debate on the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/15/guardian-eu-referendum-debate-with-farage-clegg-alan-johnson-and-leadsom-live>
 were hungry for both more talk about Europe and, possibly, more pantomime. 
They booed, whistled, roared, shouted and wanted villains to heckle or applaud. 
And from the stalls only a few things seemed certain.

1. People hate it when politicians don’t give direct answers. (“Answer the 
question!” was a favourite heckle).

2. Those who show up for debates have probably already decided in which of the 
two opposing camps – Brexit or Bremain – they belong.

3. Public engagement on the Europe issue is in fine fettle.

So which side will prevail in June? Will Britain’s fate be decided by trade, 
the economy, immigration? What about the third of the electorate who are still 
dithering? And what about the third within each camp who could start dithering 
again in the next 100 days?

If the Palladium’s clapometer is any guide, the Leave side still has more of 
the energy and momentum. A louder, more vigorous cheer certainly went up for 
Brexit than for Bremain when warm-up comedian Andy Zaltzman asked us to declare 
our hands. Although he got an even bigger cheer when he asked how many would 
vote for Britain to leave Planet Earth altogether.

A pugnacious Nick Clegg really got the Remain side going when he accused 
outers of behaving as if Britain was just “a piddling little island”, always 
being bullied by Brussels. Clearly energised by being back in the political 
ring, the former Lib Dem leader brought the house down several times: calling 
out the “deeply dishonest” scaremongering of the outers about the refugees
“fleeing war, attrition and hunger” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/15/voices-from-syria-refugees-camp-paradise-conflict-teacher-midwife>
 and drawing on his own forensic knowledge of how the EU works to make 
mincemeat of the argument that British business would flourish if only it could 
be liberated from the stifling red tape. If you’re a manufacturer of plastic 
ducks in Britain, you’ll still, after all, have to comply with the single 
market’s plastic duck manufacturing rules, he pointed out, so why on earth 
would you give up your place at the table to influence the plastic duck issue? 
And in any case, Clegg assured everyone, claims that theQueen had got into a 
bust-up with him over Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/eurosceptic-rant-by-the-queen-never-happened-says-nick-clegg>
back in 2011 were “A-grade, 24-carat bilge”.

EU referendum debate – share your reaction | Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/eu-referendum-live-debate>
But Ukip leader Nigel Farage also delivered thumping soundbites about how 
lovely life would be to be “as rich, happy and successful” as the Nordic 
paradise Norway. And he won applause when he saidAngela Merkel’s welcome for 
immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/30/immigration-asylumseekers-refugees-migrants-angela-merkel>
 had been one of the biggest policy errors of recent history.

The Ukip leader provoked near uproar, however, on claiming that staying in the 
EU would drag Britain into a “political union with Turkey”, bring in “77 
million even poorer people” and that Brussels was plotting a European army to 
rival Nato.

Andrea Leadsom, energy minister and a Conservative out campaigner also got 
short shrift when she offered “We speak English” as one of the reasons why 
Britain would prosper as a go-it-alone nation. Howls of “Rubbish!” met her 
claim that a Polish constituent thought the EU was a “totalitarian” 
organisation.

Alan Johnson, Labour’s big beast on the Remain side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/26/alan-johnson-interview-eu-referendum-labour>
, got his loudest cheer when he derided Nigel Farage’s attack on Europe’s free 
movement rules. Ukip didn’t want us to come out of Europe just so they could 
let in more people from Pakistan, Johnson mocked to great effect.

Leaving the theatre Mike, 57, confirmed how difficult it is to illuminate the 
debate on Europe in a neutral way, because so many of the supposedly objective 
facts can be justifiably used by either side to support their case. Mike was 
one of the few who put up his hand as “undecided” in the audience. And by the 
end he was no surer – “My friends are all inners” – but Farage and Leadsom had 
made valid points, he thought.

Linda, in her 70s, was disappointed that Farage hadn’t been even more 
confrontational in the clash. “I could tell he wasn’t happy. He was like a 
racehorse being held back.” Kasim, 18, a law student, was looking forward to 
his first ever vote to make sure Britain gets out of the EU because there was 
“too much political overspill”. Cameron’s renegotiation was “worth nothing”.

Sarah and Loretta, two young women from Kent, were unimpressed that it had all 
been “a bit of a cat fight” with a lot of on-stage “banter”. Sarah said she 
wasn’t sure what anyone meant when they talked about sovereignty. If Britain 
could make its own laws then what kind of laws would the outers bring in? 
“Would they want the death penalty?” she wondered.

Jacob, 19, accompanied by his mother, said he had been roused out of his 
apathy by the event. “Nick Clegg convinced me to vote Remain,” he said. “And 
remember, you didn’t even want to come tonight,” his mother reminded him.

But who knows where Jacob, or Sarah or Mike, or even Kasim, will be by June? 
As with all good theatre, it’s not over till the fat lady sings.
 