
Ohio legislators passed a controversial bill to ban abortion from as early as 
six weeks into pregnancy, known as a “heartbeat bill”. The bill, which is on 
its way to the Republican governor,John Kasich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kasich>, after passing the state 
house on Tuesday night, would be one of the country’s most stringent abortion 
restrictions.

It would prohibit most abortions as early as six weeks into pregnancy after 
the first detectable heartbeat.

Kasich, an abortion-rights opponent, has previously voiced concerns about 
whether such a move would be constitutional. He has not said whether he plans 
to sign the measure.

‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
The state senate president, Keith Faber, a Republican from Celina, said the 
twice-defeated bill came back up again because of Donald Trump’s presidential 
victory and the expectation he would fill supreme court vacancies with justices 
who are more likely to uphold stricter abortion bans.


Asked if he expected the Ohio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> 
proposal to survive a legal challenge, Faber said: “I think it has a better 
chance than it did before.” The ban would make an exception if the mother’s 
life were in danger but not in cases of rape or incest, he said.

Naral Pro-Choice Ohio said the move would block access to abortion before most 
women even know they’re pregnant.

Under the US supreme court’s 1973 Roe v Wade ruling establishing a nationwide 
right to abortion, states were permitted to restrict abortions after viability 
– the point when the fetus has a reasonable chance of surviving under normal 
conditions outside the uterus.

The ruling offered no legal definition of viability, saying it could range 
from 24 to 28 weeks into a pregnancy.

Ohio House also heard testimony about a possible ban on abortions after 20 
weeks on Wednesday morning, with a vote planned for late Wednesday.
 