
The Ohio state legislature threw down the gauntlet this week to the supreme 
court, passinga new anti-abortion “heartbeat” bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/ohio-abortion-ban-bill-heartbeat-passes-state-house>
 that would ban terminations from as early as six weeks, the most severe 
restrictions in the country.

Ohio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> politicians say they were 
motivated to push through the bill by Donald Trump’s win, believing they might 
find a more friendly US supreme court that would uphold the law.

Ohio legislators pass restrictive abortion bill, citing Trump victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/ohio-abortion-ban-bill-heartbeat-passes-state-house>
If passed by Governor John Kasich, the bill could serve as a test case for the 
limits of constitutional protections of abortion, and even for overturning the 
landmark decision Roe v Wade, which enshrines a woman’s right to choose 
abortion until the fetus is “viable” (between 24 and 28 weeks gestation). But 
activists on both sides of the issue doubt that strategy is likely to succeed, 
and say it could do more to harm the legal movement than help it.

The bill passed by the Ohio state legislature on Tuesday stops just short of 
banning abortion from the time a fetus’s heartbeat is detectable, which is 
usually around six weeks. The new law states that if a doctor terminates a 
pregnancy without listening for a heartbeat or when a heartbeat is audible, 
then the physician would be committing a fifth-degree felony and face up to a 
year in jail, disciplinary action and civil lawsuits.

Many women do not even realize they are pregnant at this early stage. 

“If this law would take effect, it really is a flat-out abortion ban,” said 
Amanda Allen, senior state legislative counsel at the Center for Reproductive 
Rights.

Many other states have also tried to get “heartbeat bills” through in the 
past. North Dakota and Arkansas state legislature passed similar laws in March 
2013, however the eighth circuit appellate court ruled them unconstitutional in 
2015 and the laws were never enacted.

Ohio lawmakers have considered their own bill in the past. But lawmakers said 
that Trump’s election and a free seat on the supreme court gave them new 
impetus for the bill and make it more likely that the bill would be upheld in 
the courts.

“A new president, new supreme court appointees change the dynamic, and there 
was consensus in our caucus to move forward,” said senate president Keith Faber.

But despite lawmakers’ views, many anti-abortion activists in the state are 
not celebrating the move.

Mike Gonidakis from Ohio Right to Life, an anti-abortion lobby group, says his 
group is officially “neutral” on the bill because he fears the law would be 
struck down, after an expensive and lengthy court battle. He believes the 
six-week ban would be so dramatic that even the supreme court would vote 5-4 to 
strike it down, even if another conservative justice were confirmed to replace 
the vacancy on the court.

“You have to be patient and strategic with the courts,” said Gonidakis.


“That doesn’t even take into account millions of dollars Ohio would be forced 
to pay the lawyers for Planned Parenthood and the ACLU,” he added.

Gonidakis thinks it may even strengthen Roe v Wade.

“We will be inviting nothing more than damage and danger to all we’ve 
accomplished for the past 40 years,” said Gonidakis.

And while some are worried that the law sets up a test case that might become 
a referendum on the supreme court’s Roe v Wade president, Ohio’s arm of the 
American Civil Liberties Union says it’s ready to declare a legal challenge if 
the bill becomes law. Allen says she’s not too worried the legal challenge 
would have an adverse effect at the high court, since another court has already 
judged the North Dakota and Arkansas laws unconstitutional.

“These types of bans are completely unconstitutional and have very little 
chance of standing up in court,” said Allen, noting that Roe v Wade has been 
settled law for over 40 years.

Ohio has tightened abortion restrictions in recent years, and this legislation 
was tacked on to an unrelated bill last minute in Ohio this week.

This was the third time Ohio attempted to pass it, after it failed in 2012 and 
2014.

On Thursday, the Ohio state legislature passed another anti-abortion bill, 
which would ban abortion from 20 weeks. Currently 18 states haveenacted some 
form of 20-week abortion 
<https://rewire.news/legislative-tracker/law-topic/20-week-bans/> ban, and 
Allen noted that lawmakers may be pushing the “heartbeat” bill as a red herring 
while the other, also controversial measure flies under the radar.


“That could certainly be part of the strategy,” noted Allen. “Both bans are 
prohibitions on abortion prior to viability and the US supreme court has been 
very clear that states may not do that.”

Kasich, who ran as a moderate during the Republican primaries but has signed 
several restrictions on abortion into law in the last few years, will have to 
decide whether to sign one or both bills into law, veto them, or ignore them, 
in which case they would automatically be enacted into law within a few weeks.
 