
Yes, college basketball owns the month of March, but that doesn’t mean there 
hasn’t been big news going on in the realm of organized basketball where teams 
can’t justrefuse to schedule 
<http://www.omaha.com/columnists/hansen/hansen-ultimate-matchup-wichita-state-fanatics-are-spoiling-for-chance/article_ecffdab0-641f-560c-90e8-7642295e932f.html>
 games against their rivals. It’s around that time in the NBA when teams are 
beginning to clinch playoff spots, key players return to lineups and award 
races go down to the wire.


Kevin Durant is out indefinitely


On Friday, Oklahoma City Thunder president Sam Presti announced that Kevin 
Durant would beshut down indefinitely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/20/oklahoma-city-thunder-star-kevin-durant-could-miss-rest-of-season>
 with pain in his right foot. The announcement came shortly after the news that 
the Thunder would bewithout Serge Ibaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/18/is-kyrie-irving-the-cleveland-cavaliers-mvp>
 for something close to the remainder of the regular season following knee 
surgery.


That bit of bad news about Ibaka might have shifted Oklahoma City’s approach 
to Durant’s long-term health. Until last week, the Thunder’s main goal was to 
try to sneak into the the Western Conference playoffs and hope to have its 
players somewhat close to 100% by the time the postseason arrives. After the 
Ibaka news, it was clear that the best case scenario just wasn’t going to 
happen, and the decision was made not to do anything that could potentially 
jeopardize Durant’s career.

While one would think that this announcement would have opened up the race for 
the eighth seed in the Western Conference, the Thunder have actually increased 
their chances of making the postseason in the meantime. The Thunder have won 
their last four games, thanks in no small part to Russell Westbrook’s ability 
to getsomething close to a triple-double 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/23/nba-takes-away-russell-westbrooks-triple-double-from-sunday/>
 every night. Meanwhile, the New Orleans Pelicans, the team best situated to 
take advantage of Durant’s indefinite absence, have dropped their last three 
games and have been overtaken in the standings by the once left-for-dead 
Phoenix Suns, who are currently ninth.

The Thunder could make the playoffs despite everything, but, with the possible 
exception of Westbrook himself, nobody thinks they have a real shot at the 
title without Durant. That brings us the real reason that Friday’s announcement 
was potentially devastating for fans. With only one year remaining on Durant’s 
contract, and no guarantee that he will remain in Oklahoma City, there’s a very 
real chance that next season will be the last chance this version of the team 
will have at a championship.

When the Thunder played the Miami Heat in the 2012 NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> Finals it seemed like it would be the 
start of something special for the Thunder. It might turn out, thanks to 
several straight seasons of untimely injuries, that series might end up being 
their last, best chance.


Paul George is/isn’t actually returning to the Indiana Pacers

While the bad news about Durant claimed the headlines, this week’s injury 
report actually features some good news.


OK, the updates haven’t been all positive. The Los Angeles Clippers will, it 
seems, have to focus on playing without Jamal Crawford.According to team-mate 
Blake Griffin 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/blake-griffin-says-jamal-crawford--can-barely-walk-232843519.html>
, Crawford “can barely walk” right now. The Toronto Raptors’ Kyle Lowryleft 
Tuesday night’s game 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12553616/kyle-lowry-toronto-raptors-leaves-game-back-spasms>
 against the Detroit Pistons with back spasms.

 Still, on Monday night alone, the NBA welcomed back the Chicago Bulls’ Jimmy 
Butler and the Golden State Warriors’ Klay Thompson. The Houston Rockets have 
announced that Dwight Howard, who last played on 23 January,will return 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/24/kevin-mchale-plans-to-have-dwight-howard-return-to-lineup-wednesday-against-pelicans/>
 in Wednesday night’s game against the New Orleans Pelicans.


One player who we haven’t seen yet has been the Indiana Pacers’ Paul George 
<http://www.sportsonearth.com/article/113731108/paul-george-leg-injury-indiana-pacers-dont-come-back-for-playoffs>
. The news surrounding the Pacers’ franchise player, who was seemingly lost for 
the season after suffering a major leg injury during a warm-up game on route to 
the Fiba Basketball World Cup, has been mixed and contradictory.


Reports that George could return in the next few weeks were followed by 
stories that he wasn’t even close to being physically ready to play at the NBA 
level yet. Those reports were then followed by the surprise announcement that 
George could make his season debutagainst the Brooklyn Nets on Saturday 
<http://www.sportingnews.com/nba/story/2015-03-20/paul-george-return-pacers-injury-team-usa-leg-practice-reports>
.

That didn’t happen. Despite Pacers president Larry Bird saying 
<http://www.twitlonger.com/show/n_1slc3vh> he was confident that George will 
play this year, nothing further apparently has been settled. It doesn’t help 
George’s chances of returning that Indiana is in danger of completely falling 
out of the playoff race, having dropped its last six games. The less likely the 
Pacers will appear in the postseason, the less likely George will risk further 
injury by pushing an early return.


The best (and the worst) teams faced one another


Last week proved to be a rare opportunity to see both the best and the worst 
teams in the NBA face each other. In the end, theGolden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> and the New York 
Knicks stood apart from the competition.


 On Wednesday, in what was one of the most hyped games of the regular season, 
the Western Conference leading Golden State Warriorseasily defeated 
<http://www.sfgate.com/sports/ostler/article/Warriors-6144177.php> their 
counterparts in the East, the Atlanta Hawks, 114-95.


The Hawks have since struggled to recover. On Friday, Atlanta lost 123-115 to 
Russell Westbrook and an Oklahoma City Thunder team that refused to appear 
demoralized after the bad news about Durant. Then, on Sunday, they lost 114-95 
to the San Antonio Spurs,who are looking more and more 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/here-come-the-spurs--after-dismantling-the-hawks--san-antonio-looks-ready-to-roll-161316874.html>
 like the Spurs of old as the playoffs loom.


These losses to tough Western Conference teams finally gave some ammunition 
for those who have been looking to dismiss Atlanta’s record as more of a 
product of weak competition than a sign that they were true championship 
contenders. In contrast, the Warriors have continued to play like the most 
dominant team in the NBA. Since Wednesday’s win, they have had double-digit 
wins over theNew Orleans Pelicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-orleans-hornets>, Utah Jazz, Washington 
Wizards and Portland Trail Blazers.

If one is looking for the exact opposite of the Warriors, there are the New 
York Knicks who have spent the last week proudly defending their reputation as 
the league’s worst team. On Thursday, just a day after the teams with the best 
records in their respective conferences played against each other, the Knicks 
fought theMinnesota Timberwolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/minnesota-timberwolves> in a Battle of the 
Conference Bottom-Feeders. It was a game that neither team seemed to want to 
win, understandable since draft lottery odds were potentially on the line, but 
the Knicks eventually lost in overtime, 95-92.

The very next day, the Knicks faced the Philadelphia 76ers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/philadelphia-76ers>, their biggest “rivals” 
as far as clinching the worst record in the Eastern Conference. It was the 
first game of the season where the 76ers were actually favored and the game 
proved the odds-makers right, as the Knicks lost 97-81.

Thanks to these two key losses, the Knicks’ 14-57 record currently would give 
them the best odds at landing the No1 pick in this year’s draft. Knicks fans 
just have to hope that Phil Jackson isn’t serious about possiblytrading it away 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/new-york-knicks-phil-jackson-2015-nba-draft/>
. After all, they truly deserve some sort of reward for suffering through this 
season.

Really Bad Excuses Department

The Boston Celtics’ Marcus Smart says this was a “freak accident.” 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/sports/2015/03/23/spurs-matt-bonner-says-marcus-smart-incident-freack-accident/WVuNGBRRIhloPERvpAwpNJ/story.html>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwQy_Aj6i6GM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwQy_Aj6i6GM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwQy_Aj6i6GM&media=>
 We will accept the “freak” part of that comment. 
Other things we’ve learned

• What’s been settled in the Eastern Conference: On Monday, the Chicago Bulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-bulls> became the third team in the 
Conference, after the Atlanta Hawks and Cleveland Cavaliers, to clinch a 
postseason appearance. The Hawks have also clinched the Southeast Division, for 
those who care about such things.

• What’s been settled in the Western Conference: On Friday, the Memphis 
Grizzlies secured a spot in the postseason. The Golden State Warriors, who were 
already playoff bound, officially won the Pacific Division for the first time
since 1976 <http://scores.espn.go.com/nba/recap?gameId=400579351> with Tuesday 
night’s win over the Portland Trail Blazers.

• Steve Nash has made his retirement official. Here were my thoughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/24/steve-nash-nba-injury-end-career>
 on the Hall of Fame point guard back when it was announced that he would miss 
the entire season.


• Michael Beasley is back with the Miami Heat for the rest of the season and 
he has made it known that he wants to beHassan Whiteside’s mentor 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/michael-beasley-sees-himself-as-hassan-whiteside-s-mentor-005947710.html>
. No way this could possibly backfire.


• Dunk of the Week: Courtesy of the Sacramento Kings’ Derrick Williams:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz6UOs6CsqCQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz6UOs6CsqCQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz6UOs6CsqCQ&media=>
• The Milwaukee Bucks’ Khris Middleton did this to the Miami Heat last night. 
Heat fans might want to look away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyPHo2Esno9A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyPHo2Esno9A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyPHo2Esno9A&media=> 