
It seems like early March should really be the NBA’s time to shine. With 
baseball still a month off and the MLS season just peeking out of its shell, 
the only other major North American league playing meaningful games is the NHL. 
Here’s what’s being happening in theNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> 
while preparing for March Madness, getting caught up in the different kind of 
chaos that is NFL free agency or watching long and pointless MLB spring 
training games if only for a window into an alternate universe completely 
devoid of snow.

Russell Westbrook enters the MVP discussion

How crazy good has the Oklahoma City Thunder’s Russell Westbrook been this 
last month? There’s actually now a point-counterpoint discussion aboutwhether 
<http://www.sbnation.com/2015/3/5/8152913/russell-westbrook-highlights-stats-triple-double>
 ornot <http://theclassical.org/articles/russell-westbrook-not-a-robot> he can 
be rightfully compared with a killer robot that was sent back in time to 
destroy humanity.

Westbrook rattled off three straight triple-doubles before literally denting 
his face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/04/james-harden-lebron-nba-five-things>
. This injury seemed like it would, at the very least, slow him down. Instead, 
he missed a grand total of one game and when he returned to the court for 
Wednesday night’s game against the Philadelphia 76ers, he recorded his fourth 
straight triple-double in as many games played. That ended up being his sixth 
of the season.

Of course, from there Westbrook suffered through a dry spell. It would be a 
whole four days before he came up with his seventh triple-double of the year, 
this time during awin over the Toronto Raptors 
<http://uproxx.com/dimemag/2015/03/russell-westbrook-triple-double-against-toronto-raptors/>
 on Sunday.

Now obviously a big part of Westbrook’s purple patch has to do with the fact 
that, with Kevin Durant missing so many games with injuries, he essentiallymust 
play at this high of a level for the Thunder to hold on to that eighth seed in 
the Western Conference and sneak into the playoffs.

If this scenario feels familiar, it’s because it’s not entirely different than 
the circumstances that led to Durant beating out LeBron James for MVP last 
season. With Westbrook missing long stretches thanks to his own injury-riddled 
season, Durant carried the team offensively. This season, it seems Westbrook is 
determined to do the same. It’s like the basketball equivalent of tag-team 
wrestling.

Unfortunately, even if Westbrook plays at this level for the remainder of the 
season (which would give him like 11 triple-doubles for the year), he will not 
be winning the MVP. Westbrook himself missed too many games to start the season 
to catch up to the likes of Houston’s James Harden or Golden State’s Steph 
Curry.

Plus the early stretch of the season where the Thunder had to play – or 
attempt to play – without Durant and Westbrook put them in the hole they’re in 
now, scratching and clawing just for a chance to make the postseason. Voters 
tend to look at their team’s overall record when examining a player’s MVP case.


This feels unfair. If anything, the gap between how Oklahoma City played 
during that stretch without Westbrook and how they are playing now only 
magnifies how valuable he is to his team.

Adam Silver and the NBA Player’s Association at odds

March Madness will soon be upon us and, soon after that, the draft. With these 
events will come even more debate about when basketball players should be 
eligible to play in the NBA.

Right now, the rules require players to be 19 before being eligible for the 
NBA draft, a requirement that was supposed to ensure that the best young 
players wouldn’t enter the league right from high school. In practice, it’s 
means the more heavily hyped players spend exactly one season playing for a 
school before leaving to pursue an opportunity to actually get paid for their 
work.

It’s one of the more ridiculous compromises in recent sports labor history. 
It’s hard to imagine that a single year in college will make that big of a 
difference in a player’s wisdom and maturity. (Indeed, if the experience that 
my friends and I had, that first year of college can sometimes even lead to a 
drop-off in those areas.)

It is partly for this reason that, from the very beginning of his reign as NBA 
commissioner, Adam Silver has been very vocal about his belief that the age 
requirement should be raised to 20. Theoretically this is so that players come 
into the league better prepared to handle the experience.

Except, of course, Silver’s proposal is not really about looking out for 
players. Like most decisions made by a sports commissioner, it’s all about the 
team owners. Forcing players to spend another year playing for free in college 
would push back any potential free agent payday another year. Plus the larger 
sample size of college games played would give teams a lot more information 
about whether or not players have the skills and mindset to play in the NBA.


The NBA Player’s Association, under new head Michele Roberts, knows all of 
this, which is why the eligibility issue is shaping up to be Silver’s biggest 
challenge yet as commissioner. NBAPA general counsel Gary Kohlman is on record 
as saying that “quite likely the union will be taking a radically different 
position” on the issue. That, of course, didn’t make the headlines. No, those 
came fromwhat he said next 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/players-union-lawyer-on-nba-draft-age-limit---if-they-were-white-----they-would-be-out-there-playing-190656622.html>
:


If they were white and hockey players they would be out there playing. If they 
were white and baseball players they would be out there playing. … Because most 
of them are actually African-American and are in a sport and precluded from 
doing it, they have to go into this absurd world of playing for one year.

The fact that those on the side of the Player’s Association are not afraid to 
bring inevitably controversial comments about race into this discussion so 
early on in the process makes it clear that this is going to be an incredibly 
contentious topic. In other words, Silver should be prepared for the first 
major, meaningful opposition he’s had to face since replacing David Stern.

Atlanta Hawks defeat the Cleveland Cavaliers

It’s been a good time to be a pro hoops fan in Atlanta. Last week the Hawks 
became the first team in the league to clinch a playoff spot with a 104-96 win 
over the Houston Rockets. Then, in their biggest statement game of the season, 
they defeated theCleveland Cavaliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-cavaliers>, 106-97, in a preview 
of the Eastern Conference finals.

Now normally there would be a “could end up being” or a “what was possibly” 
qualifier before the whole “a preview of the Eastern Conference Finals” bit. 
Instead, recent injuries to pretty much every sentient lifeform with any 
connection to theChicago Bulls <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-bulls>
 have made it obvious that the Hawks and the Cavaliers are the only legitimate 
NBA Finals teams in the woeful Eastern Conference barring an out-of-nowhere run 
of dominance by the Toronto Raptors (currently the No5 seed) or the Washington 
Wizards (No6). By comparison, of course, every single playoff-bound team in the 
Western Conference can be a considered a NBA Finals contender.

It even feels wrong to put the Hawks and the Cavaliers into the same category. 
Yes, the Cavaliers have LeBron and are quite likely to be playing their best 
team basketball come the postseason. Right now, however, Atlanta has a 
10.5-game lead over Cleveland. That no more a “rivalry” than as the tug-of-war 
between the Harlem Globetrotters and Washington Generals.


Injury blotter

OK, the health situation in the NBA has officially reached the point where 
we’re just going to run the injury report as a regular feature here at Five 
Things until a) the NBA’s injury luck improves or b) there are no healthy 
players left in the league.

The biggest blow this week was dealt to the Portland Trail Blazers. On 
Thursday, shooting guard Wesley Matthewssuffered a season-ending Achilles injury
 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/blazers--wesley-matthews-leaves-game-with-apparent-left-leg-injury-055443711.htm>
. Portland, who have one of the weakest benches among all the currently 
contending teams, are ill-prepared to replace any of their starters. That’s the 
major reason that LaMarcus Aldridge has been soldiering through a torn ligament 
all season: the team simply can’t afford to lose any major players for a 
significant amount of time.

Meanwhile, the Phoenix Suns’ Brandon Knight sprained his ankle 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/03/10/suns-signing-seth-curry-with-brandon-knight-injured/>
 during Monday night’s game against the Golden State Warriors. The Suns, who 
still harbor some hope of beating out the Oklahoma City Thunder and the New 
Orleans Pelicans for the final playoff spot in the West, had just acquired 
Knight in the same deadline deal that sent off guards Isaiah Thomas and Goran 
Dragic. Well, so much for the “too many guards” problem they had at the 
beginning of the year.

And hey, look who just got in under the wire. Tim Duncan of the San Antonio 
Spurshyperextended his elbow 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12458899/tim-duncan-hurts-elbow-san-antonio-spurs-unsure-status>
 during his team’s 117-107 victory over the Toronto Raptors. Duncan’s injury 
isn’t expected to be serious, but after these last few seasons, we wouldn’t 
blame NBA fans for being worried.

There was at least one bit of possible good news: Derrick Rose thinks he will 
be able to return 
<http://espn.go.com/chicago/nba/story/_/id/12451650/derrick-rose-chicago-bulls-good-chance-back-season>
 to the Chicago Bulls’ lineup in time for the postseason. So, yes, the only 
good injury news this past week has been about the Bulls’ much-maligned floor 
general. I am as confounded as you are about that.

Other things we’ve learned

• Even before the elbow injury, there was something off about Duncan, who, 
during Sunday’s contest against the Bulls,made no field goals in a game 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/tim-duncan-went-an-entire-game-without-hitting-a-field-goal--world-continues-apace-210428181.html>
 for the first time in his 830 NBA seasons (note: this figure is possibly 
exaggerated). It didn’t matter, the Spurs still defeated the Bulls.

• Is the honeymoon officially over for breakthrough Miami Heat find Hassan 
Whiteside? After he was ejected from Monday’s game against the Boston Celtics 
for pushing Kelly Olynyk, an incident that also earned him a one-game 
suspension, teammateDwyane Wade publicly called him out 
<http://deadspin.com/dwyane-wade-sounds-pretty-fed-up-with-hassan-whiteside-1690573330>
: “We all have our moments, selfish moments. But you can’t keep having them, 
because you gotta be reliable and you gotta be able to be counted on. And right 
now, if he continues to act that way then he’s not reliable.”

• E’Twaun Moore did this? 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/e-twaun-moore-hits-game-winning-3-as-bulls-beat-thunder--snap-westbrook-s-triple-double-streak-050307565.html>
 Really? Are you sure this isthe E’Twaun Moore and not an impostor?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFci_Tk4P1HQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFci_Tk4P1HQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFci_Tk4P1HQ&media=>
• Welcome back Craig Sager 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/craig-sager-the-jacket-returns-to-the-sideline-1425514736?tesla=y>
. We never thought we would miss your ridiculous wardrobe this much. Not to 
mention the fact that this means a reunion of one of the best comedy duos in 
sports history: Sager and Popovich.
 