
Antonio Banderas as Pablo Picasso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/feb/21/antonio-banderas-pablo-picasso-33-dias>
? Cool. The casting of thestar of Desperado, Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down! and, er, 
Puss in Boots 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/jul/29/antonio-banderas-interview-almodovar>
 as the greatest artist of the 20th century is very promising. I mean, he's not 
simply Spanish but Andalusian. What's more, Banderas was born in Picasso's own 
birthplace, Malaga. That has to be better than theWelsh Picasso of a previous 
biopic <http://www.merchantivory.com/picasso.html>.

Plausible casting is not the only promising thing about 33 Dias, to be 
directed by Carlos Saura 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118050494.html?cmpid=RSS|News|FilmNews>. It 
sounds as if it will be a potentially insightful view of an artist at work. For 
it is all about the making ofGuernica 
<http://www.oneonta.edu/faculty/farberas/arth/Images/110images/sl24_images/guernica_details/guernica_all.jpg>
 – not simply the most powerful political work of art of modern times, but also 
the outcome of an unusually well-documented creative process.

Photographs of the successive states of Picasso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>'s history painting were 
taken by his lover, Dora Maar, as it developed 
<http://24.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_ks30514GWL1qzn0deo1_400.jpg>. Picasso's 
drawings <http://0.tqn.com/d/painting/1/0/x/P/2/Picasso-Guernica-Study-b919.jpg>
 and sketch paintings for the screaming horse, the burning building, the broken 
warrior and Guernica's other component images, together with his progressing 
conceptions of the overall design of the painting, also survive. As it happens, 
some arecurrently on view at Tate Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/exhibitions/picassoandbritain/default.shtm>.

Guernica was conceived as an explicit response to a contemporary event, the 
horrific bombing of an ordinary town, a massacre of civilians akin to what is
currently taking place in Syria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/middle-east-live/2012/feb/23/syria-marie-colvin-homs-bombardment-continues-live>
. It was also an attempt to marry the fractured imagery of cubism and the dream 
art of surrealism with the traditional genre of history painting.

The way Picasso worked on, and recorded his working on, Guernica was itself an 
engagement with tradition. The idea of the big, planned manifesto painting has 
a long history in European art – a famous example isGéricault's The Raft of the 
Medusa <http://www.victorianweb.org/art/crisis/crisis4d.html>. Picasso was born 
in the 19th century, trained in the academic tradition and believed in the 
value of such programmatic works when he could sum up a period of insight or 
deliver a great statement of his vision – he worked onLes Demoiselles d'Avignon 
in this same way <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2007/jan/09/2>, with heaps 
of preparatory studies.

Guernica, as a painting of disaster, consciously looks back to Raphael's 
fresco The Fire in the Borgo 
<http://mv.vatican.va/3_EN/pages/SDR/SDR_04_SalaInce.html>. It aspires to a 
similar grandeur and authority while using the broken revelatory style of 
cubism to turn reality inside out and communicate, like a punch in your face, 
the eviscerated horror of a bombed town.

Picasso left not just a great painting, but also a great model of how art can 
be made – and why it matters. To translate the story of his one-man campaign to 
change the world into a film is a fine idea. Let's hope the result lives up to 
Picasso's moral and imaginative heroism.
 