
It may have cost a whopping £300m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/aug/19/rolls-building-court-complex-london>
 to build. But the new state-of-the-artRolls Building 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/guidance/courts-and-tribunals/courts/rolls-building.htm>
 off Fetter Lane was this week suffering from numerous embarrassing teething 
problems – a dodgy mobile phone signal, no internet (BT's fault, apparently) 
and a snack machine that refused to give me a can of Coke after I'd paid it 80p.

The gleaming 11-storey law court complex opened its doors for the first time 
on Monday. It was, appropriately enough, the venue for one of the UK's biggest 
private litigation battles. Up on the third floor, in court 26, the Russian 
political exile Boris Berezovsky wassuing his former friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/03/abramovich-berezovsky-clash-london>
 Roman Abramovich for damages "in excess" of $5bn. I arrived at 8.50am. The 
complex had just opened. I may even have been the first journalist to peer 
inside.

The good news is that the building is, architecturally speaking, fabulous: at 
its centre a light-filled glass and steel atrium done in a curvaceous, 
contemporary style. It all looks a bit like a posh cruise liner. There are 
lifts, comfortable wooden benches, coffee machines, consultation rooms. And 
there are panoramic views of the old Royal Courts of Justice just across the 
road. (In fact, the picture window is the only place you can get a decent phone 
signal.)

The bad news is that new "super-courts" built for complex multi-party trials 
are ridiculously small. It was obvious that Berezovsky v Abramovich was always 
going to attract attention. But court 26 was simply unable to accommodate the 
throng of lawyers, bodyguards, and reporters who turned up to take part/watch 
the proceedings. Several lawyers had to sit in the public "gallery" – two rows 
of chairs at the back of the room.

This left 20 people standing, including a heavily pregnant woman. The judge, 
Lady Justice Gloster, spent the first 10 minutes of the case dealing with the 
overcrowding. She said: "I'm going to be very sexist here and if there's a 
pregnant lady of the press, she can come and sit down here. Mr Pollen, we can 
put four seats there, presently, four or five there, and I will discuss with Mr 
Pollen after no doubt the members of the press have bent his ear during the 
course of the morning, in the break, as to what the allocations should be 
between members of the public and members of the press."

Did no one think of this? And can someone fix the vending machine on the third 
floor?
 