
Nina Persson is best known as the lead singer of the Cardigans 
<http://www.cardigans.com/?sid=default&bfs=1>, the Swedish pop-rock band 
propelled to international stardom by their 1996 singleLovefool 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wYw1cwxig5k>, which was was featured on the 
soundtrack to Baz Luhrmann's filmRomeo + Juliet. After The Cardigans' fourth 
album,Gran Turismo, went multiplatinum in 1998, the five-piece took a break 
from recording to pursue solo projects, with Persson releasing records as A 
Camp. In 2006, she became a member ofthe Cake Sale 
<http://www.yeproc.com/artists/the-cake-sale> – a musical collective whose 
album profits were donated to charity – while other collaborations have 
included a duet on the Manic Street Preachers trackYour Love Alone Is Not Enough
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A_OnFHJou4o>, as well as an appearance on the 
2010 Danger Mouse/Sparklehorse album,Dark Night of the Soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/08/danger-mouse-sparklehorse-dark-night-of-the-soul-cd-review>
. Persson's debut solo album to be released under her own name,Animal Heart, is 
out now. 

Musician: Connie Converse 
<http://www.squirrelthing.com/artists/connie-converse>
 New York songwriter Connie Converse. 
Connie Converse was born in 1924 and she lived in New York for a period. She 
was a very plain lady who did office jobs but she loved to write songs. She did 
a couple of recordings in someone's kitchen in the 1960s and those songs have 
recently been released. In 1974, she wrote letters to all of her friends and 
then she disappeared. Nobody knows where she went, or if she's alive. She's a 
mystery. The music is beautiful, very haunting. Of course, her story adds to 
the mystique. The record that was put out recently was calledHow Sad, How Lovely
... <http://www.squirrelthing.com/artists/connie-converse> it's worth checking 
out.

Artist: Helene Schjerfbeck <http://www.ateneum.fi/en/helene-schjerfbeck>
 Maria, 1909, by Helene Schjerfbeck, 1909. Photograph: Amos Anderson 
Kunstmuseum, Helsinki 
Helene Schjerfbeck was a painter born in the late 1800s and she's a big artist 
in Finland. I've got a book [of her work] and I return to it a lot. She did 
some time in Paris and was very well schooled [in art]. She painted a lot of 
portraits of women. They're quite traditional-looking but her colouring, the 
expressions in her portraits, and her technique are beautiful and very 
interesting. I saw one of her exhibitions in Gothenburg, Sweden – that was the 
first time I had ever heard about her.

Book: Nancy Cunard: Heiress, Muse, Political Idealist 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780231139380>
 Nancy Cunard. Photograph: Gamma-Keystone/Getty 
This is Lois Gordon's biography of Nancy Cunard, who was an intriguing woman. 
She was a badass: she came from the upper class, and she was an artist and a 
designer. She did some pretty progressive things: she bought a book printer 
very early on and published books herself. She also became a bit of a fashion 
icon. She had a very eccentric way of dressing, she looked cool. I tried to 
copy her style in one of my videos. She was really interested in African 
culture – she collected lots of African bracelets and she wore them all, up to 
her armpits. She also wore turbans and dressed very dramatically. I really like 
a good biography, especially about women.

Film: Frances Ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/28/frances-ha-gerwig-baumbach-review>
 Frances Ha. Photograph: IFC Films/Everett Collection 
I mostly watch documentaries and TV shows, but this is a great movie based 
around really great acting. It's in black and white and I'm sure it was 
low-budget. I like Greta Gerwig; you sort of get a girl-crush on her, she's so 
charming and clumsy. It's set in New York and, if you live here, it's really 
fun to see art based around living here. I'm a different generation [from 
Gerwig's character, Frances], I'm more settled, but moving between couches is a 
very New York thing. I was on tour recently and that, for me, is always a 
wonderful time to read and see movies.

Chocolate: François Pralus 
<http://www.chocolats-pralus.com/en/francois-pralus.html> 
 François Pralus's Barre infernale noire. 
François Pralus makes a lot of different chocolates, but the one that is 
absolutely insane is calledBarre infernale noire 
<http://www.chocolats-pralus.com/fr/barre-infernale-noire.html>. It's like a 
gold bar of praliné. It's perverse how good it is. You have to cut slices with 
a knife to eat it. There are two places in New York that I know sell it and I 
make special trips there. It's pretty pricey, but it's worth it. I've developed 
a habit where I need to eat chocolate after each meal. When I try to be 
healthy, chocolate just doesn't apply.

Writer: Alice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro>
 Alice Munro. Photograph: Canadian Press/Rex 
Alice Munro has just been awarded the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/nobel-prize-literature-2013-live>
 and I was really psyched that [the winner] was someone whom I had actually 
read. She writes a lot of short stories; I'd recommend one calledToo Much 
Happiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/15/alice-munro-too-much-happiness>. 
They're all about women who have committed some kind of crime. It's striking 
how, in very short pieces, she can describe a whole scenario or a whole world. 
She uses very direct, pregnant language. I don't usually pick up short story 
books but this is like the only way in which her writing could exist. I read 
too little these days, but I sometimes read on the subway and I'm the kind of 
person who reads before they turn out the light.
 