
The football manager


Sam Allardyce, 61, is a former footballer and now manages Sunderland. He 
divides his time between the north-east of England and Bolton, where he lives 
with his wife, Lynn.

I wake up naturally between 7am and 8am on a match day; we’re playing 
Bournemouth this afternoon. I’ll put Sky Sports on while I’m having a cup of 
tea, but I don’t want any phone calls because that means there’s a problem – 
someone’s been taken ill or fallen down a pothole. We train most mornings but 
never on a match day, so I’ll drive from my home in Bolton to the home training 
ground in Sunderland for a pre-match meal at 11.45am with the rest of the lads. 
We jump on a coach to the stadium and by 1.45pm I’ve put in the team sheet 
(listing the players’ names) and invited the opposition manager and captain for 
a drink after the game. Then I have a meeting with all my players in the 
dressing room and we look at the opposition’s team on a board, so everyone 
knows who they’re marking on set pieces. The lads will then warm up and I’ll 
sit quietly, thinking about how the game might pan out.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-sam-interactive/index.html>
I don’t like match days at all; I’m always so nervous. Professor Greg Whyte 
looked at my data and says my heart rate is a “classic example of chronic 
psychological stress”, but this is a massive game, because Bournemouth are 
right next to us at the bottom of the league. If we get relegated this year it 
will be the only failure I’ve had as a manager.

I prefer playing at home, although life is very difficult at the moment 
whether we’re home or away. The home fans (averaging 42,000) will criticise the 
team if it feels like they’re not trying, but they will applaud, even if we 
lose, if they’ve given everything they’ve got.

My heart rate rises at 2.45pm, because I’m agitated and jumping up and down 
before kick-off at 3pm. Bournemouth score after 13 minutes and I’m concerned 
about whether my team can hold their nerve, but they score just before half 
time, which makes life much easier in the second half. Bournemouth don’t score 
again and we draw 1-1. I don’t say too much after the game because everyone’s 
pretty emotional. I lose my rag now and again, but only if I feel it’s to the 
benefit of the players to kick them up the backside. We didn’t play as well as 
I wanted us to, but it was one point gained, not two lost – and it’s not about 
how well you play, it’s about getting results.

The two-hour drive home is a good time to reflect on the game. I also reduce 
my heart rate by meditating when I get the chance, which I’ve been doing since 
2004. Stress becomes a part of your life for so long. I’ve had the fear of 
failure since I left school to become a footballer at 15, and when you move 
into management the anxiety only gets worse. When Ifinished at West Ham in May 
2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/sam-allardyce-west-ham-exit-steve-bruce-hull>
, I wondered whether that was the time to pack it in, but then I got the itch 
for Sunderland. My wife, Lynn, thinks I’m crazy. She says, “Why can’t you just 
leave it alone now?” I’m at home by 8.30pm and have beans on toast. In my 
younger days, my anxiety wouldn’t have gone by then – it would linger – but I 
know what I need to do on Monday.

We’ll get into bed at 11pm and watch telly (The Affair or Blue Bloods). Lynn 
will fall asleep but I will be watching until 2am. I’m a 4-5 hours’ sleep man. 
I’ve always been like that.

The teacher
 Joseph Bispham. Photograph: Manuel Vazquez for the Guardian 
Joseph Bispham, 30, teaches English and is head of media studies at Forest 
Gate community school in London. He lives in east London with his girlfriend.

I wake up a lot in the night, often from dreams about the kids at school. That 
explains the big spike in my heart rate around 2am. But when my alarm goes off 
at 6.30am, I’m up and out the door in half an hour, with a Thermos of fresh 
coffee. The longer I linger at home, the less time I have to plan my lessons. 
There’s nothing worse than the sea of faces that look up at you when you 
haven’t got a lesson ready, so I’m not surprised by my consistently high heart 
rate, which dips briefly when I stop for breakfast at the canteen.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-bispham-interactive/index.html>
At 8.45am I teach year 11 literature. The text is JB Priestley’s An Inspector 
Calls, which they love, because they get to use a lot of sophisticated 
political and sociological vocabulary. It’s brilliant when they’ve got a really 
interesting and relevant text. Kids want to be clever – they’re not afraid of 
hard work, they’re just afraid of feeling stupid. They get a bit lively towards 
the end of the class so I raise my voice a lot. One piece of feedback I always 
get is that I’m too loud and boomy. But my voice is the easiest way to get 
their attention.

Between classes, I snatch half an hour to do some marking, which I hate with a 
passion. It’s like stabbing yourself with your mistakes, because if they’ve 
done something wrong, it’s usually because you’ve taught it badly. You are held 
accountable for the outcome of your children but you’re not the factor that 
decides your own success, which takes a lot of control away from you. Teachers 
are often portrayed as moaners, but people don’t understand our level of 
frustration and fear for the children; as a result, it’s very hard to switch 
off.

I’m prepping for a meeting when I’m interrupted by a GCSE pupil. My low heart 
rate suddenly peaks.

Over a canteen lunch at my desk I’m prepping for a meeting in the afternoon 
about the school’s long-term plans when I’m interrupted by a GCSE pupil. My low 
heart rate suddenly peaks. She has very high predicted grades and works really 
hard but is underachieving in English. It’s a supportive but frank 
conversation. At Forest Gate, they’re incredibly driven kids. They tend to pick 
their moments, but you can’t turn them away because they’d never let you forget 
it. Someone once described teenagers as being like lawyers – they analyse 
everything you’ve ever said.

At 1.10pm it’s my year 11 media studies class, which is challenging and 
disorganised at the moment, and my heart rate is rapidly up and down. At one 
point, I say the worst thing I’ve ever said to a child: “At what point in your 
life did you have your common sense surgically removed?”

I’m looking forward to the long-term planning meeting later in the afternoon, 
where I feel a lot more relaxed. With adult company and a bit of camaraderie, 
it’s a sanity check; what it must be like working in a normal office.

Cycling home (I had left my bike at school) through the Olympic Park 
punctuates my day nicely and sees a healthy spike in my heart rate. I’m 
brutally inefficient in the evening, but I do the necessary marking after 
dinner, before settling down to the last two episodes of Netflix’s Making A 
Murderer. My heart rate is on average a lot lower than during my school day, 
but it spikes a couple of times, which I’m not surprised about; I’m rocking 
like a madman on my sofa.

The stage actor

 Jonathan Andrew Hume. Photograph: Manuel Vazquez 
Jonathan Andrew Hume, 33, plays Simba in The Lion King 
<http://www.thelionking.co.uk> at the Lyceum Theatre in London. He lives in 
east London with his wife.

Every morning, I set my alarm for 10am; but that’s an “If you’re not up by 
now, you need to get up” alarm. I’m usually already awake. You can tell when I 
jump into the shower by the spike in my heart rate. I tend to procrastinate 
afterwards – but it’s important to chill out as much as I can before a two-show 
day. I’ve been in The Lion King since I was 18. I started in the ensemble and 
got the lead role of Simba in 2011. I need a lot of protein to sustain a good 
level of energy, so I cook a lunch of rice noodles with chicken breast, 
sweetcorn, soya beans and hard-boiled eggs, while eating a small bowl of bran 
flakes and oats. I get the tube from my home in east London to the theatre 
while listening to hip-hop or chart music. It has to be upbeat; silence has an 
adverse effect.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-lion-king-interactive/index.html>
I arrive in plenty of time for the cast vocal warm-up at 1.15pm. Once that 
starts, I won’t stop – and my heart rate is consistently high – until the end 
of the matinee show at 5pm. To physically warm up, I do 25 minutes of squats, 
push-ups, sit-ups, rolling (on a foam roller; it’s a bit like having a sports 
massage) and stretching. The role involves a lot of jumping, so my body takes 
quite a beating. Simba is played by a child in the first act, so I don’t appear 
on stage until just before the interval, but there’s no time for sitting 
around. I shower before costume and makeup, using the heat to steam my vocal 
chords. After 30 minutes in the makeup chair, my muscles have started to relax, 
so I’ll do more stretching. I get nervous before every show, especially if 
there’s a family member or celebrity in the audience (Star Wars’ John Boyega 
came a few weeks ago), but having a routine helps. Doing the same thing, every 
day, for eight shows a week might sound mundane, but we try to bring something 
new to every show. Simba’s story really touches people – I’ll spot audience 
members crying – and that spurs me on.

My heart rate peaks dramatically at 9pm, as I throw myself into the second act

After the first show, my heart rate dips. It’s 6pm, so I grab food from 
Wagamama and relax in my dressing room, watching something like The Big Bang 
Theory on my iPad. I’ll also ice my knees, which is a bit like when footballers 
have an ice bath to prevent injuries, and it’s back into a tracksuit – as close 
to pyjamas as possible – before the process starts again. On a two-show day we 
need to maintain that same standard; we demand it of ourselves. My heart rate 
peaks dramatically at 9pm, as I throw myself into the second act; my energy 
level is exactly where I want it to be.

After a hot shower, I get the tube home, cook a light dinner, then roll and 
ice my knees so I don’t have tight muscles the next day. My heart rate starts 
to come down just before midnight, when I’m playing with my two kittens, 
Sashimi and Miso, before going to sleep at 1.30am for at least eight hours. 
Cats are brilliant stress relievers.

The surgeon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d3461ad9dbc383b4a7065261a4efaa2ac8997c%2F180_600_5240_3144%2F5240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20pulse%3A%20a%20chef%2C%20a%20football%20manager%20and%20a%20TV%20star%20track%20their%20heart%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20pulse%3A%20a%20chef%2C%20a%20football%20manager%20and%20a%20TV%20star%20track%20their%20heart%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5d3461ad9dbc383b4a7065261a4efaa2ac8997c%2F180_600_5240_3144%2F5240.jpg>
 Roshana Mehdian. Photograph: Manuel Vazquez for the Guardian 
Roshana Mehdian, 30, is a junior doctor training as a trauma and orthopaedic 
registrar. She works at a London hospital, where she’s also on call in the 
evening.

I’m a very heavy sleeper so I set six alarms, which start going off at 6.10am. 
I rush out the door by 7.10am and into my car for the 40-minute journey into 
the hospital. I’m on call tonight and I know it’s going to be a long two days, 
so I feel quite anxious before I get to work. This is the highest my heart rate 
will be all day. Listening to Radio 1 or Smooth FM helps, as does humming the 
Rocky theme tune. Also, tea is a big thing in the NHS. Just knowing I will get 
10 seconds at some point to make a cup is hugely reassuring. When you’re a 
doctor, you’re never going to be in your comfort zone, so you need to get 
comfortable with the feeling of being challenged.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-junior-doctor-interactive/index.html>
We have a trauma meeting at 8am to work out which cases are most urgent and 
will need to be operated on this afternoon. In a typical meeting there are four 
or five consultants, eight registrars and eight senior house officers (SHOs) 
who assist them. An hour later, my heart rate spikes when the orthopaedic 
clinic starts. I see back-to-back patients for the next three to four hours 
with non-emergency ankle and feet problems, including not being able to walk 
because of bad bunions or arthritis. It’s so busy that I often go straight from 
the clinic into the theatre operating room at 1pm (until 4.15pm). I’m lucky 
today to get half an hour for lunch before surgery starts, but I’m sitting at 
my desk doing paperwork, so there’s no chance for my heart rate to go down. The 
notion that doctors ever take a dedicated break is rubbish, because we’re not 
allowed to switch off our bleep.

There are a lot of personal sacrifices you make as a doctor

There are a lot of personal sacrifices you make as a doctor, which you choose 
to, because you want to do the job, but that’s being eroded by the feeling of 
being undervalued. Everyone is so demoralised at the moment; it’s making people 
think twice about their jobs, which is really sad. I’m always anxious walking 
into the theatre operating room, but as soon as I’ve got the knife in my hand, 
I get into the zone. Today, I’m working on a fractured and dislocated ankle. At 
my level, there are only some operations I feel happy doing on my own, so a 
consultant will always hover if I need them. If I’m really not confident, a 
senior surgeon will train me through. A recent attempt at fixing a difficult 
ankle on my own was extremely challenging and affected my confidence. I feel 
close to calling my consultant now, but I manage it – my heart rate rising very 
slowly and gradually, before dipping again.

Most surgeons are alpha males or females. I’m atypical because I’m not 
thick-skinned, but I am persistent and resilient. I feel the most stressed all 
day when I’m on call in A&E from 4.15pm, and my heart rate is at its most 
erratic. From car accidents to someone who’s shot themself with a nail gun, you 
never know what’s going to come in. I get to leave at 8.30pm but I’m 
technically on call until the next morning, so my heart rate doesn’t come down. 
The other night, I was there until 3am. Sometimes I get phone calls from the 
SHO, seeking advice about patients, but there’s nothing to disturb me tonight, 
and I get a decent sleep before it all starts again.

The live TV presenter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8199b5658527e58ba592fcc163847cf13f470cfb%2F624_543_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20pulse%3A%20a%20chef%2C%20a%20football%20manager%20and%20a%20TV%20star%20track%20their%20heart%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20pulse%3A%20a%20chef%2C%20a%20football%20manager%20and%20a%20TV%20star%20track%20their%20heart%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fstressful-job-chef-football-manager-tv-star-track-heart-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8199b5658527e58ba592fcc163847cf13f470cfb%2F624_543_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
 Kirsty Wark. Photograph: Manuel Vazquez for the Guardian 
Kirsty Wark, 61, has worked on BBC2’s Newsnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsnight> since 1993. She commutes to 
London from her home in Glasgow, where she lives with her husband, TV producer 
Alan Clements, and their daughter Caitlin, 25. Their son, James, 23, lives in 
New York.

I’m up at 5.30am, and out of the house in half an hour. I set two alarms 
because I’m terrified of missing my flight to London. Looking at my data, I’m 
surprised my heart rate is so high in the morning as I’m quite a calm person, 
but I’m going into London earlier than usual to attend a memorial service for 
my former colleague,Sue Lloyd Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/13/bbc-journalist-sue-lloyd-roberts-dies-of-cancer>
. I would normally get a train that gets in at midday. I’ve always commuted 
from Scotland: it’s where my family are, and as a presenter, it gives me a 
different perspective from those who live in London. My heart rate dips when 
I’m on the plane; I love not being contactable. I read articles I’ve cut out 
from the weekend papers, likeJK Rowling’s conversation with Lauren Laverne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/28/conversation-lauren-laverne-jk-rowling-interview>
, then hit the broadsheets, which are all full of speculation about the Syria 
vote the next day.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-kirsty-wark-interactive/index.html>
There’s a spike at 8am because I’m running to catch the DLR into town, but the 
highest spike is at 9am when I have a big espresso at Kaffeine; a ritual of 
mine. I have four or five small cups of black coffee throughout the day, but it 
looks like I’m going to have to start weaning myself off it. I head to All 
Souls church at 11.30am for the memorial service and listen in awe to Sue’s 
daughter making a remarkable and moving speech. Then I’m back at my flat around 
the corner to do some writing; grabbing lunch from Gitane, a nearby Persian 
restaurant. I’m working on the first draft of my second novel, so it’s a calm 
hour well spent.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is within spitting distance of 
my flat, and when I arrive at the Newsnight studio at 2pm, the decision has 
just been made to do a Syria special. I love it when we throw everything up in 
the air and change the entire programme. That’s what it’s all about. We start 
researching and brainstorming guests – three pro-military action and three 
against – to structure it as a formal debate. Our deputy editor, Rachel Jupp, 
is a feeder, bringing Jaffa Cakes in to the meeting.

The highest spike is at 9am when I have a big espresso. It looks like I’m 
going to have to start weaning myself off it

I’m an obsessively prepared “homework” person; I don’t want to be caught on 
the hop. A good interview is when you get someone to open up. Politicians don’t 
very often, but a lot of the time it’s about what they don’t say. I really look 
forward to going on air at 10.30pm; that’s hugely enjoyable, rather than 
stressful, and you can see the adrenaline in my heart rate. One person hasn’t 
shown up, but we get someone else to argue both sides. It’s live TV, so you 
just have to deal with it. I can’t believe I’ve been doing this for 23 years. 
It’s passed in the blink of an eye.

When we come off air at 11.15pm, we’ll have a debrief over a glass of 
incredibly bad wine in the green room. Sometimes I catch the sleeper train back 
to Glasgow, but tonight I head back to my flat and start reading Signs For Lost 
Children by Sarah Moss, as I’m judging this year’s Walter Scott prize for 
historical fiction. I read until I fall asleep. It doesn’t feel like work.

• Kirsty Wark’s debut novel, The Legacy Of Elizabeth Pringle 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Legacy-Elizabeth-Pringle-Kirsty-Wark/dp/1444777602> 
(Two Roads, £7.99), is out now and also available as an ebook.

The chef
 Angela Hartnett. Photograph: Manuel Vazquez for the Guardian 
Angela Hartnett MBE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/17/angela-hartnett-neil-borthwick>
, 47, is chef and proprietor of restaurants including the Michelin-starred 
Murano in Mayfair and Merchants Tavern in Shoreditch. She lives in east London 
with her partner, chef Neil Borthwick.

I’m not someone who jumps out of bed. I set my alarm for 6am and it goes off 
every 15 minutes. I like to think I’ll get up early, but as you can see from my 
heart rate, it’s more like 8am. The night reports, telling me about the 
previous day’s takings and any issues, come in from all my restaurants anytime 
from midnight to 1.30am, but I’m careful not to read them until I get up the 
next morning and have coffee. I need two cups to get my brain functioning. I 
cycle from my home in Spitalfields to Murano for a 10.30am menu tasting.
heart rate graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/02/embed/hearts/hr-angela-hartnett-interactive/index.html>
It’s the first time I eat, and I taste about 16 dishes, which doesn’t do 
anything for my metabolism. I taste, comment on and photograph each dish, 
before going through them with the head chef. I’ll say, “Tweak this, change 
that… why did you put that with that?” It can’t just be about my opinion; we 
can’t have partridge and venison on the menu just because I like them, when 
duck would be the better option. It has to be collaborative. Modern techniques 
aren’t necessarily my style, but if the flavour works then I’m all for it.

My heart rate is only high when I’m cycling between restaurants. It would be a 
lot higher if I was opening a new restaurant: you have to be ready to open on 
time, because delays cost money, and you have to get the right staff on board – 
and there’s a real shortage of trained staff. And then you’re flooded with 
critics who all want to come on the first day – I had four critics in on 
Murano’s second ever service. Jay Rayner argues that if you’re charging full 
prices you’ve got to be ready, but it’s not that sort of business. You need to 
build a team.

Getting the food out on time can be stressful, but it gives me an adrenaline 
rush

I’m quite a relaxed person, day-to-day: they’re restaurants, for Christ’s sake 
– people need to get over themselves and realise it’s only a carrot. My heart 
rate rises at 12pm, when lunch service at The Merchants Tavern starts. My 
partner, Neil, is the head chef, so I just do what he wants me to do, I don’t 
argue.

Getting the food out on time can be stressful, because you’re reliant on other 
people, but it gives me an adrenaline rush. It’s the most fun part of the job. 
I think the mistake a lot of chefs make is putting TV and books and 
extracurricular things before a restaurant. The minute you start taking your 
eye off it is when things go wrong.

When I’m not working in the evening, I’ll eat out locally. I stick to regular, 
local haunts, like St John Bread and Wine and Taberna do Mercado. I don’t want 
to be challenged on my nights off. I get into bed at 11pm and read for 20 
minutes until I drop off, and I sleep through.

 * All heart rates were tracked using the Fitbit Charge HR 
<https://www.fitbit.com/uk>, other than Roshana’s – she used a Polar H7 
<http://www.polar.com/uk-en/products/accessories/H7_heart_rate_sensor>. Data 
analysis was done byGreg Whyte <http://www.gregwhyte.com>.  