 At the moment I have several patients who are seeing me for dietary advice 
while undergoing courses of radiation therapy to the mouth. This treatment, 
while obviously absolutely necessary, is particularly cruel in that when their 
bodies desperately need nutrients to heal themselves and fight cancer cells, 
their mouths can become so sore and painful that it is impossible to even think 
about eating anything. On top of this, while good oral hygiene is vital, people 
undergoing radiation therapy to the mouth are often unaware that their 
toothpaste may also help dictate whether or not they can eat; the flouride in 
conventional toothpaste can make it feel as though they're torturing their 
mouths with bleach.
It's not just radiation therapy that results in a sore mouth - more mundane 
causes include dental treatment, tonsillitis, mouth ulcers or simply inflamed 
gums - but common to all of these conditions is the need to keep the mouth 
clean and infection-free. A salt toothpaste, either on its own or combined with 
a gentle balm such as calendula (available from health-food stores), applied on 
a soft-bristled toothbrush can clean and soothe your mouth.

Foodwise, once your mouth feels less painful, you should be able to tackle 
such soft, nutrient-packed fruits as the delectable Alphonso mangos that are 
starting to appear in the shops - they are full of the healing nutrients 
vitamin C and beta carotene. Enjoy them as they are or combine them with thick, 
natural yogurt (a creamy variety is better than a sour one) or even with cooled 
custard.

These are far more appetising alternatives to the 'complete-food' drinks that 
many 'how-to-eat-with-a-sore-mouth' information leaflets promote. Even if you 
have a chronic oral or swallowing problem, a host of mouth-watering 'real' 
foods can make eating a pleasure, not a painful or tasteless chore. As well as 
soft fruits, try soufflés, soups, omelettes or puréed vegetables mixed with 
olive oil and finely grated Parmesan cheese.

 Nutrition news: Bingeing and infertility 

 Women who binge on food could be making themselves infertile, according to Dr 
Morgan, a consultant psychiatrist at St George's Hospital, London, and the 
author of a study which found that polycystic ovary syndrome (a hormonal 
imbalance that can lead to infertility) may be triggered by binge eating. Dr 
Morgan interviewed 87 women who suffered from the syndrome. One-quarter had 
been binge eating and one-eighth suffered from bulimia, while eating disorders 
predated the development of the syndrome in most cases.

Many sufferers from binge eating who are overweight find that losing weight 
can lessen their POS symptoms, especially when they reduce their intake of 
concentrated-carbohydrate foods. If you are in the grip of binge eating or have 
weight problems, ask your doctor to refer you either to a dietician who 
specialises in compulsive eating disorders or a psychologist.

Your questions

 I am going through the menopause and have been alarmed to find that for the 
first time in my life I am suffering from acne-type spots. How can I get rid of 
them?

Acne <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> vulgaris is primarily a 
hormonal problem, which is why your skin has erupted now. Although you don't 
mention whether you're taking hormone-replacement therapy (HRT), it may be that 
a natural hormonal treatment, such as a yam extract or cream, can stabilise 
your hormonal levels and clear up your acne. Ask your doctor to refer you to a 
specialist in natural, plant-based HRT treatments.

Acne tends to strike my patients when they're feeling stressed or depressed, 
which is often when they reach for fatty and sugary foods. Although I don't 
agree with the common belief that acne is caused by eating too many of these 
foods, I would urge you to ensure that it's not at the expense of vitamin 
C-rich fresh fruits and vegetables, which assist the body to fight the 
infections that can take hold within blocked pores and repair wounded skin.

My acne-stricken patients often notice a significant improvement in their skin 
if they boost their intake of foods that are rich in vitamin A, beta carotene 
and zinc, such as oily fish, eggs, carrots, dark-green, leafy vegetables, 
leeks, courgettes, lettuce (especially Cos varieties), pumpkins, apricots, 
peaches, mangos, crumbly cheeses, chicken, nuts and wholegrains. Drinking 
plenty of water is vital, too, to hydrate the skin and flush away toxins, but 
above all, to enable the body to glean acne-busting vitamins and minerals from 
food. In addition, avoid dehydrating your body by eating too many salty foods 
and drinking too many caffeine-rich or alcoholic drinks.

Many dermatologists prescribe antibiotics for acne, but the trade-off may be 
such unpleasant side effects as thrush and an irritable bowel. My initial 
advice would be to improve your diet and reduce your stress levels for a few 
weeks to see if these measures can clear up your skin.

 Jane Clarke is a state-registered dietician. If you would like her to answer 
any questions or address any issues in this column, please write to Jane Clarke 
c/o Life magazine, The Observer, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER or email 
her atlife@observer.co.uk <mailto:life@observer.co.uk>. Please note that Jane 
Clarke cannot enter into any personal correspondence
 