
Johannes Hahn’s job title sounds a little incongruous these days: he’s the EU 
commissioner for European neighbourhood policy and enlargement negotiations. 
The job title was created in the late 1990s during a period of optimism and 
expansion. But now, thanks to the will of 52% of British voters, the EU looks 
set to contract rather than enlarge for the first time in its history.

There are still six candidate countries for EU membership, in the process of 
making formal applications to join the bloc, as well as a number of other 
countries with various levels of association. But with many in the EU wary and 
sceptical of further expansion, the only enlargement negotiations going on at 
the moment are about managing the expectations of countries that want to join.

With this shock a new, EU-friendly Britain is born | Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/29/brexit-birth-eu-friendly-britain>
Hahn was in Kiev last week, meeting Ukrainian government officials and 
chairing ministerial meetings of the EU’sEastern Partnership 
<http://eeas.europa.eu/eastern/index_en.htm>, a programme linking the EU with 
six former Soviet countries, which was launched as a response to theRussian war 
with Georgia in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/08/georgia.russia2> and was 
implicitly meant as the first step towards EU membership for the nations. 
“Don’t believe that the unfortunate decision ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 will have any influence on our relationship – quite the opposite,” he told a 
meeting of the group’s foreign ministers.

But in reality, the initial Eastern Partnership plans are in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/eu-eastern-partnership-highlight-failure-plan-check-russia>
 tatters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/eu-eastern-partnership-highlight-failure-plan-check-russia>
, as both enlargement fatigue inside the EU and a stick-carrot combination from
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has pushed a number of the 
countries away from wanting further integration with the EU. Two of them,Belarus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> and Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, have joined Russia’s Eurasian 
Economic Union <http://www.eaeunion.org/?lang=en>, an explicit challenge to the 
EU, while nobody seriously speaks aboutUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> or Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/georgia-news> as members any more.

In Ukraine, at least, there is strong pro-European fervour. The 2014 
revolution that oustedViktor Yanukovych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/viktor-yanukovych> began as a protest 
against the president’s refusal to sign a free-trade agreement with the EU 
envisaged by the Eastern Partnership. For weeks, thousands of protesters waved 
EU flags on theMaidan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/21/-sp-ukraine-maidan-protest-kiev>
, while visiting Eurocrats were given the kind of welcome normally reserved for 
rock stars; watching Catherine Ashton, the EU foreign policy chief, being 
greeted by an ecstatic throng of people chanting her name was a particularly 
surreal moment.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Feu-enlargement-fatigue-ukraine-membership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9139322395143b5b85386fc4f3d4b6961a47028%2F0_107_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once-expanding%20EU%20prepares%20to%20contract%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20its%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Feu-enlargement-fatigue-ukraine-membership%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once-expanding%20EU%20prepares%20to%20contract%20for%20the%20first%20time%20in%20its%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Feu-enlargement-fatigue-ukraine-membership%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9139322395143b5b85386fc4f3d4b6961a47028%2F0_107_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Members of the Dutch Socialist party (SP) campaign against the association 
treaty with Ukraine. Photograph: Bart Maat/EPA 
Now the free trade agreement has been signed, though at the cost of the 
annexation of Crimea and a war in the east of the country, with Russia showing 
it wasn’t bluffing when itsaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/22/ukraine-european-union-trade-russia>
 Ukraine heading towards Europe would be catastrophic. Abizarre referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/dutch-voters-reject-closer-eu-links-to-ukraine-in-referendum>
 in the Netherlands in April, triggered by a new law that offers a referendum 
if a petition receives more than 300,000 signatures, saw Dutch voters come out 
against the free trade agreement with Ukraine, albeit on a low turnout.

Ukraine’s intense pro-European feelings were as much a reaction against 
Russian influence and the corrupt system of Yanukovych as they were an active 
desire to join the EU. “Only 20% of Ukrainians have ever been abroad, so people 
were standing with European flags and they hadn’t even seenEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>,” said Svitlana Zalishchuk, one 
of the young reformist MPs elected to the post-Maidan parliament.


On a tour of Ukraine organised by an EU-funded journalism centre to coincide 
with Hahn’s visit, a dozen European journalists were shuttled through Kiev to 
meet bright-eyed young reformers in media, politics and law enforcement – the 
new class of Ukrainians who came out of the Maidan revolution and burn with 
“Euro-optimism”, even if they are up against the entrenchedoligarchic interests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/ukraine-oligarchs-maidan-revolution>
 of the Ukrainian system and, at least in part, its billionaire president, 
Petro Poroshenko.

The message was that however many setbacks there may have been, close 
engagement betweenUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> and the 
EU was still vital. Despite soporific press conferences laced with talk of 
benchmarks, provisional agreements, regulatory frameworks and the guaranteeing 
of fundamentals, Ukrainian reformers say pressure from Brussels really has been 
a key driver of the reform process. 
 Johannes Hahn Photograph: Laurent Dubrule/EPA 
Many key Ukrainian reforms have been implemented with “significant help and/or 
pressure” from the EU, said Mykhailo Zhernakov, who is working on revamping the 
judicial system. Hahn said Ukraine had fulfilled 140 benchmark reforms in order 
to qualify for visa-free travel for its citizens, and Zhernakov said the 
prospect of a visa-free regime was the only reason many of the reforms had been 
pushed through.

Ukraine should be given the deal by the Schengen countries later this year, 
although given current public opinion in many EU countries there is pressure to 
delay the decision. Britain was already separate from the agreement and had no 
plans to give Ukraine a visa-free regime even before the Brexit vote.


This month a summit of western Balkan nations in Paris resulted in a vague 
commitment that nations such asMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> and Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> still had an eventual route to 
membership. But even Hahn admitted that the situation had changed over the past 
few years.

“We have to acknowledge that today there is an enlargement fatigue among our 
citizens, there are currently no member states where this is a majority for a 
new member, because many people believe that a new member will be a financial 
burden,” Hahn said. “All the current candidate countries are fully aware that 
they won’t become members in this decade, and also here we have learned our 
lessons. But Brexit doesn’t have an influence on our neighbourhood policy.”

In Kiev, there is also a sober assessment of the medium-term chances of 
membership of the EU. Poroshenko has said he would like to be ready to make a 
serious bid by 2020; others feel this is unlikely.

“I think sometimes in Ukraine we’re stronger about European values than in 
some European countries,” said Olena Sotnyk, an MP with the liberal Samopomich 
party. “The main goal or idea is not to become a member of the EU in five, 10 
or 20 years. Our idea is to build Europe in Ukraine, and then we will decide if 
we need the EU or not.”
 