
One in four Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> voters are 
less likely to vote for the party following the referendum campaign, a leaked 
internal survey shows.

A poll conducted by YouGov for the party shows that 27% of the party’s 
supporters at the last general election said they were less likely to support 
the party following the referendum campaign.

Cameron: decision on Brexit timing will be 'for Britain alone​​ to take'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/cameron-decision-on-brexit-timing-will-be-for-britain-alone-to-take>
Eleven per cent of voters said they were more likely to support the party 
since the campaign ended on Thursday.


The figures will be seized upon by critics of Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/jeremy-corbyn-loses-labour-mps-confidence-vote>
 who have claimed that Labour is losing its core voters under his leadership. 
MPs calling for Corbyn to stand down have said that he is partly to blame for 
the failed remain campaign.

At a fraught Parliamentary Labour party meeting on Monday, the head of 
Labour’s remain campaign,Alan Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanjohnson>, told Corbyn that he had to 
take some responsibility, saying his team did not even turn up for the 
scheduled weekly meetings during the campaign.


The YouGov survey interviewed 2013 British adults on 26 and 27 June. It asked: 
“Thinking particularly about the Labour party and the Labour campaign in the 
referendum, would you say that this made you more or less likely to vote Labour 
or has it made no difference?”

It found that 6% of those who voted Labour in 2015 said it was much more 
likely they would vote Labour; 5% said a little more likely to vote Labour, 
making a total of 11%.


The Guardian view on Jeremy Corbyn: after the experiment | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/the-guardian-view-on-jeremy-corbyn-after-the-experiment>
Fifteen per cent of Labour’s voters said they were a little less likely to 
vote Labour since the referendum campaign; 12% said it made them a lot less 
likely to vote Labour, making a total of 27%.


But the survey also appears to confirm previous claims by Corbyn and his 
supporters that 65% of Labour supporters voted to remain. It finds that only 
24% voted to leave while 9% did not vote.


A spokesman for Corbyn said the party does not comment on internal surveys.
 