
As much as Abbey Road is a household name, it still tends to be defined by 
that morning in August 1969 when, bearded, bare-footed, white-suited and 
nearing the end of their Fabness, the Beatles popped out for a casual stroll 
across the zebra crossing outside the studio.

The vast majority of the tens of thousands of people who make the pilgrimage 
to Abbey Road every year come because of the Beatles, but in the interests of 
proportional representation, there should be a few other sets of fans blocking 
the traffic. A heavy contingent of Pink Floyd devotees, for example. Not to 
mention representatives of everyone from Radiohead to Noel Coward and Duran 
Duran to Max Bygraves. But, beyond music lovers, the pavements of NW8 should 
also be thronging with fans of James Bond, Star Wars, The Lord of the Rings, 
Harry Potter and Indiana Jones, because the soundtracks of all of these films 
were also recorded at Abbey Road.

London likes to call itself the world's capital of film scoring, and with a 
studio space large enough to accommodate a 100-piece orchestra and a 120-person 
choir, and the technology to back it up, Abbey Road is one of the industry's 
nerve centres. Since its Screen Sound unit opened in 1980, some 150 scores have 
been recorded there, not just big event movies but also titles such as The Last 
Emperor, A Room with a View, Braveheart and The Talented Mr Ripley.

So Abbey Road is as much a movie lover's shrine as a music lover's. But before 
a turf war breaks out, here's news that should make both sides happy, and fans 
of Beatles movies ecstatic: this month for the first time the general public 
will be invited inside the studios themselves. Not only that, they'll be able 
to sit in the gigantic Studio 1 and watch some of the films that have been 
scored there. There will also be a photography exhibition in Studio 2, where 
the Beatles recorded.

It's easy to take film music for granted. When it really works, it is simply 
there - an invisible, integral component of the experience. But Abbey Road's 
retrospective is a much-welcomed chance to learn more about the work that goes 
on behind (usually) closed doors to make a film sound and feel as good as it 
looks.

There are many ways to add music to a film. In the first days of cinema, all 
you needed was an agile pianist with decent eyesight, and early films simply 
pasted together snatches of existing tunes. Max Steiner's symphonic score to 
King Kong set a higher standard, and especially composed orchestral soundtracks 
became the prevailing fashion for Hollywood after the film's release in 1933. 
Opera was the template (MGM boss Sam Goldwyn advised composers to "write music 
like Wagner, only louder"), but composers such as Edmund Meisel (who scored 
Battleship Potemkin), Bernard Herrmann, Elmer Bernstein and, more recently, 
Philip Glass and Michael Nyman steadily introduced modern and avant garde 
elements into the mix.

In the mid-1960s, though, there emerged the easier alternative of assembling a 
soundtrack from pre-recorded music, either existing or tailor-made. Cheaper to 
produce and occasionally more appropriate to the film, pop soundtracks also 
offer better prospects of a big-selling album spin-off, along the lines of 
Saturday Night Fever or Pulp Fiction.

In terms of cinema rather than album sales, the best results seem to come 
about when the director and the composer each adjust their work to fit the 
other's. Eisenstein cut some scenes of his 1938 epic Alexander Nevsky to fit 
Prokofiev's pre-recorded score. Similarly, Alfred Hitchcock only added music to 
the shower scene in Psycho after Bernard Herrmann persuaded Hitch he had just 
the thing for it. A modern equivalent would be a project such as The Lord of 
the Rings, which combined "songs" with an orchestral score by Howard Shore. As 
the final images were locked off, minutes at a time, the music was precisely 
fitted to them day by day, sometimes by adjusting the composition, at other 
times by manipulating it in the studio. At times Shore, director Peter Jackson, 
the musicians and the sound team were in different parts of the world, 
communicating with the control centre at Abbey Road by video phone.

This month get the chance to get a little closer to this process. Not to 
mention the chance to see a collection of great films in the room where Elgar 
once conducted Land of Hope and Glory, where Glen Miller laid down his final 
tracks, where the Beatles broadcast All You Need Is Love to the world, and 
where countless other moments of history were created.

Â· The Abbey Road film festival starts next Saturday March 19. There's more 
information on page 6 of this supplement or visitabbeyroad.com 
<http://www.abbeyroad.com> for full film listings and to book tickets
 