
John Nagel has an intimate understanding of the risks of winter hiking. It was 
a clear, windless day in February 2015 when he stepped onto an unseen patch of 
hard ice while snowshoeing with a friend near Juneau,Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska>. A cleat on his snowshoe slipped, 
and in an instant he was careening toward a band of rocks below.

As he attempted to steer away, his body launched into the air. He remembers 
the profiles of familiar mountains spinning in the flat light. “So this is how 
it ends,” he thought, and closed his eyes.

“You slip one time, and sometimes that’s all you get,” said Chris Brookhart, 
assistant fire chief with the Mount Baldy fire department in southernCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

Brookhart works with several agencies to coordinate search and rescue efforts 
in theAngeles mountains <http://www.fs.usda.gov/angeles>, a rugged wilderness 
that is only 30 miles from the second-largest metropolitan area in the US. The 
range remained relatively dry during the past five years of drought, but recent 
weather tilted toward other extremes: heavy snowfall, rain, and a sharp drop in 
temperatures that solidified the wet snow into shiny “bulletproof” ice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716cbd3862447db4a0156b188172f125aa38b83f%2F0_8_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20slip%20is%20all%20you%20get%3A%20winter%20hiking%20is%20more%20popular%20than%20ever%20despite%20dangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20slip%20is%20all%20you%20get%3A%20winter%20hiking%20is%20more%20popular%20than%20ever%20despite%20dangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716cbd3862447db4a0156b188172f125aa38b83f%2F0_8_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 John Nagel hiking in the mountains above Juneau, Alaska, in December 2015. 
Photograph: Robert Gabriel Melanson/Supplied 
Hiker numbers have increased as well. Brookhart has observed full parking lots 
on winter weekdays. Hiking clubs arrive in buses packed with 50 people. Most 
live among the palm trees in the valley, and many aren’t prepared for ice so 
hard that even crampons can’t pierce the surface. It’s like walking on a 
mirror. A fall would be almost impossible to stop, even with an ice axe.

“Winter conditions with this kind of ice – it doesn’t give you a second 
chance,” Brookhart said.

In the last week, two people died on Mount Baldy 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-mt-baldy-closures-20160208-story.html>
, a popular 10,000-foot summit. Daniel Nguyen, 23, fell more than 1,500 feet on 
2 February after losing his footing on a notoriously steep ridge called Devil’s 
Backbone. On 6 February, Dong Xing Liu, 47, died after he slipped while hiking 
with his wife, who was badly injured.

At the time, the San Bernardino county sheriff’s department was conducting an 
aerial rescue of five people stranded on an icy trail. Twelve hikers and two 
dogs were air-lifted off the mountain that day. By 8 February, Angeles national 
forest had closed five trails due to “severe risk of injury”.

Winter conditions with this kind of ice – it doesn’t give you a second chance
Chris Brookhart 
In January alone, 21 people died in avalanches in North America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/27/us-second-worst-january-avalanche-deaths>
. Snow-covered slopes are riddled with hazards and cold temperatures are a 
relentless menace. Relatively small mistakes can lead to hypothermia, which 
quickly becomes deadly. Why risk all this? For avid winter hikers, the 
combination of extreme temperature and difficult terrain means its the ultimate 
sport challenge.


Kevin Breitenbach, a cyclist in Fairbanks, Alaska, regularly ventures out for 
rides through the boreal forest in temperatures down to 50 below zero. Frigid 
weather presents challenges, he said, but once he figured out how to stay 
comfortable, he felt safer during a season when the dry, cold air prevents 
sweat from chilling his skin, bugs and predators are mostly hibernating, open 
water is frozen, and snow helps cushion falls.

“We’re consumed with the idea of, comfort, safety and ease,” Breitenbach said. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c92769f41bbfafa31da78b2f3546e5142da644%2F0_362_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20slip%20is%20all%20you%20get%3A%20winter%20hiking%20is%20more%20popular%20than%20ever%20despite%20dangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20slip%20is%20all%20you%20get%3A%20winter%20hiking%20is%20more%20popular%20than%20ever%20despite%20dangers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fwinter-hiking-snow-avalanche-deaths-california-alaska%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c92769f41bbfafa31da78b2f3546e5142da644%2F0_362_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Kevin Breitenbach takes his bike out in Fairbanks, Alaska. Photograph: De 
Bruyn Joubert 
“Traveling self-supported in winter conditions changes your idea of what is 
comfortable, what is easy, and what is safe. Am I safer alone on a winter trail 
in the middle of the night with just myself to depend on, or am I safer on the 
highway surrounded by folks texting and driving 60mph? Inexplicably to me, most 
people would take the latter.”

Joe Grant, a professional runner in Gold Hill, Colorado, adapted his training 
to volatile winters in the Rocky mountains. He too has honed his gear and 
skills to feel at ease on steep, snow-covered slopes, but said he also learned 
hard lessons from too-late starts and bad snow conditions.

“The primary reason I run is to explore wild places under my own power,” Grant 
said. “Winters can be quite harsh, hence a need to adapt my perspective and 
skill set.”

Grant advised novices to use proper gear, understand risks and honestly assess 
abilities. Most mistakes happen when people venture too far beyond their limits 
– becoming tired, weak, and unsure where to place that next step.

Traveling self-supported in winter conditions changes your idea of what is 
comfortable, what is easy and what is safe
Kevin Breitenbach 
Brookhart has witnessed hikers going around tape on closed trails. Although 
exact numbers aren’t available, Brookhart said rescues have increased sharply 
over the past few years. It will only become more difficult to bail out people 
who make poor decisions. Mobile phones mean it’s easy for people to call for 
help, Brookhart said, but that only solves part of the problem.

“Our resources are stretched so thin,” Brookhart. “Now, people can just text 
911 on their phones. In the mountains that’s useful, but I think it also 
affects their decision-making.”

As for John Nagel, he doesn’t remember landing after his body went airborne, 
only the sensation of snow hitting his face as he slowed to a stop.

A sharp pain radiated from his shoulder and he slipped once more while trying 
to stand. He’d fallen several hundred feet, and staggered for several minutes 
before his friend, Geoff Roes, located him and helped him change out of 
snowshoes and into microspikes. Nagel managed to walk out, but an x-ray later 
revealed he’d broken three ribs under his left scapula.

Seven months later, Nagel had recovered from his injuries but still felt 
tinges of fear as he went for a solo run on the ridge.Snow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/snow> had given way the brightly colored 
tundra of autumn. The noise of Nagel’s footsteps flushed a wolf from the 
alders. He heard howling, and turned to see another wolf, flanking him in 
almost the same place where he slipped in February.

For Nagel, standing between two wolves was a sign he needed to retreat once 
more. It was also a life-affirming experience. Although he recognizes the 
risks, he believes his happiness is inextricably connected to Juneau’s 
backcountry.

“It’s a wild, beautiful and joyful place to be,” Nagel said. “Being absolutely 
present in such an inhospitable environment makes for such a profound and 
pleasurable experience. But I am the one attaching those descriptions. The land 
is indifferent at best in the winter or summer.”
 