
Leading female lawmakers and women’s groups are turning up the pressure on New 
York governorAndrew Cuomo <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo> to 
help pass a paid family leave law in the state.

A group including state senators, assemblywomen, and more than a dozen local 
and national women’s organizations, senta letter 
<http://timetocareny.org/more-than-fifty-women-lawmakers-leaders-and-organizations-respond-to-governor-cuomo-with-letter-urging-action-on-paid-family-leave/318>
 to the governor last Thursday, urging him to show support for paid leave. The 
letter was a response to recent remarks by Cuomo alleging that Albanylacks the 
“appetite” 
<http://www.capitalnewyork.com/article/albany/2015/02/8562915/cuomo-albany-lacks-appetite-paid-family-leave>
 to debate such a policy. “We respectfully disagree,” Thursday’s letter read.

A second letter 
<http://familyvaluesatwork.org/media-center/dear-governor-cuomo-women-leaders-are-hungry-for-paid-leave>
, bearing a dozen more signatures and a similar message, was delivered on 
Monday.
Maternity leave promo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/maternity-promo1/Index.html> 
America’s lack of paid family leave stands in stark contrast to most of the 
rest of the world. As the Guardian reported last year, the US is the only 
developed country thatdoesn’t guarantee paid maternity or parental leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/03/-sp-america-only-developed-country-paid-maternity-leave>
 to its citizens. Every other OECD nation, including Mexico, offers at least 12 
weeks of available paid leave for new and expectant mothers. Australia offers 
18 weeks of paid time off, the UK offers 39 weeks, and other nations offer even 
more generous benefits.

Because a national policy is lacking, several states have taken action on 
their own.

During the 50s and 60s, six states – including New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> – and Puerto Rico established 
disability benefits through which expectant and new mothers could also access 
paid maternity leave.

But only three states – California, New Jersey and Rhode Island – have since 
passed and implemented full-scale family leave policies.


These policies include up to six weeks’ paid leave for fathers, as well as 
adopted and foster parents, and give more time off for mothers.

The laws also guarantee paid time off for workers who need to care for ailing 
family members, among other provisions. (Washington state passed a paid family 
leave law in 2007, but never implemented it due to lack of a funding mechanism.)

This year, two competing proposals for paid family leave have been introduced 
by Democrats and Republicans in the New York legislature –one 
<http://assembly.state.ny.us/leg/?default_fld=&bn=A03870&term=2015&Summary=Y&Memo=Y&Text=Y>
 in the assembly and theother 
<http://www.nysenate.gov/press-release/state-senate-co-leader-jeff-klein-and-independent-democratic-conference-unveil-new-bud>
 in the senate. A similar bill passed the assembly last year, but supporters 
are making a more concerted push this time around.

Supporters hope to capitalize on momentum from Barack Obama’s recent push 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/14/obama-give-federal-employees-six-weeks-maternity-leave>
 for paid leave. “There’s a lot of political momentum right now,” said Sherry 
Leiwant, co-founder and co-president of A Better Balance, a signee on last 
week’s letter to Cuomo.

Below, we compare the main points in the two competing New York state bills to 
current programs in three other states.

compare paid family leave bills 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/2015-03-ny-paid-leave/> 
The Republican-backed paid family leave bill passed the state senate last 
week. The Democrats’ bill will likely pass in the assembly again,according to 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/16/nyregion/advocates-press-cuomo-to-support-paid-family-leave-legislation.html?_r=0>
. But reconciling the two plans and overcoming opposition from business 
interests in the state are two major hurdles on the way to enacting paid family 
leave in the state.

If Cuomo and lawmakers in Albany are able to muster up the “appetite” to push 
a law through to the end, New York will be the fourth US state to implement 
paid family leave – and many families will almost certainly breathe a sigh of 
relief.


 