
Microsoft has been winning generally approving headlines for its Microsoft 
Band fitness tracker and accompanying Microsoft Health platform, since both 
were revealed –seemingly unintentionally at first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/30/microsoft-fitness-band-health-software>
 – on Wednesday.

One of the key points about both hardware and software is their cross-platform 
nature: they won’t just be restricted to people with a Windows Phone smartphone 
and/or a computer running the Windows OS. They’ll also supportAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, iOS and Mac.

Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> Health is also 
open to other devices and apps, with Jawbone’s Up and the apps MapMyFitness, 
MyFitnessPal and RunKeeper the first to be announced.

“We plan to have a regular cadence of Microsoft Health announcements including 
additional device and service partnerships, SDK availability and additional 
cross-platform applications and services,”blogged Microsoft’s Todd Holmdahl 
<http://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2014/10/29/introducing-microsoft-health/>.

Integrating other fitness apps isn’t unusual: it’s an approach also being 
taken by Apple’s Health app and HealthKit API, as well as Google Fit, whichalso 
launched this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/29/google-launches-fit-app-apple-heath-samsungs-s-health>
. Meanwhile, hardware makers including Fitbit, Withings and Jawbone have built 
a network of data-sharing deals to work with apps beyond their own.

Even so, Microsoft Health’s commitment to cross-platform is notable, if 
perhaps essential given the relatively small market share of Windows Phone. Do 
you think it gives the company’s new venture a healthy chance of attracting 
people? The comments section is open for your views.

Some other food for tech thought and discussion this morning:

 * Former Android boss Andy Rubin is leaving Google, but his plans sound 
pretty interesting:according to the Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/article_email/former-android-leader-andy-rubin-leaving-google-1414713040-lMyQjAxMTE0NTMxMDQzOTA4Wj>
 he’ll be “starting an incubator for startups interested in building technology 
hardware products”. It stresses that Rubin’s departure doesn’t mean Google is 
cooling on the robotics space. Probably a good thing, givenall those 
acquisitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/04/google-robots-andy-rubin-amazon>
...

 * Talking of robots, here’s a new study from scientists at Oregon State 
University, the Royal Veterinary College and others suggesting thatroboticists 
can learn a lot from running birds 
<http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2014-10/osu-rro102314.php>. “We should 
ultimately be able to encode this understanding into legged robots so the 
robots can run with more speed and agility in rugged terrain.”

 * More birds: Warblr is an intriguing Kickstarter crowdfunding campaign 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1190241008/warblr-an-app-that-recognises-birds-from-their-son?ref=nav_search>
 for “an audio recognition app for birdsong”. Basically it’s Shazam for your 
garden: trained on recordings of more than 80 British species, it enables you 
to record a bird’s song and then identify it.

 * Music industry blog China Music Business has a good interview about 
intellectual property rights in China 
<http://www.chinamusicbusiness.com/article/ramble-on-intellectual-property-rights-and-the-chinese-music-industry-interviewdongdong-special/>
. “As China inevitably moves from a manufacturing economy to an innovation 
economy – meaning that companies need to innovate to stay ahead of competitors 
– you will see domestic companies that once infringed IP start to use the laws 
toprotect their IP...”

 * Finally, CNN has been talking to Humanetics 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/10/23/tech/innovation/obese-crash-test-dummies-mci/>
, which makes crash test dummies, about its work on a new obese model. “Obese 
people are 78% more likely to die in a crash. The reason is the way we get fat. 
We get fat in our middle range. And we get out of position in a typical seat.” 
The company is also working on a model that can reflect age as well as size. 
What do you think of these stories, and what else have you seen today that you 
think fellow Guardian Tech readers would enjoy chatting about? The discussion 
is open.
 