
Guardian News & Media have worked with VisitEngland 
<http://www.visitengland.com/> over the last two years to produce a 
multi-platform campaign that offers our audience inspiration for taking a break 
in England. The content has reflected their Enjoy Every Minute, Enjoy England 
brand with ideas ranging from ten minute treats to a full week away.

During year one we created seven print supplements, held seven exclusive 
reader events with GNM journalists, created a mobile site for users to upload 
their own tips and engaged over 80,000 people with our bespoke online site. Our 
challenge for 2010 was to maximise all of this existing collateral but also 
move the project forward in terms of interaction and engagement.

Utilising our Open Platform technology we have created an interactive map 
<https://www.theguardian.com/enjoy-england> to live at the heart of the 
campaign. The Open Platform API feeds all of the previous content (and new 
content as it is produced) into Google mapping technology where it is geotagged 
to location and categorised by timeframe (ten minutes, an hour, a day etc). 
Guardian content is clearly shown on the map with a blue 'G' flag and will be 
updated regularly throughout the next twelve months. In addition to this, users 
are able to become part of the project by uploading their own tips for Enjoying 
Every Minute to the map, which appear in real time and are shown with a red 
person flag to differentiate them from Guardian content.

The map has also been embedded into Enjoy England's website 
<http://www.enjoyengland.com/> where the Open Platform has allowed us to 
automatically upload Guardian content so that it immediately appears on the 
Enjoy England map. Each user tip, regardless of whether it is generated on the 
Guardian map or Enjoy England's version will immediately appear on both sites 
too.

In this map <https://www.theguardian.com/enjoy-england>, we have created an 
interactive, technologically advanced piece of creative which can live not only 
in the world of the Guardian, but on Enjoy England's website and beyond - a 
true representation of the Guardian's commitment to openness, enabled by our 
Open Platform.

For the full content produced to date, the map and lots of fantastic ideas, 
please visittheguardian.com/enjoy-england 
<https://www.theguardian.com/enjoy-england>
 