
While American author George Saunders was being awarded the inaugural Folio 
prize earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/10/george-saunders-tenth-of-december-first-winner-folio-prize>
, British author AS Byattbemoaned the lack of exciting UK authors being 
published today 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/wheres-uk-book-talent-asks-a-s-byatt-as-american-george-saunders-wins-40000-folio-prize-9183785.html>
.

The Folio prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/folio-prize>, launched to 
celebrate authors who take risks in their writing, only had one UK author on 
its shortlist – Jane Gardam – while five of the shortlisted eight were from the 
US.

AS Byatt <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> said that the US books up 
for the Folio prize were "inventive and beautifully written", but "I don't 
think there's one that is the slightest bit interested in Britain or Europe or 
Africa or Asia."

Byatt, who began writing alongside UK authors Doris Lessing, Iris Murdoch, 
Anthony Burgess and William Golding, continued: "I don't have the feeling of 
that kind of energy any more."

She asked to know why UK publishers had not found anything as exciting as the 
US Folio entries, warning that the recent trend of latching on to sucessful 
self-published titles was "dumbing down" the industry: "This might be very good 
for making money but not for British literature."

Meanwhile, there are only four British writers on the 20-strong Baileys 
women's prize longlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/four-british-writers-baileys-prize-longlist>
 – and with the Man Booker open to US authors for the first time this year, 
there are fears of an American takeover there too.

So what do you think? Do you agree with AS Byatt that there is a lack of 
impressive UK authors currently writing? Or are you reassured byGeorge 
Saunders' response 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/wheres-uk-book-talent-asks-a-s-byatt-as-american-george-saunders-wins-40000-folio-prize-9183785.html>
 that Britain need not worry after producing authors such as Zadie Smith, 
Martin Amis and Charles Dickens? Do you think UK publishers are too adverse to 
taking risks and that self-publishing is "dumbing down" what we read?
 