
Charles Wuorinen's opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/20/brokeback-mountain-the-opera-opens-madrid>
 on Annie Proulx's Brokeback Mountain is anything but an adaptation ofthe movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KVK6yLqY54w>. For a start, the opera features 
Proulx's own libretto, whereas the author did not write the screenplay for the 
Oscar-winning movie. As Proulx told me for this week'sMusic Matters 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3/musicmatters>, creating her own opera libretto 
from her 1997 story was about compressing the already heightened, concise world 
of the short story still further into the distilled essentials that the 
characters will sing on stage at the world premiere at theTeatro Real 
<http://www.teatro-real.com/es> in Madrid tonight. Wuorinen says that he wanted 
to do something that the film didn't: instead of the beautifying effects of the
cinematography 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-wP_sVEIGy0Y/URgec8znsVI/AAAAAAAAWhw/7rMO8M_N3O4/s1600/Brokeback%2BMountain%2Bposter.jpg>
 on the mountainous landscape of the North American West, the opera returns to 
the sense of threat, of danger, of hard-fought existence that the Wyoming 
mountains are really about, something that's there in the story but less 
apparent in Ang Lee's film. You can hear that even in the brief excerpts from 
the opera that underscore this interview 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoZekAKhF84>: the mountain looms in that 
ominous orchestral chord, which becomes a kind of leitmotif for the multiple 
threats to Jack and Ennis' love as the opera develops.

But if the opera isn't an adaptation of the film, the amount of coverage and 
interest Wuorinen's Brokeback Mountain has received is largely thanks to the 
movie's success, as well as, of course, the resonances of the drama, at once a 
great and tragic romance, and a story that contributes to debates about 
sexuality and society that will always be relevant. And just as it's become 
common for Broadway and the West Endto turn to the cinema 
<http://www.hairspraythetour.com> for stories to shape into shows and musicals, 
the opera world has been doing the same thing in recent years. The Canadian 
bass-baritoneDaniel Okulitch <http://www.danielokulitch.com>, who creates the 
role of Ennis tonight in Madrid, was also a lead in Howard Shore's opera with 
David Cronenberg onThe Fly <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kiOVFc_FW4w> - an 
opera based on the movie - and Okulitch also starred in Jake Heggie's operaDead 
Man Walking <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Djc_mvGWpeI>, telling the story of 
Sister Helen Prejean's book, which was most famous thanks to Tim Robbins's 
film. Gerald Barry'sThe Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/sep/09/classicalmusicandopera> at ENO 
is another film-inspired opera, albeit based on a play and a movie with less of 
a hold on the public's imagination. There are plenty of other examples of 
opera's with filmic connections and inspirations too: Andr√© Previn'sBrief 
Encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/12/andre-previn-brief-encounter-classical>
, Olga Neuwirth's Lost Highway <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEohnostKao>, 
Tobias Picker'sDolores Claiborne 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2013/sep/27/entertainment/la-et-cm-dolores-claiborne-review-20130927>
.
 Today's myths are made in the movies... Jake Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger in 
Ang Lee's 2005 movie. 
As Okulitch told me, it makes sense that composers should look to the cinema 
for inspiration. Operas have always called on the stories we have in common: 
that once meant myths, fairy-stories, or plays from earlier centuries, but 
today's myths are made in the movies. There's solid commercial sense in looking 
to the stock of film stories for new operas or musicals - audiences want to 
feel they have some connection with what they're seeing. But once they're 
sitting in the opera house, the composer and creative team can take the 
audience to different places than any film could. Wuorinen's Brokeback Mountain 
ought to do exactly that, and anyone who expects to see or hear the film on 
stage will, hopefully, be positively shocked, as the uncompromising rigour and 
robustness of Wuorinen's musical language takes the story of Jack and Ennis 
into the universalising world of the opera stage. A few hours away from the 
premiere, that'sWuorinen's  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoZekAKhF84>and 
Proulx's hope, at least!

Andrew Clements's review of the new opera will be published tomorrow.
 