


Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> companies need to get out of 
their “ghetto” where they are protected by concepts of excellence and artistic 
integrity and find new audiences on their own ground, the director Graham Vick 
has told a gathering of the movers and shakers of Britain’s classical music 
world.

Attracting younger, more diverse audiences to become the classical music 
devotees of tomorrow occupies the mind of all companies. The question is: how 
to do it?

Vick, the founder and artistic director of Birmingham Opera Company 
<https://www.birminghamopera.org.uk/latest-news>, suggested there were better 
ways and, controversially, described conventional education and outreach work 
as a “barrier” to reaching new audiences.


It should be the work itself which finds, develops and educates an audience, 
he said in hiskeynote speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/10/graham-vick-opera-rps-awards-keynote-speech>
 at theRoyal Philharmonic Society awards 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/awards>. 

“You do not need to be educated to be touched, to be moved and excited by 
opera. You only need to experience it directly at first hand with nothing 
getting in the way.

“It is those of us who make the work whose responsibility it is to remove the 
barriers and make the connections that will release its power for everybody.”

Vick is an internationally recognised opera figure who has been director of 
productions at both Scottish Opera and Glyndebourne. He founded what is now 
Birmingham Opera Company in 1987, annually staging startling, imaginative 
productions in unusual places – whether abandoned factories or old warehouses.

He challenged his audience “to step up and take responsibility for the 
wellbeing of our society rather than just talking”.

“Maybe that way artists will help bind together our fractured society … But 
only if we get up off our arses, get out of our ghetto where we’re protected by 
our excellence, our artistic integrity, our outreach and education departments, 
our annual reports and go out to find the new world, embrace the future and 
help build a world we want to live in – not hide away fiddling while Rome 
burns.”

It was a spiky, passionate call to arms in which Vick also criticised the 
changing art funding model whereby arts organisations are having to raise a 
greater proportion of their funds privately as public funding falls.

“I see 40 years of work towards the democratisation of art being swiftly 
reversed by its privatisation,” he said.


“I keep hearing ‘mixed economy’, but make no mistake. We are hurtling towards 
the American model, where the wealthy pay even less tax in return for a 
stranglehold on cultural institutions – a phenomenon we see across our society 
and one that risks driving division ever wider.

“I can’t be the only one who feels a sense of collusion – of appeasement? 
Isn’t everything built on such foundations bound to corrode?”

All publicly funded arts organisations in England are now required to show 
better progress in making audiences, programmes and their workforce more 
diverse.

Publishing strategies was a key part of the government’s white paper and Arts 
Council England at the end of 2014warned that it would cut money if it believed 
not enough was being done. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/08/arts-council-england-make-progress-diversity-funding-axed-bazalgette>

The debate was sharpened last year by a report from the Warwick commission 
which showed thatthe wealthiest, best educated and least ethnically diverse 8% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
 of society make up nearly half of live music audiences and a third of 
theatregoers and gallery visitors.

Vick is in demand as a director at some of the world’s grandest opera 
companies but always returns to Birmingham for, he said, “the glorious 
participation of audience and performers – of people from every aspect of the 
city, every age, every ethnicity, every social background.

“Only there can I be completely myself, only there do I find myself, only 
there is my loneliness always consoled.”

Vick gave examples of Birmingham Opera Company’s work which brought people 
together for shared experiences. Last year’s projectbased around Michael 
Tippett’s The Ice Break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/05/the-ice-break-review>, in an 
empty inner-city warehouse, “touched the lives of over 10,000 participants in 
all 10 districts of the city, 99% of them new to Birmingham Opera Company, 75% 
under 35.”

Vick was awarded honorary membership of the RPS at the awards ceremony – 
considered the Oscars of British classical music – in the City of London on 
Tuesday night.


One of the most eye-catching winners and one which chimes in with the 
sentiments expressed by Vick is an organisation based in Peckham’s multi-storey 
car park.

Multi-Story won the audiences and engagement award “for its ingenuity and 
simplicity; for its impact in the local community; and as a model that can be 
replicated to create new audiences for classical music around the UK.”

The ensemble specifically sets out to attract new and younger audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jun/20/peckham-car-park-multi-story-orchestra-sibelius>
 and has been resident orchestra in the Bold Tendencies car park since2011 when 
it performed Stravinsky’s 1913 The Rite of Spring <https://vimeo.com/44765167>.

In other awards it was a good night for pianists, with the 25-year-old Russian 
virtuoso Daniil Trifonov winning the instrumentalist prize for his “technical 
brilliance, deep musicality and fearless sense of adventure”, and Clare Hammond 
– who also made her film debut as a young Maggie Smith in The Lady in the Van – 
winning the gong for young artists.

Youth was further celebrated when the National Youth Orchestra of Great 
Britain won the ensemble award from a shortlist that also included the Royal 
Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, the Fidelio Trio and the Chineke! Orchestra.

The youth orchestra had been, judges said, “a beacon of excellence for 
decades”.

“But last year it broke new ground with its campaigns to inspire and directly 
engage hundreds more teenagers with the orchestra. At a time when music has 
such a precarious place in the schools’ curriculum the outstanding work of 
Britain’s world-class youth orchestra is needed more than ever.”

Other winners included the BBC Symphony Orchestra’s chief conductor, Sakari 
Oramo; Glyndebourne forBarrie Kosky’s staging of Handel’s Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/24/saul-review-glyndebourne-opera-lewes-sussex-barrie-kosky>
; the baritone Roderick Williams; theCarducci String Quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/10/carducci-quartet-shostakovich-15-review>
; the Kings Place concert venue in London; London’s Tri-borough Music Hub in 
the learning and participation category; composers Julian Anderson and Luca 
Francesconi; and Michael Church, editor of The Other Classical Musics.

The RPS chairman, John Gilhooly, also spoke of the importance of widening the 
reach of classical music, of “shouting so loudly” it could not be ignored.

He said: “At the heart of all great music is the idea of looking outwards, of 
trying to make sense of the world around us, and articulating our thoughts and 
lives. And in the 21st century, this should be all lives.”

• A programme featuring highlights, music and interviews from the awards will 
be broadcast on BBC Radio 3 at 7.30pm on Wednesday 11 May.
 