
Oscars 2016: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-2016-full-list-of-nominations-awards-movies>
This year’s Oscar nomination list confirms the massive frontrunner status of 
Alejandro González Iñárritu’s The Revenant, which has won 12 entries including 
best film, best director and best actor forLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>. This movie – a brutal 
survival story – is an electrifying experience on the big screen, thrillingly 
cinematic; for me a film like this has to be savoured in the cinema, and not at 
home on your tablet or smartphone.

There are other things to cheer about in this Academy Award list. Charlotte 
Rampling has a much deserved nomination for her performance in Andrew Haigh’s 
45 Years, although sadly there is nothing for Tom Courtenay. It is certainly a 
good best actress list, with further nominations for Jennifer Lawrence for Joy, 
Cate Blanchett for Carol, Brie Larson for Room – and Saoirse Ronan for 
Brooklyn, which is the performance which I think should win. It is also great 
to see nominations for best documentary go to Asif Kapadia’s Amy and Josh 
Oppenheimer’s The Look of Silence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcarol-the-revenant-and-mad-max-to-compete-for-best-picture-oscar-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20gets%2012%20Oscar%20nominations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcarol-the-revenant-and-mad-max-to-compete-for-best-picture-oscar-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20gets%2012%20Oscar%20nominations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcarol-the-revenant-and-mad-max-to-compete-for-best-picture-oscar-video&media=>
 The Revenant gets 12 Oscar nominations – video 
As for snubs, that perennial subject, the academy has once again found itself 
in hot water for a lack of diversity. Despite a supporting nod for Stallone, 
there is no nomination for Ryan Coogler or Michael B Jordan as director or 
actor for their amiable Rocky 2.0 boxing picture, Creed, or Idris Elba for his 
great performance in Beasts of No Nation, or Samuel L Jackson in The Hateful 
Eight. It isn’t PC to groan at this.

Oscar nominations and Alan Rickman – the Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-and-alan-rickman-the-dailies-film-podcast>
Elsewhere, I think Alicia Vikander would have been a good best actress 
nomination for her performances in Ex Machina or The Danish Girl – and Carey 
Mulligan could have got something for Far From the Madding Crowd. And Toni 
Collette would have been a smart and interesting choice for her utterly 
heartfelt performance in Catherine Hardwicke’s Miss You Already. Quentin 
Tarantino failed to get deserved writing and/or direction nominations for his 
superlative new film The Hateful Eight – although it is great to see Jennifer 
Jason Leigh’s work on that movie get recognised.

Oscar nominations 2016: The Revenant leads field, Mad Max in second place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-2016-the-revenant-leads-field-mad-max-in-second-place>
As for the other films, George Miller’s delirious fantasy action-adventure Mad 
Max: Fury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> has a 
whopping 10 nominations, a testament to how popular this movie is and how 
excited the Los Angeles industry is about it. I very much enjoyed this 
entertainingly hyperactive film, and Tom Hardy and Charlize Theron are both 
very good. But I have to reiterate my bafflement at how reverently it is being 
treated. It is great that the Oscars aren’t kowtowing to middlebrow “quality” 
cinema: sure. But in that case I’d prefer to see Inside Out get more 
nominations. This wonderful animation has something for best original 
screenplay, but it should also have been in there for best film. So, too, 
should Charlie Kaufman’s unclassifably extraordinary Anomalisa.

Another big winner is Ridley Scott’s The Martian with seven nominations, and 
this is another likeable, good-natured film about a Nasa astronaut marooned on 
Mars which is riding a wave of popularity, very much on the back of Matt 
Damon’s boyish and winning lead performance. But I can’t be persuaded it’s as 
good as all that. (At the Golden Globes, it even found itself winning big in 
the comedy category, something which I found puzzling at first, but might be a 
clever way of responding to it as entertainment.) I think The Martian is 
certainly well directed byRidley Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ridley-scott> – who, oddly, does not have a 
nomination.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Martian – video review. 
Now I must risk being even more churlish in expressing my disappointment with 
Adam McKay’sThe Big Short <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-big-short> 
(five nominations) about the financial mavericks, geniuses and chancers who 
“shorted” the market on Wall Street before the 2008 crash – that is, betted 
that the sub-prime disaster was going to happen. If there was an Oscar for 
being overrated, I think this would win – shallow, laborious, self-conscious, 
patronising and unsure whether to be a righteous condemnation of fraud or a 
celebration of cool amoral dudes who saw how to make big bucks out of disaster. 
For me, it had neither the energy of Scorsese’s The Wolf of Wall Street nor the 
plain informative clarity of a documentary like Charles Ferguson’s Inside Job.

But it looks increasingly as if The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> is going to own this awards 
season. That would be all right with me.
 