
East Asian Hollywood stars have reacted angrily to a “patronising” apology 
from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for its “tone-deaf” 
attitude at this year’s Oscars.

Two dozen Academy members, including the two-time Oscar-winning film-maker Ang 
Lee, Star Trek actor George Takei and the actor Sandra Oh,published an open 
letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/ang-lee-oscars-chris-rock-racist-joke-east-asians-academy-awards-2016>
 to organisers on 15 March, complaining about “tasteless and offensive skits” 
based on racial stereotyping at this year’s ceremony.Now the Academy’s response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/oscars-sorry-for-tone-deaf-portrayal-of-asians-at-academy-awards>
 has been dismissed out of hand by Takei, and the industry siteDeadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/03/academy-apology-letter-asian-community-24-members-raises-even-more-concerns-1201721057/>
 says that it “basically reads like a form letter”.

Ang Lee slams Oscars over Chris Rock's 'racist' joke about east Asians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/ang-lee-oscars-chris-rock-racist-joke-east-asians-academy-awards-2016>
E! Online (@eonline) 
And the Oscar for best sorta apology after making Asian jokes goes to...The 
Academy.https://t.co/VtmidKMS7W <https://t.co/VtmidKMS7W> 
pic.twitter.com/gEz9orUhwS <https://t.co/gEz9orUhwS>
 <https://twitter.com/eonline/status/709883682878787585> March 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/eonline/status/709883682878787585> 
“It was a bland, corporate response,” Takei told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/business/media/academy-chiefs-apology-for-jokes-at-oscars-riles-asian-members.html?_r=2>
 while labelling the letter “patronising”. He added: “The obliviousness was 
actually shocking. Doesn’t anyone over there have any sense?”

Deadline reports that none of the 24 Academy members who signed the initial 
complaint has been asked to meet Oscars organisers. The site furthermore 
suggests the apology letter from Hudson fails to address demands for “concrete 
steps” to address complaints over racial stereotyping.

The 24 Academy members wrote the open letter in response to skits in the later 
stages of last month’s broadcast, during which hostChris Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/chris-rock> introduced three children of 
east Asian descent named “Ming Zhu, Bao Ling and David Moskowitz”, who he said 
were “the accountants” who had tabulated the Oscars results. Sacha Baron Cohen 
also made a joke about the size of Asian genitalia during his appearance in 
character as Ali G.

Oscars sorry for 'tone deaf' portrayal of Asians at Academy Awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/oscars-sorry-for-tone-deaf-portrayal-of-asians-at-academy-awards>
“In light of criticism over #OscarsSoWhite, we were hopeful that the telecast 
would provide the Academy a way forward and the chance to present a spectacular 
example of inclusion and diversity,” wrote the 24. “Instead, the Oscars show 
was marred by a tone-deaf approach to its portrayal of Asians.”

In her apology letter, Academy CEO Dawn Hudson wrote: “It certainly was never 
the Academy’s intent to offend anyone. We are committed to doing our best to 
ensure that material in future Oscar telecasts be more culturally sensitive. It 
pains us that any aspect of the show was considered offensive, and I apologise 
for any hurt the skits caused.”

Boone Isaacs has been under intense pressure since the #Oscarssowhite row over 
racially homogenous acting nominees at the past two ceremonies. On 15 March, 
the Academy fulfilled its promise to add new board members from diverse 
backgrounds, appointing Oscars producer Reginald Hudlin, Selena director 
Gregory Nava and Kung Fu Panda stalwart Jennifer Yuh Nelson. The New York Times 
reports that the organisation has also added women and people of colour to a 
number of committees and moved to remove voting rights from inactive members.

 * This article was amended on Thursday 17 March 2016. We originally said that 
AMPAS president Cheryl Boone Isaacs wrote a letter apologising to the group 
offended by jokes during the Oscars broadcast. In fact it was the Academy’s 
CEO, Dawn Hudson. This has been corrected.  