
Birdman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman> and The Grand Budapest 
Hotel scored nine nominations at the 87th Academy Awards, announced in Los 
Angeles on Thursday. Alejandro González Iñárritu’s experimental satire about a 
fading movie actor (played by Michael Keaton) tied for top place going into the 
awards with Wes Anderson’s whimsical comedy.

That left Boyhood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood>, Richard 
Linklater’s audacious 12-years-in-the-making coming-of-age epic, trailing with 
just six nominations, the same as Clint Eastwood’s Iraq war drama American 
Sniper, which has recently picked up momentum.

Boyhood took top honours at the Golden Globes last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/11/boyhood-best-film-director-golden-globes>
, scooping gongs for best drama, best director and best supporting actress. 
Birdman’s predicted win in the best comedy or musical category was snatched 
instead by The Grand Budapest Hotel.


Selma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma>, Ava DuVernay’s stirring civil 
rights drama about Martin Luther King’s 1965 campaign to secure equal voting 
rights in Alabama, which had been seen as a frontrunner, went home with just 
two nominations, for best picture and best song for ‘Glory’. Had its director 
been nominated, it would have made her the first black woman to be so. The 
glaring lack of non-white faces across the board – especially stark the year 
after the best picture victory for 12 Years a Slave – was bemoaned on social 
media. British actor David Oyelowo was also overlooked for his performance.

There was good news for the Brits elsewhere, however. The Imitation Game, 
about Alan Turing’s time as a Bletchley Park codebreaker, scored nods for 
Benedict Cumberbatch’s lead performance and Keira Knightley’s supporting, as 
well as best picture, best director, best adapted screenplay, best editing, 
best production design and best music.

Rival scientist biopic The Theory of Everything took five nominations, 
including one for best picture, one for each of its leads – Felicity Jones and 
Eddie Redmayne - one for music and another for adapted screenplay. Eric 
Fellner, co-chairman of producers Working Title, paid tribute to the film’s 
subject, Stephen Hawking: “He’s won everything else already, so it’d be 
gorgeous if he got close to an Oscar.”

Fellner also acknowledged the role that the Labour and coalition governments 
had played in such a strong showing for British cinema. “So much great art has 
been the result of investment by successive governments,” said Fellner. “At a 
time when we’re manufacturing less physical material, British governments over 
the past 10 years have had the sense to invest in creative industries right 
across the board. We don’t just bring in hundreds of millions of pounds through 
the US movies shot here, we’ve shown we can export them, too.”

Meanwhile the team behind Mr Turner – which scored no Globes nominations and a 
disappointing haul at the Baftas – will be cheered by its four Oscar nods, for 
music, production design, costume design and cinematography. But there was 
nothing for Timothy Spall’s performance, nor for Mike Leigh’s direction or 
screenplay.

Dick Pope, Leigh’s longtime cinematographer, reacted with elation to his 
second Oscar nomination, and first for his work with Leigh. The lack of 
nominations in headline categories was, he said, a happy change from the norm. 
“It would be churlish of me to whinge and nitpick. It’s been many years that 
actors have taken the front stage. It’s great that we, Mike’s company of 
players, have finally taken one for the team.”

When Pope’s name was read out, Academy president Cheryl Boone Isaacs managed 
an unfortunate mispronunciation of Pope’s surname as “Poop”. Pope had not heard 
the broadcast as he was otherwise engaged – revisiting the Late Turner show at 
Tate Britain.

Rosamund Pike was also nominated for best actress for her role in Gone Girl, 
alongside shock nominee Marion Cotillard for Two Days, One Night. Jennifer 
Aniston failed to make the cut, in the end, for her anti-vanity project as a 
chronic pain sufferer in Cake. But Julianne Moore is seen as the clear 
favourite in this category for her role as a neuroscientist with early-onset 
Alzheimer’s in Still Alice.

Robert Duvall (in The Judge) and Laura Dern (in Wild) were outsider shots in 
the best supporting categories whose inclusion was met with cheers as the 
nominees were read out. The inclusion of Bradley Cooper in the best actor race 
was blindsiding for commentators who had reserved the space for Jake Gyllenhaal.

Foxcatcher, Interstellar and Whiplash all took five nominations, a 
better-than-expected result for all three films. A late show of solidarity for 
Bennett Miller, who recently came under fire from one of the men on whose story 
Foxcatcher is based, may have helped propel him to a best director nod; the 
film also picked up a best original screenplay nod, as well as acclaim for 
Steve Carell in the best actor category and best supporting actor for Mark 
Ruffalo (although co-star Channing Tatum missed out). Notably, though, it 
didn’t take one of the eight best picture nomination spaces.


Many had predicted recognition for Whiplash’s editing and best supporting 
actor (JK Simmons), but Damien Chazelle’s taut drama about a ferocious drum 
teacher also scored best picture, best sound editing and best adapted 
screenplay nominations.

Interstellar’s five nominations weren’t quite enough for it to take the honour 
previously held by Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight for the most nods 
without a shot at best picture.

But there were some significant omissions: The LEGO Movie missed out on an 
expected nomination for best animation, but picked one up in the best song 
category for ‘Everything is Awesome’. Life Itself, Steve James’s much-loved 
documentary about the late film critic Roger Ebert, failed to make the cut in 
best documentary contenders, althoughCitizenfour, Laura Poitras’s study of the 
week in which Edward Snowden’s NSA revelations – and identity – became public, 
did make the cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/edward-snowden-film-citizenfour-oscar-documentary-category>
.

Gillian Flynn’s failure to pick up an adapted screenplay nod for her rewrite 
of novel Gone Girl meant both screenplay categories were solely men-only.

The nominees were announced by Academy president Cheryl Boone Isaacs, actor 
Chris Pine and directors Alfonso Cuaron (who took the best director award last 
year for Gravity) andJJ Abrams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams>, 
whose Star Wars film is among the most anticipated movies of the year.

The awards will be announced on 22 February 2015 in the Dolby Theatre in 
Hollywood in a ceremony hosted byNeil Patrick Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/neil-patrick-harris>.

More on this year’s Oscars

• The nominations as they happened
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2015/jan/15/oscars-nominations-2015-live>
• Our predictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/15/oscar-nominations-2015-our-predictions>
• Full list of nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/oscars-2015-full-list-of-nominations>
 