
Influential members of the visual effects (VFX) artists community say they are 
planning another protest to coincide with the Oscar ceremony on 2 March. This 
followsa 400-strong demonstration against the industry's treatment of VFX 
artists last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/oscars-protest-life-of-pi>.

According to the Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/oscars-visual-effects-protest-planned/?>, Daniel Lay, 
author of the VFX Soldier blog, is among those planning the new protest, which 
is being termedMarch in March 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1411561172415016/?source=1>. According to 
their Facebook page, their aim is to "bring awareness and show support for our 
effort to levy duties against VFX subsidies".

Last year the VFX community focussed its attention on Life of Pi, as the 
company that supplied its visual effects was forced to file for bankruptcy 
despite winning an Oscar for best visual effects. The mood was further hardened 
when director Ang Leefailed to acknowledge any VFX artists in his speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/26/ang-lee-visual-effects-life-of-pi>
 on receiving the best director Oscar.

Now, however, the protest is aimed at subsidies, which enable non-US VFX 
outfits to price US companies out of the market and the work to migrate to the 
UK, Canada and New Zealand. "We're trying to focus on the destructive impact of 
the subsidies race," said Lay. "It's great that there's an Oscar party going 
on, but a lot of us are being hurt by this subsidy."

Lay has also co-founded an organisation called ADAPT (Association of Digital 
Artists, Professionals and Technicians), which will agitate for a levy to be 
charged to films that benefit from such subsidies. Lay told the Guardian: "Many 
international artists are hurt by subsidies."

Dave Rand, who last year chartered a plane to fly over the Oscars towing a 
banner reading "Box Office + Bankrupt = Visual Effects vfxunion.com" said: "The 
march is going to be a less angry demonstrationâ€¦we don't want to be disruptive 
or disrespectful to theOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> ... We 
want this one to be more focused. Basically all of our jobs in Los Angeles have 
left, so that issue is moot unless we can bring the industry back."
 