
Oscars organisers are to meet with Asian and Asian-American Hollywood figures, 
including Oscar-winning directorAng Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee> and Star Trek icon George Takei, to 
address complaints over “tasteless and offensive skits” based on racial 
stereotyping at this year’s ceremony.

Two dozen members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences published 
an open letter to the organisation’s senior hierarchy on 15 March, after host
Chris Rock <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/chris-rock> introduced three east 
Asian children as “Academy accountants” at this year’s Oscars ceremony. The 
members were also reportedly unhappy that Sacha Baron Cohen made a joke about 
the size of Asian genitalia during his appearance in character as Ali G.

Spotlight producers admit dialogue of Boston school worker was 'fictionalised'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/spotlight-producers-dialogue-school-worker-fictionalised>
A swiftly-issued Academy apology was subsequently labelled “patronising” by 
Takei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/oscars-academy-apology-racist-asian-stereotypes-chris-rock>
, amid concern that the organisation had failed to outline how it will ensure 
future ceremonies avoid stereotyping.Deadline reports 
<http://deadline.com/2016/03/academy-apology-letter-asian-community-24-members-raises-even-more-concerns-1201721057/>
 officials have now agreed to meet the 24 members in order to address 
“sensitivity” issues with regard to the Oscars and people of east Asian 
extraction.

In their open letter to the Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/ang-lee-oscars-chris-rock-racist-joke-east-asians-academy-awards-2016>
, the members wrote: “We’d like to know how such tasteless and offensive skits 
could have happened and what process you have in place to preclude such 
unconscious or outright bias and racism toward any group in future Oscars 
telecasts.”

The Academy has been under intense pressure to confront diversity issues since 
the #OscarsSoWhite row over racially homogenous acting nominees at the past two 
ceremonieserupted in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/academy-president-calls-for-change-after-all-white-oscar-nominees>
. Rock’s accountant gag was all the more surprising because Oscars producers 
David Hill and Reginald Hudlinpromised prior to the ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/09/academy-awards-producers-diverse-oscars-nominees>
 that it would represent “true diversity” and “what the world looks like”.

On 15 March, the Academy fulfilled its promise to add new board members from 
diverse backgrounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/academy-addresses-oscars-race-row-with-new-appointments>
, appointing Oscars producer Reginald Hudlin, Selena director Gregory Nava and 
Kung Fu Panda stalwart Jennifer Yuh Nelson. The organisation has also 
reportedly added women and people of colour to a number of committees and made 
good on its controversial vow to remove voting rights from inactive members.

 