
The Ospreys coach, Sean Holley, was left to rue his side's increasing injury 
crisis as they lost 19-17 toNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> in their LV= Cup opener 
at the Liberty Stadium.

The severely depleted hosts, without 29 players through injury and 
international call-ups, trailed 13-0 after 20 minutes but fought back to take a 
17-16 lead thanks to tries from Richard Hibbard and Jonathan Spratt.

But the Northampton fly-half Stephen Myler slotted his fourth penalty of the 
game with 10 minutes to go to seal the win for Saints.

Ospreys' injury woes were increased before the game as the full-back Barry 
Davies withdrew with a back spasm while the captain Ian Gough, lock Filo Tiatia 
and hooker Hibbard were forced from the field during the match.

"I think we are on our last legs now. It's very, very difficult," said Holley. 
"We had some boys out there who had not played at the Liberty for a while and 
some of the execution and some of the skills were very disappointing. We were 
down to our ninth and 10th-choice second rows at the end of the game so what do 
you expect?"

The Welsh side face Bath next weekend in their second group game and Holley 
admitted Tiatia and Gough look certain to miss that game. "Filo will definitely 
be out," he said. "Even with our second row situation I can't see Ian Gough 
lining up next week."

The Northampton director of rugby Jim Mallinder was just pleased to see his 
side claim victory despite being below their best. "It's always hard to come 
down to Wales and it is always good to win," he said. "It wasn't the best 
performance and it was a bit scrappy but we'll go back up the motorway quite 
content.

"Our lineout went well and we took our opportunities. We had an inexperienced 
front five, but I thought we scrummaged well and some of the decisions there 
were controversial, but we don't know why referees make some of those 
decisions."
 