
In the week following the rapid loss of the Ashes, the responses have been as 
predictable as the series ending with an English batsman standing in the middle 
wondering whether an injured colleague could be arsed to come out and join him 
in the middle. Ian Botham, punchy as ever, called for the old guard, including 
Hussain, to be removed and replaced by... whoever.

Others attributed the blame to the lack of cricket being played in schools. A 
conventional suspect, but the heavier damage was done when the nationwide sale 
of school playing fields ensured the time would come when children who had not 
been taught cricket at school would become parents who could not teach cricket 
at home. Yet others found a hillock of refuge from the irrefutable, if 
irrelevant, fact that despite events in Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth the 
English were still superior to the Australians at making pop music.

And Sir Tim Rice appeared on national television to announce (and then 
renounce) that The Urn was unfit to travel. Perhaps the first time in sporting 
history that the fragility of a team had communicated itself to the trophy for 
which, had they been fit, they would have been competing.

All of the above have a smidgen of merit, but in the rush to defeatism they 
overlook the salient point that in one respect this Ashes series has been a 
resounding success. Crowd records have been broken at every venue and it is the 
English supporters who have been doing the record breaking. A remarkable 42 per 
cent of the 25,000 pre-booked tickets were booked by England fans. Remarkable, 
because the Barmy Army are not renowned for their forward planning, and many 
travelled 10,500 miles in the hope that tickets would be available on the day.

Furthermore, given that the next two Tests are being played over Christmas and 
the New Year, many thousands more are expected to show up for these dead 
matches, if only to avoid their families. In short, England, when it comes to 
supporting, have the series in the bag and unless the fans are struck down by a 
shopping virus or the Aussies hit them with a complete alcohol ban they look 
certain to complete a white-wash.

Sad days, indeed, for Australian cricket-watching. Despite playing at home 
against a nation from the other side of the world, despite fielding perhaps the 
strongest team in cricket history against a bunch of ingenus and incompetents, 
they have been out-cheered everywhere. Little wonder that, on surveying the 
carnage, Ian McLachlan, president of the South AustralianCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Association, was moved to state: 'I 
only hope that next time the number of Australian flags will outnumber the 
Union Jacks.' Dream on, Ian.

If I were a crueller man I might now take the opportunity to dispense some 
colonial advice under the guise of detailing the flaws in their game. I might 
draw attention to the fact that while their supporters can occasionally rouse 
themselves, when one of their batsmen hits six consecutive boundaries or a 
bowler finagles a hat-trick, they have neither the guts nor gumption to rise to 
the occasion when the pressure is really on - say, during a drinks break.

I might point to the ugly statistic that attendances at the Pura Cup, a 
competition that can include some of the world's best players, are lower than 
those at a second division game in the Frizzell County Championship, which 
usually does not. I might even throw in some damaging generalisations re the 
Australian national character. How, for all their harping on about mateship, 
they seem curiously disinclined to actually turn up to support their 
countrymen. How, for all their professed love of sport and supposed generosity, 
they are very slow to dip into their pockets to pay to watch a game. But it is 
cheap to allude to such matters when a country is in the doldrums.

More gracious, all things considered, to consider why it is that the England 
supporters are the only team in world cricket to have defeated the Australians 
in their own back yard so regularly and with such ease.

In the main, this success is down to a natural gift for laziness. The 
exponential rise of the internet has fed on a national predilection to create a 
nation of voyeurs. The English are more comfortable watching than doing. They 
know their limitations and stay within them. It is a trait best demonstrated by 
the rampant advance of lap-dancing clubs into the unlikeliest parts of the 
country.

Whatever the sport, the English are the best in the world at watching it in 
large numbers. At the last football World Cup, no country produced more 
travelling fans than the English. At the next rugby union World Cup, the same 
is likely to be the case. At every Open, the galleries are praised for their 
knowledge and numbers.

Nor should this talent be lightly dismissed for, as Wimbledon FC have proved, 
without spectators there is no soul. The fans pay the money, which ensures the 
players are enticed to take part in a game for the benefit of the fan. The fan 
is fundamental, a point made robustly in Percy M Young's 1950 classic Football: 
Facts and Fancies or The Art of Spectatorship , where he writes: 'Those who 
condemn us watchers I hate. They have neither wit nor imagination. They have 
forgotten all that is worth remembering and have deprived us of our dreams. 
"The Puritan hated bear-baiting," wrote Lord Macauley, "not because it gave 
pain to the bear, but because it gave pleasure to the spectator".'

The Australians, more puritan than they would allow, have made the error of 
thinking that what you do might be more important than what you dream. 
Obsessing over the works of Sun Tzu, they have concentrated on the art of war 
and forgotten the art of spectatorship.

Inevitably that which makes the British great at watching games undermines 
their ability to play them. First, there is the dreich weather, which is useful 
for galvanising people off their sofas and on to a plane to the southern 
hemisphere, but is unlikely to motivate them to walk to the local park for a 
pick-up game.

Second, there is the seeming contradiction that the spectator, unlike the 
player, can prefer defeat to victory. There is, after all, so much more to talk 
about if you have flown all the way to Perth for the fourth day of the Test 
than if you have routinely watched your team win the Ashes for the eighth 
consecutive time.

English cricket (watching) is unarguably in great shape, but it would be a 
mistake to be complacent. While our cricket fans have been outperforming 
themselves on away tours, it is noticeable that they have been blown away at 
home playing against India and Pakistan. In order to be world-beaters it is 
vital for the England supporters to incorporate some of the Asian talent and 
passion for the game. A process that might be accelerated were more Asian 
players to be selected for the national team.

 Â· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank 
as you like, we can take it, tosport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:sport.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> or mail the Observer direct at 
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 