
To anybody visiting from another planet, yesterday would have seemed like a 
landmark day for musical team-ups. From Björk and Led Zeppelin toNine Inch Nails
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nineinchnails> and Alicia Keys, dozens of 
artists chose 1 April to announce the weirdest collaborations of their careers. 
Here's a rundown of some of our favourite musical April Fool's pranks.

Björk reignited Led Zeppelin reunion speculation by announcing that she is 
taking over as the band's lead singer. Out with Robert Plant, she declared on 
herwebsite <http://www.bjork.com/news/?id=899>, and in with the pixie from 
Reykjavik. The sole stipulation? That the re-formed band only play songs from 
albums I and IV, including Black Dog, Stairway to Heaven and Communication 
Breakdown. It seems Björk is not a fan of Whole Lotta Love.

Over at Coldplay's website <http://www.coldplay.com/newsdetail.php?id=374>, 
Chris Martin and co announced their new recording studio – a zero-gravity 
airplane. "Coldplay are to boldly go where no musicians have gone before," they 
wrote. "Later this year, the band will board a modified Boeing 727 aircraft, 
which can provide zero gravity for periods of 20-25 seconds at a time. Wearing 
self-designed outfits based on early Russian cosmonaut suits, they will be 
joined by producer/collaborator Brian Eno, who will use custom-made 'heavy' 
microphones to record the sessions on a 1969 analogue cassette player."

While Martin called it the "right environment to record the perfect snare drum 
sound", we called it "the perfect joke to elicit extended, humourless groans".

Sigur Rós had a little more luck, tricking fans with news of a Coldplay 
team-up. According to the Sigur Rós website, keyboardist Kjartan Sveinsson 
wrote and arranged strings for four songs on Coldplay's forthcoming Viva La 
Vida follow-up, and frontman Jonsí Birgisson performed a duet with Martin on 
one track. But it's not just Sigur Rós fans who were rolling their eyes – some 
Coldplay fans balked too. "What?! Sigur Rós are a fucking embarrassment," one 
commenter wrote, "Wimpish at best. They sound likeColdplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coldplay> wound backwards."

However, there's a clear winner of 2009's musical April Fool's crown. Trent 
Reznor announced on Twitter a new Timbaland-produced Nine Inch Nails album 
called Strobe Light. But far from a one-line joke, Reznor had set up an
dedicated website <http://www.nin.com/strobelight/>, complete with looped MIDI 
soundtrack. For just $18.98 plus a $10 "digital service fee", naive fans were 
promised DRM-locked Windows Media audio files for songs such as Everybody's 
Doing It (featuring Chris Martin, Jay-Z and Bono), Still Hurts (featuring 
Alicia Keys) and intro and outro skits. "You will also receive an exclusive 
photo and a free email account with our partner Google's Gmail service," the 
website boasted.

If only Chris Cornell's Timbaland-produced album was as much of a joke.
 