
1) Andrew Flintoff on Desert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b060yk4m>

If Andrew Flintoff had to spend the rest of his days on a desert island with 
only one song for company, he would chooseI Just Can’t Help Believing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAldo6Fv_uc> by Elvis Presley. (Flintoff isn’t 
a fan of the “bump bump” music the younger cricketers play in the changing 
room.) In other news, this is how he motivated his England team to victory 
against India in 2006:

The series was in the balance on the last day, so I went into the dressing 
room and, rather than giving a team-talk, I had a shower. I walked out naked 
with a towel over my shoulder and went to my iPod and found Johnny Cash. Ring 
of Fire was on. It started “de de de de de de de” and, naked, I started dancing 
and swinging my towel around my head. And then, one by one, the team started 
getting up and dancing. Bearing in mind we’re going back out to field any 
minute. I was naked, swinging my towel around my head, swinging everything 
about, while one of the world’s best ever players, Sachin Tendulkar, pokes his 
head around the dressing room, saying: ‘What is going on here?’ I said: 
‘Sachin, don’t worry about it’, and we went out after Ring of Fire and bowled 
India out to win a Test match in Mumbai for the first time in 20 years.”

2) The Old Course at St Andrews has been second best for 120 years 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/15/sports/golf/at-st-andrews-british-open-site-new-course-is-no-rival-for-the-old.html?ref=sports&_r=0>

The Old Course has the history but, if you want to test yourself in St 
Andrews, try the 120-year-old “New Course”.

3) Roger Federer is great because he’s OK 
<http://theclassical.org/articles/roger-federer-is-great-because-hes-ok>

Roger Federer’s tally of 17 grand slams makes him the greatest tennis player 
of all time to most observers, but Federer has one awkward blight on his 
résumé: his record against Rafael Nadal. When the pair play, Nadal usually 
wins. Federer has won 10 of their 23 meetings and only two of their nine 
contests at the slams. Federer’s greatest rival has always been Nadal, while 
Nadal’s greatest rival has always been his own knees.

You might conclude that Nadal is the better player, but as Alexander Goot 
<https://twitter.com/agoot18> points out in The Classical 
<http://theclassical.org/articles/roger-federer-is-great-because-hes-ok>, 
Federer deserves praise for playing in a style that helps him avoid injuries. 
He doesn’t need to pound his body into submission every time he goes on to a 
court as his flawless technique allows him to ease his way past opponents:

Simply surviving, simply making it through the grind of week after week on a 
variety of surfaces, simply staying healthy and whole, simply ‘being OK’ is a 
daunting task in and of itself. And nobody, in arguably the greatest era of 
men’s tennis the world has seen, has done it better than Federer. It’s one 
thing to win but it’s something even more impressive when you can do it 
fluidly, calmly, gracefully, without any damage to your body and mind, so that 
you might start over and do exactly the same thing at the next tournament.

4) Conor McGregor is the UFC’s most important fighter 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/ufc-189-conor-mcgregor-chad-mendes-most-important-fighter>


Conor McGregor spent most of his fight against Chad Mendes last Saturday on 
his back. Midway through the second round, Mendes picked up McGregor, threw him 
into the canvas and began to pepper his face with vicious, scything forearms. 
The American seemed to be in complete control of the contest, but McGregor 
managed to wriggle free, pull himself on to his feet and land a knockout punch. 
Mendes went down and McGregor went in for the kill.

This is what McGregor does. He stands up, he swings his fists and he 
entertains his people. He also enjoys a spot of trash-talking.Shea Serrano 
<https://twitter.com/sheaserrano> has reported on some of his best lines for 
Grantland 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/ufc-189-conor-mcgregor-chad-mendes-most-important-fighter/>
.

5) The Premier League will be back on Saturday 8 August 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1OdFyJ2_xhM>

Hallelujah.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1OdFyJ2_xhM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1OdFyJ2_xhM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1OdFyJ2_xhM&media=>
6) Is there too much Champions League football on TV? 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_uk/article/too-much-of-a-good-thing-how-blanket-champions-league-coverage-spoils-the-show>

Have you seen the goal Adam Lallana scored for Liverpool against Brisbane Roar 
on Friday? The game took place a few hours ago but, by the time Liverpool had 
wrapped up a decent 2-1 victory, the footage had been broadcast, consumed and 
re-packaged for a global audience. The Guardian liveblogged the match; the 
highlights are already doing healthy traffic on YouTube and Lallana was 
trending on Twitter within a few minutes as Liverpool fans shared Vines of the 
goal around the web.

Contrast that level of coverage to the way a Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> semi-final was broadcast 
in 1999. When Dynamo Kyiv hosted Bayern Munich in the Olympic Stadium in the 
1998-99 season, the match was only shown live in two countries: Ukraine and 
Germany. It ended 3-3, with Andriy Shevchenko, Stefan Effenberg and Carsten 
Jancker among the scorers. It’s one of the best matches ever played in the 
European Cup but not many of us watched it.

Rob O’Connor 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_uk/article/too-much-of-a-good-thing-how-blanket-champions-league-coverage-spoils-the-show>
has an old VCR recording of that game and it’s something he treasures. He 
thinks those old matches were worthy of being adored as they were difficult to 
discover. Everything is too accessible these days. As he puts it in this piece 
forVice Sports 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_uk/article/too-much-of-a-good-thing-how-blanket-champions-league-coverage-spoils-the-show>
: “Central to the art of seduction is leaving something to the imagination.” 


7) David Walsh on An Irishman Abroad 
<https://soundcloud.com/an-irishman-abroad/david-walsh-episode-95>


David Walsh <https://twitter.com/davidwalshst> is wonderful company in this 
90-minute chat withJarlath Regan <https://twitter.com/jarlath>. He talks about 
his early days in journalism, his first trip to the Tour de France, his 
relationship with Stephen Roche, his battles with Lance Armstrong and his 
thoughts on Mo Farah’s recent troubles. But he is probably most interesting 
while discussing a recent meeting with Jonny Wilkinson. He’s talking about the 
selfish drive that seems to unite top athletes when Wilkinson comes to mind:

I interviewed Jonny Wilkinson recently, Saint Jonny, who is of course a 
fantastic team player, a brilliant part of England’s World Cup winners in 2003. 
I’ve interviewed him over the years and Jonny has never, ever, ever asked me 
any question that related to me, and our interviews go on for an hour and a 
half. In the last interview I’m asking him about what he wants to do for the 
rest of his life and he says he wants to affect people’s lives in a positive 
way.

He said he’s learned that, if you have a goal, you are not going to get there 
in one smooth line. Because of the troubles he has had with injuries and 
overcoming them, he feels he can really help people on their journeys. 
Basically, he said he wants to find a really big platform to be able to touch 
people’s lives because he wants toknow their stories. I want to know what they 
want to achieve and help them get there.

I’m thinking, Jonny, I’ve interviewed you seven times, and have had to make 
horrendously long journeys to see him, and he’s never once even said: ‘Did it 
take you long to get there this morning? How did you come?’ Never once. I 
thought, it’s kinda bullshit Jonny. He’s naturally been selfish. By nature it’s 
not him. Perhaps his last great achievement will be to turn himself into that 
person but I thought, you know what mate, you could start here right now.

There’s a line in the Shakespeare play Coriolanus where he’s been told he 
needs to do something and says, no, I can’t do it, ‘Rather say I play the man I 
am’. And I’d rather Jonny plays the man he is, because what he was telling me 
just didn’t sound like him.

8) Amy Lawrence, the vox in the box 
<http://thesetpieces.com/interviews/vox-in-the-box-amy-lawrence/>

Amy has been writing about football for over 20 years now, so it’s about time 
someone sat her down and picked her brain about Italia 90, her first job at 
FourFourTwo, the day Kevin Keegan blessed her and modern football’s lack of 
humanity.

9) Making history is lonely for Serena Williams 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/sporting-scene/serena-wins-next-question-please>

In August 2009, when Sir Alex Ferguson was asked about what would motivate him 
in the forthcoming season, he said this: “I have always worked under a fear of 
failure. I think every manager would say the same.” Ferguson had won thePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> and Champions 
League only a few months earlier, but he was still running from the spectre of 
defeat.

Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> can 
probably relate to that sentiment at the minute. She is so dominant in her own 
era of women’s tennis that people watch her matches to see how she fares 
against the great champions of the past. She played Garbiñe Muguruza in the 
Wimbledon final last Saturday but her real battle was against Steffi Graf’s 
tally of 22 grand slams. Serena is so far ahead of anyone else in the game 
right now that she is evaluated for her ability to break records. She isn’t 
congratulated for her victories, just given new challenges to overcome. And the 
prospect of defeat is always lurking behind her.

It’s tough at the top. Ian Crouch <https://twitter.com/iancrouch> of the New 
Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/sporting-scene/serena-wins-next-question-please> 
puts it like this: “By this point in her career, Williams has been tasked not 
simply with playing tennis, but with that lonely and at times rather grim 
sports endeavour of ‘making history’.”


10) Follow the transfer window with Post-it Players 
<https://twitter.com/p_i_players>


P_I_Players (@P_I_Players) 
Basti #MUFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/MUFC?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/lzAcPtlVk2 <http://t.co/lzAcPtlVk2>
 <https://twitter.com/P_I_Players/status/620691493381124096> July 13, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/P_I_Players/status/620691493381124096>  