
Taylor Swift by Hermione Hoby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/23/taylor-swift-shake-it-off>

Even though her publicist had told me that this was exactly what was going to 
happen, I just didn’t believe that Taylor Swift was going to be waiting for me 
in a restaurant one weekday lunchtime in September. And so I had – embarrassing 
to say – a little moment of overwhelm when I walked in and there she was, 
meekly texting in a booth. Better to exorcise it than battle it, I thought, so 
I just told her that this was a treat for me and I loved her music. She 
instantly pulled a perfect“Taylor Swift surprised face” 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/aj8/44-photos-of-taylor-swifts-surprised-face-cfe3>. 
From there on in it only got better: I found her smart and sweet and impeccably 
self-aware. I was under strict instructions from my editor to get a selfie with 
her so I stoicallydid my professional duty 
<https://twitter.com/hermionehoby/status/499255078965235712>. For several days 
afterwards my inbox was characterised by emails with subject lines of 
“TAYYYYYLOOOORRRRR!!!!!!!!!!!!” asking things like, “WHAT DID SHE SMELL 
LIKE????” The burst of Swift-centricTwitter followers 
<https://twitter.com/hermionehoby/status/499565299570860032> was bewildering, 
but not nearly as batshit as reading Instagram commenters confidently averring 
that I was Taylor Swift’s assistant/new bff/girlfriend.


AC/DC by Michael Hann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>

The first album I ever bought was Powerage 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLAFDBD20AE2E57B79> by AC/DC. Aside from 
everything on the Grease soundtrack, the first single I ever bought wasRock and 
Roll Ain’t Noise Pollution <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X_IWlPHMziU> by 
AC/DC. In fact, AC/DC are the one great constant of my musical life. I’ve been 
pursuing an interview with them for years, and the chance to meet Angus Young 
and Brian Johnson finally came in November – in the midst of the most trying 
period of AC/DC’s career. To be honest, I was a little trepidatious. AC/DC 
interviews rarely produce anything in the way of revelation: they tell the same 
stories every five years, when they have a new record to promote, and that’s 
your lot. What’s more, you can’t really delve deep into their personalities 
based on their lyrics: “So tell me, who is big Jack, and why does he have a big 
sack?” But I needn’t have worried: the pair were delightful company, and 
surprisingly frank about their departed bandleader, Malcolm Young, and his
dementia <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-29439423>. It was one of 
those rare occasions when meeting your heroes is as pleasant as you might hope 
for.

 Abba ... do these people look down to earth to you? Photograph: PR 
Abba by Tim Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/10/abba-interview-bjorn-ulvaeus-frida-lyngstad>

I usually find it a bit of a cliche when journalists describe celebrities as 
being “just like a normal person”. Yet the gargantuan contrast between Abba’s 
mega-success – 400m records sold – and the two entirely grounded people I was 
sitting down with really was astonishing. “I think being Swedes we have a very 
down-to-earth way of looking at ourselves and what we do,” admitted Frida. 
“We’ve never had any, what do you call it … hubris?” Not that this prevented 
them from telling their incredible story with flair – Bjorn even kicked things 
off with an awful impression of a drug dealer.

 Judas Priest by Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/03/judas-priest-rob-halford-quentin-crisp-interview-redeemer-of-souls>

In person, some rock stars are completely different to how you might imagine 
them. Others are exactly as a fan might hope them to be. Rob Halford comes into 
the second category. More than 30 years after he successfully hoodwinked middle 
American teenage metal fans into dressing like the denizens of a gay S&M club – 
surely one of the most genuinely subversive acts in rock history, the stuff of 
Malcolm McLaren’s dreams – Halford is a total delight: smart, charming, 
thoughtful, possessed of that bone-dry, doleful sense of humour peculiar to 
Midlanders. Metal deserves an elder statesman like him.

 Dolly Parton wows Glastonbury in June. Photograph: Brian Rasic/REX 
Dolly Parton by Tom Lamont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/06/dolly-parton-more-to-me-than-big-hair-phoney-stuff>

Dolly likes to keep a firm hand on her public image and has done so very 
effectively for the better part of 50 years. Partly by maintaining a fearsome 
mental logbook of comebacks, wisecracks and anecdotes, from which she plucks 
appropriate nuggets during interviews, always keeping a firm control on the 
flow of information. When we met in Nashville for an interview, I asked my 
questions and listened politely whenever she went in to one of these 
mini-routines, about her music, her background, her looks, her lovelife, many 
lines from which I’d heard or read before, some of it even used as stage patter 
at Glastonbury, where Dolly had triumphantly performed in the summer in front 
of 180,000 people. But here and there we were able to get on to fresh, 
unscripted ground, and we seemed to get on, and when her manager invited me 
aboard to explore her luxury tour bus later, it felt as significant as being 
handed a dossier on alien existence, or being trusted with the nuclear codes. 
Exposure to the real life of the real Dolly! I don’t think a journalist had 
ever climbed up that bus’s steps before ...


Brody Dalle by Charlotte Richardson Andrews  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/10/brody-dalle-interview-im-not-going-to-be-held-down>

I’ve had a framed poster of punk icon Brody Dalle on my wall for the last 12 
years. It’s a tatty, monochrome thing that came free with 2002’s Give ’Em the 
Boot compilation, bearing the image of Dalle during her Hellcat years – liberty 
spikes slicked high, eyes heavy with kohl (the very same image that US megastore
Macy’s recently “borrowed” for a storefront display 
<http://instagram.com/p/wnnFQCm447/>). This year, I had the daunting pleasure 
of meeting Dalle in the flesh. As she explained to me back in the spring, in an 
interview spread across two days at Shoreditch’s Ace Hotel, a lot has changed 
since that power portrait was taken …

 Ariel Pink: music’s most hated man? Photograph: Sasha Eisenman/PR 
Ariel Pink by Rhik Sammader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/15/ariel-pink-pom-pom-4ad>

I’d been warned Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> 
could be tricky. Indeed, the day before our scheduled meeting, the oddball 
popstar went awol. When I eventually met Pink in LA, he was cresting a wave of 
unpopularity: labelled a “delusional misogynist” by Grimes, and a troll by most 
of the music press. Unrepentant, he treated me to a bizarre, occasionally 
brilliant two-hour monologue in which he courted further controversy, admitting 
he was giving me “all the ammunition needed to take him down”. Underneath the 
self-sabotage and bravado, I discerned an intelligent, conflicted outsider 
artist, amused and horrified by the heat of the spotlight.

Rick Ross by Lanre Bakare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/07/rick-ross-24-hours-with-the-mastermind>

 When I was told I could hang around with Rick Ross for 24 hours I felt a mix 
of excitement and apprehension. This was the Boss. The bellicose teller of 
apocryphal tales. But when I first met him, backstage at The Tonight Show, he 
merely looked a bit sad, sat there in joggers while eating a burrito and 
playing on his phone. Once his entourage got him talking, though, he spewed 
forth a hilarious mix of yarns about feuding with his neighbour John McEnroe 
and theories on the illuminati that didn’t make much sense. Ross definitely 
likes to play the part, and the transformation from backstage sulker to onstage 
performer was impressive. When we sat down for an interview he clicked into 
character again. Most rappers have that ability, but Ross’s is probably the 
furthest away from his actual, real-life self, who just seemed to want to hang 
about in Miami and eat nice food.

Lostprophets/No Devotion by Caroline Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/10/lostprophets-he-said-he-was-innocent>

The conviction of Lostprophets’ singer Ian Watkins for child sex offences in 
December 2013ended the band’s career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/02/lostprophets-announce-split-ian-watkins>
, leaving the other members in limbo. It was partly to respond to accusations 
on social media that they must have known what Watkins was doing that guitarist 
Lee Gaze and bassist Stuart Richardson agreed to be interviewed in July. How 
does an interviewer address such a sensitive subject? Luckily, having decided 
they were going to talk about it, they did, at length. Gaze in particular was 
eloquent on the subject of Watkins’s betrayal – it was clear that they’d been 
as shocked as anyone else. I was moved by his need to talk it through. He and 
the other ex-Lostprophets had by then formed a new band called No Devotion, but 
he barely mentioned it. It was pretty obvious that this wasn’t a promo 
opportunity for him – it was a form of therapy.
 Pharrell Williams ... looks good in anything (even that hat). Photograph: 
Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Anheuser-Busch 
Pharrell Williams by Simon Hattenstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/08/pharrell-williams-interview-daft-punk>

 It’s not what he said that I remember – Pharrell is pretty much non-verbal. 
It’s what he looked like. I’ve never met a man so effortlessly cool. There were 
racks and racks of clothes at the shoot, and whatever clashing 
poncho/hat/shirt/dungaree combo he picked up, he looked wonderful in. 
Astonishing cheekbones, too. Bastard. Before we met his people said he wanted 
to pay homage to a wilderness Johnny Depp in the shoot. So we hired two huge 
horses. He was appalled when he got there. Turned out he was terrified of 
horses. But he agreed to be photographed with them so long as we didn’t linger. 
“Take your picture, bro,” he told the photographer, Gustavo Papaleo. “I’m not 
going to do this 20 million times. It’s freaking me.”

Frankie Goes to Hollywood by Paul Lester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/28/frankie-goes-to-hollywood-30-years-welcome-to-the-pleasuredome>

I recently read a statistic – which at first made me recoil, because it seemed 
grossly inflated: that in the summer of 1984, one in four teenagers in Britain 
owned one of those Frankie Goes to Hollywood T-shirts with the “Frankie Say” 
slogans on. But the fact is, Frankie were so big that summer that the statistic 
might actually be an understatement. They were that once-in-a-generation pop 
double-whammy: massive and dangerous, like the Sex Pistols if they’d sold 
spectacular quantities of records, or One Direction if they’d comprised two 
openly gay frontmen and three disgraceful, debauched yobs on bass, guitar and 
drums. They were astonishingly big that year. Even more astonishing is that 
they barely get mentioned in rock histories these days or cited as an 
influence. So I decided to write a feature asking why that might be.
 