
Hotly tipped team that will do badly

David Lengel: The Giants’ even-year assault began with a rotation refresh 
including Johnny Cueto and Jeff Samardzija. I don’t trust the newbies, 
especially the latter. The NL West is now a crowded house: theGiants could be 
the odd ones out.


DJ Gallo: It’s always a safe bet to say the Nationals won’t meet expectations, 
but let’s go with a different team this year just to break it up:Boston. The 
Red Sox are getting World Series buzz, but even adding David Price and Craig 
Kimbrel isn’t quite enough to fix one of baseball’s worst pitching staffs.


Les Carpenter: The Blue Jays have an explosive lineup, but their great second 
half run last year came after the David Price trade and the stabilizing of 
their bullpen. Price is gone and aside from Marcus Stroman the rotation is 
filled with questions. They can’t slug their way to another division title.

Jonathan Bernhardt: Let’s go with Houston Astros. Not sold on them outside of 
Altuve and Keuchel; not ready to anoint Carlos Correa without seeing how the 
league adjusts.

Surprise package that will make the playoffs 

DL: No number-crunching nerds running the show in Phoenix, just Dave Stewart 
and Tony La Russa selling jeans. This year’sDiamondbacks model is sexy, with 
Zack Greinke helping their pitching potentially measure up with their beastly 
bats. I like ’em.


DG: If the Dodgers or Giants fall short of expectations and the Cardinals, 
Pirates and Cubs beat themselves up to the point of only one NL Central team 
making the playoffs, the Paul Goldschmidt and Zach Greinke-ledDiamondbacks 
could slip into the postseason.

LC: Despite this spring’s clubhouse tension, the White Sox have a lot of 
intriguing parts. They improved their lineup with several low-level veteran 
signings and trades, have an excellent closer and might have one of the more 
promising rotations in the American League. If Carolos Rodon builds on his 
late-season growth, Jose Quintana finally breaks out and Mat Latos is healthy, 
Chicago might sneak into the postseason.

JB: Arizona Diamondbacks. Probably talking “second Wild Card” here, but the 
Wild Card game is the playoffs.

Should kids be allowed in the clubhouse?

DL: Whose kids? My kids? Definitely, they’d love it. Other big leaguers might 
wonder who they belong to and why they’re unsupervised. The players’ kids? Now 
and again, but not all the time, just like anywhere else.


DG: Not only should kids be allowed in the clubhouse, they must. Or baseball 
teams will fall into anarchy without the steady leadership provided by feral 
children.
HardballTalk (@HardballTalk) 
Adam Eaton: “We lost a leader in Drake” https://t.co/M0adQGbvlh 
<https://t.co/M0adQGbvlh>
 <https://twitter.com/HardballTalk/status/711266989482725376> March 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HardballTalk/status/711266989482725376> 
LC: Children have long been in big league clubhouses – that won’t change. 
Several players bring their kids to the ballpark, especially in the summer. 
Nobody minds. Everyone understands that baseball players spend an enormous 
amount of time away from their families – maybe more than any professional 
athletes.

JB: Only if the adults in the clubhouse don’t whine like kids themselves when 
their playmate has to go home.

MVP winner, American League

DL: Mike Trout had a spring OPS of close to 1.200: that’s higher than Babe 
Ruth’s career mark. Now, we don’t care a damn what people do in March, but 
after losing his MVP title last season, you do get the sense he’s on a mission.


DG: The AL West doesn’t look to have a runaway winner and if the Angels stay 
anywhere in striking distance,Mike Trout and whatever absurd video game numbers 
he puts up this year will get much of the credit.


LC: Undoubtedly many will complain that a player on a last-place team – Trout 
– isn’t the most valuable player but his numbers will be too good to ignore.

JB: Mike Trout. Trout’s the best player in MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> history through his age 23 season, and 
he’ll make that through 24.

MVP winner, National League

DL: If the Diamondbacks put it all together in 2016, it will almost definitely 
meanPaul Goldschmidt is your MVP, finally, after a pair of second place 
finishes over three seasons.


DG: Bryce Harper will be in contention for this award for the next 10 years. 
Well, not the NL MVP specifically. He’ll be in contention for the AL version 
starting in 2019 when he signs a $500m deal with the Yankees.

LC: Anthony Rizzo sometimes gets lost in the Cubs loaded lineup but he might 
be their most consistent hitter.

JB: A Chicago Cub. There hasn’t been a media darling like the 2016 Chicago Cubs
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-cubs> in awhile, and they’ll back 
it up.

Cy Young winner, American League

DL: Just two out of 14 AL Cy Young vote getters had WHIPS under 1.000. If Wade 
Davis (filthy 0.787) closes all season for KC, he’s your Cy Young winner hands 
down. Apply that logic to 2016 and hand him the plaque.

DG: Cole Hamels won seven games in 12 starts for the Rangers last year and is 
a solid bet to win 20 this year. Right or wrong (it’s wrong), that number still 
resonates with many Cy Young voters.

LC: Felix Hernandez is aging but he might be a better pitcher than ever. He 
can still dominate and plays in a pitcher’s park.

JB: David Price. He could have won it last year, and this year he’ll have a 
full season on one team with a good bullpen behind him.

Cy Young winner, National League

DL: Since Jake Arrieta will have a 5.46 ERA this season, and Zack Greinke will 
suffer slightly from performing in a tiny ballpark, that leavesthe usual NL 
suspect, LA’s lefty innings machineClayton Kershaw.


DG: Clayton Kershaw supposedly got off to a slow start last year and still 
finished with 301 strikeouts, a 2.13 ERA and a 0.88 WHIP. It’s terrifying to 
think he can be better than that.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18d4dab4c33878e59121be72cb430f5a52106dd5%2F0_128_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18d4dab4c33878e59121be72cb430f5a52106dd5%2F0_128_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 Clayton Kershaw: terrifying. Photograph: Anthony Gruppuso/USA Today Sports 
LC: Clayton Kershaw is still in the prime of a remarkable career, the Dodgers 
will need him to be great again if they hope to win the NL West.

JB: Noah Syndergaard. Hard to bet against Kershaw, Greinke, or Arrieta, but 
Syndergaard’s something special.


Rob Manfred is … 

DL: ...being tested while negotiating the next Collective Bargaining Agreement 
with the MLB Players Union. After 21 years of peace there are more hurdles in 
front of 22, 23 and beyond than usual.


DG: ... a thoughtful, energetic commissioner who understands that baseball 
needs to make some changes in order to bring in a younger fanbase. In short, he 
is very much not Bud Selig.

LC: … a commissioner on his honeymoon. Unlike some of his counterparts, 
Manfred inherits a game somewhat at peace. Everybody is making money. What will 
happen if the cable TV bubble bursts? This will probably be his great test but 
that’s a few years down the road.

JB: ...a fool if he presides over the implementation of the DH in the National 
League.

Which is more likely: the Cubs win the World Series or Trump presidency? 

DL: Trump, but deep down inside both are scared to death of winning, not that 
they’d ever admit it. Both will have their moments before folding.


DG: Trump is close to 50/50 at this point while all of recorded history makes 
the Cubs still feel like their odds are 1 in 1908.

LC: Hell will have a speed skating track before either happens, but you’d have 
to think the Cubs might win one in the next two centuries.

JB: A Trump presidency, though with every day that passes that becomes less 
and less a commentary on the Cubs.

AL East champion 

DL: David Price is in Boston, but now the Jays have a healthy Marcus Stroman. 
They also have power, pen, and, now, real dirt base paths! So it seems like
Toronto, but this division is a basket case. Can I switch in July?


DG: The Blue Jays went for it all last year and came up short, but they still 
have a potent lineup in place that could be the difference in a competitive 
division.

LC: Picking up David Price was huge. Craig Kimbrell is an overpowering closer 
who will thrive in Boston. The lineup remains strong, Mookie Betts will finally 
break out and theRed Sox will benefit from seeing the Good Hanley Ramirez.

JB: The Boston Red Sox. Turns out hiring a GM who understands you’re a big 
market team and acts like it turns a roster around quick.

AL Central champion 

DL: You can get away with predicting that the Kansas City Royals will fail to 
repeat as champs. Failing to pick them as AL Central winners is straight up 
rude, and shame on you.


DG: The Royals won the AL Central last year by 12 games. Even the biggest 
World Series hangover isn’t going to allow the Twins, Indians, White Sox or 
Tigers to bridge that gap.

LC: This could be a tough division with great starting staffs in Cleveland and 
Chicago and a Minnesota team loaded with promising young players, but theRoyals 
have a lineup that works. As long as they keep their regulars healthy, can 
squeeze enough good innings from their starters and shut down teams in the late 
innings, Kansas City will win.

JB: My heart says Chicago White Sox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-white-sox>, even with the LaRoche 
embarrassment. My head saysKansas City Royals.

AL West champion 

DL: The Rangers emerged as the “best” of a horrid division last year and still 
made the playoffs. Now that Yu Darvish and their pitching rotation are getting 
healthy, they’ve got to be at least five games better than the 88 they won last 
year. It’ll be enough.


DG: The Astros finished in second place last year and didn’t make any major 
offseason moves. That’s fine. The continued maturation of Carlos Correa and 
George Springer beats most any free agent acquisition.

LC: Houston is loaded with talent but the Astros still build home runs around 
piles of strikeouts.Texas has a less exciting line-up but it has enough players 
who can get on base and produce runs. The key will be if either Derek Holland 
or Martin Perez can recapture prior brilliance until Yu Darvish returns in the 
early summer.

JB: Texas Rangers. A full season of Cole Hamels and an early season return by 
Yu Darvish will complement a lineup that’s a lot better than “#5 hitter Mitch 
Moreland” implies.

NL East champion 

DL: The Mets and Nationals will each enjoy 57 games against the Phillies, 
Marlins and Braves. Only one of those teams is big league, so they’ll both make 
the playoffs. The underdog role suitsWashington, who dine on Daniel Murphy’s 
state secrets all season long.

DG: The Mets actually have the pitching the Nationals thought they’d get from 
Stephen Strasburg and Gio Gonzalez. Yoenis Cespedes will quickly become known 
again more for driving in runners than driving in cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004d4d5287d4f80a75bc1f6245acb32a34040b00%2F0_77_3695_2219%2F3695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004d4d5287d4f80a75bc1f6245acb32a34040b00%2F0_77_3695_2219%2F3695.jpg>
 Bryce Harper can help the Nats win the NL East. Photograph: Logan Bowles/USA 
Today Sports 
LC: Much of the Nats’ collapse last year can be blamed on leadership. Dusty 
Baker will stabilize the clubhouse. Bryce Harper should have another great 
season. Max Scherzer, Stephen Strasburg and Gio Gonzalez lead a rotation that 
could add the highly-anticipated Lucas Giolito by late summer.

JB: New York Mets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-mets>. 
Washington’s gotten worse on paper and is a mess internally, while the Mets 
made the complementary moves they needed to make this offseason.

NL Central champion 

DL: Look, St Louis have missed the playoffs four times since 2000 and won nine 
division titles during that span. I don’t care if the Cubs trot out Johnny 
Evers, Joe Tinker, Ernie Banks, Billy Williams, Fergie Jenkins, and Ron Santo: 
I’m done betting against the Cards.


DG: The Cardinals run of divisional dominance had to end sometime and Jason 
Heyward jilting them for theCubs feels like the turning point. Of course, if 
Heyward is consumed by bees 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/baseball/cubs/ct-jason-heyward-bee-stings-spt-0328-20160327-story.html>
, all bets are off.

LC: This should finally be the year when everything goes right for the Cubs – 
so, of course, that means something won’t. But the additions of Jason Heyward 
and Ben Zobrist give them a lineup without holes. The biggest questions will be 
can the Cubs cut down on their strikeouts and will their starting pitchers be 
consistent enough?

JB: St Louis Cardinals, just so Chicago Cubs doesn’t sweep. St Louis is 
perhaps the best-run organization in baseball top to bottom, so hard to count 
them out.

NL West champion 

DL: They’re deep and youthful and yet somewhat of a work in progress. They’re 
also antsy:LA’s 26-year title drought is by far the longest since 1955. Winning 
the division hasn’t been the problem.


DG: The Giants win biennial World Series. And considering they’ve added Johnny 
Cueto, Jeff Samardzija and Denard Span, their chances in the division seem 
better than just the continuation of some weird trend.

LC: It’s not the players the Dodgers start the season with who will make a 
difference, it’s who they will add mid-season. No farm system is deeper and no 
team is better poised to make a deadline trade for a star or call up a pitcher 
who can go on a August and September tear. Any number of their home-grown 
pitchers or Cuban signings could be difference-makers in the pennant race.

JB: Even year San Francisco Giants, baby.

AL wildcard teams

DL: Some AL ifs: if the Red Sox rotation can back Price, if the Orioles 
starters are servicable, if the Yankees fragile roster sticks together, if the 
Angels bats recover, if the Indians hit, if the Mariners recover from an 
abysmal 2015. No idea: I’ll take theBoston and Cleveland, because they both do 
at least one thing well.


DG: The Rangers and Yankees. We are running out of opportunities to see Alex 
Rodriguez play in the postseason. Cherish them all and the mean tabloid 
headlines they bring.

LC: Pitching matters and these could be the two-best rotations in baseball. At 
some point a Carlos Carrasco or Jose Quintana is going to blow up into a star. 
Carlos Rodon of theChicago White Sox and Danny Salazar in Cleveland could be 
the difference-makers.

JB: I have not been a fan of the new regime in Toronto so far, and the 
rotation is questionable, but that lineup? Yeah. And this is the year theAngels 
actually win something for Trout, I know it. Please ignore “starting 1B CJ 
Cron.”

NL wildcard teams 

DL: The Cubs bomb and while Pittsburgh’s ascent is slowed. The D-Backs and Mets
 emerge from a wild September for a winner-take-all game in Queens, leaving the 
locals demoralized.


DG: Even without Zack Greinke, the Dodgers have $248m worth other somewhat 
talented players that should be enough to at least nab them a wildcard. And 
what would the NL’s annual play-in game be without thePirates participating?

LC: The Cardinals always find a player you never heard of to do something big 
in a key moment. They have their usual pesky lineup and will throw out a 
high-quality starting pitcher every night. TheMets will have some regression in 
their young pitchers and will again struggle to score runs as they did for much 
of last year but they have enough pitching to get to the playoffs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d77eb723072c98dea09c1c0f7cd97dcf8a53699%2F0_244_4042_2427%2F4042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20MLB%20predictions%20for%202016%3A%20can%20anyone%20stop%20the%20rampant%20Royals%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fbaseball-mlb-preview-kansas-city-royals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d77eb723072c98dea09c1c0f7cd97dcf8a53699%2F0_244_4042_2427%2F4042.jpg>
 Are the Cardinals the best-run team in baseball? Photograph: Steve 
Mitchell/USA Today Sports 
JB: Even I’m not down on the Cubs enough to predict they’ll miss the 
postseason. And theNationals might not be as good as the Mets, but they’ve 
still got Bryce Harper and an easy division to beat up on.

ALCS result

DL: Kansas City over Toronto

DG: Astros beat Blue Jays

LC: Kansas City over Boston

JB: Rangers beat Red Sox


NLCS result

DL: Dodgers defeat Washington

DG: Cubs beat Giants 


LC: Chicago over Washington

JB: Giants beat Cubs


World Series winner

DL: Kansas City are filling up on enough pre-season disrespect to power them 
all the way through 2016. After two straight straight World Series appearances 
and a ring, Vegas put them at 18-1 – behind theCleveland Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-indians>. Outrageous.


DG: Astros. Just six months ago the Astros were only two innings away from 
knocking off the eventual World Series champion Royals. That experience will 
help them get over the hump this year, barring any untimely tweetsfrom the Texas
 <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-astros-governor-idUSKCN0S62AU20151012>
governor 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-astros-governor-idUSKCN0S62AU20151012>, 
of course.

LC: Kansas City.

JB: San Francisco Giants. All jokes aside, they’re a well-rounded team that 
significantly addressed last year’s rotation issues. As good a choice as any.
 