
Andy Murray blamed the weight of expectation for his hapless first-round exit 
in the Australian Open.

The 18-year-old suffered a straight sets, 6-1, 6-3, 6-3 defeat to Argentinian 
Juan Ignacio Chela a day after fellow Briton Tim Henman fell to Dmitry Tursunov.

"If you guys expect me to play well every single match and every single 
tournament then it's not going to happen," a flat Murray said.

"Everybody has a bad tournament sometime. Unfortunately, it came here.

"But I'm going to have much better days than this one, and I'm sure I'll have 
worse days. You guys (the media) are expecting me to win matches like this. The 
guy's ranked 20 places in front of me, he is a much better player than me."

Murray continued: "It's difficult for me to go out there and try to perform to 
the best that I can when I'm expected to win all these matches."

Questioned further about his claims, after it was suggested he has received 
nothing but good press since he arrived on the circuit, Murray bristled before 
the press conference came to an abrupt end.

"You don't think there's any pressure on me? Well, if you don't think that, 
then I'm obviously going to disagree on something. If you guys don't think 
you're putting pressure on me, then that's fine. I'll forget about it."

After making the biggest jump of any player in 2005 as he surged from world 
number 514 to number 65 by the end of the year - and also becoming the first 
British teen since Buster Mottram in 1974 to finish in the top 100 - Murray has 
been touted as a future champion.

But Murray had no answer to the consistent play of his more experienced 
opponent and made a poor start by surrendering his serve in the second game of 
the match. A second service break in the sixth game, as he committed 15 
unforced errors, saw Chela take the set in just 23 minutes.

Chela was not as quick to take his opportunities in the second set but it 
mattered little as he broke in the second game on the way to leading 3-0. 
Murray lifted his intensity and pressured Chela's serve in the sixth and eighth 
games in an effort to get back into the contest but, after failing to break at 
30-40 and with Chela leading 4-3, he dropped his serve for a fourth time to 
fall two sets behind.

Thirteen second-set winners were offset by 17 more unforced errors, and for 
the third time in as many sets Murray was broken in the second game, with Chela 
then holding firm on his own serve to cruise home and set up a second-round 
clash with local hope Lleyton Hewitt.

Hewitt and world No1 Roger Federer both advanced into the second round. 
Top-seeded Federer signalled his intentions with a 6-2, 6-3, 6-2 demolition of 
Denis Istomin, while third seed Hewitt earned hard-fought 6-4, 2-6, 5-7, 7-6 
(7-4), 6-3 marathon victory over Robin Vik of the Czech Republic.

Federer's dismantling of his Uzbekistan opponent took less than 90 minutes, 
but the three-time Wimbledon champion insisted: "It was not easy today because, 
you know, he was serving big, taking a lot of chances on my return.

"We didn't see too many rallies, which didn't really allow me to get the 
rhythm going."

Hewitt produced a mixed performance as he overcame nine breaks of service and 
13 double faults to take the match in five intense sets lasting nearly four 
hours.

Slovakian 12th seed Dominik Hrbaty trailed by two sets before fighting back to 
overcome Austrian Oliver Marach 3-6, 4-6, 6-2, 6-1, 6-3. Fifth seed Nikolay 
Davydenko was severely tested by Croatian Ivo Karlovic, edging home 7-5, 4-6, 
3-6, 7-5, 6-3.

And Argentina's Guillermo Coria was another seed made to work hard for his 
victory, the world No9 eventually toppling Romanian Victor Hanescu 6-4, 1-6, 
4-6, 6-2, 6-1 to move through to the second round.

Other results

Janko Tipsarevic (Ser) bt Andreas Seppi (Ita) 1-6, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4; 
Paul-Henri Mathieu (Fra) bt Arnaud Clement (Fra) 6-3, 7-6 (7-4), 6-3; Federico 
Luzzi (Ita) bt Juan Antonio Marin (Crc) 6-1, 6-4, 7-5; Luis Horna (Per) bt Gael 
Monfils (Fra) 6-4, 7-5, 6-1; Peter Luczak (Aus) bt Ivo Minar (Cze) 7-6 (7-4), 
7-6 (7-5), 6-4; Paul Goldstein (USA) bt Novak Djokovic (Ser) 6-2, 1-6, 6-3, 
6-2; Nathan Healey (Aus) bt Filippo Volandri (Ita) 6-2, 6-3 ret; Juan Monaco 
(Arg) bt Jean-Rene Lisnard (Fra) 4-6, 6-2, 6-4, 6-3; Florian Mayer (Ger) bt 
Hyung Taik Lee (Kor) 6-4, 6-1, 4-6, 6-4; Amer Delic (USA) bt Potito Starace 
(Ita) 7-5, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, 3-6, 6-3; Davide Sanguinetti (Ita) bt Jacob 
Adaktusson (Swe) 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, 6-2; Nicolas Kiefer (Ger) bt Paradorn 
Srichaphan (Tha) 6-7 (5-7), 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-1, 6-2; Max Mirnyi (Blr) bt 
Thierry Ascione (Fra) 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, 6-7 (4-7), 6-0; Nikolay Davydenko (Rus) bt 
Ivo Karlovic (Cro) 7-5, 4-6, 3-6, 7-5, 6-3; Kristof Vilegen (Bel) bt Christophe 
Rochus (Bel) 6-3, 6-1, 6-4; Boris Pashanski (Ser) bt Wayne Arthurs (Aus) 7-3, 
6-4, 4-6, 7-6 (7-2); Igor Andreev (Rus) bt Nicolas Almagro (Spa) 7-5, 6-4, 6-3; 
Tommy Haas (Ger) bt Richard Gasquet (Fra) 6-2, 7-5, 6-2; Dominik Hrbaty (Svk) 
bt Oliver Marach (Aut) 3-6, 4-6, 6-2, 6-1, 6-3; Bjorn Phau (Ger) bt Carlos 
Berlocq (Arg) 6-4, 7-6 (7-3), 2-6, 7-6 (7-4); Dick Norman (Bel) bt Zack 
Fleishman (USA) 6-4, 7-6 (8-6), 5-7, 0-6, 6-3; Kevin Kim (USA) bt Harel Levy 
(Isr) 6-4, 6-4, 6-0; Olivier Rochus (Bel) bt Michael Llodra (Fra) 6-4, 6-2, 
6-2; Alex Bogomolov Jr. (USA) bt (9) Fernando Gonzalez (Chi) 4-6 7-6 (8-6) 6-3 
6-7 (3-7) 7-5, Raemon Sluiter (Ned) bt Pavel Snobel (Cze) 6-4 2-6 6-2 6-4, 
Fernando Verdasco (Spa) bt Kenneth Carlsen (Den) 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, 6-4; Juan 
Carlos Ferrero (Spa) bt Tomas Zib (Cze) 7-5, 6-0, 6-2; Sebastien Grosjean (Fra) 
bt Mark Philippoussis (Aus) 6-4, 6-2, 6-3.
 