
Two Orange prize-shortlisted novels appear in paperback this month. Madeline 
Miller'sThe Song of Achilles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fairytales/9781408816035/the-song-of-achilles>
 goes behind the scenes of the Iliad, and back into the childhoods of Achilles 
and Patroclus. "She is a respectful and clearly loving reader of Homer,"wrote 
Charlotte Higgins 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/oct/28/song-achilles-madeline-miller-iliad>
. "Nothing strikes a false note in her intricately created world ... where 
ordinariness and wonder (centaurs, goddesses) are woven together without 
jerkiness. She nails her colours to the mast, too: Miller has her Achilles and 
Patroclus inseparably, gloriously and physically devoted, which certainly makes 
sense to this reader."

Georgina Harding's Painter of Silence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408830420/painter-of-silence>
, meanwhile, uncovers the wartime experiences of a deaf-mute artist in Romania. 
"Harding writes with exquisite restraint,"wrote Clare Clark 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/23/painter-of-silence-georgina-harding-review>
, contrasting "the grim greyness of the communist city" with the pastoral 
landscape. "Her deceptively simple prose gives a startling beauty to the 
ordinary, and evokes great depth of suffering. It is a challenge for any writer 
to conjure the world of the wordless through words and in this Harding 
triumphantly succeeds."

Amitav Ghosh <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/amitav-ghosh>'s Sea of Poppies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780719568954/sea-of-poppies>
 began a trilogy investigating the opium trade of the 1830s. The second volume,
River of Smoke 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780719568992/river-of-smoke>
, moves from India to China, where the trade "has inflicted a plague of 
addiction on the Chinese population while making empire-sized fortunes for the 
irrepressibly shameless traders, mostly British". "Ghosh's novels somehow 
succeed in taking us back inside the chaos of when 'then' was 'now',"wrote 
Tessa Hadley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/11/river-smoke-amitav-ghosh-review>. 
"Both novels are cabinets of curiosities, crowded with items that hold a story 
of their own." She missed the verve of the first book, but found a "sensual 
freshness" that means "the spirit of the novel is enthusiastic tragicomedy, not 
moralising post-hoc gloom".

The Wandering Falcon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780241145159/the-wandering-falcon>
 by Jamil Ahmad washailed by our reviewer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/25/wandering-falcon-jamil-ahmad-review>
 as "one of the finest collections of short stories to come out of south Asia 
in decades". They are the work of a Pakistani civil servant, now in his 70s, 
who was inspired to turn into fiction what he saw decades ago when working in 
the tribal areas on the Pakistan-Afghan border. "The Pak-Afghan frontier has 
become synonymous with terrorists and the mechanised war of drones ... Jamil's 
stories return the humanity to this devastated region. His characters defy the 
much-used categories of our times: moderates or extremists, Salafis or Sufis, 
pro or anti-American. Their concerns are often ordinary, mostly difficult 
struggles for a life of dignity and love."

Towards the end of the month comes Alan Hollinghurst 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/alanhollinghurst>'s The Stranger's Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483247/the-strangers-child>
, an elegantly constructed country house novel about literary lives and 
afterlives over the 20th century.Theo Tait 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jun/17/strangers-child-alan-hollinghurst-review>
 called it "a sort of ironic meditation on the evolution of literary memory", 
as new myths replace old ones and new fashions reinterpret history. "Flawlessly 
executed though this book is," the review admitted, "it has rather less bite 
than its predecessors. The Stranger's Child is stately, even a touch tweedy, 
and not exactly original" – yet it's undeniably "elegant, seductive and 
extremely enjoyable to read".

There's more highly coloured fare in Erin Morgenstern's Orange prize- and 
Guardian first book-longlisted debutThe Night Circus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846555237/the-night-circus>
. A dreamy, atmospheric extravaganza about a fin de siècle circus powered by 
real magic, it won't be to everyone's taste, but should enchant fans of 
Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell – or even those resistant to fantasy. "I am 
hostile to whimsy",declared the Guardian's reviewer Claire Messud 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/sep/23/night-circus-erin-morgenstern-review>
, "yet I found it enchanting, and affecting ... in this sparklingly realised 
alternative reality, Morgenstern explores the relation between competition and 
collaboration, collusion and manipulation, fate and freedom." With chocolate 
popcorn, too.
 