A fashion journalist investigates a death at her friend's hair salon and finds 
her detective ex assigned to the case  Salon Suspicion  Cut Into Pieces  Killer 
Hair  Blow Die A newswoman turned “soccer mom” must prove her husband's 
innocence when the soccer coach is murdered  Inspector Mom  A Mother's Fight 
For Justice  Deadly Pitch  Coached To Kill A music critic travels cross-country 
with her mother's dog called Binky and learns about herself  Girl's Best Friend 
 Dog Days  On the Road With Binky  Doggy Road Trip An unmarried woman gets 
tired of being single so decides to marry herself  Do You Take Yourself?  Hers 
and Hers  Here Comes the Bride  I Me Wed A horse trainer is betrayed by her 
womaniser husband and sent to prison so gets some plastic surgery and creates a 
new identity to get revenge  Remember Me  A Face To Kill For  Changing Faces  
Deadly Makeover A brilliant female detective solves crimes with her ex-husband  
Married to Murder  A Screwball Homicide  Deadly Divorce  Crime Scenes From A 
Marriage A woman finds that her normal-seeming neighbour has secretly installed 
video surveillance in her home and is spying on her but finds that it's 
actually legal  Video Voyeur: The Susan Wilson Story  Hidden Deceit: The Mindy 
Wilkins Story  Secret Movies: The Janelle Mason Story  Betrayed By My 
Neighbour: The Laura Barnes Story A disturbed man puts mini-bombs in pacemakers 
as revenge for his son dying during a surgery accident  The Heartbreak Killer  
Dead in a Heartbeat  Love Bomb  Pacebreaker A teacher's holiday video is 
doctored to look like a porn film and uploaded online, ruining her life  Girls 
Gone Mild: Stolen Moments  Nightmare Vacation  The Video That Ruined My Life  
Reckless Behaviour: Caught on Tape A woman is convinced she has three children 
but she actually just has two  The Child That Doesn't Exist  Where Is My Son?  
Invisible Child  A Mother's Terror  You got…  Dangerous Talent: The Winner's 
Story  Fighting The Odds: The Decent Result Story  A Quiz-Takers Mistake: The 
Mediocrity Story  Fatal Errors: The Loser's Story  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  