
As Pakistan celebrates its 60th anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international/story/0,,2148453,00.html> of 
independence from British colonial rule, the people of Baluchistan mourn the 
crushing of their free and independent nation by what they see as "Pakistani 
imperialism".

On August 11 1947, the British protectorate of Baluchistan declared its 
independence. Three days later,Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> also became an independent nation. 
But the two states coexisted for less than a year.

In March 1948, Pakistan invaded and seized Baluchistan. Under threat of 
imprisonment, the traditional Baluch leader, the Khan of Kalat, Mir Ahmed Yar 
Khan, was pressured to sign a treaty of integration. This treaty was, however, 
never agreed by the Baluchistan parliament and never mandated by the Baluch 
people.

Ever since, for six decades, Baluchistan has been subjected to Pakistani 
military occupation, political domination, economic exploitation and cultural 
hegemony. Pakistan is an oppressed nation turned oppressor nation. It now 
adopts the imperialist tactics of its former colonial overlords to subjugate 
and exploit the Baluch.

Baluchistan makes up the whole south-west of Pakistan, bordering Afghanistan 
and Iran in the west and the Arabian Sea in the south. It accounts for nearly 
half of Pakistan's land mass and is immensely rich in natural resources, 
including oil, gas, coal, copper and gold. Despite this huge mineral wealth, 
Baluchistan is one of the poorest regions of Pakistan. Much of the population 
is malnourished, illiterate and semi-destitute, living in squalid housing with 
no electricity or clean drinking water.

Faced with Baluch resistance to annexation and occupation, the Pakistan armed 
forces have often resorted to extreme brutality, including war crimes and 
crimes against humanity.

In December 2005, Sardar Ataullah Mengal, Baluchistan's former chief minister, 
reported that Pakistani troops had usedchemical weapons 
<http://www.hinduonnet.com/fline/fl2303/stories/20060224001705100.htm> against 
Baluch tribespeople. He produced photographs of individuals bleeding from their 
mouths and noses, who he said were civilian victims of poison gas attacks. 
Other reports allege Pakistan's use of napalm and cluster bombs in civilian 
areas. Although such weapons violate the laws of war, Pakistan's crimes against 
the people of Baluchistan have, so far, escaped any serious international 
criticism.

Emboldened by the indifference of the UN, Pakistan has mounted indiscriminate 
attacks on civilian areas in a bid to crush Baluch rebellion and terrorise the 
population into submission.

On March 17 2005, the Pakistan military shelled the town of Dera Bugti, killing
 <http://www.balochwarna.org/derabugti/index.htm> more than 70 civilians. In 
December that year, Islamabad launched a ruthless military operation against 
the Marri Baloch people,killing 86 
<http://baltimore.indymedia.org/newswire/display/11692/index.php> and wounding 
120. Many of the victims were women andyoung children 
<http://www.bso-na.org/army_operation_in_balochistan.html>.

A 2006 report by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) documented 
<http://www.hrcp-web.org/images/publication/balochistan%20report/pdf/balochistan_report.pdf>
 arbitrary arrests and detention, torture, extra-judicial and summary 
executions, disappearances and the use of excessive and indiscriminate violence 
by Pakistan's police, military, security and intelligence forces. These 
findings were corroborated byAmnesty International 
<http://web.amnesty.org/library/index/ENGASA330042006>.

Typical tortures include being hung upside-down, sleep deprivation, electric 
shocks and cigarette burns. Baluch torture victims talk about the abuses they 
suffered,here 
<http://www.balochwarna.org/modules/VDdownloads/visit.php?cid=3&lid=85> and here
 <http://www.balochwarna.org/modules/VDdownloads/visit.php?cid=3&lid=96>.

Kachkol Ali Baloch, an opposition leader in the Baluchistan assembly, has 
alleged there are about 4,000 people who are either missing or have been 
detainedwithout trial 
<http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2006%5C01%5C29%5Cstory_29-1-2006_pg7_29>
. Those who have disappeared number around 1,000 students and politicalactivists
 <http://baltimore.indymedia.org/mod/comments/display/14296/index.php>, 
including prominent nationalist leaders such as Ghulam Mohammed Baluch, 
president of the Baluch National Movement, and Saleem Baluch and Sher Mohammed 
Baluch, both leaders of the Jamhoori Watan party. The Balochvoice.com website 
lists over 260 people who have beenabducted 
<http://balochvoice.com/information/06_12_Missing_Baloch_Peoples_List-2006.html>
 by the Pakistanis.

Among those jailed are Akhtar Mengal 
<http://www.thenews.com.pk/daily_detail.asp?id=67400>, president of Balochistan 
National party, who is widely believed to have been framed on terrorism 
charges. Other nationalist leaders are dead. Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti and 26 of 
his colleagues were killed in August 2006 by the Pakistani army in a targeted 
assassination plot to decapitate the nationalist leadership.

Pakistan's violent suppression has forced almost 100,000 Baluch civilians to 
flee their homes. They have become refugees in their own land. Pakistan ignores 
their plight, restricting media access and reportage and refusing to allow the 
UN and international aid agencies in to assist them.

To further subjugate and pacify Baluchistan, Islamabad is working on a 
sinister scheme to colonise the region with Punjabis (the largest and dominant 
ethnic group in Pakistan). The aim is to make the Baluch people a minority in 
their own homeland, as happened to the Native Americans in the US. This goal 
has already been achieved in major cities like Quetta, where colonist settlers 
now predominate.

Cultural imperialism is another weapon in Pakistan's bid to crush Baluchistan. 
Punjabi supremacists believe they have a sacred duty to "civilise" the 
"uncivilised" Baluch. They have imposed an alien language, Urdu, on the 
Baluchi-speaking people. In a similar fashion to the tactics of the apartheid 
regime in South Africa, which forced black children to be schooled in 
Afrikaans, Islamabad has dictated that Urdu is the compulsory language of 
instruction in Baluch educational institutions.

The cultural conquest of Baluchistan also involves the Islamification of the 
traditionally more secular Baluch nation. A large number of religious schools 
have been funded by the Pakistani state, with a view to imposing Pakistan's 
harsher, more narrow-minded interpretation of Islam. This is fuelling 
fundamentalism.

The west's attitude towards the plight of the Baluch is less than honourable. 
Because Britain and the US want Pakistan as an ally in the so-called war on 
terror, they have armed Pakistan and acquiesced with its suppression of the 
Baluch people.

Pakistan's war against Baluchistan is strengthening the position of the 
Taliban, who have exploited the unstable, strife-ridden situation to establish 
bases and influence in the region. From these bases, the Taliban terrorise the 
more liberal and secular Baluch people and seek to enforce the Talibanisation 
of Baluchistan. The Pakistani government mostly tolerates the Taliban, on the 
grounds that its presence acts as a second force to crush the Baluch people and 
weaken their struggle for independence.

If the foreign secretary, David Miliband, wants to strike a blow against the 
Taliban and Islamic fundamentalism, he should seek an end to Pakistan's 
repression in Baluchistan and support the Baluch people's right to 
self-determination.

* More information on the Baluch freedom <http://www.balochvoice.com> struggle 
<http://www.balochwarna.org>.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 