
It was a sunny Sunday afternoon at an artsy exhibition space in Queens, New 
York, and Panda Bear had a dimly lit wigwam full of people pondering their own 
mortality.

The prompt wasn’t particularly subtle. Noah Lennox, the Animal Collective 
frontman, spent nearly all his 75-minute long set –streamed on the internet as 
part of the Boiler Room sessions 
<https://boilerroom.tv/session/panda-bear-momaps1/> – with his eyes closed. 
Overhead a cowled skeleton (a nod to his fifth studio album, Panda Bear Meets 
the Grim Reaper), projected on the curved ceiling of the Moma PS1 dome, cradled 
and rocked a stuffed panda bear doll before shredding it to pieces. The same 
ghostly, red-sequin-clad visage beckoned to the crowd:you’re next. Message 
received.

It made for a show that was as much a visual as a musical event, with 
experimental film courtesy of artistDanny Perez <http://diptriana.com/>, the 
director behindODDSAC <http://www.oddsac.com/>, Animal Collective’s 2010 visual 
album. It seemed to serve Lennox, an “intensely”private person 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/cover-story/reader/panda-bear/>, well, evidenced 
by his desire to fade into the chaotic backdrop while performing songs that are 
deeply personal.

Lennox played an immersive, nonstop set stacked with offerings from his latest 
LP, which has been called hismost accessible to date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/panda-bear-meets-grim-reaper-review-lennoxs-blithe-kaleidoscopic-side-uppermost>
. After appearing onstage to little fanfare and pausing to ready his elaborate 
synthesizer setup, Lennox set to work. He eased into the album’s opening track, 
Sequential Circuits, a flowing song that could be the soundtrack to your 
personal journey down the River Styx.

That’s not to say it wasn’t fun. As we were carried away by a sea of pulsing 
strobe lights and flowing technicolor for Crosswords, the crowd was transfixed. 
Panda Bear seamlessly transitioned through the plunkingBoys Latin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=prBaZzYmQrI> and Faces in the Crowd.

It’s easy to lose the disarmingly lovely quality of Lennox’s voice when it’s 
half-obscured by layer upon layer of looping sound on a studio album, but he 
shines in a live setting. He brought a boyish, melodious howl to Tomboy 
highlight You Can Count on Me and a stunning, detached fragility to Come to 
Your Senses, with the repeated entreatment: “Are you mad?” In this surreal 
space, it begins to almost make sense that there are naked alien-like beings 
rolling and dancing around each other projected all around us.

But the delicate centerpiece Tropic of Cancer was the real gem – showcasing 
Lennox finding peace after a loved one succumbs to illness in a sprawling, 
unabashedly pretty ebb and flow with the sound of harps.

All the while, the crowd bobbed appreciatively and was overjoyed at the chance 
to cheer Lennox to an encore when finally given a break in the action. He 
reappeared quietly, taking a moment to ready himself before launching into Mr 
Noah, the lead single from Grim Reaper, and an extended version of album 
standout Lonely Wanderer.

We were treated to visions of otherworldly demons beaming as they spewed 
vomit, coupled with a booming, unintelligible voice. It’s unclear whether it 
was a message from our alien overlords or a voice in the darkness urging us 
deeper down the rabbit hole, but the ambiguousness works for Panda Bear, who 
disappears as the sight and sounds of ocean swells envelopes the room. The 
audience is cast into soothing darkness, but the beautiful ambience of the set 
lingers on like a benign ghost.
 