
Tonight's Panorama will surely enrage the notoriously touchy Barclay boys. 
Sirs David and Frederick Barclay are media tycoons who like to stay out of the 
media spotlight.

Often described as reclusive, the proprietors of the Telegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> dislike the term. They 
prefer to regard themselves as people who merely wish to be private.

Semantics aside, the point is that they have a history of complaining whenever 
they are treated to the sort of publicity to which other entrepreneurs are 
routinely subjected.

And they have also taken to the courts. In the 1996, they sued John Sweeney 
<http://www.caslon.com.au/defamationprofile7.htm#barclays>, the journalist who 
is presenting tonight's programme and the BBC for invading their privacy. In 
2005, theywent to court in France to sue The Times 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/feb/10/pressandpublishing.law> over a 
series of articles about their business deals (eventually dropping the action 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/feb/09/pressandpublishing.thetimes>). In 
2010,they sued Private Eye <http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/node/45678> for 
running a spoof Daily Telegraph front page.

So the boyos have form. And I'd guess that they will be watching BBC1 at 
8.30pm to see what Sweeney has to say in a Panorama entitled "The tax haven 
twins." Then again, maybe they cannot receive the programme live in their 
castle on Brecqhou in theChannel Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/channelislands> or in their other home in the 
tax haven of Monaco.

But they have plenty of British-based aides, and lawyers, who will surely be 
monitoring the broadcast, which the BBC's publicity department says will allege 
that one of their London hotels, The Ritz, hasn't paid any corporation tax in 
17 years.

Panorama has investigated the accounts of the hotel, which was acquired by the 
Barclays in 1995. It's a profitable business, but the hotel has taken advantage 
of a series of perfectly legal tax reliefs to ensure its corporation tax bill 
was zero.

The programme will also raise questions about another of their businesses, the 
catalogue company Littlewoods, which they bought in 2002. It secured a VAT 
rebate, plus interest, from the revenue commissioners worth £472m over payments 
dating back to 1973. But the company has gone to court to demand a further £1bn 
from the government in compound interest.

It's an important test case for taxpayers because, should Littlewoods win, it 
could open the door to claims worth billions of pounds from other companies.

The twins say they have had nothing to do with the running of the UK companies 
since they retired to Monaco more than 20 years ago.

"We have not attended office, management or board meetings in the UK since 
leaving the country," Sir David Barclay said in a statement. "My brother and I 
have no editorial, political or economic power in the UK."

Littlewoods, the Ritz and the Telegraph are each controlled by offshore 
trusts. However, the trusts were set up by the twins and one of the brothers 
attends trust meetings.

The UK businesses are managed by Sir David's son, Aidan Barclay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>. On the Littlewoods claim, he 
said:

"This represents tax taken incorrectly by HMRC and held incorrectly for many 
years, facts which HMRC publicly recognise and accept.

Directors of companies have legal responsibilities and duties to recover and 
secure their companies' assets from the perspective of each company itself and 
its various stakeholders. It would be a dereliction of their duties not to 
pursue repayments which are properly due fromHMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc>."



Aidan Barclay told Panorama that Littlewoods lodged its VAT claim before the 
family took over the company, which is true. But the £1bn test case for 
compound interest was launchedafter the Barclays' takeover.

He also explained that the Ritz had reinvested profits made by the hotel, 
adding: "The Barclay family members and their companies abide by the law and 
pay the taxes required by UK law and the laws of other relevant countries."

Sir David Barclay said: "We have always acted in a responsible way with regard 
to taxation and have never been involved in any tax avoidance scheme. We are 
not responsible for corporate taxes in the UK and are unaware what tax is paid 
on the Ritz."

Panorama will also touch on the controversy surrounding the Barclays' 
activities inSark <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sark>. the island adjacent to 
Brecqhou.

As David Leigh has reported 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/dec/14/bbc-panorama-investigation-barclay-brothers>
, the Sark segment has already attracted complaints from the Barclays' estate 
manager on the island, Kevin Delaney.

His Sark Newsletter <http://www.sarknewsletter.com/Bulletin_Archive.html> 
carried a lengthy article on 10 October criticising Sweeney for his (allegedly) 
"unbecoming drunken antics" during his visits earlier this year to film on the 
island. He wrote:

"Empowered by the might of the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, Mr 
Sweeney filmed people without their consent.

He aggressively invaded my offices and harassed and intimidated my staff in 
his concerted efforts at staging a hostile confrontation with me on camera - 
despite being made aware, in writing, that I did not want to be interviewed by 
him."

Delaney returned to the attack on the BBC in a bulletin dated yesterday (16 
December) <http://www.sarknewsletter.com/> in which he alleged that the editor 
of Panorama, Tom Giles, had repeatedly threatened him with libel proceedings.

Sweeney says he'll let the programme speak for itself.

Source: BBC Full disclosure: I was interviewed for the programme
 