
In Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> it’s a sea of pillars, 
decorated for each participating nation. There’s always a grand entry to these 
climate summits – or conferences of the parties (COP) to the UN climate 
convention – as if to remind the thousands of delegates traipsing in each day 
that they are entering Planet COP.


After 21 years the annual summits have a familiar structure even though each 
takes place in a difference country.

There’s a similar lay-out – huge halls with little prefabricated offices for 
each national delegation or international organisation. Some are fancier than 
others. The UN usually has a relaxation lounge. Some have gimmicks. This year 
China has a talking robot that tells you the greenhouse emissions you have 
created travelling to Paris and how you might offset them.
Lenore Taylor (@lenoretaylor) 
A robot telling me the emissions from my flight to Paris 
pic.twitter.com/h4EDXaMcsl <https://t.co/h4EDXaMcsl>
 <https://twitter.com/lenoretaylor/status/671797753387884544> December 1, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/lenoretaylor/status/671797753387884544> 
There’s a pavilion where all manner of climate-related organisations set up 
stalls and a media room as big as a barn and some gimmicks to provide 
photographic backdrops – in Paris, somewhat unoriginally – a mini Eiffel tower.

And everything is climate-themed – from the water bottle in each participants’ 
welcome pack (Did you know that most of us use around 650 plastic cups each 
year? ForFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> alone that’s 25 
Eiffel towers of waste”) to the chocolate bars handed out on the way in 
(containing letters from the world’s children as a “sweet reminder” of the 
requests from young “climate justice ambassadors”.)

Stretching the friendship


But while Planet COP is obsessively, earnestly devoted to a global agreement 
on climate change – it sometimes seems less weird than Planet Oz.


Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
joined 150 world leaders on Monday urging a Paris deal that locks in current 
national greenhouse gas-reducing commitments and then rachets them up every 
five years.

Welcome to the wonderful world of climate talks, where less means more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/27/welcome-to-the-wonderful-world-of-climate-talks-where-less-means-more>
But at home he was being warned – in anonymous quotes to the Daily Telegraph – 
that there would be “hell to pay” if he even considered increasing Australia’s 
commitment because Tony Abbott had already “stretched the friendship” with the 
current 26-28% target by 2030. Apparently Australia’s fair share of avoiding 
catastrophic warming is to be determined by unspecified “friendships” within 
the Coalition.

And the same mindset inside his own conservative parties meant that – even as 
he pledged to increase spending on clean energy research and development, 
Turnbull could not say he had abandoned Tony Abbott’s plan to abolish the 
agencies that commercialise and fund that same technology – the Australian 
Renewable Energy Agency and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.

Planet COP is a strange microcosm, but Planet Oz can sometimes seem stranger. 
And the gap between them looks even bigger than the gap between dangerous 
global warming and the world’s promised reductions in emissions.
 