
Paris climate deal might just be enough to start turning the tide on global 
warming | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-gives-even-a-cynic-grounds-for-optimism>
Governments have signalled an end to the fossil fuel era, committing for the 
first time to a universal agreement to cut greenhouse gas emissions and to 
avoid the most dangerous effects of climate change at crunch United Nations 
talks in Paris.


Speaking outside the conference hall, a jubilant foreign affairs minister, 
Julie Bishop, said theagreement involving all nations and trading competitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2015/dec/12/paris-agreement-a-victory-for-climate-science-and-ultimate-defeat-for-fossil-fuels>
 could give Australia “comfort” to take tougher action to reduce its greenhouse 
gas emissions.

After 20 years of fraught meetings, including the past two weeks spent in an 
exhibition hall on the outskirts of Paris, negotiators from nearly 200 
countries signed on to a deal on Saturday evening that set ambitious goals to 
limit temperature rise and hold governments to account for reaching those 
targets.

After an anxious two-hour wait for the final plenary session to begin, Laurent 
Fabius, the French foreign minister, who was chairing the meeting, invited 
delegates to adopt the agreement. After looking up briefly, he brought down the 
gavel to widespread applause and cheering, signifying the deal had been 
formally agreed.

“It is a small gavel but I think it can do a great job,” he said, once the 
applause had died down.

François Hollande, the French president, appealed to negotiators to approve 
the 31-page text, and said countries had a rare chance to make history. “We are 
at a decisive point in time,” he said.

Paris climate talks: governments adopt historic deal – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-talks-francois-hollande-to-join-summit-as-final-draft-published-live>
Fabius said: “It is my deep conviction that we have come up with an ambitious 
and balanced agreement. Today it is a moment of truth.”

Bishop, who led Australia’s negotiating team, said it was a “historic” and 
“momentous” occasion because the whole world had agreed to act on climate 
change – something that could alsoallow Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/12/what-does-paris-climate-agreement-mean-for-australia>
 to do more.

“It gives us comfort that we know what the major economies are doing, our 
major trading partners are doing, our trading competitors are doing,” she said.

“It certainly means there is flexibility for us to do more, and the spirit of 
the agreement is to encourage countries to be ambitious, to aim higher and to 
take into account their circumstances.

“We are having a review of our policies in 2017 and we will consider what more 
needs to be done at that time,” Bishop added. “This will give us comfort and 
confidence that we are working in collaboration with almost 200 other 
countries, including the major emitters, the US and China.”

But she avoided questions about what the deal could mean for Australia’s coal 
industry, saying every country would act as it saw fit, and nothing would be 
imposed by others or by the UN.

Bishop was the second minister to address the conference after the agreement 
had been adopted, speaking on behalf of the so-called umbrella group of 
developed nations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670950a773253ad83b458191cb2958752c2926ca%2F0_0_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20talks%3A%20Bishop%20hails%20'historic'%20day%20as%20nearly%20200%20countries%20sign%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20talks%3A%20Bishop%20hails%20%27historic%27%20day%20as%20nearly%20200%20countries%20sign%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F670950a773253ad83b458191cb2958752c2926ca%2F0_0_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
 French president François Hollande, French foreign minister Laurent Fabius, 
fourth right, and United Nations secretary-general Ban Ki-moon, third right, 
attend the COP 21 Climate Conference. Photograph: Xinhua / Barcroft Media 
The US president, Barack Obama, meanwhile, hailed the historic deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/12/obama-speech-paris-climate-change-talks-deal-american-leadership>
 as “a tribute to strong, principled American leadership”.

In a seven-minute address from the White House, the president cited the US 
agreement with China on carbon in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/12/china-and-us-make-carbon-pledge>
 as a “foundation for success in Paris”.

Obama said the Paris climate deal answered the need for “an enduring global 
agreement that reduces carbon pollution and sets the world on course to a 
low-carbon future”.

“We met the moment,” the US president said. “I want to thank the people of 
nearly 200 nations, large and small, developed and developing, for working 
together to construct a deal for the people of all nations.”

He added: “Today the American people can be proud, because this historic 
agreement is a tribute to American leadership. Over the past seven years, we’ve 
transformed the United States into the global leader in fighting climate 
change.”

Six years after the chaotic collapse of the Copenhagen climate summit, the 
agreement now known as the Paris Outcome for the first time commits rich 
countries, rising economies and some of the poorest countries to work together 
to fight climate change.

Under the deal, adopted by consensus, all countries agreed to reduce 
emissions. Rich countries agreed to raise $100bn (£66bn, A$1.38bn) a year by 
2020 to help poor countries transform their economies. The overall agreement is 
legally binding, but some elements – including the pledges to curb emissions by 
individual countries and the climate finance elements – are not.

Government and business leaders said the agreement, which set a new goal to 
reach net zero emissions in the second half of the century, sent a powerful 
signal to global markets, hastening the transition away from fossil fuels and 
to a clean energy economy.

The International Investors Group on Climate Change, a network managing €13tn 
of assets, said the decision would encourage greater investments in renewable 
energy.

“Investors across Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> will 
now have the confidence to do much more to address the risks arising from high 
carbon assets and to seek opportunities linked to the low-carbon transition 
already transforming the world’s energy system and infrastructure,” the group 
said.

Jennifer Morgan, of the environmental thinktank the World Resources Institute, 
said the long term goal was “transformational” and “sends signals into the 
heart of the markets”.

The deal set a high aspirational goal to limit warming below 2C and strive to 
keep temperatures at 1.5C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
 above pre-industrial levels – a far more ambitious target than expected, and a 
key demand of vulnerable countries.

It incorporates previous commitments from 186 countries to reduce emissions, 
which on their own would only hold warming to between 2.7C and 3C.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F249acf102543202991d24dfe54d189bc3454589e%2F0_114_1793_1075%2F1793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20talks%3A%20Bishop%20hails%20'historic'%20day%20as%20nearly%20200%20countries%20sign%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20talks%3A%20Bishop%20hails%20%27historic%27%20day%20as%20nearly%20200%20countries%20sign%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fparis-climate-deal-talks-julie-bishop-australia-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F249acf102543202991d24dfe54d189bc3454589e%2F0_114_1793_1075%2F1793.jpg>
 A climate demonstrator in Paris on Saturday. Photograph: Etienne Laurent/EPA 
But it sets out procedures for review at regular intervals to deepen emissions 
cuts, with countries aiming for global greenhouse gas emissions to reach a peak 
as soon as possible, and then rapidly scale down in the second half of this 
century.

Critics said the agreement would still condemn hundreds of millions of people 
living in low-lying coastal areas and small islands. But supporters said the 
negotiations took a significant step forward in getting countries to act 
together on a global challenge of immense complexity, and in sending a signal 
to global markets.

Saturday’s agreement was the product of years of preparation and two weeks of 
intense negotiations, capped off by three sleepless nights, withBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and Hollande phoning other 
leaders to bring them on side with the deal.

What does the Paris climate agreement mean for Australia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/12/what-does-paris-climate-agreement-mean-for-australia>
Accounts from behind the closed doors of negotiating session described tense 
exchanges between oil-producing countries, such as Saudi Arabia and Russia, and 
a rapidly constituted US- and Europe-backed High Ambition Coalition, which kept 
up the pressure for a strong temperature goal and regular reviews of 
emission-cutting plans.
COP21en (@COP21en) 
#ParisAgreement <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ParisAgreement?src=hash> is 
adopted in#Paris <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Paris?src=hash> at #COP21 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/COP21?src=hash>! #GoCOP21 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GoCOP21?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/9wCxyshWa7 
<https://t.co/9wCxyshWa7>
 <https://twitter.com/COP21en/status/675746019078991872> December 12, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/COP21en/status/675746019078991872> 
The French hosts also won praise from negotiators for using a mixture of 
informal huddles, or indabas, and traditional shuttle diplomacy to bring the 
deal home.

The text commits countries to peak greenhouse gas emissions as soon as 
possible, and to seek a balance between human-caused emissions and removals by 
carbon sinks.

“This means bringing down greenhouse gas emissions to net zero within a few 
decades,” said John Schellnhuber, director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate 
Impact Research, and a climate adviser to the Vatican.

But he added that countries would have to move aggressively, peaking before 
2030 and eliminating emissions by 2050 through reforestation and technologies 
such as carbon capture and storage.

For vulnerable countries, the high ambition of the 1.5C goal was offset by the 
weakening of the agreement when it came to dealing with irreparable damage of 
climate change.

Negotiators and campaigners said pressure from the US and European Union 
stripped the agreement of language that would have opened up new sources of 
funding for small islands and low-lying states that could experience 
irreversible damage due to climate change.

“The idea of even discussing loss and damage now or in the future was off 
limits. The Americans told us it would kill the COP,” said Leisha Beardmore, 
the chief negotiator for the Seychelles. “They have always been telling us: 
‘Don’t even say that’.”

Even so, campaign groups were broadly positive about the outcome. Given 
intense pressure from oil-producing countries, negotiators managed to craft a 
text that was far more ambitious than expected.

The universal nature of the agreement was a radical departure from the Kyoto 
Protocol, the 1997 agreement that drew sharp divisions between the obligations 
of wealthy and developing countries but ultimately failed to lower emissions.

Unlike Kyoto, the agreement reached on Saturday depends on political will, 
with countries setting their own climate action plans.

Rich countries promised that by 2025 they would set a new goal for climate 
finance “from a floor of $100bn per year”, the figure first pledged at the 
Copenhagen climate talks six years ago. However, the commitment was offered as 
a non-binding decision that accompanied the binding text.

All the countries agreed on demands from the US and European Union for 
five-year reviews of their emissions reductions – an exercise that had been 
resisted by China.
 