
Hackers have leaked the private login details of nearly 1,415 officials at the 
UN climate talks in Paris in an apparent act of protest against arrests of 
activists in the city.

Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous>, the hacktivist 
movement, hacked the website of the summit organisers, the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), and posted names, phone numbers, 
usernames, email addresses, and secret questions and answers onto an anonymous 
publishing site.

From Isis to Atlantic Records: five targets of Anonymous's cyberwarfare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2015/nov/17/isis-anonymous-targets-cyberwarfare-hacktivists-atlantic-records>
Anonymous claimed the attack was an act of protest against the arrest of 
protesters on a climate march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/29/peaceful-paris-climate-gathering-descends-into-clashes-with-police>
 in Paris on Sunday. Climate activists organising a peaceful protest say that 
the demonstration was hijacked by a small group of anarchists who clashed with 
police. All public protests have been banned in the city since a state of 
emergency was declared after the terror attacks nearly three weeks ago.

Officials whose data has been leaked are from a range of countries including 
the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Peru, France, and the US. Employees of the 
British Council and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs are 
among the British officials whose data is now in the public domain.


“For the UNFCCC itself it’s embarrassing,” says Oliver Farnan, security 
researcher at the Cyber Security Network in Oxford University. “The specific 
attack that was used [an SQL injection attack] is a well-known vulnerability … 
To have their entire user database compromised in this way demonstrates a lack 
of focus on security,” he said.

Farnan also said that the password encryption used by the UNFCCC appeared to 
be an “old and weak hashing algorithm,” that should have been “phased out”.

However the damage is likely to limited, and mitigated by changing the 
passwords on any accounts that use similar passwords.

“Although it’s embarrassing, it’s essential to ensure that their users don’t 
get compromised in follow on attacks,” Farnan said.


 