
The Turnbull government says it will reform the parliamentary expenses system 
to clarify what “official business” means after more revelations aboutCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> members’ use of 
parliamentary expenses emerged.

The Coalition’s expenses controversy deepened this week with revelations three 
ministers billed taxpayers to attend a New Year’s function hosted byMalcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> in 2015.


Sussan Ley, who stood aside as health minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 on Monday following a taxpayer-funded trip to the Gold Coast where she bought 
an investment property in 2015, will also face further questions after a report 
she took another trip to inspect a Gold Coast property in September 2014.

Sussan Ley stands aside as health minister while travel claims investigated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
Kelly O’Dwyer, the acting special minister of state, moved to quiet the 
controversies on Tuesday.

She said the Turnbull government would implement the recommendations from last 
year’s review of the expenses system 
<https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/independent-parliamentary-entitlements-system-review-feb-2016.pdf>
, led by Remuneration Tribunal president John Conde and former Finance 
secretary David Tune.

The Turnbull government intended to introduce legislation in the first half of 
this year to help it do so, she said. The review of the expenses system was 
published in February 2016. It was initiated afterformer speaker Bronwyn 
Bishop’s use of a taxpayer-funded helicopter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/16/bronwyn-bishop-agrees-to-pay-back-cost-of-5000-helicopter-trip>
 to travel to a party fundraiser, costing $5,227.

In March 2016, then-special minister of state Mathias Cormann indicated the 
Turnbull government had accepted all of the report’s recommendations in 
principle. A government spokesman told Guardian Australia on Tuesday that just 
three of those 36 recommendations had been implemented.

Bronwyn Bishop agrees to pay back cost of $5,000 helicopter trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/16/bronwyn-bishop-agrees-to-pay-back-cost-of-5000-helicopter-trip>
O’Dwyer on Tuesday reiterated that the government had accepted all of the 
report’s recommendations. “The Australian people expect that parliamentarians 
adhere to very high standards when it comes to claiming of work expenses,” she 
said.

“The government does respect the Australian people which is why we are the 
government that is actually taking action in relation to changing and cleaning 
up this system. There are many governments before that have ducked this issue. 
The Turnbull Government is dealing with it.”

O’Dwyer’s announcement came after the Greens, Senator Nick Xenophon, and 
Independent MPAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> vowed to push for 
reforms of parliamentary expenses.

Greens leader Richard Di Natale told Radio National that scandals over many 
years, includingthose that engulfed Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
,Labor’s Sam Dastyari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 andthe Coalition’s Stuart Robert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
, showed the need for a national anti-corruption watchdog.

He said parliamentarians encountered “grey areas” when they conducted both 
official business and met people outside their portfolio on the same trip, but 
the Department of Finance is not able to give definitive advice about whether 
expenses are within the rules.

Sam Dastyari resigns from Labor frontbench over donations row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
O’Dwyer said it was a priority for the government to clarify what “official 
business” meant. She said a clear definition of the term was “at the centre of 
the changes that need to be made and will be made by the government”.

Wilkie criticised O’Dwyer’s announcement. “The government must think we’re all 
mugs if it believes we’ll take seriously the report today that it’s committed 
to implementing the reforms that came out of the 2016 review into parliamentary 
expenses,” he said in a statement.

“Kelly O’Dwyer may well have said all the right things today. But so did 
Senator Mathias Cormann way back in March 2016 and virtually nothing’s changed. 
Until something actually changes it’s all just more political gobbledygook out 
of Canberra.”



 