
In Bangladesh, no one really commemorates August 15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,822544,00.html>, the 
independence of India and Pakistan. After all, how many independences can one 
country take? First there was the exit of the British - something to be 
celebrated, surely, as Bengal was at the heart of the reform and nationalist 
movements throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries. Then, there was the 
creation of Pakistan, which Bengali Muslims voted for and endorsed. Then, of 
course, we had our very own independence - the independence that came about in 
1971, when East Pakistan became Bangladesh.

The question of dates becomes even more complicated because of the events of 
August 15 1975. On this day,Sheikh Mujibur Rahman 
<http://www.storyofpakistan.com/person.asp?perid=P035>, the leader of 
Bangladesh's independence movement, was brutallymurdered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international/story/0,,411744,00.html> along with 
14 members of his family. A strong lobby in Bangladesh has called for August 15 
to be declared a national day of mourning. With these complex associations, and 
with the layering of history which inevitably encourages us to replace certain 
dates with new ones, Bangladeshis would unequivocally nameMarch 26 1971 
<http://www.virtualbangladesh.com/history/declaration.html> as their day of 
independence <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/1073306.stm>. 
However, even this date gestures towards an unfulfilled promise, because 
freedom was granted to too few, and with too many conditions.

Throughout the Bangladesh war 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bangladesh_Liberation_War>, Pakistani soldiers 
repeatedly asked Bengali freedom fighters if they were Bengali or Muslim, as 
though the cultural identity could not coexist with the religious identity. The 
Bengalis of East Pakistan were Bengali and Muslim; they fought a war of 
independence so that they could have a country in which these two identities 
could be integrated.

But sadly, the fight that led to the legitimisation of this identity did not 
lay the groundwork for pluralism, nor indeed did it result in a final 
resolution of the tension between cultural and religious identity. People are 
still wondering whether they are Bengali or Muslim, and in the wake of this 
great anxiety, a sinister and violent form of identity politics has taken root 
that has left many Bangladeshi citizens behind. For East Pakistan, and East 
Bengal before it, was not only made up of Bengalis andMuslims 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/islam/>. It also included Hindus 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/hinduism/>, Buddhists 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/buddhism/>, Christians 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/>, Jains 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/jainism/>, and the indigenous peoples -
Chakmas <http://banglapedia.search.com.bd/HT/C_0090.htm>, Santals 
<http://banglapedia.search.com.bd/HT/S_0085.htm>, and Garos 
<http://banglapedia.search.com.bd/HT/G_0043.htm>. These people are neither 
Bengali nor Muslim, and this debate has not only disenfranchised them from the 
major questions of identity that grip modern-day Bangladesh, but has distracted 
us from the slow and steady colonisation of their lands, cultures, and habitats.

For our minorities, freedom has not arrived at all, not with three dates on 
the calendar, not with three decades of citizenship, and certainly not with the 
crude majoritarianism that we call democracy.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 