
 Author:  George Orwell (1903-1950) was educated at Eton, but turned his back 
on a life of privilege by joining the Imperial Police in Burma. He left in 
1927, after deciding to become a full-time writer. His first publication, Down 
and Out in Paris and London (1933), was an indictment of specific social 
conditions. He then turned to novel-writing - Burmese Days (1934), A 
Clergyman's Daughter (1935) and Keep the Aspidistra Flying (1936) - before the 
life-changing experience of fighting in the Spanish civil war. He contracted TB 
in 1938, was turned down for service in the second world war and took a job at 
the BBC. Animal Farm (1945) was his first real commercial success; despite his 
increasing illness, Orwell completed Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949) and died a few 
months after its publication.

 The story:  A dystopian political satire of astounding influence originally 
titled The Last Man in Europe, Nineteen Eighty-Four follows the doomed 
intellectual rebellion of Winston Smith, party member of the ruling caste in a 
dictatorship. Smith's love affair with a fellow rebel, Julia, is both the 
expression of his dissidence and the cause of his downfall; he is trapped and 
then interrogated by a party grandee, O'Brien. Smith, however, avoids execution 
- after succumbing to O'Brien's brutal methods, he is reduced to a 
near-braindead party functionary. In this novel, Orwell initiated a plethora of 
ideas and phrases that are now fixtures in our mainstream culture: Big Brother, 
room 101, thought police, doublethink.

 Film-makers:  After a career in TV documentaries, Michael Radford (b1946) 
crossed to feature film-making with the wartime drama Another Time, Another 
Place (1983), and was given the much-prized option on the novel after 
impressing Orwell's estate with his script. Production began in late 1983, with 
the plan to release the film in 1984; Radford and producer Simon Perry secured 
finance from Richard Branson's Virgin Films. (It ended up costing Branson 
Â£5.5m, a huge amount for the time.) Radford quickly cast John Hurt as Winston 
Smith, but O'Brien was much harder to find; filming had already started when 
Richard Burton took on the role. Virgin insisted some specially commissioned 
Eurythmics songs be included on the soundtrack, much to Radford's displeasure. 
They were eventually removed after a struggle.

 How book and film compare:  Strict controls over the content of any film 
adaptation had been left by Orwell's widow, Sonja, after her death in 1980 - 
she especially disliked the noirish Americanised version made in 1956. She 
objected to any outlandish future-world concepts. Radford put forward what he 
called a "collapsed futurism", rooting the look and content of the film very 
much in the postwar Britain that Orwell evoked. Embellishments include using 
footage from an actual wartime propaganda film scripted by Dylan Thomas for the 
Two Minutes Hate scene, and inventing a cod-Nazi salute for the party members.

 Inspirations and influences:  Radford's concept for his treatment of the book 
has a lot in common with the idea of "retrofitting" that Ridley Scott developed 
for Blade Runner (1982), another example of a future-world where modern 
technology is grafted on an older, decaying shell. It reached its apogee a year 
later with Terry Gilliam's Brazil (1985), which drew heavily on Orwell.
 