
Patrick Hodgkinson, who has died aged 85, was the architect of one of the most 
original urban creations of the past half-century, theBrunswick Centre 
<http://www.ajbuildingslibrary.co.uk/projects/display/id/2173> in Bloomsbury, 
central London. Conceived in the late 1950s but not completed until the 70s, 
the development stemmed from the marriage of big money – in the persons of the 
property developer Alec Colman and the McAlpine construction dynasty – and art, 
in the persons of Hodgkinson and his then employer,Leslie Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/aug/02/guardianobituaries1>, the 
architect best known for his work on the Royal Festival Hall.

The orthodoxy of the day was tower blocks (a previous scheme had proposed two 
17-storey towers). But Martin and Hodgkinson envisaged something quite 
different, scarcely higher than the surrounding Georgian terraces, with flats 
in twin A-shaped linear blocks facing across a raised public/retail plaza with 
car parking below.

When Harold Wilson’s Labour government in 1964 unexpectedly introduced 
security of tenure for furnished tenants, Colman told Hodgkinson to go and talk 
to the new borough of Camden about housing. The result was a public-private 
partnershipavant la lettre: as developer, McAlpine built the car parking and 
shopping privately, and as contractor it built the flats as local authority 
housing for Camden.

But this did not go according to plan. The concept was that the linear plaza 
would connect two main roads, Bernard Street and Tavistock Place. But the 
northern part of the site was occupied by a Territorial Army centre and the 
Ministry of Defence refused to budge. Shorn of its northern third, the 
Brunswick terminated inconsequentially in a minor road and as a result it never 
became the bustling centre that the architects had envisaged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fpatrick-hodgkinson-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc361da0fbadd43ba60b7cca938265ce5c1fdfded%2F503_579_4124_5151%2F4124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Hodgkinson%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fpatrick-hodgkinson-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Hodgkinson%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fpatrick-hodgkinson-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc361da0fbadd43ba60b7cca938265ce5c1fdfded%2F503_579_4124_5151%2F4124.jpg>
 Patrick Hodgkinson became director of the BArch degree course at Bath 
University in 1981 
Hodgkinson was born in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, the 
youngest of three children. His father, Geoffrey, was a wealthy landowner and 
farmer with an antipathy to art; he was dead set against Patrick becoming an 
architect. But there were artistic connections in the family, through his Irish 
mother, Patricia (nee Denning). One of her sisters, Toni, was the wife of the 
celebrated designer Gordon Russell, while another, Vere, was a protege of Elsa 
Schiaparelli and married to the fashion photographer John French.

Raised in Little Blakenham, Suffolk, and then across the border in Aldeby, 
Norfolk, Hodgkinson went to Orwell Park preparatory school, near Ipswich, and 
Charterhouse, Surrey. He thought of becoming an artist, was mentored by the 
landscape painter Sir John Arnesby Brown, and attended Norwich School of Art 
for a time, before doing his national service in the Royal Navy, and then 
enrolling at the Architectural Association in London in 1950. To pay his way, 
he worked for Neville Ward, one of Russell’s favoured architects, and later for 
the structural engineer Felix Samuely.

Hodgkinson’s class at the AA was a glittering one, including Neave Brown, 
Kenneth Frampton and John Miller; but even in this distinguished company 
Hodgkinson stood out. His fourth-year housing project in 1953 – in many ways 
the origin of all that was to follow – was an extraordinarily accomplished 
scheme that took Le Corbusier’s idea of the Unité d’Habitation, as demonstrated 
by the recently completed18-storey slab block in Marseille 
<http://www.archdaily.com/85971/ad-classics-unite-d-habitation-le-corbusier>, 
and turned it into a four-storey “groundscraper”. Hodgkinson dispatched the 
drawings from Finland, where he was spending the second half of his fourth year 
in the office ofAlvar Aalto <http://www.alvaraalto.fi/index_en.htm>, to his 
tutors in London.

After leaving the AA, Hodgkinson was invited by Martin in 1957 to join his 
studio in Cambridge, to work on a housing scheme for the then St Pancras 
borough council. The scheme, which was published but not built, was 
unmistakably based on Hodgkinson’s student project. Then cameHarvey Court 
<http://www.architecturetoday.co.uk/?p=21471>, Hodgkinson’s design for a 
student hall of residence for Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, which was 
completed in 1962, followed by theBodleian Law Library 
<http://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/law> in Oxford. On both projects Colin St John 
Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/may/16/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
was formally the associate architect and was credited as such, giving rise to a 
subsequent claim to design authorship, which in the case of Harvey Court was 
certainly not justified.

On the Brunswick, Hodgkinson was lead architect from the start, and once 
planning permission had been obtained Martin handed the project to him. On this 
basis, Hodgkinson set up his own studio in London, modelled on Martin’s, with a 
small team including David Levitt and David Bernstein (who later formed their 
own practice), and Anthony Richardson. Levitt recalls Hodgkinson in these years 
(1964-70) as “delightful to work for” – gentle, thoughtful and calm. This was 
Hodgkinson in his prime.

However, the gift of so large a first commission proved a double-edged sword, 
for it meant that Hodgkinson had never mastered the first lesson of 
architecture – how to get work. Accordingly, when McAlpine decided in 1970 that 
it no longer needed an architect to supervise construction and summarily 
terminated his Brunswick appointment, he was left exposed.

A large mixed-use scheme for Oxford University, Wellington Square, fell 
through and in 1981 he moved into academia, becoming director of the BArch 
degree course at Bath University. Here, unusually, architecture and engineering 
were taught together – harking back to his days with Samuely. A chair followed 
in 1990. Among his students at Bath were several who would become leaders in 
the field, including Keith Bradley, Richard Lavington, Gerard Maccreanor and 
Steve Tompkins.

Hodgkinson retired in 1995. He later returned to the Brunswick, working 
alongside Levitt Bernstein on the regeneration and upgrading of the scheme – 
and finally giving it the coat of cream paint that he had always intended.

He was married twice, to Anna Tomlinson (1955) and Jacqueline Metcalf (1972); 
both marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by four sons, Tristram and 
Aldous from his first marriage, and Edward and Aidan from his second, plus five 
grandchildren.

• Patrick Geoffrey Hodgkinson, architect, born 8 March 1930; died 21 February 
2016
 