
Nick Xenophon <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> as 
late as Wednesday night was hopeful the NXT might pick up the last Queensland 
Senate spot – but it wasn’t to be.


Pauline Hanson has emerged from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/04/pauline-hansons-one-nation-wins-four-seats-in-new-look-senate>
 what has felt like the never-ending federal election with four senators, which 
makes One Nation the largest small bloc outside the Greens. Xenophon is just 
behind with three senators.

Arise, Queen Pauline of the parliament.

Pauline Hanson's back, and the disaffection genie is well and truly out of the 
bottle | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/pauline-hanson-back-and-the-disaffection-genie-is-well-and-truly-out-of-the-bottle>
When the final results emerged on Thursday, the record shows the Coalition has 
30 senators (down three), Labor has 26 (up one), the Greens have nine (the 
South Australian Robert Simms failed to get back so they are down one) – and 
the crossbench now numbers eleven, which is three more than the last 
parliament. That last parliament would be the one theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> complained was 
unmanageable.


Four Hansons, three Xenophons, Derryn Hinch in Victoria is a newbie – then 
some of the band from the last parliament is back together –Jacqui Lambie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie> is back in Tasmania, 
Bob Day, the Family First senator, in South Australia, the LDP senator David 
Leyonjhelm is back in New South Wales.

Bottom line? The Coalition will need nine votes to get anything through the 
upper house. In practical terms this will mean the government needs either 
Labor, or the Greens to pass anything in relatively straightforward fashion.

If Labor and the Greens are a no, the government will have to hustle nine 
crossbenchers to say yes – quite the task given the spread of views on the 
crossbench.

The simple thing to say now the election is finally done and dusted is Malcolm 
Turnbull’s two major objectives in the recent poll: to emerge from winter on 
the hustings with a clear personal mandate, and to take a fire hose to the Mos 
Eisley Cantina in the Senate, have backfired, and badly.

Turnbull’s own political position is weakened. The Coalition only just 
controls a majority in the lower house and the Senate crossbench has expanded, 
not contracted, courtesy of his call to take the country to a double 
dissolution.

As well as the free-range populists and the ideologues, this election cycle 
has delivered two political blocs emphatically opposed to the Coalition’s core 
free trade, open-market, philosophy: One Nation and the NXT.

But the simple story isn’t the only story to tell today.

The first thing to say is this new Senate is genuinely representative, ranging 
from progressive left through the shades of centrism to reactionary right.

Representative is good. Representative might go some way to encouraging 
disaffected voters to keep engaging with the federal politics – you never know, 
people might buy in if they feel their interests sometimes rate in dispatches 
in Canberra.

The prime minister has some profound calls to make.

Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
can attempt to forge a centrist path on big and important issues like budget 
repair if he chooses to engage Labor seriously and in a bipartisan way – that 
pathway is open to him if he and Scott Morrison are prepared to make 
compromises rather than just declare it’s my way or the highway.

Labor also has some big calls ahead. All the incentives in this parliament 
push the opposition in the direction of mischief rather than productive 
compromise –Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> is going to have to 
decide the balance between public interest and the Labor party’s political 
interest in fomenting discontent in the Coalition’s already febrile ranks.

Shorten’s call is actually more difficultthan it looks.

And recent history also tells us we shouldn’t assume that newcomers to 
professional politics make a seamless transition to life as a senator.

Truth is, standing here today, we don’t have perfect wisdom on how the Senate 
will operate.

Clive Palmer’s Senate bloc exploded on impact. Nick Xenophon and Pauline Hanson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> are seasoned 
operators – but who can say how their colleagues will adjust to their new high 
pressure public lives?
 