
Good news for PC makers - or at least, less-bad news. Total PC shipments in 
2014 will fall only by 3.7% compared to last year, rather than the 6% 
previously forecast, says the research company IDC.


That means that IDC now expects total shipments will hit 303.5m in 2014 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25064514>, compared to 315.1m in 
2013 - which was itself substantially down from the 352m in 2012, and 361.5m in 
2011, when the market peaked.

However IDC does not have good news in the long term, forecasting that by 2018 
total PC shipments will fall to 291m, with falls in three of the four major 
categories - desktop sales in both “mature” and “emerging” markets, and 
portable sales in mature markets - and only a small rise in sales of portables 
in emerging markets.

That will leave PC shipments essentially in a replacement market, and 25% 
below their peak.

Loren Loverde, in charge of IDC’s worldwide PC tracking, noted that people and 
businesses are taking longer between PC updates, though the introduction of 
Windows 9 – expected in 2015 – could help matters. “It will be hard to gauge 
the actual impact until the advantages [of Windows 9] to consumers and 
commercial users in functionality and integration with specific devices is more 
apparent.”

The key driver for PC sales at present is business spending in market markets, 
which has been stimulated by the end of support for Windows XP in April. But 
“Chromebooks”, the cloud-connected PCs using Google’s stripped-down ChromeOS, 
have also emerged as a popular choice in some education and business markets, 
helping to boost overall PC numbers.
 IDC forecasts continuing falls in PC sales over the next two years - and 
further out 
Tablets and 2-in-1s (where the screen is detachable from the keyboard), which 
once vied strongly with PCs for consumer spending, now look less of a direct 
threat - though their extensive adoption still means consumers “increasingly 
see PCs as only one of several computing devices,” commented IDC’s senior 
research analyst Jay Chou.

In May IDC cut its forecast for tablet sales over 2014 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS24890514>, down from 260.9m 
units to 245.4m, which would be a 12.1% growth rather than the previous year’s 
51.8% growth of 2012-2013. Apple in particular has seen successive drops in 
iPad shipments, though chief executive Tim Cook says that they are “meeting 
expectations”. However IDC still forecasts that tablets will in time outsell 
PCs.

Separate data suggests that tablets have achieved a comparatively high 
installed base, following a dramatic rise in sales after the introduction of 
the iPad in March 2010. In the US, the Pew Research Group found in January 2014 
that42% of adults own a tablet 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/01/16/tablet-and-e-reader-ownership/> just 
four years after launch, compared to 58% who have a smartphone - a category 
that is roughly a decade old - and 32% who own an e-reader; the first Amazon 
Kindle was launched in November 2007.

IDC’s forecast for the PC market implies increasing financial pressure on 
market participants, both small and large. The largest six PC makers by volume 
- Lenovo, HP, Dell, Asus, Acer andApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> - together account for a growing 
share of shipments, reaching an all-time high of 72% in the second quarter of 
2014.
 The biggest PC makers - Lenovo, HP, Dell, Acer, Asus and Apple - are taking a 
growing share of shipments, reaching an all-time high of 72% in the most recent 
quarter. Data: IDC. Photograph: Guardian/IDC 
For smaller makers, the combination of falling shipments and growing power by 
the larger makers is expected to push some out altogether.Sony exited the PC 
market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/06/sony-vaio-exit-pc-market-analysis>
 this year, and there are expectations that LG could follow suit.

But bigger players are not immune from the changes as consumers and businesses 
look to smartphones, “phablets”, tablets and 2-in-1 devices.Dell left the stock 
market after a $24.8bn private buyout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/12/michael-dell-buys-back-pc-company-founded>
 in autumn 2013 to remake itself and focus on corporate accounts, while Asus 
and Acer have both seen PC revenues fall over the past two years, according to 
data in their financial results.

 * Apple rumoured to be launching larger version of iPad in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/26/apple-rumours-12inch-ipad-2015> 