
It would, perhaps, be the defining irony of Arsène Wenger’s uneasy 
relationship with Chelsea if it turns out that when he finally deviseda way of 
beating them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 it provoked a tactical shift that won the Blues the title. Since Chelsea 
switched to a back three when 3-0 down at half-time at the Emirates, they have 
conceded only once, winning seven Premier League games in a row. They passed 
one major test bycoming from behind to beat Tottenham last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
 but on Saturday represents an even more severe examination as they go to 
Manchester City.

Sergio Agüero and Manchester City fight back to see off Burnley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/burnley-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> against 
Antonio Conte: the intense brooder against the manic extrovert, two men 
obsessed by tactics. Conte spends up to an hour a day working with his players 
on shape; Guardiola is a perpetual tinkerer, forever adjusting positions on the 
pitch looking for the best disposition to expose the opposition’s weakness. 
And, implausible as it may have seemed in the first month of the season, it 
feels as though it is City who need to adjust, that Chelsea have a balanced 
formation, confidence and momentum and that it is up to Guardiola to disrupt it.

Guardiola’s instinct is always, as he often says, to be bold. He is not 
someone who naturally looks to contain or frustrate. He will take the game to
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, not just because City 
are at home but because that is how he believes football should be played.

Chelsea’s two worst performances of the season, at home to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 andaway at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, came against opponents who pressed them early and attacked with pace. City 
naturally do that. It is true the Liverpool and Arsenal matches came before the 
shift to the back three but Tottenham showed in the first half last Saturday 
that Chelsea can be rattled, as most teams can, by a hard and high press.

The advantage City have over Spurs, particularly when it comes to facing 
Chelsea, is they have natural attacking wide men. Raheem Sterling went off 
during the second halfagainst Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/burnley-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 but should be fit to take his place on one flank with either Nolito or Leroy 
Sané on the other. Whether it is Sterling on the right and Nolito on the left, 
or Sterling on the left and Sané on the right, City have pace and aggression 
that can attack any space behind the wing-backs. Marcos Alonso and, 
particularly, Victor Moses have excelled in those roles in recent weeks but 
neither has faced a defensive test of this magnitude. And if Chelsea’s 
wing-backs are defending, or at least looking anxiously over their shoulders, 
then they will be less able to link up with Pedro and Eden Hazard in the 
inside-forward positions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpep-guardiola-antonio-conte-manchester-city-chelsea-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd710d2792eae25fa4f1d1583db8f4417f6cf387%2F0_132_3036_1821%2F3036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%20v%20Antonio%20Conte%3A%20a%20tactical%20showdown%20of%20brooder%20against%20extrovert%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpep-guardiola-antonio-conte-manchester-city-chelsea-tactics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%20v%20Antonio%20Conte%3A%20a%20tactical%20showdown%20of%20brooder%20against%20extrovert%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fpep-guardiola-antonio-conte-manchester-city-chelsea-tactics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd710d2792eae25fa4f1d1583db8f4417f6cf387%2F0_132_3036_1821%2F3036.jpg>
 Raheem Sterling went off injured against Burnley but should be fit to take one 
of Manchester City’s wide attacking positions against Chelsea. Photograph: 
Gareth Copley/Getty Images 
City also use inside-forwards but how they deal with Chelsea’s will perhaps 
govern the shape of their own midfield. Guardiola has used two basic systems 
for his five rearmost players this season: a back four protected by a 
deep-lying midfielder or a back three protected by two. Even with the back-four 
option, in possession, he likes to operate a 3-2 shape. Initially he achieved 
that by having the full-backs tuck in but in the absence of those as 
comfortable on the ball as Philipp Lahm and David Alaba, Guardiola had John 
Stones step up.

The classic Cruyffian theory is to have one more defender than the opposition 
have forwards, which would mean using two centre-backs – that is, a back four – 
and giving the full-backs the licence to push on, increasing the pressure on 
Chelsea’s wing-backs. The danger in this instance, though, is that leaves 
Fernandinho, as the holding midfielder, caught between Pedro and Hazard.

It may make more sense to use two deep-lying midfielders in Fernandinho and 
Ilkay Gündogan. Guardiola in recent weeks has taken to fielding more of a 
4-2-3-1 and he has the option of bringing in Fernando, who played at Tottenham 
in October, or Yaya Touré. The question is what advantage the full-backs confer 
against this Chelsea system; it seems to make more sense to use two deep-lying 
midfielders with a back three behind them. Nicolás Otamendi can pick up Diego 
Costa, with either Aleksandar Kolarov or Stones pushing up to help deal with 
Pedro and Hazard as required and the other acting as a spare man. That has the 
additional advantage of getting an extra passer into the team.

With Gündogan and Fernandinho together at the back of midfield City should be 
able to control possession. Fernando’s comparative lack of quality on the ball 
was shown up at Spurs, while there must still be a doubt as to whether Touré 
has the energy for a game of this intensity. That then leaves Kevin De Bruyne 
and David Silva to operate as free No8s, posing just the same problem to N’Golo 
Kanté and Nemanja Matic that Pedro and Hazard will be causing Gündogan and 
Fernandinho. The significant difference is City should have the bulk of the 
possession and will have more attacking wide men.

That suggests City have an edge but so long as Moses and Alonso can stand up 
to the defensive challenge, it really means nothing more than they will have 
more of the ball. The question then is whether a defence who have proved 
susceptible to counterattacks all season can deal with Chelsea on the break.

Hot-blooded Costa takes his revenge for Chelsea against Spurs – and serves it 
cold | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/26/diego-costa-chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-revenge-served-cold> 