
Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> has praised 
Antonio Conte as possibly the world’s finest manager and said the Italian has 
made Chelsea even stronger contenders to win the Premier League title.

Love John Terry or loathe him, an unignorable career is winding down | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/02/love-john-terry-loathe-chelsea-manchester-city>
Guardiola faces Conte when Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> take his side on at the 
Etihad Stadium in Saturday’s early game. Chelsea are the leaders and take a one 
point advantage over City into the match. After finishing 10th and 31 points 
behind Leicester City last term, Conte has transformed the side’s fortunes with 
seven successive victories.

Guardiola said: “Conte is without doubt, one of the best, maybe the best coach 
in the world right now. They were contenders to win the Premier League from the 
beginning. Now, maybe more than before. It’s a good test for us. It is the 
first time we are going to face each other. It’s good to play against him. He 
made an exceptional job in Turin [with Juventus] and in the national job. It 
doesn’t matter if it is Serie A or the national team, you realise his strengths.

“He has started here with maybe not good results, but they have won last seven 
games, conceding one goal. That says a lot about how good they are.”

Guardiola, who gave his players two days off at the start of the week, has 
tinkered with the pre-Chelsea preparation, training his squad on the Etihad 
pitch on Friday.

“Tomorrow we play early, so we will sleep here,” he said. “Today I decided to 
go to the Etihad, but not for a special thing, no, I decided that.

“We were 11, 12, 13 days without a day off. In training, the players like to 
play every day. We don’t give a day off to the players when you have a lot of 
games in a row. That’s why they had two days off and we were training for three 
days to prepare forChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>.

“We all like to play football, that’s why we’re here, but sometimes you have 
four, five or six months, playing, playing, playing, so not playing one week is 
good, not only for the players, the staff to see their families. Playing in 
Europe, it’s normal when that happens.”

Guardiola said he has no fresh injury concerns among his squad.
 