
Considering Saturday’s high‑stakes visit of Chelsea Pep Guardiola was breezy 
when discussing the challenge of Antonio Conte’s Premier League leaders. There 
was a quip about still having hair “a long time ago”, when he played against 
the Italian in Serie A, and a playful grimace when one questioner confused the 
former Juventus manager with Carlo Ancelotti,a predecessor at Stamford Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/22/chelsea-sack-carlo-ancelotti-manager>
.

Conte, it is understood, was City’s second choice behind Guardiola to replace 
Manuel Pellegrini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-manager-data>
 and the Catalan was serious when discussing his counterpart’s quality as well 
as a challenging December programme which starts with Chelsea and includes 
Liverpool and Arsenal following a trip to the champions Leicester City.

Manchester City v Chelsea: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/02/manchester-city-chelsea-match-preview>
“This month is so important. We’re going to see our level. I’m not thinking 
about what happens if we win or we don’t win the games,” said Guardiola. “I’m 
most thinking about what will be our level and if we will be able to fight 
until the last moments of the season. I’m curious about how we compete, how our 
football will be against these three, four really good teams. After that we’re 
going to analyse, to keep going until the end. That is what I am concerned 
about most in this moment.

“I’m not just thinking about three points or drawing or losing the game. I 
want to see how my team react against the good teams. Against Barcelona for 
example,in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
, we were OK, we were there, we played good. I’m curious to see my team against 
top players and top teams.

“Conte is without doubt one of the best, maybe the best, coach in the world 
right now. [Chelsea] were contenders to win thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> from the beginning. Now, 
maybe more than before. It’s a good test for us; it is the first time we are 
going to face each other. It’s good to play against him. He did an exceptional 
job in Turin [with Juventus] and in the national job. It doesn’t matter if it 
is Serie A or the national team, you realise his strengths.

“He has started with maybe not good results but they have won their last seven 
games, conceding one goal. That says a lot about how good they are.”

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are a point better off 
than City, a surprise perhaps, given Guardiola’s pedigree and the Blues’ 
travails last season when they finished 10th, having sacked José Mourinho 
before Christmas.

The high regard is clearly mutual between coaches who have yet to face off 
despite their considerable experience in the dugout. Conte said: “I have great 
respect for him because Pep likes to study football, to find new solutions 
always. It’s not easy to transfer these ideas to different teams a few times. 
But he’s a fantastic manager doing fantastic work withManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>. When you see this team, 
I recognise his idea of football. Saturday, for us, it will be a very tough 
test.”

It will certainly be a contrast in styles; Guardiola’s is a ball-hogging 
philosophy, while Conte’s is more pragmatic, hoping to hit teams hard on the 
break.

He said: “Every team has its own characteristics or ideas. All Guardiola’s are 
about possession for many minutes, to find the ball between the lines, to find 
the one-v-ones on the flank. But I think that every single manager has his own 
idea of football. Very simply, I’m more straight towards the goal, less 
possession than in this case. But there are a lot of ways. For this reason I 
always have great respect for every idea of different managers.”

Chelsea’s results have taken off since the 3-0 defeat by Arsenal in late 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
. Arsène Wenger’s side were 3-0 ahead when Conte pulled off Cesc Fàbregas on 55 
minutes and brought on Marcos Alonso. The Spaniard went to left wing-back as 
the coach switched to a three-man defence that featured Gary Cahill, David Luiz 
and Branislav Ivanovic. The 3-4-3 shape has been retained ever since, with 
Cahill, David Luiz and César Azpilicueta lining up as centre-backs. They did 
not concede a goal until Christian Eriksen’s in the 11th minute in last 
weekend’s2-1 comeback win against Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
, as Chelsea reeled off a remarkable seven consecutive league victories.

Guardiola has analysed the strategy that has transformed Conte’s side. “When 
they have the ball, they play like a 3-4-3; but they defend with many players 
behind the ball,” he said. “They have conceded just one goal [in their winning 
run]. They are doing well. When I was at Munich a lot of teams played with four 
or five at the back, closing the space down in the middle. They allow you to 
cross the ball from wide because they have five players in the box.

“We will be cautious when they have the ball. When we have the ball we will 
attack as much as possible. They are so good when they arrive in the box; they 
score goals. They don’t need to create too many chances to score goals. They 
are solid but we are going to play with the quality players we have, attacking 
the best way as possible. All the guys are so good on the counterattack.”

Guardiola gave a trademark response when asked whether a draw would be a good 
result. “It depends on the way we play,” he said. “For examplethe draw against 
Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/manchester-city-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 was not good, the way we played. Sometimes you deserve a draw because you play 
badly. It depends on the game. But of course we’re going to play against the 
top of the league and it will be our level against that team.”

Guardiola’s levity even extended to Conte’s feverish touchline antics and 
whether these are more influential than his own. “I don’t know who moves their 
arms quicker, him or Pep. Does it help the team? I don’t think so. They don’t 
hear you,” he said. “I’m not talking about Antonio but I think I [would] 
confuse them. But I cannot control it.

“I don’t think it will help a lot to speak with the players; they play, not 
me. Sometimes you have to take decisions quickly, sometimes you are involved in 
the game. You want to help them to make it better, you want to see them, 
correct something. But you have 10 minutes at half-time. OK you can correct 
something if the game stops. Hopefully in the future I can improve it – be more 
relaxed and calm – that would be good for me.”
 