
Perceptions of corruption in the Australian government and public sector 
increased in 2015 for the fourth year running, surging six points since 2012 in 
an annual index by Transparency International.

A federal anti-corruption agency, muscular anti-foreign bribery laws and 
political donations reform were required to help arrest the slide, senior 
members of the anti-corruption group said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fperceptions-of-corruption-in-australian-government-and-public-sector-increase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0822f5d48eef11e54bf7d17f064c0947163f36da%2F0_0_1860_1200%2F1860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Perceptions%20of%20corruption%20in%20Australian%20government%20and%20public%20sector%20increase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fperceptions-of-corruption-in-australian-government-and-public-sector-increase%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Perceptions%20of%20corruption%20in%20Australian%20government%20and%20public%20sector%20increase&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fperceptions-of-corruption-in-australian-government-and-public-sector-increase%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0822f5d48eef11e54bf7d17f064c0947163f36da%2F0_0_1860_1200%2F1860.jpg>
The result put Australia in 13th place globally for perceived openness, the 
country’s equal lowest ranking in the 20-year history of the report.


AWB made secret payments worth US$220m to Saddam's Iraq, court hears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/12/awb-made-secret-payments-worth-us220m-to-saddams-iraq-court-hears>
Comparable democracies such as the UK, the US and New Zealand have held steady 
or improved their index scores in the past four years.

The annual index, which ranks 168 countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/index-perceived-corruption-billions-locked-in-poverty-by-public-sector>
 on a scale of 0 (highly corrupt) to 100 (very clean), is compiled from 12 
surveys of transparency experts and business people.

Australia’s 2015 score was 79, down from 80 last year. Denmark came in first 
with 91, followed by Finland (90), New Zealand (88) and the Netherlands (87). 
North Korea and Somalia ranked last with eight points each.

Brazil suffered the biggest fall, dropping five index points amid a bribery 
and money-laundering scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/brazil-petrobras-scandal-rio-de-janeiro-2016-olympics-contracts-investigation>
 engulfing its state-owned oil company, Petrobras, that has drawn in some of 
the country’s most senior politicians.

Libya, Spain and Turkey were singled out with Australia as “big decliners”, 
with Greece, Senegal and the UK praised for their progress.

The chair of Transparency International Australia, Anthony Wheatley QC, said 
Australia’s score was “the result of inaction from successive governments who 
have failed to address weaknesses in Australia’s laws and legal processes”.

Brazil's anti-corruption prosecutor: graft is 'endemic. It has spread like 
cancer'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/brazil-anti-corruption-prosecutor-deltan-dallagnol-lava-jato-investigation>
Foreign bribery scandals such as those involving the Australian Wheat Board and
Securency 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/former-securency-bosses-arrested-20110630-1gtr8.html>
 had damaged Australia’s reputation and legislation introduced into parliament 
in December was “long overdue”, he said.

The group also called for a federal anti-corruption agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/25/federal-icac-rejected-government-mps-say-corruption-isnt-a-problem>
 with similar powers to the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption; a 
nationally consistent andtighter political donations disclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/15/overhauling-political-donation-laws-what-a-great-new-election-years-resolution>
 regime; and safeguards against dirty money from overseas bleeding into the 
Australian finance or real estate industries.

Wheatley said addressing weaknesses in government would also raise the bar for 
the private sector.

The Turnbull government “seems to be taking steps that look very encouraging”, 
he said.
 