
The federal government has flagged it may take more refugees fleeing war zones 
in Syria and Iraq.

So far 6,507 have arrived in Australia – a little over half the intake 
announced by the Abbott government in 2015.

“If we get this program right [it allows us] to say to the Australian people 
that we may want to expand this program,” the immigration minister, Peter 
Dutton, hastold the ABC’s Australian Story 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-21/peter-dutton-open-to-accepting-more-refugees-from-syria/8027124>
. “And if people have faith in the integrity of the process, then it does give 
the government the ability to expand beyond the 12,000.”

Dutton acknowledged the process could be “long and protracted” but defended 
the need for security checks.

Malcolm Turnbull urges patience on refugee resettlement deal with Malaysia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/20/malcolm-turnbull-plays-down-chances-of-refugee-resettlement-deal-with-malaysia>
“In some cases people are interviewed for a whole day or a series of days,” he 
said. “There would be many cases where we’re able to tease out as much detail 
as possible. In some cases, that’s not possible because the war has torn apart 
a village, documentation is not available. And the experts within my department 
make assessments in relation to each of those cases.”

Aid groups, including World Vision, Oxfam, Save the Children, Plan 
International, Care and Amnesty International,have condemned Australia’s 
response to the Syrian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/australia-criticised-over-hollow-promise-to-resettle-12000-syrian-and-iraqi-refugees>
 both for its scope and the pace at which refugees are being resettled.

They have called on the government to resettle all the promised 12,000 by the 
end of March 2017.

The US and Canada have resettled more than 10,000 and 30,000 respectively. 
Canada’s government runs a website, tagged #Welcome Refugees, which gives 
progress updates, while Australian officials are reluctant to give updated 
figures.

The conflict across Syria and Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> is 
producing the largest number of forcibly displaced in the world at present. 
Nearly 12m Syrians are either internally displaced, asylum seekers, or 
refugees. Neighbouring countries Turkey, Jordan, and Lebanon are hosting the 
vast majority of those forced out by the five-year-old internecine conflict.
 