
For Ashley Giles the battle to succeed Andy Flower in charge of the England 
team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/02/ashley-giles-andy-flower-england-head-coach>
 is showing worrying similarities to the race for the 2011 County Championship 
title. That September, Giles' Warwickshire team went into their final fixture 
against Hampshire with a commanding lead over a Lancashire side coached by 
Peter Moores – and even before the last day of their match against Somerset, 
the Red Rose were rank outsiders.

Yet that evening Mike Gatting, on behalf of the England and Wales Cricket 
Board, headed for Taunton rather than Southampton topresent Lancashire with 
their first outright Championship since 1934 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/15/lancashire-win-county-championship>
. Now the fear for Giles must be that he will miss out to Moores again when 
Gatting's former Middlesex and England team-mate Paul Downton, in his role as 
managing director of England Cricket, makes his final decision.

Both are due to be interviewed this week by a three-man panel comprising 
Downton, theECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> chief executive, David 
Collier, and Gordon Lord, the former Worcestershire batsman who is now English 
cricket's head of elite coach development.

There are known to be at least three other contenders – Mark Robinson, the 
former Yorkshire seamer who succeeded Moores at Sussex; Nottinghamshire's 
director of cricket, Mick Newell; and Trevor Bayliss, an experienced Australian 
who has previously coached Sri Lanka.

The involvement of Lord would seem to confirm the suspicion that the ECB is 
keen to appoint a product of its own substantial investment in coaching, just 
as it did when Moores was promoted from his position as the director of the 
National Academy in Loughborough to replace Duncan Fletcher in early 2007 – 
when England were also reeling froma 5-0 whitewash in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/05/ashes2006.cricket2>.

Both Robinson and Newell have excellent records, with two Championships 
apiece, and have taken charge of England Lions tours – Robinson earlier this 
year in Sri Lanka. But with England in such a mess and the spotlight so fierce, 
it would be a major surprise if the ECB takes a punt on a relative rookie in 
terms of international cricket. Informed sources have suggested that as they 
did in that 2011 Championship race, Giles and Moores are going head to head.

When news of Flower's resignation leaked in late January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/31/andy-flower-sacked-england-cricket-coach>
, Giles was installed as odds-on favourite and the job seemed to be his to 
lose. He had been earmarked as the ECB's chosen successor when he was appointed 
to take charge of England's 50-over and Twenty20 teams in September 2012, 
having underlined his coaching and man-management abilities by reviving 
Warwickshire from the bitter disappointment of their near miss to Lancashire by 
leading them to the title the following year – when Moores' champions were 
relegated.

Unlike Moores, Giles had international playing experience, ensuring respect 
from former team-mates, either those then playing, such as Kevin Pietersen, or 
working in the media, such as Michael Vaughan.

The modest early record of his England teams was mostly accepted as a 
consequence of Flower making Test cricket the priority before consecutive Ashes 
series, and Giles heaped up more credit with a run tothe final of the Champions 
Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/23/england-india-champions-trophy-final>
 on home soil last June. It was only this winter, either side of Flower's 
departure, that things started to go wrong. He was unable to turn back the 
Australia tide in the 50-over and Twenty20 series that followedEngland's Ashes 
rout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/07/weekly-sport-diary-ashes-whitewash>
, and then the predictable failure of a makeshift squad at the World T20 in 
Bangladeshended in humiliation by the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/31/england-humiliation-holland-world-twenty20>
.

Moores, meanwhile, managed to sit tight and keep his counsel, only confirming 
his interest in the job after he had been outed on the shortlist – and even 
then, subtly letting it be known that he had been approached to apply. He was 
also happy to acknowledge that he had "made mistakes", "learned a lot" and 
there were "definitely things we could have tackled differently". But there is 
also an argument that he might not need to change too much as this time he will 
inherit a more receptive dressing room.

He was done no favours in 2007 when he inherited one captain, Vaughan, who led 
a collection of senior players for whom Fletcher had been a key influence, and 
after that had to work with Pietersen, which was never a meeting of minds. It 
is much easier to see him forming an effective partnership with Alastair Cook, 
the pair having worked together on a Lions tour before both were promoted to 
England duty. It was also Moores who gave responsibility to Stuart Broad and 
Jimmy Anderson as new leaders of the England attack, having dumped Steve 
Harmison and Matthew Hoggard, and he also worked well with Matt Prior and Ian 
Bell.

But Anderson stressed, when praising Moores for the "energy" and "technical 
stuff" he would bring to the dressing room, that he was not advocating him 
ahead of Giles, whose coaching he had also enjoyed during the Champions Trophy.

The truth is that no one knows for sure until the interviews are completed, 
with an announcement expected next week. The stakes for Giles are high as 
unlike the other contenders, he would not have a job to fall back on – although 
there has already been some chatter tipping him to replace Moores at Lancashire 
or even Robinson at Hove if, as is being whispered around the county circuit, 
the ECB asks them to recreate their successful Sussex combination. The spectre 
of September 2011 is looming large.
 