
Cannes jury decisions often baffle both outsiders and the jury members 
themselves. They have had to argue, shout, horse-trade — and then, as the clock 
runs down, and with festival director Thierry Frémaux frowningly entering the 
jury room pointing at his watch, finally come up with a compromise decision 
that satisfies no-one.

Cannes 2016: Peter Bradshaw's festival verdict and award predictions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/20/cannes-2016-peter-bradshaw-festival-verdict-award-predictions>
The prizes this year were a surprise and a mixed bag which somehow missed out 
many of the films which were generally found to be exciting and successful. 
Nothing for Maren Ade’s brilliant comedyToni Erdmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/toni-erdmann-review-long-german-comedy-is-slight-biting-little-miracle>
. Nothing for Jim Jarmusch’s wonderfulPaterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/paterson-review-adam-drivers-poetic-bus-driver-proves-safe-pair-of-hands>
 and nothing for Paul Verhoeven’s outrageously enjoyable thrillerElle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/elle-review-paul-verhoevens-brazen-revenge-comedy-is-a-dangerous-delight>
. And it was incidentally exasperating to see that film’s star Isabelle Huppert 
overlooked for the best actress award — along with Kristen Stewart, Ruth Negga 
and Sonia Braga — in favour of Jaclyn Jose as the Manila drug-dealer in 
Brillante Mendoza’s Ma’Rosa. A good performance, but not exceptional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7193f81f0aa35570b95f404c4f08a6431d200bf9%2F156_0_3285_1973%2F3285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes's%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don't%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes%27s%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don%27t%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7193f81f0aa35570b95f404c4f08a6431d200bf9%2F156_0_3285_1973%2F3285.jpg>
 Snubbed? ... Toni Erdmann Photograph: Handout 
But, in my view, no bad films were given prizes and it was very satisfying to 
see Ken Loach pick up his second Palme d’Or forI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
 —a coldly angry indictment of food bank Britain, scripted by his longtime 
screenwriter Paul Laverty. It was the only film of the festival which moved me 
to tears; the heart-wrenching and frightening scene in the food bank itself has 
enormous power. This was a film of almost radical plainness, with a great 
performance from Dave Johns (as so often in the past, Loach has got great 
serious work from a comic — he has cast John Bishop and George Lopez in the 
past). Loach is, as I have written before, the John Bunyan of contemporary 
cinema. Or to use another comparison, he has directed a film which repudiates 
frills and nuances as firmly as a medieval mystery play. It may well be that 
his heartfelt idealism and Amish simplicity became a sort of Esperanto for the 
international jury. It was something they could all understand and endorse in 
each other’s company.

I, Daniel Blake review: Ken Loach's welfare state polemic is blunt, dignified 
and brutally moving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/i-daniel-blake-ken-loachs-welfare-state-polemic-is-blunt-dignified-and-brutally-moving>
So: to the decision which outraged almost everyone, but which caused me to 
rise briefly from my laptop and shout: “Ha! Yes!” and then subside chuckling to 
my seat. The grand prix went to Xavier Dolan’sIt’s Only the End of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/its-only-the-end-of-the-world-review-xavier-dolans-nightmarish-homecoming-is-a-dream>
. Now, there were films I liked better at Cannes, sure, and films which I 
thought more deserving of this particular award. But it was really good, a 
provocation made with uncompromising attack and flair, a film driven with 
authorial personality and a film which has been mocked and misunderstood by the 
majority of critics. It is an absurdist drama of confrontation and hysteria, 
which conveys in stylised and dreamlike form the horror experienced by a young 
man who must return to his hometown and tell his family he is dying. (He is a 
successful dramatist: the movie is based on an autobiographical play by 
Jean-Luc Lagarce, who died of Aids in 1995.) The result is a non-stop screaming 
match: a cinematic death-metal opera. It’s not for everyone, but it is 
fascinatingly created and intended. Perhaps this prize will persuade the 
detractors to give it another go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a405585fda357bf842cfa7fa220c6da9486a53d%2F380_14_3527_2115%2F3527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes's%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don't%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes%27s%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don%27t%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a405585fda357bf842cfa7fa220c6da9486a53d%2F380_14_3527_2115%2F3527.jpg>
 Emo ... Xavier Dolan accepts his prize for It’s Only the End of the World 
Photograph: Pascal Le Segretain/Getty Images 
Again, it is satisfying to see two really excellent films being distinguished. 
In my view, Cristian Mungui’sGraduation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/graduation-review-cristian-mungiu-romania-cannes-2016>
 and Olivier Assayas’sPersonal Shopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
 were the two best films in competition. Graduation was my (incorrect) tip for 
the Palme. As it turned out, Mungiu and Assayas shared the director’s prize, 
and that will have to do. Graduation is an utterly absorbing film of masterly 
compositional flair which is a very persuasive character-study of a doctor 
whose muddy moral choices infect his daughter’s worldview — and also a 
resoundingly authoritative picture of Romania and the Eastern Europe which now 
has a generational perspective on the escape from communism.

Personal Shopper review: Kristen Stewart's psychic spooker is a must-have
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/personal-shopper-review-kristen-stewarts-psychic-spooker-is-a-must-have>
Personal Shopper is a tremendously exciting and bizarre picture which 
mischievously messes with genre. Along with Paul Verhoeven’s Elle and Nicolas 
Winding Refn’s LA horror-shocker The Neon Demon (both ignored), it was a film 
which caused festival-goers to become slightly delirious and skittish. This was 
down partly to a really excellent, downbeat performance from Kristen Stewart 
whose contribution to this festival was very substantial. She plays a troubled 
young woman who has two things to do: she is a personal assistant to a 
demanding fashionista, but she is also a medium, trying to contact the spirit 
of her dead twin brother. It was utterly intriguing, with audacious flourishes 
of suspense. And it was very well directed.

Asghar Farhadi’s The Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/the-salesman-review-asghar-farhadi-cannes>
 was a serious and valuable movie, though its pattern of opaque implications 
were beginning to look like a mannerism for this director and not as subtle as 
his previous movies. But it was widely admired at the festival and now gets 
both the screenplay prize (a valid award, I concede, considering the subtle 
intricacy of its structure) but also the best actor prize for Shahab Hosseini, 
as a teacher and actor in a semi-professional theatre group, playing Willy 
Loman in a production of Death of a Salesman. As the run begins, his wife is 
attacked in mysterious circumstances. Hosseini does a perfectly good job in the 
role and his underplaying is exactly right. But to return to the scandalous 
neglect of Maren Ade’s comedy Toni Erdmann, I would have much preferred to see 
the prize go its star, Peter Simonischek, or indeed to Adam Driver for his 
wonderfully sympathetic, humble performance in Jarmusch’s Paterson as the poet 
who drives a bus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd9c850000ae78dbb25c524516446ad4f776a61%2F0_38_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes's%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don't%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Bradshaw%20on%20Cannes%27s%20closing%20awards%3A%20baffling%20choices%20don%27t%20spoil%20a%20vintage%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fpeter-bradshaw-palme-dor-cannes-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd9c850000ae78dbb25c524516446ad4f776a61%2F0_38_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Sweet ... Grand Prix-winner American Honey Photograph: PR Image 
The jury prize for Andrea Arnold’s American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
 is pleasing: an American-realist study in the style of Van Sant and Korine, 
with something of Malick’s reverence for epiphanic detail, all about a bunch of 
kids on a bus touring around the US, selling magazine subscriptions 
door-to-door and living and partying in hotel rooms at night. It was a film 
which I felt did not have the brilliance and natural idiom of her other films, 
and I also felt that Shia LaBeouf could have been directed and controlled more. 
But it had Arnold’s habitual, superb confidence in her own ability to create 
ambient cinema, to summon up the mood and moment. She just puts you on the tour 
bus, or in the hotels, or in the K-Marts, or the streets around which the kids 
were trudging, and lets you stay there. We talk about films being immersive. 
You were marinaded in this one. I was always keen to see this a second time, 
and the Jury Prize has only whetted my appetite more.

Cannes 2016 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannes-2016> was an 
exceptionally good year, and the competition list was a virtually uninterrupted 
hot streak of talent, only rarely interrupted by disappointments. The prize 
list being an anticlimax is becoming a bit of a tradition, but need not lessen 
any satisfaction at this festival. 2016 is a great vintage.
 