
It’s not a great day to take the heat off Jeremy Hunt, just as he’s trying to 
force the endgame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/11/jeremy-hunt-to-impose-contract-on-junior-doctors>
 in his dispute with the not-so-junior doctors. As with most industrial 
disputes neither side has a monopoly of virtue, so let’s skip to another corner 
of the galactic health empire over which Emperor Jeremy and his Darth Vader,
Simon Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/18/simon-stevens-trying-save-nhs-from-mother-of-messes>
, rule. What, on planet Earth, is Pfizer up to?


You may have read the US pharmaceutical firm’s complaints about NHS England’s 
drugs policy – we’d be better off getting cancer in Scotland or even Greece, 
says its UK boss – in Thursday’s Telegraph or on Radio 4’s Today. But it was all
in the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/04/even-greeks-can-get-more-medicines-than-brits-pfizer-boss-claims>
, part of the paper’s epicThis is the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/this-is-the-nhs> series.

 What Pfizer’s Eric Nordkamp 
<https://www.kch.nhs.uk/news/public/news/view/18992> is telling anyone who 
listens is that the widely admired National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (Nice <http://www.nice.org.uk/>), the independent assessor of new 
drugs’ clinical and financial value, has fallen behind international rivals, 
and behind NHS Scotland’s Scottish Medicines Consortium (SMC) too, in the way 
it goes about its business. Patients are suffering, he says. Pifizer is 
suffering too, he fails to add.

This one is tricky, but even those anxiously scouring websites for medicines 
which may cure loved ones, prolong lives or just alleviate pain, should be wary 
of special pleading by “Big Pharma” (the largest players in the pharmaceutical 
world). They have troubles of their own, and rapacious shareholders demanding 
blood as they grapple with an uncertain future.

With so many industries going belly up or abroad, health is a fast-expanding 
market with an endless supply of eager customers in countries rich and poor 
around the world.

The Guardian’s NHS series addresses the pros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/saving-nhs-insurance-money-health-poor-suffering>
 andcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/11/crisis-of-funding-in-the-nhs-will-be-felt-far-and-wide>
 of a growing presence in the UK’s unusually state-dominated sector. The 
business pages of the FT are rarely without a report on a merger or takeover, 
hunts for new drugs to replace the postwar generation of brilliant (and 
lucrative) lifesavers which are rapidly falling out of patent protection. They 
have invested billions, but it’s tough going.

That’s where you probably last heard of Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer>. When you can’t find a useful 
product then use some financial engineering to beef up profits.

Pfizer, which has shrunk (not yet closed) its huge research campus 
<http://www.pfizer.com/research/science_and_technology/rd_locations/uk_sandwich>
 at Sandwich, in Kent – gratitude for discovering Viagra, it is said – made a
$100bn bid for the UK’s AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/astrazeneca-board-reject-pfizer-takeover-bid>
. The idea was to soak up some global profits it was keen to keep abroad, out 
of the hands of the US taxman.

Pfizer got seen off and has since continued with acquisitions and mergers 
elsewhere, the latest beingAllergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/23/pfizer-allergan-agree-160-billion-dollars-deal-tax>
. On Tuesday, the FT reported fears that Pfizer would now accentuate its move 
towards an Allergan-plus style strategy (common in risk-averse boardrooms 
everywhere) of cutting down on its famous inhouse research and buying smaller 
firms or university teams’ smart ideas. Cheaper and more effective, says 
Allergan’s CEO, Brent Saunders, who seems to be in line to head up Pfizer in 
due course.

Not our problem or that of the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. 
Our problem is sick people and the best, most humane and cost-effective way to 
treat them. Here Nice stands as a barrier between drugs sellers and patients, 
sometimes to the dismay of the latter’s relatives. It takes its time to 
evaluate a new product, it sometimes says no and even de-lists a drug that does 
not do what it promised on the tin. It is upsetting for patients and any 
newspaper allies for whom cancer is a bogeyword used just to frighten readers 
and enlist sympathy.

Deeming Nice’s lengthy procedures intolerable, in 2011 Andrew Lansley, then an 
NHS “reformer”, introduced the £200mCancer Drugs Fund 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/cancer/cdf> (CDF) to placate them both. But 
it rapidly overspent, prompting NHS England, led by Stevens, to play its own 
Nice role. It de-listed some cancer treatments, including the £90,000-a-year 
Kadcyla, as the Guardian’sSarah Boseley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/03/life-extending-cancer-drugs-to-be-axed-by-nhs>
 reported. Its future is uncertain.

Ministers, who are scrambling to save money, imposed a two-year freeze on the 
£12bn annual drugs budget (2014-16), adding to pharma woes. It has also 
acknowledged that the Nice procedures may not have kept up with best practice 
in a fast-changing medical world. It is just completing a consultation and 
hopes to introduce greater flexibility whereby temporary access to new drugs 
could be granted while Nice makes up its mind either way.

That’s not enough for Nordkamp, who fears a wasted opportunity, one in which 
the bigger picture – including patient involvement and fast development of 
drugs designed for small groups of specific cancers not one-size blockbusters – 
are better taken into account.

Scotland does it better, he says, so do other EU states, including Greece, 
though as Boseley and Graham Ruddick point out in their Guardian article the 
Greek decision to make paramount the saving of life – do what you can, or the
“rule of rescue” 
<http://policyinsider.com/being-right-when-youre-wrong-on-nice-and-the-cancer-drugs-fund/>
 principle – helped bankrupt the social insurance fund which paid for them. So 
it’s private cash upfront for many Greeks in the current economic crisis.

The unavoidable fact is that, however we choose to fund health care, the drugs 
bill continues to rise, and much of the money is wasted; perhaps because 
patients don’t need or discontinue the penicillin the GPshouldn’t have given 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blog/2015/aug/21/antibiotic-resistance-the-race-to-stop-the-silent-tsunami-facing-modern-medicine>
 in the first place. Or, as so many reports confirm, somewonder drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/29/cancer-drugs-effectiveness-score-esmo-rankings>
, especially where the c-word is invoked, do not do the job.

So even the SNP government 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-32761132> in 
Edinburgh, which prides itself on doing better than NHS England, has had its 
own cancer fund’s costs double. It has instituted its ownreview 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-35451226>. 

Good, we can all learn from each other. Here’s a perfectly sensible 
contribution to the debate fromCancer Research UK. 
<http://scienceblog.cancerresearchuk.org/2015/11/19/reforming-nice-and-the-cancer-drugs-fund-four-key-changes-we-want-to-see/>

But remember, a large-scale NHS problem, its poor cancer outcomes, is to do 
with slow diagnosis further back the medical food chain. And one £90,000 cancer 
drug that prolongs a life for six months is £90k not spent somewhere else in 
the NHS. It’s a lot of money and I’m not convinced that it or other very costly 
treatments should always be invested in the elderly, among whom I grudgingly 
include myself. As the Guardian’s NHS series has said in many ways, the
medicalisation of death has led to most of us dying in hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2014/nov/24/healthcare-professionals-patients-dying-wishes-die-at-home>
 when perhaps we want to die at home, the way people once did.

It is partly our fault, in a society which often treats the death taboo as 
unrealistically as the Victorians treated sex, where also doctors are promising 
more than they, or Jeremy Hunt’s budget, can deliver. “Big Pharma” is also in 
the frame; in the 20th century it did once unimaginable wonders for humanity. 
But we can have too much of a good thing – even when we can’t afford it. It’s a 
curse of our materialistic age.
 