

Would rush-hour travellers be comforted by the beauty of a piano playing? 
Photograph: Martin Argles

"Let's imagine, for a moment, that beauty is the central plank in the 
government's manifesto,"wrote Anita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/oct/31/guardiansocietysupplement1?gusrc=rss&feed=environment>
 in a touching column published posthumously in Wednesday's Guardian. "Let's go 
further and imagine that I have been sworn in as a government minister charged 
with responsibility for public space. The first thing I would discover, once I 
was behind my Whitehall desk, would be that the job wasn't only fun but also 
really inexpensive."

She wrote that one of her first initiatives would be to get "theft-proof and 
waterproof pianos installed in public squares and fields".

As a pianist I warmed to this idea, though with a certain frisson as I 
imagined the consequences. I tried to summon up the image of a wonderful 
pianist, say Vladimir Horowitz, charming the birds from the trees with a bit of 
Chopin at dusk, the rush-hour travellers hushed and comforted by its beauty. 
But the image wouldn't stay. It was pushed aside by a raucous picture of youths 
cackling as they bashed the piano, poured vodka into its innards and sprayed 
graffiti on its black casing. Rush-hour travellers would hurry by in the rain, 
eyes averted, wondering if it was time to emigrate after all.

I once belonged to a music group, Domus 
<http://hyperion-records.co.uk/artist_page.asp?name=domus>, which played 
concerts in a glorified tent. We had a piano that we took around with us, and 
once the tent was up, the piano lived in it. We guarded it as well as we could. 
Some of our braver, stronger members even took it in turns to sleep inside the 
tent to guard the piano at night, but once, illness struck and there was nobody 
to do guard duty. I won't forget the sight that greeted us next morning when we 
arrived at the tent to find the aftermath of an impromptu party in which the 
piano had clearly played its part. No, they didn't try to steal it, but that 
was about all they didn't try.

I smiled sadly at Dame Anita's notion that her initiatives were "really 
inexpensive". Did she know that a new grand piano can cost Â£80,000? Even an 
older piano, a good one, costs tens of thousands of pounds. Of course, if 
beauty were really the central plank of the government's manifesto, these 
prices would be a drop in the ocean. That's assuming that the government would 
divert zillions of pounds from the defence budget - or should that be the 
offence budget? - into the beauty budget. Wouldn't that be a fantastic, 
positive idea?

As well as public squares and fields with pianos, though, we'd need squares 
and fields without them. Without unnatural noise of any kind. Silence is 
golden, and beautiful too.
 