
Some of the most heartening and inspirational stories are to be found in real 
life.

And there is a lot to be learnt from the trailblazing achievements of 
history’s most renowned and respected figures. But how did these inspirational 
figures reach their goals and what prompted them to act the ways they did?

Picture book biographies peel back history and bring to life the true stories 
of iconic figures for a younger generation of readers. Crossing nationalities, 
careers and cultures, people including Nelson Mandela and Amelia Earhart have 
overcome all sorts of obstacles to realise their dreams.

Here are 10 of the most inspiring picture book biographies for young readers 
to read and savour:

Wangari’s Trees of Peace 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/364466/> by Jeanette 
Winter

Wangari Maathai, is credited with planting over 30 million trees in Kenya. 
Wangari spent six years studying in America, only to return to Kenya to find a 
wasteland and her beloved trees gone. She started a programme to reintroduce 
Kenya’s trees to the land, which grew from starting in her garden, to covering 
the whole of Kenya. Her incredible life which culminated in her winning a Nobel 
Peace Prize in 2004 is told here in breathtaking detail.

Just Being Audrey <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/just-being-audrey.html> 
Margaret Cardillo and Julia Denos

Discover the inspirational woman behind the camera in this book about Audrey 
Hepburn’s life and charity work. As well as exploring her work on classic films 
including Roman Holiday and Breakfast at Tiffany’s, this picture book by 
Margaret Cardillo and Julia Denos follows Audrey’s childhood in Nazi-occupied 
Europe and her work in Africa as a Unicef ambassador. This is a great way to 
introduce this iconic screen legend to a younger audience and her dedication to 
helping and empowering others.

Malala Yousafzai: Warrior with Words 
<http://www.arabworldbooks.com/authors/karen_leggett.html> by Karen Leggett 
Abouraya and LC Wheatley

The iconic story of Malala Yousafzai’s story is a testament to bravery and the 
importance of believing in yourself that is told here with the aim of educating 
a younger audience about the importance of education and the power of words. A 
voice of a generation and an inspiration to teenagers across the globe, this 
picture book bring’s Malala’s commitment to fairness and equality for all to a 
whole new generation of readers.

Long Walk to Freedom 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/long-walk-to-freedom-11.html> abridged by 
Chris van Wyk and illustrated by Paddy Bouma
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7536f1bde074d2142392b338e0ec0cbd6fae325e%2F0_0_3152_2551%2F3152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picture%20book%20biographies%3A%20best%20heartwarming%20true%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picture%20book%20biographies%3A%20best%20heartwarming%20true%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7536f1bde074d2142392b338e0ec0cbd6fae325e%2F0_0_3152_2551%2F3152.jpg>
The biography of the 20th centuries most famous activists is re–told for 
children by Chris van Wyk. Paddy Bouma’s illustrations capture the vibrancy of 
life in South Africa. A great book to introduce the countries first back 
president to younger readers.

Amelia to Zora 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396679/> by Cynthia 
Chin-Lee and illustreated by Megan Halsey and Sean Addy


You get 26 true tales of 26 pioneering women who sought to change the world 
around them here. From Amelia Earhart – the first woman to fly solo across the 
Atlantic – to Zora Neale Hurston, a trail blazing author, this is a book that 
celebrates the achievements of 26 women who made their unique marks on history.

Story of Ruby Bridges 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/story-of-ruby-bridges.html> by Robert Coles, 
illustrated by George Ford


From Pulitzer Prize winning author Robert Coles, this is the true story of 
six–year–old Ruby Bridges, who defied protesters to enter a segregated, 
all–white school in 1960. This is a story of defiance and strength of sprit 
brilliantly brought to life with delicate watercolours by George Ford and 
Coles’ touching story–telling.

Anne Frank <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/anne-frank.html> by Josephine 
Poole and Angela Barrett
 Anne Frank cover Photograph: PR 
This sensitively illustrated picture book follows the story of Anne Frank, her 
persecution at the hand of Nazi Germany and her infamous diary. However, rather 
than starting the story with Anne and her families decision to hide in an 
annex, we are taken back to Anne’s early childhood, giving us insight into her 
life as a normal, happy child. Follow her heartbreaking story from beginning to 
end in this sensitive and delicate book that brings the human cost of the 
holocaust to life.

Girls Think of Everything 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girls-think-of-everything.html> by Catherine 
Thimmesh and Melissa Sweet

Did you know that some of the world’s most ingenuous inventions were thought 
of by women? Catherine Thimmesh’s book lifts the lid of some of histories 
unsung, female inventors. From Mary Anderson, who invented the windshield wiper 
to Ruth Wakefield who invented the first chocolate chip cookie, it also 
features young inventors including 10-year-old Becky Schroeder, who became the 
youngest woman to secure a patent in American history. The book is while being 
beautifully illustrated throughout by Melissa Sweet.

Henry’s Freedom Box <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/henry-s-freedom-box.html>
 by Ellen Levine and Kadir Nelson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F923bc4a719e0b75071b22e25ca4d86b9b85167f5%2F0_0_2386_2879%2F2386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picture%20book%20biographies%3A%20best%20heartwarming%20true%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picture%20book%20biographies%3A%20best%20heartwarming%20true%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fpicture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F923bc4a719e0b75071b22e25ca4d86b9b85167f5%2F0_0_2386_2879%2F2386.jpg>
This is the true story of Henry Brown, a boy who is born into slavery in the 
American South. Forced to work in a warehouse, he has an idea: to mail himself 
to the North where he can be free. This touching story about determination and 
the strength of the human sprit is captured with a heartwarming sincerity.

Little People, Big Dreams: Frida Kahlo 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367865/> by Isabel 
Sanchez Vegara and Gee Fang Eng

This book is one of four in the “little people big dreams” series by Isabel 
Sanchez Vegara, released this year. The other editions cover the extraordinary 
lives of fashion icon Coco Chanel, writer Maya Angelo and pilot Amelia Earhart. 
This kooky volume is a quirky take on artist Frida Kahlo’s life, that took her 
from ordinary child to extraordinary artist. Starting with her early childhood 
and her early dreams of becoming a doctor that were then ended with an 
unfortunate accident, Kahlo refused to give up and started painting from her 
bedside. Expect lots of vibrant colours and sweet, cartoon style drawings, the 
book also comes with facts about her life at the back.

Have we missed your favourite picture book biography off the list? Let us know 
via twitter@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> or by email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com and we’ll add them to this blog.
 