
Former champion Mary Pierce crashed out of the second round in straight sets 
to Iveta Benesova.

The tournament's fifth seed was expected to romp home over her more 
inexperienced opponent but she struggled from the outset and Benesova won 6-3, 
7-5.

The Czech, who had never made it past the second round in a grand slam 
tournament, won the first five games of the match en route to claiming the 
first set.

Pierce did find some rhythm in the second and broke Benesova to lead 5-3, only 
for the 22-year-old to break right back.

She then won the next three games to set up a third round meeting with Martina 
Hingis.

Pierce, who also boasts a French Open title, ended up hitting 41 unforced 
errors - 25 in the second set - to Benesova's 19.

Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> was also made 
to battle - a back problem - as she faced Meng Yuan of China. The Belgian 
eventually won 6-4, 6-2 after 29 unforced errors turned what should have been 
an easy first set into a struggle.

The second set saw the world No2 improve as she cut down on her error rate, 
managing two breaks of serve to take the match.

Clijsters admitted she was concerned heading into a third-round match-up with 
Italy's Roberta Vinci.

"My hip is actually pretty good," she said. "It's my lower back that's not 
doing too great.

"The problem that I had in Sydney with the fluid, I think it's with the 
anti-inflammatories that I'm taking, is reducing and it's helping a lot. It's 
just my lower back that's struggling.

"I think that my hip has always probably been not the strongest part of my 
body, especially when I was younger growing up, I had always had some lower 
back problems."

She then revealed that she would not make a decision on playing until the 
morning of her next match, which is due on Saturday.

"Every day I hope it improves. But, I'm sort of waiting every day and see how 
it feels. So I can't tell you now yet.

"I'm not someone who's going to give up and if I say, no, it hurts tomorrow, 
I'm not going to hit. I'm going to try. At least I'm going to try out there and 
see."

Other results

Aiko Nakamura (Jpn) bt Gisela Dulko (Arg) 6-1, 6-1; Flavia Pennetta (Ita) bt 
Martina Sucha (Svk) 6-3, 6-0; Nicole Vaidisova (Cze) bt Anna Chakvetadze (Rus) 
6-2, 6-1; Michaella Krajicek (Ned) bt Sania Mirza (Ind) 6-3, 7-5; Samantha 
Stosur (Aus) bt Ana Ivanovic (Ser) 6-3, 7-5; Sybille Bammer (Aut) bt Zi Yan 
(Chn) 6-3, 6-4; Maria Antonia Sanchez-Lorenzo (Spa) bt Anna-Lena Groenefeld 
(Ger) 4-6, 6-4, 6-1; Anastasia Myskina (Rus) bt Jamea Jackson (USA) 7-6 (7-4), 
0-6, 6-3; Patty Schnyder (Swi) bt Shinobu Asagoe (Jpn) 6-1, 7-6 (11-9); Amelie 
Mauresmo (Fra) bt Emilie Loit (Fra) 7-6 (7-1), 6-2; Sofia Arvidsson (Swe) bt 
Dinara Safina (Rus) 6-4, 6-0; Francesca Schiavone (Ita) bt Catalina Castano 
(Col) 6-1, 4-6, 6-3; Roberta Vinci (Ita) bt Marion Bartoli (Fra) 6-4, 3-6, 6-3; 
Martina Hingis (Swi) bt Emma Laine (Fin) 6-1, 6-1.
 