
Britain’s Pinewood Group, which includes the celebrated Pinewood and 
Shepperton film studios in the UK, as well as facilities in Toronto and 
Atlanta, Georgia, has posted record revenue as it seeks to expand its 
operations worldwide.

In an investor announcement that appeared on the company’s website 
<http://online.morningstarir.com/ir/pws/ir.jsp?page=news-item&item=2119317252472832>
, Pinewood said its income for the 2014/15 financial year was £75m, an increase 
of £10.9m on the previous year. The operating profit for the group was recorded 
as £5.8m, an increase of £0.9m on 2013/14.

Pinewood’s chief executive Ivan Dunleavy said in a statement: “Pinewood is a 
uniquely positioned independent operator and has once again delivered strong 
growth.”

However, he also sought to assert the necessity for Pinewood’s increase in 
capacity, by saying: “Although we have hosted the three largest film 
productions of the year, being Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens,
Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> and the 24th Bond 
film Spectre, we continue to be unable to meet all the demand from large films. 
This will be partly addressed by the first phase of the Pinewood expansion.”

Termed the Pinewood Studios Development Framework 
<http://www.pinewoodgroup.com/pinewoodexpansion>, the £200m scheme is designed 
to add over 30,000 sq m of studio space over the next 15 years at the company’s 
flagship Pinewood studios at Iver Heath, Bucks, which includes acquiring and 
building on neighbouring land.

As well as the above films, which used stages at Pinewood itself, recent 
shoots at Shepperton included Alice in Wonderland: Through the Looking Glass 
and Into the Woods, while Pinewood Toronto has hosted Suicide Squad and the 
Robocop remake. Pinewood Atlanta Studios recently saw shooting on its first 
major production, Ant-Man, andproduction began there in May 
<http://www.pinewoodgroup.com/our-studios/usa/news/marvel-announces-production-captain-america-civil-war-pinewood-atlanta-studios>
 on Captain America: Civil War.
 