
Steve Jobs' other company is entering the Windows netbook market with the 
Disney Netpal, aimed at children aged 6-12. It will have an 8.9 inch screen and 
will be available in Princess Pink or Magic Blue.

DigiTimes in Taiwan <http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20090618PR209.html> says 
the XP-based Netpal "is durable with a reinforced mechanical design, while 
offering a unique Disney user interface". Two models -- one with a 16GB solid 
state drive, one with a 160GB hard drive -- will be sold via Toys R Us, Amazon 
and other retailers at a suggested $349.99.

The Netpal should be available in the US in the summer, and might reach Europe 
towards the end of the year.
There's a mostly-untapped kids market for netbooks, and there's at least a 
potential market for branded netbooks -- we've already seen Hello Kitty, for 
example. How many units they might shift in a depressed economy is another 
matter.

As The Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124523798295822973.html?mod=googlenews_wsj> 
has pointed out:

In 2004, Disney introduced a children's desktop PC that was bright blue with a 
monitor framed by a mouse-ears silhouette.
The Disney Dream Desk PC, which was priced at about $900, with the monitor, 
didn't gain much traction. The Disney branding on the netbook is more subtle.

The netbook is part of a raft of new devices from Disney Consumer Products, 
which is also launching its first camcorders and MP3 players for kids, a $129 
"Ultimate Buzz Lightyear robot that responds to voice commands and plays laser 
tag, a Wii-like Zippity TV-game system for preschoolers, and a next-generation 
digital still camera whose body twists to let kids take close-ups of 
themselves," reportsTWICE 
<http://www.twice.com/article/CA6665886.html?desc=topstory>.
 