
One thing that always fascinates me is how reductionist, how mechanical, how 
sciencey and medical we like our stories about the body to be. This week, a new 
study was published on acupuncture. Many newspapers said it showed acupuncture 
performing better than medical treatment: in fact it was 8 million times more 
interesting than that.

They took 1,162 patients who had suffered with back pain for an average of 
eight years (so these were patients who had failed with medical treatment 
anyway) and divided them into three groups. The first group had some more 
medical treatment; the second had full-on acupuncture with all the trimmings, 
the needles all put carefully into the correct "meridians" and so on; while the 
third group just had some bloke pretending to be an acupuncturist, sticking 
needles in their skin at random.

The study set a threshold for "response to treatment", which was an 
improvement of 33% on three items out of a bigger scale, or 12% on one symptom 
scale. So this was not "getting better", or a "cure".

I'm not carping, I'm just telling you what they measured. And what were the 
results? Firstly, 27% of the medical treatment group improved: this is an 
impressive testament to the well-known healing power of simply "being in a 
trial", since medical treatment hadn't helped these patients for the preceding 
eight years. Meanwhile, 47% of the acupuncture group improved, but the sting is 
this: 44% of the fake acupuncture group improved too. There was no 
statistically significant difference between proper, genuine acupuncture and 
fake, "bung a needle in, anywhere you fancy, with a bit of theatrical ceremony" 
acupuncture.

There are three possible explanations for this finding. One is that sticking 
needles in your body at random helps back pain due to some physiological 
mechanism. The second is that theatrical ceremony, reassurance, the thought of 
someone doing something useful, helps back pain. (The third option is "a bit of 
both".)

Now as I have said so many times before, the placebo effect is not about a 
sugar pill, it's about the cultural meaning of a treatment, and our 
expectations: we know from research that two sugar pills are more effective 
than one, that a salt water injection is better for pain than a sugar pill, 
that colour and packaging have a beneficial effect, and so on.

Interestingly, there has even been a trial on patients with arm pain 
specifically comparing a placebo pill against a placebo ritual involving a sham 
medical device, modelled on acupuncture, which found that the elaborate ritual 
was more effective than the simple sugar pill. "Placebo" is not a unitary 
phenomenon; there is not "one type of placebo".

But the most important background information missing from the news reports 
wasn't about the details of the study: it was about back pain. Because back 
pain isn't like epilepsy or tuberculosis. Most of the big risk factors for a 
niggle turning into chronic longstanding back pain are personal, psychological, 
and social: things like depression, job dissatisfaction, unavailability of 
light duty on return to work, and so on.

And the evidence on treatments tells an even more interesting psychosocial 
story: sure, anti-inflammatory drugs are better than placebo. But more than 
that, bed rest is actively harmful, specific exercises can be too, and proper 
trial data shows that simply giving advice to "stay active" speeds recovery, 
reduces chronic disability, and reduces time off work.

We don't like solutions like that for our health problems. There are huge 
industries telling you that your tiredness is due to some "chromium deficiency" 
(buy the pill); your cloudy-headed feeling can be fixed with vitamin pills, 
pills, and more pills. It is a brave doctor who dares to bring up psychosocial 
issues for any complaint when a patient has been consistently told it is 
biomedical.

But in conditions like back pain or fatigue, information alone can make a 
difference. In Australia, a simple public information campaign ("Back pain: 
don't take it lying down", arf) was shown to reduce back pain significantly.

Â· Full academic references for these studies are at badscience.net 
<http://www.badscience.net>
 