
The photographs reveal things as though through a keyhole, spotlit vignettes 
rearing up from a forbidden world. They are small, black-and-white, 
home-developedsilver gelatin prints 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VqWyJstBSoo>, and they glower round the walls, 
not so much inviting as inciting you to look.

This small show at Richard Saltoun in London’s Fitzrovia 
<http://www.richardsaltoun.com/exhibitions/> is the first UK exhibition of 
Pierre Molinier 
<http://www.kamelmennour.com/exhibitions/33/pierre-molinier.html>’s work for 
over 20 years. Molinier, born in 1900, makes the spectator feel like a voyeur. 
But he wants us to witness what he himself wanted to see: these are episodes 
from a life in private, revealed to the world. His photographs have the 
repetitiveness of obsession and pornography. The same old things, again and 
again, the same focus, the same rooms, the same furniture and paraphernalia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514744650%2Ff2372a11-0c88-4fc5-81b6-ebb006943bf7-1020x718.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier's%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier%27s%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514744650%2Ff2372a11-0c88-4fc5-81b6-ebb006943bf7-1020x718.jpeg>
 Je rampe vers Gehamman, planche 25 du Chaman, 1965. 
And Molinier himself, again and again. These are more than selfies. He shows 
too much of himself, nevertheless. A man with a rose in his arse, corseted, 
masked, veiled, bewigged, high-heeled, impaled, laughing, giving us his rictus 
grin. Here’s his stockinged legs, bound at the ankles. Here’s his bum. Here it 
is again. There’s that stool, the chair, the out-of-focus wallpaper. It looks 
like nothing has changed here in decades.

Although many of the photographs date from the 1960s and 70s, they seem to 
come from an earlier age. There’s something musty and cloistered about them. 
They show a man alone, a man with mannequins, performing for himself and for 
the camera – and an invisible audience who might not be there at all.

Everything happens in an apartment at 7 Rue de Faussets in Bordeaux. Here, 
Molinier acted out his fantasy life and death before the camera. In 1950 he 
photographed himself as a lain-out corpse, andconcocted a shot of his own 
imaginary grave <https://www.pinterest.com/pin/914862401169365/>. “He was a man 
without morals,” he wrote on the cross embedded in the earth. Finally, in 1976, 
he committed suicide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514814545%2F1610148e-6eff-4de2-987d-55ace60d1c38-1529x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier's%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier%27s%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514814545%2F1610148e-6eff-4de2-987d-55ace60d1c38-1529x2040.jpeg>
 Eperon d’amour, c 1960 
He left a note on the door: “I’m killing myself, the key is with Claude 
Fonsale, the lawyer.” Beside his corpse was a second note, railing against “all 
the bastards who have been a pain in the arse all my bloody life”. Molinier 
staged his death, just as he staged so much of his life. He found it amusing, 
he once wrote, that those who would come to dissect his corpse (which he had 
donated to science) would discover his toenails immaculately painted red. 
Molinier, who also had a thing about guns, shot himself in the mouth in front 
of a mirror. He wanted to watch. Throughout his work there is a quest for 
obliteration, losing himself in sex and in the merger with a fantasised 
feminine alter ego.

Molinier, who had a thing about guns, shot himself in the mouth in front of a 
mirror. He wanted to watch

A housepainter by trade, Molinier became first a painter of surrealist, 
symbolist canvases. André Breton encouraged his paintings in the late 1950s, 
though later dropped the association. Breton may have been attracted to 
Molinier’s anti-clericism, but not to his sexuality or his photography; the 
homophobia of Breton’s circle was legendary. Yet Molinier’s art did eventually 
find its milieu, and he is recognised as a marker in an evolving queer 
sensibility, along with the wonderfulClaude Cahun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/14/claude-cahun-finding-great> 
(whom Breton also supported, then dropped). For Cahun, six years older than 
Molinier, a kind of private performance photography was also central to her art.

 Molinier’s paintings are forced, glutinous and airless, while his drawings 
are more interesting for what they represent than their style. Molinier drew 
things, I think, to show himself how they looked, their forms and perverse 
conjunctions already articulated in his mind, just as his photographs recorded 
events already premeditated – dressed for, lit, framed and staged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514856203%2F646c6434-e262-4edc-b586-d862bc62c8d3-649x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier's%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier%27s%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514856203%2F646c6434-e262-4edc-b586-d862bc62c8d3-649x1020.jpeg>
 Planche 30 du Chaman, 1967 
It was as a photographer and photomontagist that Molinier really found 
himself. The photograph became a mirror, a way of seeing and fixing himself as 
other. Presumably, he wanted to preserve the image of his display in female 
guise, as well as engaging in certain acts – some of which were only humanly 
possible through the artifice of photomontage. But his auto-fellatio images 
were real enough, performed with the assistance of a homemade yoke. Do not try 
this at home.

Molinier’s elaborate fantasy life and gender play became his art. His 
partners, for the most part, were his own photomontaged and duplicated selves. 
In his photographs he became both other and himself, man and woman, penetrator 
and penetrated. At the core of his art, his transvestism signalled the merging 
of sexes, a multiplication of organs and limbs and selves. He became the object 
of his own desire, a self that was other.

He photographed himself wearing a dildo, having sex with not one, but two 
montaged doubles over a stool. He made double and triple self-portraits – 
meeting his younger selves in the developing tray – and images of himself as a 
kind of devil-shaman, backlit, with both breasts and erection.

What human anatomy won’t allow, photomontage makes possible. Molinier's work 
is a delirious, rapturous confusion

The impossible, too, is at the centre of his work: in one photomontage – 
possibly a perverse play on Velázquez – a figure lounges on a couch in the pose 
ofThe Toilet of Venus 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/diego-velazquez-the-toilet-of-venus-the-rokeby-venus>
. Where Velázquez’s Venus is turned away from the viewer, seeing her own face 
in a mirror, Molinier’s montaged head is reversed on his own shoulders. The 
legs and female sex are also reversed. Front and back have been recombined, 
then given an extra pair of legs and an arm that gropes out of nowhere.

Other montages are kaleidoscopic Busby Berkeley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIO9y1xMPIA> mirrorings of multiple legs and 
faces and arses. These images unfold about themselves like flowers and 
mandalas, made up of body parts dismembered from his own photographs. What 
human anatomy won’t allow, photomontage and collage make possible. It is all a 
delirious, rapturous confusion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514994950%2F476501e6-de69-4807-9c73-a0bdb746b6ea-1020x715.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier's%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pioneer%20of%20perversity%3A%20Pierre%20Molinier%27s%20extreme%20exposures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fpioneer-of-perversity-pierre-molinier-extreme-exposures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514994950%2F476501e6-de69-4807-9c73-a0bdb746b6ea-1020x715.jpeg>
 The Model (Jean), 1970 
The repetition of Molinier’s images, the tiny circus of his performances to 
camera, reflects his desires and compulsions. In the photographs, not even 
Molinier changes much. His photographs try to stop time, smoothing out the 
signs of age in the darkroom and by careful lighting. Molinier is said to have 
been an influence, or at least a forerunner, ofCindy Sherman 
<https://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2012/cindysherman/gallery/6/#/2/untitled-177-1987/>
,Catherine Opie 
<http://www.regenprojects.com/artists/catherine-opie/selected-works?view=multiple-sliders#53>
 andRobert Mapplethorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/apr/02/robert-mapplethorple-grand-palais-patti-smith-photographer-paris>
. In his later years he also used other artists – notably Swiss performer and 
painterLuciano Castelli <http://www.lucianocastelli.com/fotografie/> and the 
French artistThierry Agullo <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thierry_Agullo> – to 
model for photographs in roles closely allied to his own. Maybe he saw them as 
body doubles as he grew older. Last year, a show of Molinier andGenesis Breyer 
P-Orridge 
<http://invisible-exports.com/exhibitions/breyer-p-orridge-pierre-molinier/> 
(of Psychic TV and Throbbing Gristle fame, among much else) was held in New 
York. Posthumously, Molinier has become something of a cult figure. His art was 
a kind of extreme exposure. Molinier’s life and art are inextricable. It all 
writhes together.

 * The Temptations of Pierre Molinier 
<http://www.richardsaltoun.com/exhibitions/> is at Richard Saltoun, London W1W, 
until 2 October 2015  