
Trade dud-line

In the end, the non-waiver trading deadline yielded little down to the wire 
action, that is, unless you countBud Norris' move 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9525928/bud-norris-traded-baltimore-orioles-houston-astros>
 from the Astros to the Orioles andIan Kennedy's trade 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9525645/ian-kennedy-traded-san-diego-padres-arizona-diamondbacks>
 to San Diego as drama. Yes,Jake Peavy 
<http://bostonherald.com/sports/red_sox_mlb/boston_red_sox/2013/07/scouting_report_final_piece_to_jake_peavy_puzzle>
 landed in Boston and Jose Iglesias headed to Detroit early on Wednesday,but 
where was the Cliff Lee blockbuster, the Michael Young and Carlos Ruiz deals, 
the Jonathan Papelbon trade as the 4PM deadline approached? 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/blogs/phillies/Phillies-stand-pat-at-the-trade-deadline.html>
 What exactly happened down in Philadelphia? Nothing is the answer - same in 
Texas as they failed to land a bat 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20130731&content_id=55411506&vkey=news_mlb&c_id=mlb>
 to possibly replace the outbound Nelson Cruz who could be facing a PED 
suspension, same in Seattle where the Mariners hung on to Raul Ibanez for 
whatever reason. The big deals, Alfonso Soriano to the Yankees, Matt Garza to 
the Rangers, took place before Wednesday. So with little the action between 
GM's working the phones and another waiting day on the Biogenesis front, on the 
final night of baseball in July, we were able to sit back, relax and focus 
firmly on the field and watch ten of the most exciting minutes of the season.

10:27 PM EST

What a sight to see - one of the most picturesque venues in the game, PNC Park 
in Pittsburgh, filled with fans on a Wednesday night, on their feet, cheering 
on new closer Mark Melancon, on the mound to shut the door on St Louis, again.

A day earlier, the Buccos took over the best record in baseball moniker, 
defeating the Cardinals in 11 innings, 2-1 
<http://wapc.mlb.com/play?content_id=29269915> in game one of their 
doubleheader. The win put them ahead of St Louis by a half game. In the 
nightcap, for an encore, the Piratesshut out the Redbirds 6-0 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2013_07_30_slnmlb_pitmlb_2&mode=video&content_id=29279233&tcid=vpp_copy_29279233>
, meaning that they had held one of the most potent offenses in baseball to 
just a single run in 20 innings. Until Wednesday it was the latest high-point 
in a season no one could have predicted.

Cut back to Melancon, who has Daniel Descalso in an 0-2 hole before issuing a 
filthy knuckle curve that the Cards second baseman can't even begin to handle. 
Rendered powerless, the Cards second baseman watches the ball land in the 
trusty glove of Russell Martin. Nasty - a statement pitch, the last pitch. 
Ballgame over.Another win for Pittsburgh, a 5-4 final 
<http://wapc.mlb.com/play?content_id=29316689>, their fourth straight over the 
hated Redbirds and a comeback victory to boot. Another win closer to finishing 
over .500 for the first time in 20 years, and another win closer to the 
unlikeliest of NL Central titles. Yes, there is a lot of baseball to be played, 
but who had Pittsburgh up 2.5 games in their division with the dog days of 
summer upon us? The Cardinals are suddenly reeling, dropping seven straight, 
losing their all-world catcher Yadier Molina for at least two weeks with knee 
issues. The Reds are also struggling mightily, winning for the first time in a 
week on Wednesday. The stars are aligning for a franchise of deprived fans that 
would have likely settled for being mediocre, a goal that now seems like a 
footnote to a season where loftier accolades are in sight.

10:31 PM EST
 Los Angeles Dodgers right fielder Yasiel Puig dives for a ball hit for a 
single by New York Yankees' Vernon Wells. Photograph: Mark J. Terrill/AP 

The Yankees are in Los Angeles where Vernon Wells rips a second inning Clayton 
Kershaw pitch - it looks like extra bases. Except that Wells has hit it to the 
wrong part of the outfield, right field, the lush piece of Chavez Revine real 
estate where Yasiel Puig roams. The Cuban dives to his left, can't make the 
catch but makes the stop, a one hopper right into his glove. Wells is thinking 
two right off the bat and takes a wide turn at first. Then he spots Puig who 
gets up immediately and short arms a bullet into the second baseman. Wells 
looks like he has seen a ghost, a sure thing double becomes a single after 
scrambling back to first base. It's a ridiculous play from a wildly talented 
kid who brightens the Dodgers sky wherever he goes. No wonder that despitetheir 
3-0 defeat <http://wapc.mlb.com/play?content_id=29319689>to New York on 
Wednesday,Los Angeles are 27-7 in their last 34 games. 
 <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAD/2013-schedule-scores.shtml>

10:33 PM EST
 Cleveland Indians' Carlos Santana celebrates after rounding third base on his 
solo home run off Chicago White Sox relief pitcher Dylan Axelrod. Photograph: 
Tony Dejak/AP 

You think Pittsburgh have had their problems? Sure, the Buccos haven't 
finished .500 since 1992, but Cleveland is a city where no major professional 
franchise have won a title since 1964, while the Indians have been without a 
championship sinceBob Feller and company beat the Boston Braves in 1948 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DHRH15R6600>. So when the mojo builds on the 
shores of Lake Erie, there's a lot behind it, and that vibe was on display with 
the home team facing the Chicago White Sox on Wednesday night. The Tribe had 
already tied the game with two runs in the bottom of the ninth, and an inning 
later,Carlos Santana puts Dylan Axelrod's offering deep into right field. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2013_07_31_chamlb_clemlb_1&mode=video&content_id=29317613&tcid=vpp_copy_29317613>
 When the ball lands in the seats, Cleveland has their seventh straight 
victory, 6-5. The Tribe have been streaking upwards and downwards all season 
long, but this is their longest winning run of the season for an offensively 
charged ballclub with a manager in Terry Francona that believes in his players 
and whose players believe in him. Detroit failed to put them away, just as they 
failed to put away the Chicago last season. Except these Indians have more, and 
the slacking Tigers are playing a dangerous game by keeping that window open in 
the AL Central.

10:37 PM EST
 Texas Rangers' Adrian Beltre, left, tosses his helmet to teammate Leonys 
Martin after hitting the game-winning home run against the Los Angeles Angels 
on Wednesday. Photograph: Jim Cowsert/AP 

It couldn't happen again could it? It had been a very long time since a team 
had beaten another team in walk off fashion three nights running, but it was 
indeed possible with the Angels and Rangers tied at one in the bottom of the 
ninth inning. Geovany Soto beat LA on Monday, Leonys Martin on Tuesday, both 
with big flies. Now Adrian Beltre is at the plate,taking a big swing at Michael 
Kohn's pitch at the Ballpark in Arlington. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/video/play.jsp?content_id=29318115&topic_id=vtp_budweiser&c_id=mlb&tcid=vpp_copy_29318115&v=3>
Seconds later, Beltre's helmet is in the air, his shirt nowhere to be found, 
teammates chasing the third baseman everywhere he goes. It's how they do it 
these days when you lift your team to dramatic walk-off wins, and the Rangers 
are getting good at it. The camera finds Josh Hamilton in LA's dugout - he must 
be missing those familiar cheers after a season that's been nothing less than 
harrowing for the Angels, while his former club gears up for a challenging 
stretch run towards what would be a fourth consecutive playoff appearance.

Four games, four electric moments, four reminders of what baseball is capable 
of providing us once the Biogenesis smoke clears and we head into the home 
stretch of the 2013 season.

There will be extensive coverage of the MLB suspensions when they, finally, 
happen...

MLB standings <http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/>
 