
Australia’s year 9 students have recorded lower test scores in science, maths 
and reading than three years ago despite still outperforming most countries in 
the OECD, the latest Programme for International Student Assessment results 
show.

The Pisa results, released on Tuesday evening by the Australian Council for 
Educational Research, show the year 9s’ results in 2015 are part of a long-term 
decline in each category.

Australian students’ scientific literacy has declined by 17 points since 2006, 
equivalent to seven months of schooling, with nine points of the decline in the 
last three years.

Performance in maths had declined 30 points since 2003, equivalent to one year 
of schooling, with 10 points of the decline in the last three years.

Performance in reading literacy fell 25 points since 2000, or 10 months of 
schooling, with nine points of the decline in the last three years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23ea01ed916e2777bc070df0dcc303e2674572d%2F0_89_1199_719%2F1199.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pisa%20results%3A%20Australian%20students'%20science%2C%20maths%20and%20reading%20in%20long-term%20decline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pisa%20results%3A%20Australian%20students%27%20science%2C%20maths%20and%20reading%20in%20long-term%20decline&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fpisa-results-australian-students-science-maths-and-reading-in-long-term-decline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe23ea01ed916e2777bc070df0dcc303e2674572d%2F0_89_1199_719%2F1199.png>
 Australia’s performance in Programme for International Student Assessment 
reports since 2000. Photograph: Department of Education and Training 
Despite the declines, Australia still beat 57 countries in science, 44 
countries in maths and 50 countries in reading literacy.

Australia trailed 19 countries in maths, 11 in reading and nine in science.

Australia performed as well as the UK in all three areas and as well as New 
Zealand in science and maths but lagged behind our near-neighbours in reading. 
Singapore outperformed Australia in all three areas.

Australia’s average score has never been in the “high-performing” range for 
any of the Pisa domains, though it has always been significantly above the OECD 
average at the national level.

Results were worst in Tasmania, with average results “significantly below” the 
OECD average in maths, science and reading.

Australian students' results in maths and science falling in international 
rankings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/australian-students-results-in-maths-and-science-falling-in-international-rankings>
Average performance in the Northern Territory was also below the OECD average 
in reading literacy and on par with the average in scientific literacy.

In mathematical literacy, three jurisdictions (ACT, Western Australia and 
Victoria) performed significantly above the OECD average.

The Pisa results follow the 2015 Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study (Timms), released last week, that showedAustralia’s performance 
had flatlined for the past 20 years in science and maths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/australian-students-results-in-maths-and-science-falling-in-international-rankings>
 and its year 8 students had fallen five ranks in those subjects.

Sue Thomson, the Acer director of educational monitoring and research, said 
the Pisa results were “much worse” than the flatlining Timms results.

That was because they show “Australian students’ ability to apply their 
mathematical and scientific knowledge to real life situations is falling not 
only relative to other countries but also in an absolute sense”, she said.

Thomson said there has been a 3% decrease in the proportion of high performers 
and a 5% increase in the proportion of low performers in scientific literacy 
from 2006 to 2015.

The education minister, Simon Birmingham, said it was “good news” that 
Australia was still ahead of the OECD average but the results “continued to 
paint a worrying trend”.

He said the results would be a key part of the 16 December meeting with state 
and territory education ministers about “how best to target Australia’s record 
levels of investment in schools and improve student outcomes”.

“Commonwealth funding for schools has increased by 50% since 2003 while our 
results are going backwards,” Birmingham said.

“I’m not suggesting that money is not important, of course it is vital, but as 
the OECD notes Australia ranks as spending the fifth-highest amount on 
education in the OECD and once you get to that level there is little value in 
just increasing spending the harder task is to invest in the areas that the 
evidence says makes a difference.”

Birmingham promised to tie schools’ funding to measures that would lift 
results.

Labor supports measures to boost school performance including better entry 
standards for teaching courses, greater principals’ autonomy, continuing 
education for teachers and evidence-based policies.

But Labor’s deputy leader and education spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek, told 
Guardian Australia reforms couldn’t be delivered without restoring$29bn cut 
from projected schools’ funding growth in the 2014 budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-2014-abbott-governments-health-and-schools-cuts-anger-states>
.

“This idea that money doesn’t matter, it’s all about the reforms – we agree 
it’s all about the reforms but you need extra money to deliver them,” she said.

“At the time of this testing, less than 10% of Labor’s extra needs-based 
funding had flowed to schools.

“So any attempt to draw a link between the results and needs based funding is 
completely wrong.”
 