
The winner

Swatting off any challenge in the action-blockbuster stakes from the new Mad 
Max this week and coasting to a $1.15bn running total,Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron> is now the eighth 
highest-grossing film of all time. Its $154.1m six-day Chinese debut was 
impressive – the second-highest ever in the territory and evidence of how the 
Marvel universe is now establishing itself in the farthest corners of the real 
one. But it’s short of the truly ridiculous pace, $250.5m in eight days, set by
Furious 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fast-furious-7> in April. Both 
films are in the running for the No 3 spot, currently held by the first 
Avengers, on theall-time worldwide chart 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>: Furious 7, its takings slowing 
to a crawl now, is about $20m short; Ultron about $380m. Ultron looks, right 
now, to be slightly off Furious 7’s blistering overseas pace, and also unlikely 
to match the $623.7m US haul that was the foundation of thefirst Avengers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers>’ massive strike. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
It’s still doing very capably on both counts: ahead of Avengers 1 in most 
emerging markets, which should balance out the reduced US pot – now $372m, the 
year’s highest domestic figure so far. What it’s lacking is that hot twitch of 
cultural excitement that would set it on the way to break records absolutely 
everywhere; it’s notable that the UK box office is also running shy of the 
first film’s at the same point ($65.9m to the first’s $71.2m). But there’s 
still a lot to play for. If I was betting, then I’d put money onFurious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/furious-7> finishing a fraction above 
Avengers 1, and Ultron a fraction below.


Mad world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmad-max-fury-road-video-interviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431613996776%2FNicholas-Hoult-in-Mad-Max-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%3A%20'We%20always%20have%20the%20wanderer%20in%20the%20wasteland%20searching%20for%20purpose'%20-%20video%20interviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmad-max-fury-road-video-interviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%3A%20%27We%20always%20have%20the%20wanderer%20in%20the%20wasteland%20searching%20for%20purpose%27%20-%20video%20interviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fmad-max-fury-road-video-interviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431613996776%2FNicholas-Hoult-in-Mad-Max-001.jpg>
After his 30-year absence, there was no guarantee audiences would be keen on 
another parched excursion in the company of Max Rockatansky. Very much a 
low-budget, midnight-movie kind of proposition for the first two Mad Maxes, 
building up to something of Hollywood stature for the third, there’s no 
mistaking the pressure this time. A $150m budget plus a rumoured $100m in 
marketing puttingFury Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> 
– releasing in 69 territories – puts Fury Road in the indisputable worldwide 
blockbuster ballpark.


A $45.4m US opening in that context looks like a disappointment, but given 
that the film is R-rated and, withTom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy> and Charlize Theron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlize-theron> headlining, contains no 
A-list stars, it’s a qualified success (the 24th best R-rated debut). It’s the 
best Mad Max debut – and puts Fury Road in a strong position to become the 
top-grossing film of the series, even adjusted for inflation (which would lift
Beyond Thunderdome <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mad_Max_Beyond_Thunderdome>’s 
$36.2m to $82.8m). Given the almost unanimously worshipful reviews, studio 
Warner Bros will be hoping that George Miller’s film has the same kind of 
durability at the box-office as its protagonist does in the outback.


Even if that comes to pass, the international figures are concerning – $64m 
from 68 markets – set against meaty costs. That doesn’t say must-see 
blockbuster to me; more cult breakout that you pray doesn’t have a 
three-figure-budget. Fury Road’s $7m UK figure was beaten into second place by 
Pitch Perfect 2, but still enough to make it top territory; $6.6m was enough 
for No 1 in South Korea and $6.1m for France; but $4.9m in Australia has to be 
counted as a stumble, given the franchise’suniquely screwy antipodean identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/mad-max-australian-cinema-ozploitation>
.


Compared to other adult-certified films that have performed better (Fifty 
Shades of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey> opened 
at $20.8m in the UK in February), Fury Road feels like it’s labouring to get 
much beyond the geek quorum that remembers and reveres the original films. 
Hopefully, the film’s superior quality will change that over the coming weeks.


But it’s a problem for now. It feels like Fury Road is suffering because it’s 
up against Pitch Perfect 2 in many countries, whose easy mainstream hooks are 
picking up the female audience more readily (see below) than the abstract case 
for Miller’s film as an anti-patriarchal work that emerged whenthe reviews 
embargo was lifted on 11 May 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/mad_max_fury_road/>. There was no sense in the 
long-term marketing campaign that this could be a selling point for the film – 
and a 70% male US audience on opening weekend is the result.

Bravura trailers aside, the publicity was rather diffuse, with Charlize 
Theron’s shaven-headed Furiosa mystifyingly prominent on posters at the expense 
of Tom Hardy, the ostensible star of the show. There was also animpersonal  
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=mad+max+fury+road+poster&safe=off&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=AY9bVYb-JciPU9f_gPAP&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAQ&biw=1127&bih=274#imgrc=G0oEDZ0mIWiiCM%253A%3BW6Mo5xcrafUMmM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fgamrrage.com%252Fwp-content%252Fuploads%252F2015%252F05%252FMad-Max-Fury-Road-lovely-day.png%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fgamrrage.com%252Fcritique-cine-mad-max-fury-road%252F%3B1680%3B1050>
poster campaign that relied on bland road-warrior imagery that would only 
resonate with Mad Max aficionados, and a “mastermind” billing for dirctor 
George Miller that, again, preaches largely to the converted.

It feels as if there wasn’t a clear sense of who to aim Fury Road at beyond 
the cult-movie crowd, or that someone lacked the conviction to sell it to women 
because of the fear of losing the male audience. Now, if the film is to meet 
its costs, the studio is partly reliant on the last people they usually ask to 
sell stuff for them: the critics.

Sweet harmony
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20'We're%20performing%20oral%20magic'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20%27We%27re%20performing%20oral%20magic%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Pitch Perfect 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2> is going to 
be big. The US opening for Universal’s a cappella comedy sequel – $69.2m, 
easily a record for a musical – confirms that the franchise is firmly bedded in 
when, back in 2012, it was a quirky proposition feeding off the likes ofGlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/glee> and given a limited, 
slow-building release. That could put it in line for $150-200m in the US alone. 
It’s a calculated retread, with university singing outfit the Barden Bellas 
pushed on to the international a cappella scene for no other reason than that’s 
where the bigger box office lies.

It’s also spectacularly outperforming the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123284/pitch-perfect> film in the 30 
markets where it’s out so far. After an upper-register No 1 in Australia last 
week, co-starRebel Wilson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebel_Wilson>’s home 
turf, it’s going great guns in the UK (PP1: $1.5m; PP2: $7.7m) and Germany 
(PP1: $1.9m; PP2: $4.1m), who were the next hottest for the original. The 
Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan also posted No 1s, suggesting that 
Pitch Perfect is breaking new ground, perhaps already tilled by the greater 
visibility of female-led studio fare since Bridesmaids, and the fact that Pitch 
Perfect shares the aspirational dramatic set-up of TV talent shows that are 
syndicated worldwide.

It’ll surely surpass the original’s $50.3m overseas take several times over, 
which could add up to $300m+ overall; enough to have it ululating alongside the 
likes ofInto the Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/film/into-the-woods> 
($212m),Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/94449/chicago> ($306m) 
andLes Misérables <https://www.theguardian.com/film/les-miserables> ($441m). A 
third round seems inevitable, and the franchise, with its transportable tight 
unit of singers and college setting, surely has potential to bud off into 
localised versions, too.


The rest of the world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUocs8Nsv3FU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUocs8Nsv3FU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUocs8Nsv3FU&media=>
Four offerings from outside the Hollywood system: Korean thriller Chronicles 
of Evil <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uocs8Nsv3FU>, left eating Mad Max’s 
dirt in second place in that country but still good for sixth place globally, 
about a police officer who covers up the murder of a taxi driver. Two British 
entrants –Ex Machina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina> and Far From 
the Madding Crowd <https://www.theguardian.com/film/far-from-the-madding-crowd> 
– continued modest international runs in eight and 13 territories respectively. 
Now at $26.5m and 11th place on the worldwide rankings, Alex Garland’s $16.4m 
sci-fi thriller must be hitting black some time soon; one place below and 
currently on $10.6m, it looks more dicey for Madding Crowd, for which no budget 
is available but which certainly looks glossy enough. But it’s got a lengthy 
rollout to come, including major territories in the shape of France (3 June), 
Australia (25 June), Brazil (25 June) and Russia (2 July). Finally,Ostwind 2 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaGoLTmtqsY> – which looks to have a sort of 
German Black Beauty thing going on – took 13th place with a $2m take.


The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIEYYyaN_eR0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIEYYyaN_eR0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIEYYyaN_eR0&media=>
Mad Max: Fury Road and Pitch Perfect 2 dribble out in a few more spots. But if 
Marvel’s owner Disney is fretting about the next big boy with a real chance of 
cramping Age of Ultron’s style, it can console itself with the fact that it is 
a Disney film, too. Pixar alumnus Brad Bird brings his $190m sci-fi fantasia
Tomorrowland <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomorrowland> – the latest in 
that beloved oeuvre based on theme-park rides – to 40 territories, including 
the US and the UK. In what seems like an emerging pattern lately, it’ll open in 
China belatedly mid-week. Anything to do with government-stipulated release 
dates trying to depress Hollywood grosses? (If so, it’s not working if Furious 
7 and Ultron are anything to go by.) Fox’s reboot of thePoltergeist property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85177/poltergeist> created in 1982 with 
Tobe Hooper as director and Steven Spielberg producing also hits 30 markets, 
chief among them the States, UK, Australia and Brazil, as well as a big swathe 
of the Middle East. The new one comes courtesy of Monster House director Gil 
Kenan and producers Sam Raimi and Roy Lee,the man who strip-mined J-horror for 
Hollywood remakes <http://goldsea.com/Personalities/Leer/leer1.html>. Light on 
star names – just Sam Rockwell – it has the original’s impressive $121m haul 
($296m adjusted) to beat.


Top 10 global box office, 15-17 May

1. Avengers: Age of Ultron, $227.4m from 92 territories. $1.15bn cumulative – 
67% international; 33% US
2. (New) Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, $109.4m from 69 
territories – 58.4% int; 41.6% US
3. Pitch Perfect 2, $96.3m from 30 territories. $107.5m cum – 35.6% int; 64.4% 
US
4. Furious 7, $10.2m from 67 territories. $1.49bn cum – 76.9% int; 23.1% US
5. Home, $7.2m from 24 territories. $351.1m cum – 52.8% int; 47.2% US
6. (New) Chronicles of Evil, $6.3m from 1 territory – 100% int
7. Hot Pursuit, $5.8m from 1 territory. $23.5m cum – 100% US
8. Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2, $5.3m from 53 territories. $94.4m cum – 33.3% int; 
66.7% US
9. The Age of Adaline, $4.7m from 23 territories. $48.1m cum – 22.9% int; 
87.1% US
10. Cinderella, $3.9m from 2 territories. $521m cum – 62.1% int; 37.9% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. Some of this week’s figures are 
based on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 