
Planned Parenthood <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood> 
has asked a federal judge to stop Texas from cutting it from the state’s 
Medicaid program, which the country’s largest abortion provider says would 
reduce health services for nearly 11,000 low-income women.

Where the supreme court battle goes from here: 'There will be a huge fight'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/31/donald-trump-supreme-court-picks-democrats-opposition>
The request to US district judge Sam Sparks was filed late on Friday in Austin 
and is part of an ongoing lawsuit filed last year.

Texas is one of several Republican-controlled states that have sought to deny 
Medicaid funding to Planned Parenthood following the release ofsecretly 
recorded and heavily edited videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/14/planned-parenthood-lawsuit-videos-center-for-medical-progress>
 by an anti-abortion group last year.

Investigations by 13 states into those videos, which claimed to show Planned 
Parenthood officials discussing the sale of fetal tissue, have concluded 
without criminal charges, and Planned Parenthood officials have denied any 
wrongdoing.

A Houston grand jury indicted two activists behind the videos over how they 
covertly gained access inside a Planned Parenthood clinic. A judge later 
dismissed the charges.

Federal judges have stopped Arkansas, Alabama, Kansas and Mississippi from 
similarly excluding Planned Parenthood from Medicaid reimbursements in wake of 
the videos.Texas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> is set to cut off 
Planned Parenthood as early as 21 January, unless Sparks grants an injunction.

Sparks had previously set a hearing in the case for 17 January.

“Courts have unanimously prevented these terminations and agreed that 
preventing Medicaid enrollees from obtaining care from the qualified provider 
of their choice violates federal law,” attorneys for Planned Parenthood wrote 
in their request for an injunction.

Planned Parenthood and ACLU mount abortion law challenges in three states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/planned-parenthood-aclu-challenge-abortion-ban>
Aides to Republican Texas attorney general Ken Paxton did not immediately 
respond to an email seeking comment.

Paxton’s office has said it is still investigating the videos – more than 18 
months after launching an inquiry. But Texas health officials pointed to the 
videos in sending a letter earlier this month to Planned Parenthood, which the 
state accuses of making misleading statements.

President-elect Donald Trump could also move to strip Planned Parenthood of 
nearly $400m in Medicaid funds after taking office. Republicans moved through 
Congress last year legislation to cut taxpayer funds to the 100-year-old 
organization, but Barack Obama vetoed it.

Trump sent mixed signals during his campaign about Planned Parenthood but has 
endorsed calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/donald-trump-abortion-coalition-public-funding-planned-parenthood>
 to defund the group.
 