
Reproductive rights advocates announced a significant slate of challenges to 
anti-abortion laws on Wednesday, taking aim at major restrictions in three 
states which advocates say are unconstitutional.


Planned Parenthood <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, 
the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Center for Reproductive Rights, a 
legal advocacy group which argued a landmark abortion case earlier this year, 
filed three lawsuits in Alaska, Missouri and North Carolina. In Missouri, the 
groups will challenge a pair of abortion restrictions that have reduced the 
number of abortion providers to just one. They are taking aim at a similar 
clinic restriction in Alaska. In North Carolina, they will mount a challenge to 
a 20-week ban on abortion that has some of the nation’s strictest exceptions.

‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
The two Missouri restrictions are highly similar to laws in Texas that the US 
supreme court struck down in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/27/us-supreme-court-texas-abortion-ruling>
. They require abortions to be performed in expensive, hospital-like facilities 
and require abortion providers to have certain professional relationships with 
a local hospital.

The supreme court ruled that such restrictions served no medical purpose and 
were unconstitutional. But similar restrictions remain on the books in several 
states. In Missouri, where 1.2 million women of reproductive age live, the laws 
have forced two Planned Parenthood clinics, in Columbia and Kansas City, to 
stop providing abortions in recent years. The only remaining clinic is located 
in St Louis, forcing manyMissouri <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/missouri>
 women seeking an abortion to travel long distances.

“Because of laws like the ones we are challenging today, for too many women 
across our country the constitutional right to have an abortion is more 
theoretical than real,” said Jennifer Dalven, the director of the ACLU’s 
Reproductive Freedom Project.

But it is the North Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> challenge that may have the 
bigger impact on abortion rights nationwide. This is only the second time 
reproductive rights advocates have challenged a 20-week ban on abortion in 
federal court – potentially setting the table for these restrictions to go 
before the supreme court.

North Carolina’s law bans abortions after 20 weeks except in a medical 
emergency where a woman’s condition is so grave that she requires an abortion 
immediately. That is stricter than other 20-week bans, which have health 
exceptions but don’t require there to be a medical emergency.

 The bill defines medical emergency as a condition which “so complicates the 
medical condition of the pregnant woman as to necessitate the immediate 
abortion of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a delay will create 
serious risk of substantial and irreversible physical impairment of a major 
bodily function” not including mental health.

In their lawsuit, the ACLU, Planned Parenthood and the Center for Reproductive 
Rights argue that the language essentially forces women having an abortion for 
health reasons to wait until she becomes gravely ill.

Laws banning abortion several weeks before a fetus is viable outside the womb 
are increasingly common. Across the country,more than a dozen states 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/state-policy/explore/state-policies-later-abortions>
 ban abortion two weeks before viability on the medically dubious grounds that 
the fetus can feel pain.


But despite the fact that Roe v Wade prohibits states from banning abortion 
before the point of viability, most of those laws have not faced a legal 
challenge. Only Arizona’s 20-week ban, passed in 2012 andstruck down 
<https://www.reproductiverights.org/press-room/Supreme-Court-Refuses-to-Review-Arizona-Abortion-Ban>
permanently 
<https://www.reproductiverights.org/sites/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/Previability-Litigation-With-Chart-for-Sept-20-week-ban%20vote.pdf>
 over the next two years, was ever the subject of a legal battle in federal 
court.

The challenge is especially significant now that Donald Trump has been elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/womens-right-groups-fight-trump-pence-aborition-birth-control>
 president. Trump, ina wholesale embrace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/donald-trump-abortion-coalition-public-funding-planned-parenthood>
 of the anti-abortion movement’s top priorities, has promised to sign into law 
a nationwide ban on abortion at 20 weeks.

One reason is that very few abortion providers have standing for such a 
challenge. “To challenge these laws, you would have to be actually doing 
abortions after 20 weeks,” said Priscilla Smith, an abortion rights advocate 
and a senior fellow at Yale law school. “And there are just so few states where 
you can obtain abortions at that stage of pregnancy. Despite the anti-abortion 
world’s focus on post-20-week abortions, they’re very rare.”

But another reason may be that reproductive rights advocates have been 
hesitant to launch a lawsuit that could reach the supreme court. In the past 
several decades, many such legal challenges have resulted in the supreme court
chipping away 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2013/11/justice_anthony_kennedy_abortion_swing_vote.html>
 at abortion rights.

That changed this summer, when the court ruled 5-to-3 to strike down a set of 
harsh Texas abortion restrictions. The ruling prohibited states from enacting 
abortion restrictions based on medically questionable arguments about 
protecting women’s health. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who is often skeptical of 
abortion rights, joined the majority.

With Trump potentially empowered to shift the balance of the court rightward, 
Smith said, reproductive rights advocates are probably facing the friendliest 
bench possible under the new president.

Women’s rights groups brace for Trump: ‘We are used to fighting impossible 
odds’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/womens-right-groups-fight-trump-pence-aborition-birth-control>
Courts have struck down early bans on abortion before, including an Arkansas 
law banning abortion at 12 weeks and a North Dakota law banning abortion at six 
weeks – before many women realize they are pregnant. In defense of 20-week 
bans, abortion foes commonly argue that fetuses at that stage of development 
will feel pain during the procedure. But the evidence is slim. While select 
studies have found evidence for this, the most recent systematic review of 
studies on this topicconcluded 
<https://rewire.news/legislative-tracker/law-topic/20-week-bans/> that the 
fetal nervous system is not developed enough to feel pain until the third 
trimester.

Still, bans on abortion at 20 weeks occupy fraught emotional territory. Public 
support for abortion restrictions grows with gestational age, and a substantial 
portion of Americans are ambivalent or opposed to abortion rights in the second 
trimester.

Anti-abortion activists place an emphasis on these cases, even though they 
account for only 1% to 2% of all abortions in the US. Abortion rights advocates 
argue that many women obtaining later abortions are doing so for health reasons 
or after discovering a severe or fatal fetal anomaly – although theevidence 
suggests these are not the majority of cases 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1363/4521013/abstract>.

On Wednesday, representatives for Planned Parenthood, the ACLU and the Center 
for Reproductive Rights said the three lawsuits were the beginning of a spate 
of legal challenges the groups would mount jointly.

“We are going to fight back state by state and law by law until every person 
has the right to pursue the life they want,” said Dr Raegan McDonald-Mosley, 
Planned Parenthood’s chief medical officer.
 