
I have always had slightly mixed feelings about the South African playwright 
Athol Fugard. I would rate hisSizwe Bansi Is Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/mar/23/theatre1> and The Island 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Island_%28play%29>, on which he collaborated 
in the 1970s with the actors John Kani and Winston Ntshona, as among the 
supreme testaments of the dehumanising nature of apartheid. Fugard's 1982 
autobiographical playMaster Harold and the Boys 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yS1Pl9VTZ_4> is a deeply moving study of 
ineradicable liberal guilt. Other works, such asDimetos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/mar/26/dimetos-donmar-warehouse-london> 
(an allegorical play about a man living in rural exile with his niece) and A 
Lesson from Aloes (in which a white Afrikaner hosts a farewell dinner for his 
black activist friend), strike me as top-heavy with symbolism. But watching a 
new two-hour documentary about Fugard, by award-winning director Tony Palmer (
Bird on a Wire, <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XoNOWkmVDEU> with Leonard Cohen;
200 Motels, with Frank Zappa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YHxWXeK4KJA>), I 
felt I got a new insight into both the man and his times.

Palmer's prime achievement is to see Fugard's work in the context of South 
African history. It is astonishing to watch Hendrik Verwoerd, who in the 1950s 
was the principal architect of racial separatism,blandly describing apartheid 
as "a policy of good neighbourliness" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPCln9czoys>. It is also horrifying to see 
again documentary footage ofthe Sharpeville massacre of 1960 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVMPlVBm29Y>, in which 69 people were killed 
and 180 wounded when police opened fire on demonstrators protesting against new 
laws restricting non-white movements. Fugard recalls being in London at 
the time and seeing the images of Sharpeville in an evening paper. As he 
recalls that moment, he simply buries his head in his hands in silent despair.

The film reminds one just what Fugard was up against, both politically and 
culturally, in writing about marginalised people in the South Africa of the 
1960s and 70s. Not only was apartheid in operation, Fugard had to work to 
enlist the help of the people he was seeking to champion.Kani 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PWYMvfaxDKM> was a militant supporter of ANC 
when he first collaborated with Fugard in a drama workshop: he recalls that he 
had been taught to hate whites in general and to believe that, when the 
revolution came, his first duty would be to kill them. But Fugard was also, in 
setting up small theatre groups in Cape Town and Johannesburg, defying a 
tradition that associated theatre with warmed-up versions of West End hits. 
Antony Sher recalls the sheer astonishment of going to see Fugard'sHello and 
Goodbye <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/oct/20/theatre> in late 1960s 
Cape Town: "To see on a South African stage, a play about two destitute poor 
whites was like a blow in the face." It made Sher determined to pursue a career 
in theatre.

Fugard's obstinacy and courage emerge strongly from Palmer's film. His father 
was a liberal-minded ex-jazz pianist, descended from Manchester immigrants. His 
mother, who ran a tea shop in Port Elizabeth, came from a Calvinist, Afrikaans 
background that left an even more decisive mark on the young Athol. As the 
comic actorPieter-Dirk Uys <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pieter-Dirk_Uys> says: 
"Athol's plays are really Afrikaans works translated into English." But it is 
also the physical context that helps to explain the man. When we see Fugard 
wandering around the semi-desertKarroo region 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/312635/Karoo> that was his homeland, 
we understand how its "Calvinist landscape", as he describes it, has shaped the 
bone-dry austerity of his plays. There is a revealing moment when we see him 
visiting the Port Elizabeth public library and recalling how he would go to the 
top floor to read the novels of William Faulkner. "He encouraged me," says 
Fugard, "to tell regionally specific stories without fear or compromise."

What also comes across is the high price Fugard and his fellow artists had to 
pay to practise their art. He and his wife, Sheila, were constantly harassed by 
state security police. Their passports were taken away in 1967, and they were 
encouraged to believe that their best bet was to take a one-way exit permit. 
For Kani and Ntshona, it was even worse. Palmer uses footage of them jointly 
receiving the Best Actor award at the 1975 Broadway Tonys, for their 
performances in Sizwe Bansi Is Dead. With great dignity, they say a brief 
"thank you" as they receive a standing ovation from the black-tie audience. But 
no sooner did they return to South Africa than they were arrested and 
imprisoned. Theatre was part of the struggle inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. As Janet Suzman says, "Athol's 
plays were always driven by a moral outrage and, when you have an enemy, your 
aim is sure and true."

What of Fugard's post-apartheid years? This is less vividly sketched, although 
at one point in Palmer's film he says: "I think I failed. Our whole generation 
failed. We didn't get it right." It's not altogether clear whether he is 
offering an indictment of today's ANC-led SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, which has its own restrictive laws, 
or whether he is suggesting that writing and performing plays was an 
ineffectual means of countering apartheid. If the latter, I think he is wrong. 
His work helped expose the inhumanity, injustice and blind stupidity of the 
system to audiences around the world. That is no small achievement; and the 
reason why, on his 80th birthday, we should remember this fearless, flinty, 
obdurate Afrikaner.

• Falls the Shadow, a documentary by Tony Palmer, will be screened on Sky Arts 
<http://skyarts.sky.com/sky-arts-hd-to-celebrate-fugards-80th-birthday> on 8 
June.
 