
If you found out you were pregnant at the age of fifteen, would you trust your 
high school principal enough to tell him first?

It sounds unlikely, but for many girls at Plumpton High in Sydney’s western 
suburbs, this was their reality – and the remarkable man they placed their 
trust in was Glenn Sargeant.

Sargeant was the driving force behind Plumpton High’s young mothers’ program, 
which he began when he was principal at the school in the early 90s. The 
program aimed to support teenage mothers to finish their education and expand 
their options after they graduated, with the objective of helping the girls 
retain their independence and stay off welfare.

Whose Line Is it Anyway? What to expect from the Australian iteration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/whose-line-is-it-anyway-what-to-expect-from-the-australian-iteration>
The program became a household name in 2003 thanks to a four-part ABC TV 
documentary, Plumpton High Babies, which followed a year in the life of eight 
young women who were participating in the young mothers’ program.

On Monday, a follow-up documentary – Plumpton High Babies: Ten Years On – will 
revisit three of the mothers who participated in original series.

Many of the girls came from families who may have lived on the welfare cycle, 
Sargeant told Guardian Australia. “And I’d say well over 60–70% of the girls 
now … don’t rely on welfare at all. Now I think if [the young mothers’ program] 
hadn’t existed, that would have been a very different story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e805fe7b6d35ee34e25bd5708c9c8035c6d5b9d%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plumpton%20High%20Babies%3A%2010%20Years%20On%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20teacher%20changed%20lives%20for%20pregnant%20teenagers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plumpton%20High%20Babies%3A%2010%20Years%20On%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20teacher%20changed%20lives%20for%20pregnant%20teenagers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e805fe7b6d35ee34e25bd5708c9c8035c6d5b9d%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Glenn Sargeant was the driving force behind Plumpton High’s young mothers 
program. Photograph: Supplied/ABC TV 
Frustrated with what he saw as discrimination against teenage mothers in the 
education system, Sargeant devised a practical support system for young mothers 
based around the principle of inclusion, with many features modelled on 
flexible workplace practices. It was an ambitious project that resonated 
throughout the community – and Sargeant believes nothing comparable has taken 
its place.

Pregnant and mothering students were given maternity leave, for example, 
allowing them to take time off their studies to care for their child. There was 
flexibility around when they needed to arrive and leave class. A private room 
was allocated for the girls, a retreat space that they could use for everything 
from meeting with the program coordinator to expressing milk.

With the support of the local polyclinic, instead of the usual physical 
education classes, the girls attended information sessions on topics such as 
how to care for a baby, and the legal rights and responsibilities involved in 
parenting. Young fathers were also supported where possible, in some cases 
being allocated paternity leave from studying, and similar education on what to 
expect at the hospital and how to care for infants.

Alongside these practical structures was considerable emotional support. At 
the time the original documentary series was being filmed, dance teacher 
Rebecca Cowin was allocated three and a half days a week to help the girls in 
the program.

Simone Miller (née Bryant) was one of those young mothers. A particularly 
bright student, Miller made it through to the end of year 11 before a 
combination of her young son’s ill health and friction in the classroom meant 
she failed a crucial assignment.

Miller believes that staff resources were critical to the program’s success. 
“[Rebecca] was on the ground, running around, bringing assignments out, picking 
up girls for school, taking them to young mums’ programs and things like that,” 
she tells Guardian Australia.

But it was the emotional support that she found most helpful. “I think it was 
just the understanding that helped the most … just the enormous amount of 
support they gave you … and Mr Sargeant, his compassion was invaluable at the 
time.”

Now 28, Miller is married to Marc, her boyfriend of over a decade and the 
father of the baby she had while she was in high school. The couple have five 
children, a number of whom are proving academically gifted.

Miller says part of the reason she participated in the documentary was to 
dispel some stereotypes about young mothers. “Me and Marc always prided 
ourselves on the fact that we’ve raised all of them, all five of them, together 
... We’re not the most affluent family but what we lack in money, we definitely 
make up for in other ways.”

Many of the girls who were involved in the program at Plumpton High moved 
there after being ostracised from their previous schools because they were 
pregnant. Sargeant argues that key to the Plumpton program’s success was “the 
fact that I was totally non-judgmental about anything they did”.

Aviva Ziegler, the documentary’s director, said of Sargeant: “He was the most 
non-judgemental person I have ever come across. ... He treated [the girls] as 
teenagers as well as responsible mothers and I thought that was very 
impressive.”

Sargeant’s ability to develop such robust relationships with his students 
speaks to the success of his approach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a175083672e022daa93729e35b46b0c86243b0%2F0_0_2560_1600%2F2560.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plumpton%20High%20Babies%3A%2010%20Years%20On%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20teacher%20changed%20lives%20for%20pregnant%20teenagers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plumpton%20High%20Babies%3A%2010%20Years%20On%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20teacher%20changed%20lives%20for%20pregnant%20teenagers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fplumpton-high-babies-10-years-on-how-a-teacher-changed-lives-for-pregnant-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a175083672e022daa93729e35b46b0c86243b0%2F0_0_2560_1600%2F2560.png>
 Simone Miller, a former Plumpton High student and participant in the young 
mothers’ program. Photograph: Supplied/ABC TV 
“My philosophy about school is that schools – good schools anyway – should be 
like family … And that’s the way I treated it.” He explains how he regularly 
used to stop and take the time to speak to the students in the playground about 
the things going on in their lives outside of school. “It’s only little 
things,” he says. “But in my experience it makes a huge difference to kids and 
their education.”

As well as being the first person to be told about the pregnancy, Sargeant was 
also often the person to break the news to the girl’s parents – “because that’s 
what they wanted me to do. They were a bit scared, you know?”

What emerges from the documentary is a sense that even in cases where the 
women may have not quite finished their education, or found themselves 
struggling, they had a sense of resilience and self-worth that they might not 
otherwise have had.

Reflecting on the life trajectories of these young mothers that she has 
captured on film, Ziegler says: “One of the things that Glenn says, and I tend 
to agree with him, is that success can’t be gauged in purely financial or 
professional terms. And all of those girls have become really good mothers. 
That, for him, was part of the plan … they’ve become responsible people and 
good mothers.”

In 2004 Sargeant was awarded an Order of Australia for his efforts. He retired 
as principal at Plumpton High the same year. Unfortunately, since then,the 
young mothers program has been whittled down to non-existence 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/the-untimely-demise-of-a-great-social-experiment/2006/12/02/1164777846380.html>
.

“I was told that the program marginalised the community,” Sargeant says. “I 
was told that by the Department of Education … I think that’s garbage. I think 
it galvanised the community.” 

The New South Wales Department of Education was not able to confirm why the 
program closed. A spokesperson from the department told Guardian Australia that 
“teachers, year advisers, head teachers and the school’s executive staff all 
work as a team to support pregnant and parenting students to develop local 
solutions to individual situations,” and that students have access to “a range 
of flexible education options” to allow them to finish their HSC.

But Sargeant sees it differently. “They don’t do enough. It’s certainly not 
obvious to me at all what they’re doing. Nothing has changed … There are some 
schools who will support and encourage a girl to stay in their school. Now, if 
all schools did that I think we wouldn’t have a problem – and in the first 
place, I wouldn’t have needed to have a program. But I’m sad to say they’re not 
getting any support … I don’t think they’re doing anything different than they 
ever did.”

How Tasmania became the gothic muse of Australian film and TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/how-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv>
Miller believes that programs to support pregnant and mothering students at 
school need to have emotional drive behind them. “They’d have to be committed 
to it, and have a passion for it like Mr Sargeant did,” she says. “It can’t 
just be an administrator who’s just there doing the job, because it won’t work.”

Sargeant offers his support to any school wishing to start up such a program 
for young mothers. “Give them a break,” he says. “Don’t discriminate against 
them, support them. They’re human beings, they deserve a chance in life. Give 
it to them.”

• Plumpton High Babies: 10 Years On screens on ABC TV on Monday 28 November at 
9:20pm

• This article was amended on 28 November to correct the time the documentary 
will screen on ABC TV
 