
Pluto <https://www.theguardian.com/science/pluto> may have a vast ocean 
beneath its frozen crust, according to researchers studying a heart-shaped 
feature on the dwarf planet’s surface.

Captured in high resolution by the New Horizon’s spacecraft in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/sep/11/new-pluto-images-confirm-it-as-a-world-of-mysteries>
, the bright, heart-shaped expanse is known as Tombaugh Regio, the left lobe of 
which is formed by the 1,000-kilometre-wide Sputnik Planitia. This plain is 
thought to have arisen after a meteorite slammed into Pluto’s surface billions 
of years ago, producing a crater that later filled with nitrogen ice.

But scientists have been puzzled as to why Sputnik Planitia lies near Pluto’s 
equator and faces almost directly away from Pluto’s largest moon, Charon, 
pointing out there is only a 5% likelihood that it could have ended up in such 
a position by chance.

Nasa findings hint of clouds on Pluto during New Horizons mission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/18/nasa-spacecraft-new-horizons-hints-clouds-on-pluto>
Now, in a pair of papers published in the journal Nature, two teams of 
researchers say they have the answer: Pluto tipped over , potentially aided by 
a vast ocean beneath its icy surface.

“Roughly speaking it has got the same volume as the Earth’s oceans, because it 
is a lot deeper - it might be 100 km deep - but Pluto is smaller,” said Francis 
Nimmo from the University of California, Santa Cruz, and a co-author ofone of 
the studies <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20148>, adding that 
the ocean likely stretches all the way around Pluto.

According to Nimmo, the meteorite impact on Pluto ejected a huge quantity of 
water ice, leaving a crater with only a thin layer of ice at its bottom. If an 
ocean existed beneath this layer, possibly kept liquid - or at least slushy- by 
the presence of ammonia, it would push upwards against the remaining thin 
crust, creating a bulge. And as water is denser than ice, this bulge would 
compensate for the mass of the ejected material.

As frozen nitrogen built up in the basin over time, adds Nimmo, the mass of 
the region would become greater than it was before the impact, causing Pluto to 
tip over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fplutos-icy-surface-may-conceal-a-vast-ocean-say-researchers-sputnik-planitia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F376f684fbd7cd471d338482faad7f5a1c0cbed18%2F0_0_3000_3000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pluto's%20icy%20surface%20may%20conceal%20a%20vast%20ocean%2C%20say%20researchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fplutos-icy-surface-may-conceal-a-vast-ocean-say-researchers-sputnik-planitia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pluto%27s%20icy%20surface%20may%20conceal%20a%20vast%20ocean%2C%20say%20researchers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fplutos-icy-surface-may-conceal-a-vast-ocean-say-researchers-sputnik-planitia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F376f684fbd7cd471d338482faad7f5a1c0cbed18%2F0_0_3000_3000%2F3000.jpg>
 An ocean could explain why Sputnik Planitia - the left lobe of the bright, 
heart-shaped expanse on the dwarf planet’s surface - lies near Pluto’s equator, 
facing away from Pluto’s largest moon. Photograph: NASA/Johns Hopkins 
University Applied Physics Laboratory/Southwest Research Institute 
“There are two things that are happening,” said Nimmo. “Pluto’s rotation is 
pulling that extra mass towards the equator and the gravitational effect of 
Charon is to push it towards either the point directly underneath Charon or the 
point directly opposite [it], whichever is closer.” The result is that Sputnik 
Planitia ended up in its current location, near Pluto’s equator and facing away 
from Charon.

Without the influence of an ocean the research suggests the nitrogen ice would 
need to be more than 40km thick before the change in mass would be enough to 
trigger Pluto’s reorientation - a scenario the authors describe as implausible.

Pluto's perplexing polygonal patterns caused by convection, scientists suggest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/01/plutos-perplexing-polygonal-patterns-caused-by-convection-scientists-suggest-sputnik-planum>
The second study <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20120>, from 
researchers in the US and Japan, also suggests that Pluto tipped over, 
revealing that the pattern of cracks in Pluto’s ice crust fits with its 
reorientation, together with a slow freezing of an ocean beneath its surface.

But, they add, there could be several explanations as to exactly why the 
planet tipped, besides the idea of a bulge of water. Among the possibilities is 
that material ejected by the meteorite impact might have simply fallen around 
the edge of the crater, in effect cancelling out the presence of the hole, with 
later build-up of nitrogen ice adding enough mass for Pluto to tip.

And the dwarf planet may yet be on the move. According to James Keane of the 
University of Arizona, a co-author of the second study, Sputnik Planitia might 
still be accumulating nitrogen ice, with seasonal variations potentially 
causing Pluto to wobble. “I think that Pluto has astonished almost everyone, 
even the New Horizons team and even those who have been studying Pluto for the 
last several decades, with how geologically active [it] is,” he said.

Wesley Fraser, a planetary astronomer from Queen’s University Belfast who was 
not involved in the research, pointed out that it is not the first time a 
subsurface ocean on Pluto has been mooted, but said that the new studies were 
convincing. “All in all actually I think the idea is perfectly sound, it kinda 
solves a weird thing,” he said.
 