 Gordon Brown yesterday amplified Nato calls for more combat troops in 
Afghanistan to spread a burden currently being borne by UK, US and Canadian 
forces, but the chief of defence staff warned that the country's problems could 
only be resolved by political, not military, means.
Echoing concerns expressed by General Dan McNeill, commander of the Nato-led 
international force in the country, the prime minister called for greater 
"burden-sharing" in Afghanistan. Speaking after talks in London with President 
Hamid Karzai, he added: "We are all determined thatAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> should never become a failed 
state again, and to support the democracy that's been created in that country."

He went on to say that the long-term solutions were "not simply defence and 
security", a point increasingly being made by frustrated British military 
chiefs.

"There is a common misperception that the issues in Afghanistan can be dealt 
with by military means", said Air Chief Marshal Sir Jock Stirrup, chief of the 
defence staff, yesterday. "That's a false perception ... by and large these 
problems can only be resolved politically."

He warned in an interview with Sky News that bringing Afghanistan into the 
21st century would engage the international community for decades, and 
reflected a growing emphasis on reconciliation by saying there was a need to 
talk to people who "may well have been Taliban in the past".

Britain has some 7,700 troops in southern Afghanistan and its military 
commanders say they are making progress against the Taliban. However, they warn 
of the dangers of losing ground unless civil aid and development agencies come 
in to provide sustainable progress.
 