
There is not much point living in the north of England if you can't gain some 
pleasure from a really foul August Sunday, especially when it serves your 
nation's interests. However, the crowd at Headingley was as anxious to get 
cricket yesterday as the England team were to avoid it.

The players - and their bosses - had the best of it. There were only 25 overs 
bowled in the day. By a remarkable coincidence, this was enough by one ball to 
save the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board from having to offer spectators a 50% refund, which would have cost it 
Â£200,000 on top of the million-odd it lost because of blank days earlier this 
season. Fortunately, most spectators had already gone when this was officially 
announced.

With three of the five indicator lamps lit, the umpires -David Shepherd and 
Srini- vasaraghavan Venkataraghavan - had conferred about the light one ball 
earlier. Venkat later said the deterioration in the next minute was 
substantial. But he might have trouble convincing a disgruntled Yorkshireman of 
that. "The umpires are aware of all the playing conditions," said an ECB 
official.

Anyway, for the first time in six Ashes Tests, the final day dawns with the 
game still unfinished, which for England is improvement of sorts. But today is 
the crucial one. At the end of it is a church door marked "sanctuary": a 
possible draw and the end of the humiliating prospect of a 5-0 whitewash. But 
the English fugitives are barely in sight of the churchyard; they are exhausted 
and limping, and their pursuers are nipping at their heels.

Australia declared with 110 overs left - 20 yesterday, 90 today - and England 
needing a mere 315 to win, in theory a thoroughly hittable target. The 
Australians are so rampant they spit on ideas like that: it was a witheringly 
contemptuous declaration. It was England who were relieved that only 2.3 of the 
20 were bowled. The forecast for today is better.

The two men at the crease for England were both at the centre of attention 
yesterday. The day's most bizarre stir came right at the start when a load of 
boiled sweets (said to be Murray Mints) fell out of Marcus Trescothick's pocket 
when he was fielding in the covers.

The late MP Julian Critchley said eating boiled sweets was the only safe 
indulgence for a politician in these scandal-obsessed times. But even the most 
ordinary consolation is now dangerous for a cricketer. It is legal for fielders 
to add their saliva to a cricket ball but the first-class umpires were 
apparently warned before the season that a sugary tongue might make the ball 
swing more, which would at least be on the margins of cricketing legality. In 
baseball, there was less fuss when a Montreal player lost a stash of cocaine 
from his pocket. It is not easy to see how sweet-eating can be banned from the 
cricket field. And what would be done about the Australians' gum-chewing?

This may be further evidence for Trescothick's partner, Michael Atherton, to 
help him make up his mind whether to retire or not. Atherton, presumed villain 
of the great dirt-in-pockets incident, must now be thinking that everything 
comes round again, each time more farcical than the last.

None the less, it remains bizarre that the selectors appear to be pushing 
Atherton to an early decision, which at this stage of a strenuous season is far 
more likely to be "go now" than it might be after relaxed contemplation. If and 
when there are better openers in England than Atherton, the game can easily 
afford to lose him. Until then, he should be cherished, nurtured and, if 
necessary, indulged to encourage him to continue.

The day's 25 overs came in four mini-sessions. When play started - bang on 
time - Ricky Ponting smashed the England attack all over the shop: 21 runs came 
in the first two overs, 55 in 42 minutes. If the Murray Mints were being used, 
they weren't much use. Then it rained, and when the players came back England 
took momentary control. Matthew Hayden, out of sorts, was caught behind. 
Ponting, after a brilliant match, reached 72 in 90 minutes, then was thumped on 
the pads twice by consecutive balls from Darren Gough. The second brought him 
Venkat's distinctive "out" signal, which resembles a man pulling an 
old-fashioned toilet chain.

The game's other centurion, Damien Martyn, failed second time round. But 
Australia's lead was huge enough for none of this to matter. In 1961, 1971, and 
1991 as well as, of course, 1981, England had remarkable Test wins on this 
ground, usually after being in trouble. In 2001 even a draw would seem pretty 
amazing. Indeed, sweet.
 