
To many, Pokémon was a craze that peaked at the turn of the millennium. Yet to 
thousands of dedicated players, both the video games and the trading card game 
(TCG) are still cause for celebration, and not just among kids. It turns out 
the grownups are more involved than ever as they, alongside the younger gamers, 
take part in what might be described asPokémon’s world cup – and British 
competitors of all ages are there in force.

Just as characters in the games (and animated series, and movies, and more – 
Pokémon remains a thriving media empire) employ virtual beasts to do battle, so 
too do the competitors who fight for a place at the annualPokémon world 
championships.

This year’s event took place last month in Boston, Massachusetts 
<http://www.pokemon.com/us/play-pokemon/worlds/2015/>. The tournament is split 
into video and TCG, and three tiers: juniors (under 10); seniors (11-15); and 
masters (16+). Despite the franchise’s kid-friendly nature, many competitors 
are adults.

“When I come to the events, yes there are children here but there are way more 
masters than there are younger people,” says Barry Anderson, a 27-year-old 
British hopeful. “If anyone asks why I play, I just explain that it’s the 
competitive side. It’s kind of like poker or chess. It has so much more to it 
than people realise.”
 Pokémon trading card game junior winner 2015, Rowan Stavenow from Canada. 
This is Anderson’s second time competing in the video game division, having 
previously battled in 2013 and placed ninth. This year hasn’t gone so well, but 
his enthusiasm and optimism, typical of so many players at the tournament, are 
unbowed. “Obviously it’s fun playingPokémon, but it’s addictive as well,” he 
says. “You might say ‘Oh, I’m not going to compete any more’ but you will still 
want to.”

And so it goes on the trading card side of the arena. Charles Barton, 22, from 
Southport is another player seen as a veteran, having been competing since 
2012. For him, playingPokémon has been more than just a competitive pastime: it 
helped him get into university.

“For Ucas, I had to find an extra-curricular activity, and I thought, why not 
find something unique?” Barton says. “So I didPokémon TCG as a competitor, rose 
fairly quickly, and my application was successful. I feel like mentioning it 
helped.”

The tone of the event balances between a serious sporting competition and a 
fan convention. There’s a buzz of excitement, even among those not competing. 
People walk around wearing T-shirts emblazoned with memes such as “Delphox ate 
my baby”, indecipherable to the uninitiated, while parents, far from 
long-suffering, enthusiastically follow their children’s progress. One proud 
American mother exalts her son’s standing in the top 10, talking over a 
father’s equally proud declaration that his son ranked in the top 20 for his 
bracket.

All major matches are broadcast, on stage and online, with eager commentary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JqsBfIJYHf0> from esports professionals 
analysing each move, as one would with a football match. It proves to be 
surprisingly tense viewing, and the crowd grows more rapturous with each 
victory. There are no sore losers though – everyone cites the friendly 
community as one of the main reasons they keep playing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqsBfIJYHf0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqsBfIJYHf0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqsBfIJYHf0&media=>
 Pokemon world championships 2015 masters finals 
Yet there was also a dark side to this year’s championship. Two men from Iowa, 
Kevin Norton, 18, and James Stumbo, 27, who had both entered the tournament, 
were arrested on their way to the venue with a car boot full ofguns and 
ammunition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/24/pokemon-world-championships-gamers-arrested-after-firearms-found-in-car>
. The pair had allegedly made online threats to kill another competitor.

It seems unlikely that a game as innocent as Pokémon, where even in-game 
creatures faint rather than die when defeated, could attract such individuals. 
But this did not dampen the spirits of those who came from around the world to 
compete. As the event peacefully wound down, players were already looking to 
next year’s championships. “The Boston Open is tomorrow,” said Rachel Annand, 
23, from Aberdeen. “My next season starts now. My 2016 starts tomorrow.”
 