
Surgeons of Ara Darzi's standing are used to subordinates doing their bidding 
at the wave of a rubber-gloved hand. So it was never going to be easy for him 
to make the transition into politics, a different skill-set altogether.

Officials at the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> make no secret of the fact that 
their illustrious junior minister, who quit last week, did not like the place 
much, nor the constraints placed upon him by either politics or bureaucracy. 
Former health secretary, Alan Johnson, gave him a generous free hand, but it 
was bound not to be enough.

That said, Professor Lord Darzi of Denham did pretty well for a man with a 
demanding part-time day job. He handled BBC Today's John Humphrys with 
firmness, he got drawn into the doings of the House of Lords more than was 
originally intended, and became popular, not least for hands-on interventions 
to save the occasional noble life.

All that plus the Next Stage Review of the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> - and last month's review of its 
first year in action - was quite a challenge for a relative novice, one who had 
learned how tough politics can be during his earlier defusing (sort of) of the 
fuss over don't-call-them-polyclinics.

How did he do? And what happens now he has resigned and a Tory government 
looms? It is striking that such a soft-spoken figure, trailing an aura of 
professional eminence ("less than stellar", quibbles one Guardian blogger), 
should prove so divisive.

Consultants are instinctively rude about rival branches of the trade 
("Surgeons? None too bright"). But Darzi's sweep through the NHS promoting 
clinician-led, patient-focused quality, and pioneering new, evidence-driven 
procedures attracted far more abuse from some within the GP tendency.

Those who did not regard his departure so soon after Johnson's replacement by 
Andy Burnham as a Labour plot, saw him as a Trojan horse for fat-cat private 
sector contracts (those GP-led health centres), which they claim are damaging 
the NHS in the name of "dogmatic" competition. The BMA's Hamish Meldrum 
lamented his promotion of NHS fragmentation and commercialisation. Odd then 
that the Lancet praised Darzi's "sidelining of market-based reforms", of 
perverse targets and bureaucratic managerialism. Can we be talking about the 
same man?

Perhaps Darzian ambiguity here reflected ministers' own. They were certainly 
more generous, praising his "messianic" drive and commitment to a "bottom-up" 
approach to quality on those roadshow trips with the NHS chief executive, David 
Nicholson.

But is the Darzi message really embedded in the DNA? After 12 years of Labour, 
even doctors' leaders at the General Medical Council accept the need for 
greater openness as promoted by Darzi the establishment outsider (an Iraqi 
trained in Dublin, for heaven's sake), who insists that junior doctors should 
be encouraged to admit - and discuss - their mistakes.

But will it last when - almost certain now - the Tory shadow minister Andrew 
Lansley finally gets to be health secretary? Days before Darzi quit, the Lancet 
suggested that David Cameron should retain his services and allow him to push 
reforms like Proms (patient-reported outcome measures to you). Lansley himself 
chose to present Darzi as a frustrated victim of government obstruction, though 
the peer is staying on to advise. The Tory health spokesman's talk of 
reprofessionalising the NHS - more freedom, more evidence-based policy, but 
also more accountability - appears to sit easily with Darzi's agenda.

Yet those Tories at the gates of government don't expect him to defect. 
Lansley supports his focus on quality but identifies him with a trend he 
doesn't like, the perceived centralisation of services into super-sized 
hospitals. Darzi would plead not guilty to that one, as to much else. His fans 
say he found a demoralised staff and tried to point it in the right direction. 
As financial hard times loom, time will tell.

â€¢ Michael White writes about politics from Westminster.
 