
Scotland Yard is to deploy thousands of extra police officers and impose tough 
public order restrictions over fears that aBonfire night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bonfire-night> protest in London 
against austerity and increased state surveillance will turn violent.

The Million Mask march planned for Thursday night is part of a global protest 
movement organised by the internet activist groupAnonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous>.

In what has become an annual event, police fear a repeat of the unrest that 
occurred at last year’s demonstration, whenscuffles broke out between riot 
police and protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/05/million-mask-march-london-russell-brand-anonymous>
 – many wearing Guy Fawkes masks.

The Metropolitan police believes protesters plan to damage public monuments, 
attack police officers and try to occupy buildings 
<http://news.met.police.uk/news/statement-regarding-million-mask-march-136380>. 
The owners of buildings identified as possible targets have been briefed by the 
police.

Ch Supt Pippa Mills said: “Over the last few years this event has seen high 
levels of antisocial behaviour, crime and disorder.” She cited harassment of 
commuters, including buses being rocked and protesters jumping on car bonnets.

Mills added: “This year we have strong reason to believe that peaceful protest 
is the last thing on the minds of many of the people who will come along.”

A statement from the Met said a “significant policing operation” would be in 
place for the protest, including “dedicated teams of highly flexible officers 
on standby at key locations in capital”.

Restrictions under the Public Order Act will also be imposed to confine the 
demonstration to Whitehall, Trafalgar Square and Parliament Square, and ban any 
protest after 9pm.

Thursday’s demonstration is expected to focus on proposals to increase powers 
of the security services. It will come a day after the government is due to 
publishlegislation seen as a revived snooper’s charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/03/may-calls-for-internet-companies-to-store-details-of-website-visits>
. Under the plans, internet companies will be required to store details of 
every website visited by their customers for 12 months.

The organisers of the demonstration have urged supporters to descend on London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in response to the “abuses and 
malpractice” of the government and the “profit and greed of the few”.

In a Facebook posting, they urged followers to gather at Trafalgar Square from 
6pm <https://www.facebook.com/events/485894658146587/>. It said: “We have seen 
the abuses and malpractice of this government, and governments before it, we 
have seen the encroaching destruction of many civil liberties we hold dear, we 
have seen the pushes to make the internet yet another part of the surveillance 
state, we have seen the government’s disregard for migrants, for the poor, the 
elderly and the disabled, we have seen the capital, profit and greed of the few 
put before the well-being of the many and we say enough is enough.”
 