
Hang 'em, imprison them, sack them. Tighten the rules, insist on more 
transparency, ban allowances altogether. These were just some of the public 
responses to the greatMPs' expenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>, but strangely, changing 
the electoral system to bring in the alternative vote was not high up the list. 
So at first sight, it's easy to sympathise with the Tory chairman Eric Pickles, 
who says it's"ridiculous" to blame the expenses scandal on the voting system 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/8505255.stm>.

Yet the crisis in politics today is about more than just the expenses scandal 
– there was the failure of confidence in the former Speaker,Michael Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/21/michael-martin-interview>, 
there is the poor turnout we see at most elections now and there is, of course, 
the low esteem in which most politicians are held. So the "new politics" has to 
be about much more than fixing the way MPs claim expenses, and any move to 
change the old ways should be welcomed.

It was in this spirit I watched this evening's debate in the Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/10/mps-back-electoral-reform-referendum>
 on the government'sproposal for a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/09/david-cameron-hypocrisy-electoral-reform>
 to replace the current first past the post voting system with the alternative 
vote, a system under which the votes of the last candidate on the list are 
re-distributed until one candidate has a majority. But oh dear, oh dear – this 
timid attempt to bring in the "new politics" simply showed the old politics at 
its worst.

First, there's the government, claiming glibly that its sudden conversion to 
voting reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/02/brown-promises-law-voting-reform>
 has nothing at all to do with the forthcoming election and the likelihood that 
the only possible way Labour might remain in power is by wooing the Lib Dems 
into a coalition. If Labour was on course for another hundred-plus majority 
would the party be any more interested in electoral reform than it was when Roy 
Jenkins' Royal Commission reported back in 1998? Of course not.

We are also entitled to ask where, if Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is really committed to the new 
politics, are any of the other measures deemed essential by reformers, such as 
sorting out the House of Lords, devolving power to local government, a written 
constititution, more representative MPs in terms of gender and race, and state 
funding of political parties?

But the Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> 
have hardly behaved any better. It's not surprising that they oppose a change 
to the alternative vote system, since an analysis by the BBC shows that such a 
system would at the last election have given them 27 fewer seats and Labour 21 
more. At the 1997 election, the contrast would have been even more stark: under 
the AV system, the Tories would have had 95 fewer seats and the Lib Dems 69 
more.

There has been much huffing and puffing through the afternoon from Tory 
grandees such as Patrick Cormack, Richard Shepherd, Bill Cash and John Gummer, 
complaining bitterly that the attempt to introduce a referendum on AV is simply 
a gimmick. Yet their complaints about the cost of any such referendum – around 
£80m they suggest is just as opportunistic. If a different system would benefit 
the Conservative party, do we really think they would be worried about the cost 
of a referendum?

Far from a sensible discussion of the merits of different voting systems, we 
have seen torrents of what Jack Straw rightly described as "hyperbole and 
abuse" – how "old politics" is that? Then there is the tired old way of letting 
your own backbenchers interrupt your speech with points of order, which only 
underline your case: so Dominic Grieve, the Tory frontbench spokesman, allowed 
endless diversions from his own Patrick Cormack, John Redwood, John Gummer and 
Bill Cash. Sorry guys, this is not a grown-up way to debate.

Add to the mix the party whips, who have been strong-arming their backbenchers 
to turn out to vote on this issue, and the fact that no one expects the 
referendum to happen anyway, assuming the Conservatives win the next election 
and you have – yes, a perfect example of the old politics at work, under the 
guise of making a very small step towards the new politics.
 