
Australian authorities have busted a “brazen and selfish” alleged 
international drug smuggling ring over the Christmas period, following a 
two-and-a-half year investigation.

About 500 kilograms of cocaine were seized in an operation at Parsley Bay, 
north of Sydney, late on Christmas Day. More than 600kg, which authorities 
allege to have been bound for Australia, had been seized in Tahiti in March 
2016.

The combined 1.1 tonnes of the drug was estimated have a street value of about 
$360m.


Chris Sheehan, acting assistant commissioner for the Australian Federal 
Police, said it was the biggest-ever seizure of cocaine – and one of the 
largest interceptions of any drug – in Australia’s history.

He said the “robust, resilient and determined” alleged syndicate was 
“sophisticated, and went to great lengths to avoid detection”.

“We are very confident that we’ve gone from the top to the bottom, the entire 
group has been taken out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpolice-seize-360m-in-cocaine-in-sydney-fish-market-and-tahiti-raids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecfa540b5fd0cbfc79cffce802c0b9d5db7f18b3%2F0_342_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20seize%201.1%20tonnes%20of%20cocaine%20in%20one%20of%20Australia's%20largest%20drug%20hauls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpolice-seize-360m-in-cocaine-in-sydney-fish-market-and-tahiti-raids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20seize%201.1%20tonnes%20of%20cocaine%20in%20one%20of%20Australia%27s%20largest%20drug%20hauls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpolice-seize-360m-in-cocaine-in-sydney-fish-market-and-tahiti-raids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecfa540b5fd0cbfc79cffce802c0b9d5db7f18b3%2F0_342_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Fifteen men, allegedly part of an Australian criminal syndicate, have been 
arrested in connection to 500kg of cocaine in NSW and 600kg of cocaine 
allegedly imported via fishing trawlers. Photograph: AAP/NSW police 
Fifteen men, aged between 29 to 63 years, were arrested for their alleged role 
in the syndicate between 25 and 28 December. All were charged with conspiracy 
to import a commercial quantity of border controlled drugs and refused bail.

Among them are former Roosters player John Tobin and Bondi entrepreneur Darren 
Mohr,News Corp reports 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/alleged-cocaine-ring-busted-in-series-of-christmas-day-drug-raids/news-story/176db3ec167f96ef52f627e5a8280c76>
.

Authorities had observed a fishing trawler, the Dalrymple, depart Sydney Fish 
Markets on 3 December bound for NSW’s central coast.

Three men were arrested on Sunday evening when authorities intercepted a small 
tender launched from the Dalrymple as it arrived at Parsley Bay.

Eight subsequent arrests were made after search warrants were executed across 
Sydney, including in the suburbs of Zetland, Double Bay, Kingsford and 
Greenacre. Two men were arrested in Brisbane and Hobart on Tuesday, and a 
further two in Ulladulla on Wednesday.

The maximum penalty for conspiracy to import a commercial quantity of border 
controlled drugs is life imprisonment.

Authorities traced five alleged conspiracies to import illicit drugs into 
Australia back to the ring, including the seizure of 32kg of heroin by 
authorities in Fiji in December 2014.

There was no evidence to suggest this ring had successfully imported drugs, 
and the Sydney Fish Markets were not under investigation.

“Operation Okesi” spanned more than two and a half years and involved NSW 
police, AFP, the Australian Border Force and international partners.


Mark Jenkins, the NSW police assistant commissioner, said more than 100 
officers from NSW police alone were working over the holiday period to resolve 
the operation.

“Law enforcement doesn’t rest when it comes to illicit drug enforcement, not 
even over Christmas and Boxing Day.”

He said the investigation was prompted by a “thread of information” supplied 
to NSW police’s drug squad two and a half years ago, and encouraged members of 
the public with similar tips to come forward.

“That small kernel of information has resulted in a large number of arrests 
and a seizure of drugs, it’s been a fantastic result.”

There were ongoing inquiries to determine the alleged ring’s distribution 
networks in South America, where the cocaine is believed to have originated 
from, and within Australia.

Tim Fitzgerald, the acting assistant commissioner of the ABF, said attempting 
to circumvent border control with small vessels was typical.

“It’s international organised crime syndicates trying to take advantage of our 
35,000 km coastline in the hope that we won’t be in the area that they’re in. 
But as is evidenced today ... [alleged] syndicates such as this will be taken 
down.”

He said border force officers made 18,000 seizures of narcotics bound for 
Australia every year.
 