
Tchula’s chief of police was drifting into sleep at the desk of his sparsely 
furnished office. Billy Reed had been describing what it was to run a 
department with so little money it relied on hand-me-down patrol cars still 
bearing the markings of other forces.

The cars were sitting out back, not far from where the drug dealers loitered. 
One had bullet holes in the wing and a windscreen with a starburst crack. 
Another stayed parked at night because the lights didn’t work.

Tchula police station has an air of make do. Dropped next to Reed’s office 
door was a plump black bin bag with a handwritten label saying “rape case” on a 
strip of white paper.

Behind Reed was a wall peppered with certificates attesting to more than two 
decades of shuttling between police departments in theMississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> Delta until, a few weeks 
earlier, he unexpectedly found himself chief in the poorest town in the poorest 
US state.
Factbox 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/factbox_tchula/giv-311143kOlUZRC4vDZ/>
Reed slumped, his voice wound down and his eyes closed for a few seconds 
before he re-emerged and apologised. The body of a young woman had been found 
on the edge of Tchula by deer hunters, he said. He should have been in bed but 
the call came in just as he got off work from a night shift at his other job as 
a part-time policeman in a neighbouring town.

In Tchula, even the police chief works two jobs to make ends meet. 

“It’s a pretty cool town. Tchula’s not a mile long nor a mile wide. You can go 
anywhere in Tchula in less than five minutes. Anywhere. What I like about it is 
it’s family based. People at least still care enough to be concerned about 
their neighbour and that kind of thing, and that’s impressive to me,” said Reed.

“But there’s not a lot of money. There’s not a lot of jobs. I’ve worked in so 
many other [police] departments that had so much more. We don’t have a tax 
base. We don’t have the stores. We don’t have commercial development. We’re 
trying to clean up the town so hopefully people will be impressed enough to 
bring some jobs.”

Tchula straddles the old road north between Jackson, Mississippi – final stop 
of the 1961 civil rights Freedom Ride against segregation – and Nashville, 
Tennessee. The same road carried the guitarists and singers who made Tchula a 
hub of the blues as they travelled north to seek fame in Chicago.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6c4e07a4dac95fb3eaeff9cd22f41fb5627a4d2%2F0_0_5905_3543%2F5905.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6c4e07a4dac95fb3eaeff9cd22f41fb5627a4d2%2F0_0_5905_3543%2F5905.jpg>
 Police guard a burning bus in Anniston, Alabama, in May 1961, after a mob of 
white supremacists attacked it. On board were ‘Freedom Riders’. Photograph: 
Bettmann/CORBIS 
Most of the traffic has migrated to the interstate highway to the east but the 
trains still rumble through, day and night, on a track that once divided the 
stately, columned homes of rich white plantation owners from the more modest 
brick houses and trailers of the black majority.

The mansions are still there, showing their years and inhabited by the 
descendants of the slaves and sharecroppers whose labour enriched the former 
owners. But few white residents remain and almost all of Tchula’s 2,000-plus 
people are African American.

The town’s curious history has drawn fleeting national attention over the 
years. Its first African American mayor was slung into jail in 1982 on 
trumped-up charges by a white establishment trying to hold back the civil 
rights tide. Two decades later, voters installed the US’s first elected black 
female Republican mayor,Yvonne Brown 
<http://www.franklincountytimes.com/2001/06/19/black-republican-female-elected-mayor/>
, in the hope it would encourage President George W Bush to send money.


But these days Tchula is one of the small communities dotted across rural 
America struggling to find a way to survive. Jobs in the cotton fields – poorly 
paid, backbreaking work – receded with the mechanisation of plantations. There 
was better paid work to be had in the sawmill and sewing factory but that is 
gone too.

“This whole block here was stores,” said Annie Horton, 63, standing on the 
edge of the large dirt patch next to the railway line that passes for a town 
square in Tchula. “We had a Chevrolet dealership, a Greyhound bus station, a TV 
shop, a couple of furniture stores, dry cleaners, fabric store. It’s all gone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddb873cf6a3850fc3a4326d7df515d618569a8eb%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddb873cf6a3850fc3a4326d7df515d618569a8eb%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Police and children at the scene of the fatal shooting of a young man, Travis 
Anderson, in Tchula. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
“We even had a movie theatre here and a swimming pool. We weren’t allowed to 
swim in it but it was there. When we had desegregation the whites filled it 
with cement to stop us using it.”

Economic decline has brought with it a creeping malaise smothering the 
optimism that gripped the town when segregation ended.

“In my heart, I feel for the people in this town,” said its mayor, Zula 
Patterson. “Their self-esteem is down. We’ve got to help boost it up: yes, I 
can be somebody; yes, I can do something.”

Tchula is, by at least one measure – the Census Bureau’s American Community 
Survey 2008-2012 of communities of more than 1,000 people, the latest 
statistics available at the time of reporting – among the four lowest income 
towns in the country. It is the second stop for a series of dispatches by the 
Guardian about the lives of those trying to do more than survive in places that 
seem furthest from the American Dream.
income map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/archive-zip/giv-31114TIowBj7ri6fq/>
The survey put the median household income at just $12,806 a year, compared 
with a nationwide figure of $53,915. It has improved more recently to $14,325, 
which still leaves Tchula at between a quarter and a third of the national 
average. Unemployment is officially about 25%, but in practice only about one 
in four adults in Tchula has a regular job. Most employment is seasonal. More 
than 60% of families live below the poverty line.

Tchula lies within Holmes County <http://www.co.holmes.oh.us/> which, 
depending on the year, either has the lowest life expectancy in the country or 
is near the bottom. In 2010, a man could expect to live just 67.9 years, nearly 
a decade below the national average and lower than in Indonesia and Guatemala. 
Men in Fairfax County, Virginia – where the median household income is above 
$108,000 a year – have a life expectancy of nearly 82.

“Mississippi has the highest infant mortality rate of any state,” said Dr 
Ronald Myers, who established a clinic for low-income families in Tchula in 
1988. “When I got here, it didn’t take a rocket genius to see the reason the 
healthcare was so bad, that the infant mortality rate was so high. There were 
mothers who were eight months pregnant before they saw a doctor, if they saw a 
doctor at all. That’s a product for infant mortality disaster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb01d9d961a3c4f83c5bb493141bf39a60a5bfa2%2F0_341_5976_3585%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb01d9d961a3c4f83c5bb493141bf39a60a5bfa2%2F0_341_5976_3585%2F5976.jpg>
 Playing basketball in Tchula. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
“There was a total insensitivity to the poor. The first 20 women I saw in 
Tchula had never had a breast examination. Six of them had lumps and two of 
them were cancerous.”

Back then the infant mortality rate in Tchula was three times the national 
average and on a par with that of Egypt. Wider access to medical treatment and 
a push by Mississippi to improve care for expectant mothers and newborns has 
brought it down. But even today, infant mortality in Holmes County is double 
the US average, while rates for black women age 25-29 are four times the 
average.

“I have not seen any permanent improvement,” said Myers, who is also a pianist 
and in 1994 released a CD,Blues for Tchula 
<https://www.reverbnation.com/playlist/view_playlist/-4?page_object=artist_957823>
. “I see the same problems of poverty that I saw when I first came. If you are 
born in Holmes County, Mississippi, you are going to die quicker than any 
American in the country.

“The people are sick, the people are uneducated, the people are poor because 
of an economic system that goes back to slavery. I was shocked when I first 
came here by the high number of children who were out of school to get the 
cotton in. The sharecropping system was still in place. You would think you 
were in a time warp. You can see the results all around you. Teenage mothers. 
Drugs. Dropping out of school. That’s the product of despair. Economic despair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff92c69db7e4b0263b1e7c183e33dc782f36724bf%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff92c69db7e4b0263b1e7c183e33dc782f36724bf%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Sandra Young, who brought up five children on her own. Photograph: Sean Smith 
for the Guardian 
Sandra Young would not disagree with that assessment although she would not 
explain Tchula quite so bleakly.

The 54-year-old, sitting stiffly upright on the small wooden deck of her 
immaculately kept trailer home backing on to the railway line, has spent her 
adult life navigating the obstacles and traps of living below the poverty line 
as she raised five children on her own.

“It is a poor town. You can see it is, very poor,” she said. “It’s no more 
poor or less poor than it’s ever been but it’s changed. Now, Lord, I don’t know 
what’s going on. It’s just so much chaos going on.”

Any Republican casting around for a “welfare mother” to demonise need look no 
further than Young. She made no secret of the fact that she had been dependent 
on government assistance for years but she explained it as a cool calculation 
to ensure her own children were not dependent on welfare.

The path to a better life for them, Young reasoned, was education and a bus 
out of Tchula. The challenge was to get them through a high school from which 
just six in 10 students graduate.

Young said parents living in middle-class neighbourhoods of cities where much 
of the crime is pushed to the margins did not understand the pressures on 
children routinely confronted on the streets by the sale and use of drugs or 
the influence of what people in Tchula call “babies having babies” – teenage 
parents.

America's poorest white town: abandoned by coal, swallowed by drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/12/beattyville-kentucky-and-americas-poorest-towns>
It’s a subject that causes considerable angst in Tchula. “These babies having 
babies, this is one of my biggest concerns,” said Patterson, the mayor. “These 
days, mothers is younger, grandmothers is younger. It’s a big part of our 
problems here. It’s part of the cycle.”

Teenage pregnancy rates have been falling across the US for years but 
Mississippi’s rate remains among the highest in the country and is twice the 
national average in Holmes County.

For Patterson there is a clear cycle involving poverty, early pregnancy and 
interrupted education. Teenage parents are more likely to drop out of high 
school and so be forced into low-paying jobs or reliance on welfare. Single 
parent households in Tchula outnumber those with both parents by three to one. 
It is often the mother who is left struggling to raise her children with little 
money and insufficient education to help them through school.

Young wanted her children to avoid these traps. “A lot of the other people’s 
kids was out partying, drinking, smoking this funny kind of cigarette,” she 
said. “I’d say to my kids, no, y’all can’t do that. You going to stay at home 
and we’re going to play games and read books and everything.”

She held a job for several years while receiving government assistance as head 
of a low-income family. But as her children grew older, she said, working long 
hours made it difficult to cope with the challenges of raising them in Tchula. 
So she quit her job and spent 12 years concentrating on getting them through 
school. If that meant taking more money from the state, so be it.

“I had a job for nine years in the hardware store. I was on food stamps, 
welfare and all of that too,” she said. “I stopped working because I had five 
kids in all and things was getting out of hand and I had to come back home and 
keep order. Keep them straight. I’m older now and life’s been good to me. It 
has. But I wanted them to go further than I went. It starts at home and with a 
good education.”

Young proudly ticked off how her children were doing. Three of them had 
graduated from high school and went on to have careers. She dwelled on a 
daughter with her own business in Southaven, on the edge of Memphis. One of her 
sons found work in California but she struggled to keep another in school and 
he dropped out before graduating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a9e4b2048c12072cd0502946666faa986c6501%2F291_654_3880_2329%2F3880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89a9e4b2048c12072cd0502946666faa986c6501%2F291_654_3880_2329%2F3880.jpg>
 Young women walk past the site where a young man was shot dead the previous 
night. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
It was her youngest daughter, Sharon, who proved the toughest challenge. In 
suddenly clipped sentences that unmasked the depth of the pain she still 
carried, she told of her struggle to keep Sharon in school and to shield her 
from influences she feared would dash her daughter’s prospects.

It was not to be. Sharon got caught up with drugs, dropped out of school and 
became pregnant at 17. She also developed schizophrenia in her teens. Young 
blamed it on drugs. “My daughter, someone put something in her drink and it 
messed her mind up. She wanted to be out there in public and people started to 
put things into your children’s head,” she said.

“She got hooked up with the wrong crowd and she was hard to control: ‘Your 
mama don’t let you go nowhere.’ That instilled in her that I’m being mean and 
caused chaos in my home. She was a beautiful girl and once she got out there, 
she found out people didn’t love her the way she thought, and didn’t care for 
her the way she thought, because she thought everybody loved her.”

Young had her daughter committed 10 times to the Mississippi state psychiatric 
hospital near Jackson but Sharon did not always take her medication and 
repeatedly returned to drugs.

Young already had custody of Sharon’s eldest child, Tasandra. After she gave 
birth to a boy, Shiron, in October 2005, the hospital refused to allow her to 
take him home because she appeared unable to look after him. Young collected 
the infant.

A month later, Sharon – then 23 - was walking on the edge of the railway track 
when a train came from behind. She was killed instantly. In denying liability, 
the train company highlighted Sharon’s drug use and mental instability. Young 
won a substantial payment from a jury but it was reduced on appeal. She said 
the final agreement required confidentiality, but that after paying legal fees 
she still struggled for money to raise her grandchildren.

Young wondered if it would be better to send them to her daughter in 
Southaven. “I think they would have a better education. A better chance,” she 
said. “Leave Tchula and you can make it. That’s what we tell our kids.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8716c9acc7666dd0f47886708efdf7e627762d%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d8716c9acc7666dd0f47886708efdf7e627762d%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 People collect secondhand clothes donated by a church group. Photograph: Sean 
Smith for the Guardian 
It’s advice frequently taken. Patterson lamented the loss to the town of many 
of its best educated.

“If everybody decided to leave, there won’t be no future. I understand why 
they go. Even if a young lady graduated from high school, maybe went to 
college, there’s no jobs here. So she’s going to take off and go because 
there’s nothing here for our children,” she said. “One of my sons left. He’s in 
Memphis. He’s a manager at fast food restaurants.”

Zederick Wilson is rare in that he left Tchula to further his education and 
then returned, to teach art at the high school.

“My dream was to be the first in my family to get a degree. Me and my cousin 
Anthony in 1999 were the first in our family to get a high-school diploma and 
that was huge,” he said. “My whole generation moved away. They got tired of not 
finding work. Everyone in my class has moved to Memphis, Chicago, Jackson, 
different places. Or they ended up in prison.

“I have a classmate. In school he was focused but in prison he gets his best 
education. No job, no money. I ain’t saying it’s right but it’s reality. It 
hasn’t changed. The kids I teach say they hate Tchula and everybody leaves and 
don’t come back.”

Wilson was raised by his grandmother with seven other children. “As a kid, I 
didn’t know what poverty is. We thought chicken legs were delicious. It’s not 
until you leave and see other places you realise we really did grow up poor and 
how bad things are in Tchula,” he said.

He returned because he did not think the town had much of a future if the best 
educated moved away. He sees its problems reflected in the children he teaches.

“Less and less homes have both parents, just single mothers. They’re trying to 
work but if they can find jobs that just keeps the problem growing. There’s a 
shortage of men – fathers. A lot of kids talk about how their fathers are 
locked up. Boys don’t know how to be a man any more. A lot of times kids drop 
out because no one took the time to teach them to read,” he said.

“The kids come downtown and you see they are selling crack right next to the 
police station. They see that and it has an impact. Circumstances are created 
that make you something you don’t want to be. You think people wake up and want 
to sell crack? When you’re in a situation where you’re just surviving, you do 
anything.”

There are others who have come back to Tchula. 

Samuel Calahan headed north 50 years ago, at the age of 17, to escape 
segregation and find better work after years on the plantations.

“I was picking cotton while I was at school. You did go to school for half a 
day and pick cotton for the other half because it’s the only way your family 
could survive. You get down on your knees and pull a hundred pounds of cotton 
for a couple of dollars. I was 12 when I started doing that. I did it until I 
left Tchula,” he said.


“This whole community was just a step from slavery. The only thing I could see 
then was to get the hell out of Tchula and go somewhere where I can make some 
money, make me a living. But once you get there, it’s the same thing. Might be 
on a different level, but it’s the same thing.”

Calahan moved around doing different jobs. Chicago. Detroit, working in a 
tractor factory. But after two decades he was drawn back to Tchula in part by 
his passion for music. A relative of blues singer Lee “Shot” Williams, Calahan 
opened a club and was instrumental in winning recognition for Tchula’s place in 
music history – guitaristsAlbert “Little Smokey” Smothers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ofl3nQHJrkY> and Jimmy Dawkins were born in 
the town, which was a hub for performances – with a marker on the “Blues Trail”.

The club burned down but Calahan still runs a small bar where the music all 
but drowns out conversation.

“Most people look forward to, I’m going to get rich, be a millionaire,” he 
said. “But looking forward for us in this town is maybe I can get up in the 
morning and pay for my breakfast.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cf8dd979630b67159e66c6ed901268d8b37639%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cf8dd979630b67159e66c6ed901268d8b37639%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Eddie Carthan outside the old plantation house. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
This is far from how people in Tchula imagined their future half a century ago 
as the civil rights struggle galvanised African Americans in the Mississippi 
Delta.

High on a wall in the town council’s office lobby is a long row of photographs 
of Tchula’s former mayors. A succession of generally stern looking, middle-aged 
white men in an array of hats is finally interrupted by the smiling portrait of 
a 27-year-old with an afro.

The voting rights act finally gave the town’s African American majority a say 
over who governed them in 1965 but it was not until 12 years later that they 
used it to elect Tchula’s first black mayor, Eddie Carthan. His white 
predecessor, Lester Lyon, had been in power since 1960. But follow the line of 
portraits and Lyon is also Carthan’s immediate successor.

“The whites couldn’t accept a black mayor,” said Carthan, 65, who today runs 
the town’s hardware store and is a pastor of his own church. “Not just in 
Tchula – across the delta. If I was successful here, that would have encouraged 
other towns and cities to elect black officials, black mayors. They made an 
example of me, which had some effect for a short period of while as a warning 
of what they would do to any black that act like Eddie Carthan. After that many 
blacks were discouraged for years from even running for office in Tchula.”

Carthan grew up like many African American children of his generation in 
Mississippi, spending part of his day in school and part of it picking cotton. 
By his teens his grandfather was taking him on civil rights marches.

Today he lives in a crumbling mansion formerly owned by Sara Virginia Jones, a 
member of the wealthiest and most powerful plantation family in the area. Jones 
was a renowned art collector. Works by Rembrandt, Dalí and Warhol decorated the 
mansion walls.

They have been replaced by African masks, photos of Carthan with the former 
president Jimmy Carter and a newspaper clipping of the dayLouis Farrakhan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/oct/20/race.guardiancolumnists> came to 
dedicate the ex-mayor’s church.

Carthan pulled out a photograph album and opened it to a page of black and 
white pictures of a civil rights “freedom school” he attended at a local church 
in 1964. His finger settled on the face of a young white man,Michael Schwerner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/11/usa.suzannegoldenberg1>, one of 
three civil rights workers murdered by the Ku Klux Klan and police officers in 
the“Mississippi Burning” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jun/27/mississippi-freedom-summer-50-years-on-in-pictures>
 killings.

“He came to Tchula and this picture was giving him a farewell. Two weeks after 
that he was dead,” said Carthan. “We had to have people outside to guard the 
church we was meeting in. They would throw molotov cocktails and shoot.”

In 1976, Tchula’s African American residents used their new-found voting power 
to bring about a political revolution in the Mississippi Delta by helping to 
put Carter into the White House and by replacing Tchula’s all-white council 
with black members in five of the six seats. Carthan won the mayor’s race.

“There was a lot of optimism. I put together a plan for Tchula and took it to 
President Carter. We raised a lot of money to build houses, pave streets. When 
I was elected mayor, there was white folks on one side, black folks on the 
other side. On this side you’d see beautiful antebellum homes, paved streets, 
tennis courts, swimming pools. And on the blacks’ side, dirt roads, 80% of the 
houses had no plumbing facilities. Those apartments you see, I built them. The 
first clinic, free medicine. We had the first day care centre, a feeding 
programme for the elderly.”

That was not entirely welcome in Tchula.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf01eb548490bbae9e26bc8ef7d92842fc13da0%2F0_0_5976_3585%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cf01eb548490bbae9e26bc8ef7d92842fc13da0%2F0_0_5976_3585%2F5976.jpg>
 A Sunday service in Tchula. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
“The typical relationship that whites and blacks had, you would have to get 
their permission. They expected me to be their ‘boy’, even as mayor,” he said. 
“I was a threat to them. One of our objectives was to bring industry here and 
we had two or three factories come. Bringing jobs here threatened the 
plantation owners who wanted people for cheap labour. That’s when they struck, 
and they struck hard.”

What followed amounted to a coup by the remaining white member of Tchula’s 
council and wealthy farmer, John Edgar Hayes. Hayes, who has since died, used 
two black councillors, apparently fearful of losing their jobs in white-owned 
businesses, to reduce the mayor’s powers, even locking him out of his office, 
and to reinstate the white police chief, Jim Andrews, who held the post before 
Carthan took over.

Carthan led a posse to the police station to tell Andrews he had no authority 
because the law required the police chief to be sworn in by the mayor. There 
was a scuffle, the circumstances of which remain disputed. But afterwards, 
Mississippi prosecutors charged Carthan and five others with assaulting a 
police officer, Andrews. When that would not stick because Andrews’ appointment 
was of questionable legality, they were tried for assaulting a black officer. 
The officer later said he was pressured into falsely claiming he had been 
punched.

By then Carthan had been convicted, jailed for three years and removed from 
office. Months later the deposed mayor faced a fresh charge: murder. He was 
accused of engineering the killing of one of the two black councillors who had 
sided with Hayes against him. The man was shot in a store robbery.

“They went after the gas chamber for me,” said Carthan.

The jury acquitted him after the defence put one of the robbers on the stand 
to say they had never met the former mayor, that the killing had nothing to do 
with politics and that the white district attorney had offered them 
dramatically reduced sentences for the killing if they implicated Carthan.

The subsequent national outcry over what looked very much like a conspiracy 
against Carthan forced Mississippi’s governor to release him early, but by then 
Lester Lyon was back in the mayor’s office, to be succeeded later by another 
white politician.

For all that, the writing was on the wall. White residents began leaving 
Tchula and political control slid towards the African American majority.

The town’s voters tried a different tack in 2001 when they installed Yvonne 
Brown, who campaigned on a promise to get money out of the newly installed Bush 
administration.

The Republican leadership in Washington, delighted to have an African American 
from Mississippi in the party and in office, feted Brown and she was invited to 
the White House more than once. Out of it came the largest ever development 
grant by the US agriculture department in Mississippi to build a new town hall 
where the Chevrolet dealership once stood, and a fire station and a library.

The buildings perked up the centre of Tchula and made life easier for the 
mayor - previously Brown’s office was in a church – but it didn’t shift the 
economic dynamics of the town. Jobs remained elusive and much of the population 
reliant on welfare. Today, the city only has the budget to open the library 
three days a week and city hall is closed on Thursdays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b5a11a1df7ee27874256dad2265aeeaa43e9e4%2F0_0_5212_3468%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4b5a11a1df7ee27874256dad2265aeeaa43e9e4%2F0_0_5212_3468%2F5212.jpg>
 A Union Pacific train passes through town. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
The police station, stuck on the end of the council offices, is new as well. 
But the council can only afford to pay officers a little more than $10 (£7) an 
hour.

Ask where salvation for Tchula might lie and for some the answer is 50 miles 
to the north.

“There’s this place, Tunica <http://www.tunicatravel.com/>,” said Reed, the 
police chief. “Have you heard of it? It was one of the poorest towns in the 
whole nation. Now if you go through there, there are casinos everywhere. It’s a 
multimillion-dollar tax base. It’s right outside of Memphis. My prayer is, just 
like it happened there, we can make it happen here.”

Carthan brings up Tunica too. It is a beacon of hope to Tchula. But the key to 
Tunica’s fortunes is that it sits not far from Memphis, which provides a steady 
stream of customers to fill the slot machines and play the card tables. The 
nearest major town to Tchula is Jackson, 75 miles to the south.

“Not necessarily a casino,” said Carthan. “But we need a plan to get some 
economic activity here.”

The only outside investor the town has attracted in recent years bought the 
abandoned supermarket in the centre of town. Hassan Nasser arrived in the US 
from Yemen seven years ago determined to become a businessman. He was 26 and 
barely had a dollar to his name. He trained as a lorry driver in Detroit, got a 
job with a long-distance haulage firm and slept in his vehicle to save his 
earnings.

“I came from a small town in Yemen. It was pretty much like being here. 
Mississippi is based on farms all around owned by white folks and black people 
do the work. That’s the same as Yemen. There are a few who own everything and 
the rest work for them,” he said. “Compared to other parts of the US, I’d say 
this place is 20-50 years behind in everything. Like Yemen. But we don’t have 
an obesity problem in Yemen.”

Low-income, isolated communities without supermarkets are often forced to rely 
on high-priced convenience stores for basics such as milk and bread. “They had 
nothing here at all when we came,” said Nasser. “They had only two gas stations 
with convenience stores. They were taking advantage of people. They had very 
high prices.”

Nasser said he was often mistaken for a Mexican and called amigo. Then he 
mentioned that when he first arrived in Tchula he told people his name was José 
because he was worried that his origins and religion might be held against him. 
They weren’t.

“There is really no racism here against us,” he said. “People here are good 
except some of the young ones. They broke into my store the second week of 
opening. They took tobacco and stuff so I installed bars and bought insurance.”

Patterson is grateful that Nasser reopened the supermarket. “It was a 
disappointment that nobody from here tried to open it but, to be honest with 
you, we were thankful. I’m thankful that he came because nobody else seemed 
like they wanted to. It was closed for a long time,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc86c85d6709c388174e39e46e1fef52848368713%2F0_0_5212_3468%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc86c85d6709c388174e39e46e1fef52848368713%2F0_0_5212_3468%2F5212.jpg>
 Hassan Nasser, owner of the local supermarket. Photograph: Sean Smith for the 
Guardian 
But the supermarket only provides a handful of jobs. Patterson’s vision is 
something grander: Tchula as a manufacturing hub attracting factories providing 
stable if not particularly well-paid work, likethe clothing firm and sawmill 
used to do.

She recognises there are obstacles, not least the competition from even 
cheaper labour in China and Mexico as well as the question of why a 
manufacturer would choose Tchula over any one of scores of struggling towns 
across Mississippi – or swaths of the rest of rural America for that matter.

But that is not the mayor’s most immediate problem. Patterson said Tchula did 
not have a hope of bringing new jobs unless it got “cleaned up”.

“You’re not going to find a factory that’ll come here. Our streets are all run 
down. There’s abandoned houses,” she said. “First of all, in order for us to 
get some factories, we have to get our police lined up to make sure they can 
control some of the crime we are facing now. If the people over here have a 
job, they won’t have time to drink and smoke their drugs. When you come into 
town you see young men over there. It don’t look good.”

By over there, the mayor meant the patch of bare ground just yards from the 
back of the police station where drugs were dealt and used.

“If an aeroplane would come down and drop nets down on those people on the 
corner, you would find so much drugs it’s pathetic,” said Patterson. “The 
police go out there to chastise them.”

Chastise seemed a strange word to characterise how the police deal with drug 
users until Reed explained. “Kids are just real out front with weed now. You 
could just about drive up on them smoking it,” he said. “I have to arrest them 
because that’s possession of a controlled substance. But I’m going to put them 
on their own recognisance [without requiring a bail hearing] and release them.”

Part of being chief of police in Tchula is also to be social worker, and Reed 
spends a good deal of time trying not to lock people up.

“People who live in impoverished conditions like this, we try to work other 
strategies to make them accountable because if ... you’ve arrested John Blow 
and he has no money, what do you do? They have a fixed income and it’s spent to 
the letter of meeting their basic needs,” he said.

Reed, with the town’s judge and the mayor, has implemented a work programme so 
those convicted of crimes “can pay back some of what they have done wrong as 
well as develop some community pride”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44303f6d4f408ddd3e8171475cbb3f2c7cdb3493%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44303f6d4f408ddd3e8171475cbb3f2c7cdb3493%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Police chief Billy Reed. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
“If they sold a little dope, and had a bag of weed on them, I probably work 
them around here, cleaning stuff up,” he said. “You just have to tend to be 
willing to improvise on some things. It’s kind of like, if you see them trying 
to help themselves, you can get behind that genuineness. It’s sad in a way 
because you wish you could just hire them and help them get out of their 
situation but you just can’t take that chance. Some of them stayed here too 
long. They got sucked up.”

Ferguson, Missouri – which has come to symbolise police abuse of African 
Americans since thekilling of Michael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/25/-sp-ferguson-ablaze-michael-brown-verdict-war-zone>
 by a white officer – it is not.

History is too recent and too raw to be quickly forgotten in the Mississippi 
Delta. The accounts of life in the cotton fields, the attitudes of the town’s 
former white residents, the abuses of life under segregation still spill out. 
But for all that, there’s a hesitation to pin all of Tchula’s troubles on the 
past.


“I went to all the freedom meetings they had back in the day,” said Patterson. 
“I was out there with my cousins and my family when they was down near Jackson 
trying to get the right to vote and a whole lot of young children went to jail.

“I say it was a challenge then but put that back behind you and let us move 
forward. Those are the things that happened. You’ve got the right to vote. 
Better your life. I don’t dwell on what happened back in the 60s. Oh no baby, 
that’s not me. I believe in moving forward.”

There was a time when Dr Donald Myers would have disagreed. No more. 

“I’m to the point now where I don’t blame white folks for the situation we’re 
in. I might have blamed them 20 or 30 years ago but it’s no longer the white 
man’s fault. You can blame the white man for getting us here. I ain’t going to 
deny you about slavery and the legacy of slavery. But now that we’re here, 
we’re not coming together and doing what we should,” he said.

“The people responsible should take responsibility for the condition our 
people are in. Remember, there are more black elected officials in Mississippi 
than in any state in the United States. We control one-third of the 
legislature. We’ve got enough power to make a difference.”

Myers said he increasingly saw younger African Americans disillusioned with 
black leadership today because “it has turned its back on the younger 
generation”.

Wilson, the art teacher, was respectful of the courage of the civil rights 
struggle but he regarded many older black politicians as exploiting its legacy 
while failing their communities. “A lot of these guys are sellouts. They go for 
the cameras and get money and buy a Bentley. It doesn’t help us,” he said.

That’s a view echoed all the way to Ferguson, where a new generation of 
African Americans is increasingly disillusioned with those who claim to lead 
them.

Eddie Carthan still thinks he has something to offer. The deposed mayor’s 
supporters used to describe him as a man before his time. In August, time 
caught up when, four decades after he was driven out, he was finally elected to 
public office again. He won a seat on the Holmes County legislature with a 
campaign that echoed the promises he made in Tchula back in the 1970s: to draw 
up a long-term plan to bring factories and jobs.


So what of the American Dream? Wilson was not a believer. “When you think 
about the American Dream, right here it’s just a matter of survival. The 
American Dream doesn’t mean something to the kids here as it does to a white 
kid in Massachusetts,” he said.

Calahan agreed. “Young white boys believe in the American Dream. I ain’t so 
sure about around here. This is my country. I ain’t got no problem with the 
country, but it’s messed up,” he said.

Patterson shared the uncertainty about whether the US could deliver on its 
promise to young African Americans. But Sandra Young, who lost her daughter, 
saw it differently.

“I’ve been blessed. I may not have a big home. I may not have a lot of money 
in the bank and everything but now I can see that my kids can be and have 
anything they want to have,” she said.

Reed, a religious man and inherently optimistic, believes in the Dream too. A 
music major in college, he fell into police work while helping his wife study 
for a degree in criminal justice and moved to Tchula at the behest of an old 
colleague, Anthony Jones, then the town’s police chief. A few weeks later Jones 
was killed in a car crash and Reed, as the most experienced officer in town, 
was appointed police chief.

“I look on Tchula as an opportunity,” he said. “I have a feeling there’s some 
great things going to happen in this town, a feeling the soil’s been 
fertilised, the atmosphere’s been set for something good. I believe God’s going 
to do something great here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13eb0f014c48f542d7e4bdc0a7754f445e6b256%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poorest%20town%20in%20poorest%20state%3A%20segregation%20is%20gone%20but%20so%20are%20the%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fpoorest-town-in-poorest-state-segregation-is-gone-but-so-are-the-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13eb0f014c48f542d7e4bdc0a7754f445e6b256%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Police make an arrest after the Saturday night shooting. Photograph: Sean 
Smith for the Guardian 
But first there was the killing of the woman whose body was found on the edge 
of town. The victim was Bettina Crigler, 30. As a schoolgirl she had a fleeting 
moment of local fame when she had a poem published. By the time of her death, 
Reed said she was known to have struggled with alcohol and drugs.

Before the day was out, Reed had another killing on his hands. One young man 
had shot another as he was sitting in his car on a Saturday night after an 
argument.

The victim, Travis Anderson, was mayor Zula Patterson’s cousin. The accused 
killer, Edward Young, is Sandra Young’s cousin. Brought to the police station 
after the shooting, he looked stunned and forlorn.

He has been charged with murder and is awaiting trial.

The two women had similar reactions to the shooting: sadness at lives 
destroyed but also an air of resignation as if this too was a consequence of 
Tchula.
 