
When cabinet minister Eric Pickles told the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2157141/Its-fault---Pickles-launch-crackdown-120-000-problem-families-blame-themselves.html#ixzz1xV1cKc8j>
 it was time to level blame at the 120,000 troubled families at the bottom of 
British society, he made the case for eradicating a culture of poverty. "These 
folks are troubled: They're troubling themselves, they're troubling their 
neighbourhood. We need to do something about it."

This analysis is one that regards the chaotic lives of poor people as cause, 
not symptom, of the collapse of their communities. Like his PM's pejorative
"neighbours from hell" 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/troubled-families-speech/> speech in response 
to 2011's riots, these families and their children are presented as simply 
choosing to be feckless, indolent or on the wrong side of police lines.

The announcement of a £450m payment-by-results scheme is designed to help 
local authorities deal with such disruptive elements. Most cash-strapped 
councils have put aside their politics for the cash. Pickles trumpeted the news 
that every eligible council has signed up. Local authorities that succeed in 
tackling problem families are to be paid up to £4,000 for each household whose 
lives they turn around.

However, the coalition's case is built on very shaky foundations. The figure 
of 140,000 families in Britain first surfaced five years ago in areport by Tony 
Blair's social exclusion task force 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20070701080507/http://cabinetoffice.gov.uk/social_exclusion_task_force/documents/families_at_risk/risk_data.pdf>
 which analysed 2004 data showing that the bottom 2% of families had "five or 
more of seven" disadvantages – and that these had not been lifted out of 
poverty by New Labour.

These seven indicators of "multiple disadvantage" were: no parent in the 
family was in work; living in overcrowded conditions; no parent with any 
qualifications; the mother suffering from mental health problems; at least one 
parent with a long-standing illness or disability; an income below the poverty 
line; and the family could not afford a number of food and clothing items.

As 140,000 troubled families could be found in Britain, the calculation was 
that there were 120,000 in England. But though the criteria meant these 
families were poor, poorly educated, sick or disabled, there was no link here 
with anti-social behaviour or truanting.

To make this connection, the Department for Education then produced a paper 
last year 
<http://media.education.gov.uk/assets/files/doc/e/estimated%20distribution%20of%20families%20with%20multiple%20problems.doc>
linking poverty data – focusing on income, employment, health deprivation and 
disability, education, barriers to housing, crime and living environment – to 
child wellbeing.

Maps were drawn up identifying troubled households for every council in 
Britain – there were 4,000 "families with multiple problems" in Birmingham, 
1,600 in Sheffield. The problem with this research is that, as the department 
admitted, was that it was not a measure of "families with multiple problems". 
Little wonder the PM's spokesman talked of the 120,000 families being "an 
approximate figure". Despite no evidence that truanting or antisocial behaviour 
were part of the lives of the bottom 2% who remained mired in poverty and that 
mental health stopped many from working, the Department forCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government pressed 
ahead its scheme to "get children back into the classroom and not wandering the 
streets committing crime (and) getting parents into employment".

By March Pickles's officials had simply let propaganda triumph over fact. 
Troubled families – those struggling on little cash, with mental health 
problems in poor housing – have become a benefit-scrounging crime wave.The 
department's own financial framework for the policy says 
<http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/communities/pdf/2117840.pdf>: "These 
families are characterised by there being no adult in the family working, 
children not being in school and family members being involved in crime and 
anti-social behaviour".

As Ruth Levitas, sociology professor at the University of Bristol, wrote in a 
paper <http://www.poverty.ac.uk/sites/default/files/trouble_ahead.pdf> last 
month, the fact of 120,000 families with multiple problems is turned into "a 
factoid – something that takes the form of a fact, but is not. It is used to 
support policies that in no way follow from the research on which the figure is 
based. The problem is not the research itself, but its misuse."
 