On Sunday, Dinosaur Jr bassist Lou Barlow turns 50. His first band with J 
Mascis was called Deep Wound. But what was unusual about the piece of Deep 
Wound merchandise that Mascis often used to wear?  It was a sweater knitted by 
his mother“Their resistance has a peculiarly lame quality,” wrote Nick Attfield 
of Deep Wound in his biography of Dinosaur Jr  It was a Deep Purple baseball 
cap, on which he had stickered Wound over Purple.  At the time Mascis was a 
nudist, and it was the only thing he would wear.  The makers found the bandname 
so offensive they printed T-shirts with the name Deep Wind on them. Live Aid 
took place on 13 July 1985, billed as the “global jukebox”. Which act kicked 
off proceedings at Wembley Stadium?  Adam Ant  Phil Collins  Status Quo Live 
Aid was broadcast to more than 1.5bn people in 160 countries.  The Boomtown Rats
Take That released their first single on 12 July 1991. Where did Do What U Like 
peak in the UK charts?  No 1  No 14  No 36  No 82 The video was banned from TV, 
for featuring the group baring their buttocks and smearing jelly on themselves 
Ghost Town by the Specials reached No 1 on 11 July 1981. In what type of car 
were the group filmed driving around in the video for the song?  A Ford Cortina 
 A Rover 2000  An Austin Princess  A Vauxhall Cresta The Cresta was produced by 
Vauxhall from 1954 to 1972. The model featured in Ghost Town was made in 1961. 
If Drake stays at No 1 on Friday night, One Dance will have been at the top of 
the charts for 15 weeks. But which record has spent the most time at No 1?  I 
Believe by Frankie LaineBryan Adams holds the record for most consecutive weeks 
at the top, with 15, but I Believe was No 1 for 18 weeks in 1953.  (Everything 
I Do) I Do It For You by Bryan Adams  Love Is All Around by Wet Wet Wet  
Bohemian Rhapsody by Queen This week in 2006, Primal Scream had to cancel a 
planned Top of the Pops appearance. Why?  Because the producers could only fly 
them to Luton Airport to transfer to the studio, which Bobby Gillespie deemed 
“not rock’n’roll” enough.  Because the band objected to the presence on the 
same show of Razorlight, whom they viewed as traitors on the issue of 
Israel/Palestine  Because Bobby Gillespie had been attacked in a hotel bar and 
had his nose broken.The Luton Airport incident, though true, had happened in 
1994.  Because they forgot they were due to appear, and none of the band were 
in London at the time of filming. On 15 July 2007, Prince released his new 
album Planet Earth. What was unusual about the release?  The initial release 
was on purple vinyl, which was of such poor quality that it was ruined after 
one playing.  It was given away free with the Mail on Sunday. Prince would 
later give away an album with the Daily Mirror and Daily Record.  He launched 
it with a one-off show featuring Primal Scream as his backing band.  Owing to 
mistake by the printers, the first 11,000 copies saw the album cover naming the 
artist as Prance. What birthday would Joy Division singer Ian Curtis be 
celebrating on Saturday, were he alive?  50  55  60 Curtis killed himself on 18 
May 1980, aged 23.  65 This week in 1998, Aerosmith had to cancel a tour after 
a freak accident involving drummer Joey Kramer. What happened to him?  He 
narrowly escaped death after choking on someone else’s vomit.  He suffered 
concussion after being hit by the revolving spokes of a windmill obstacle 
during a round of minigolf.  He slipped from a ladder at his home and broke a 
leg, while installing a stained glass window featuring a portrait of himself.  
His car caught fire while he was filling it with petrol, causing him to suffer 
second-degree burns.It could happen to anyone. After all, it happened in 
Zoolander. Which unlikely piece of rock merchandise went on sale on 11 July 
1992?  The Velvet Underground “Run, Run, Run” running shoe. Ad slogan: “I’m set 
free!”  A set of eight Grateful Dead ties designed by Jerry Garcia, ideal for 
all business meetings where all present are tripping.  The “Vauxhall and Eye” 
range of Morrissey-endorsed spectacles, available for a limited time at 
Specsavers.  The Guns N’ Roses “Use Your Illusion Official Magic Set”, as 
endorsed by Siegfried and Roy.  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  