
Fernando Santos has backed Cristiano Ronaldo’s reaction to Iceland’s 1-1 draw 
with Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 by claiming that their players booed and heckled the forward and Pepe 
throughout.

The Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> coach was 
unrepentant after Ronaldo branded the tiny nation as having a small mentality 
following the opening Group F game on Tuesday because of his perception they 
used negative tactics.

Cristiano Ronaldo hits out at ‘small’ Iceland after Portugal are held
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
Santos, whose team face Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> 
at the Parc des Princes on Saturday, said: “When people talk about fair play 
sometimes it makes me want to laugh.

“When we talk about other people’s reaction in Portugal we say if you don’t 
feel, you are not really a good person. But after what the players and the 
manager said and what they did, they booed Ronaldo, they booed Pepe, the 
players on the bench kept heckling. You should always have fair play and I have 
always played fair.

“Even in the post‑match press conference I made no comments about the 
statements and provocations. But I don’t think you should bring up fair play 
after other people have shown lack of fair play. In yellow cards we’re been 
exemplary.”

Santos aimed his own dig at Iceland by claiming that Austria, who lost their 
opener against Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
, will undertake a positive approach. “After Iceland scored all 10 players went 
behind [the ball],” he said. “We tried to push but we pushed with 10 when we 
should have tried to move some so we could attack.

“Austria will not defend with 10 players and neither will we. This is a very 
different match. Austria will attack in a positive way. We know what they’re 
capable of and we’re prepared to face them. We produced good moments. Some 
things were good, others not so good. Not because the players didn’t try or 
didn’t want to win. In every game, a team has to be balanced. These teams are 
not gung-ho, they’re not insane. They have to take risks, but in a balanced 
way.”

Santos also attempted to be dismissive when asked how vital Ronaldo will be on 
Saturday. “Ronaldo is the best player in the world,” he said. “How relevant do 
you think he is? I respect the questions, but Ron is the best player in the 
world.”

'Iceland inflict crushing 1-1 defeat on Portugal' – the view from Reykjavik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/iceland-portugal-reykjavik-grapevine-euro-2016-commentary>
When it was put to him that Ronaldo performs better for Real Madrid than for 
Portugal, where he operates from a wide berth rather than as a striker, Santos 
said: “He plays a different position – will you change his position? I watch 
every match of Real Madrid very attentively. When Benzema was away, who played 
in his position? Cristiano.

“Cristiano can play in any position. He is not a striker. He’ll never be a 
striker. For Real Madrid he will be over on the left but during the match he 
can be anywhere. He is a free player. That’s how it should be.

“His position is looser. The way we attack and defend, the way players are 
brought together, they have to respect my directions. He is free to be closer 
to the wing, right-wing, left-wing or down the middle.

“One of our best chances came from Ronaldo on the left. He is free to roam and 
this freedom applies to all those in these positions. He needs to break through 
our opponents lines.”

Santos would not be drawn on potential changes to the XI beyond admitting any 
will not be wholesale. “This is a different match and the opponent is a 
different opponent,” he said.

“You want to refresh the team because there is a recovery time of three days. 
There will not be a revolution. We had a revolution in 1974,” referring to the 
overthrow of the longstanding dictatorship.

Portugal need to win to stand the best chance of qualifying for the knockout 
phase. “We’ve always been under pressure,” Santos said. “We’ve been under 
pressure since we got here. Maybe the first match added a little bit of 
pressure, but this game has not changed.

“I trust the players fully. They’re all motivated and determined to reach our 
goals. We respect our opponents. We don’t say we’re the best, but we don’t fear 
any team.”
 