
Portugal's recovery from an awful start to their World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying campaign 
is almost complete. They secured a spot in the play-offs for a place in the 
finals next summer with a comfortable 4-0 win over Malta last night in 
Guimarães. They will now go into next month's deciding matches as one of the 
seeded teams.

Victory was expected against Group One's bottom country but it maintained 
Portugal's momentum after a campaign that had featured only one win in their 
first five matches. Goals from Nani, Simão Sabrosa, Miguel Veloso and Edinho 
ensured last night was a comfortable one for Carlos Queiroz's team, who were 
without the injured Cristiano Ronaldo.

The prospect of Ronaldo and his team being absent from next year's finals had 
alarmed the chief executive of the World Cup organising committee, Danny 
Jordaan, who said on Tuesday that the tournament needed players such as the 
Real Madrid winger and Argentina's Lionel Messi.

Nani, the Manchester United midfielder, put Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> ahead after 13 minutes against 
Malta. Veloso played the ball in from the left and Nani, just outside the 
18-yard box, drove sharply into the bottom corner. A second goal came a minute 
before half-time when Simao struck from outside the area. A crisp finish from 
Veloso brought Portugal's third and Edinho scored a fourth in the closing 
stages.

Ukraine reached the play-offs with a 6-0 win away to Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> in Group Six. Andriy Shevchenko 
scored a hat-trick as his side made sure of the second place they had assumed 
following their weekend win over England.

Slovakia qualified for the finals for the first time with a nervous 1-0 win 
away to Poland. An own goal by the Polish defender Seweryn Gancarczyk in the 
third minute sent them through. Slovenia go into the play-offs from Group Three 
after winning 3-0 at San Marino. Also through areSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland>, for whom a 0-0 draw at home 
to Israel was enough to secure first place in Group Two and guarantee a 
play-off place for Greece, who beat Luxembourg 2-1.

Italy may have qualified, but it was an uncomfortable night for the defending 
champions, whose coach Marcello Lippi launched a scathing attack on home 
supporters in Parma for the way they criticised his team during the 3-2 win over
Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cyprus>.

Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> trailed by two goals before 
a hat-trick from Alberto Gilardino earned them a late win. But Lippi was deeply 
unhappy with the crowd. "I am furious like a beast," he said. "If anybody has 
forgotten this, on the field out there were the world champions? Lippi changed 
his entire team after Saturday's 2-2 draw against the Republic of Ireland but 
that did not give fans the right to criticise, Lippi said. "Those people, who 
were obviously a minority, who start shouting for us to get to work should 
probably go start working themselves."
 