
All Tomorrow's Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties> is to launch its new 
festival series early next year. Like the original ATP, I'll Be Your Mirror 
will have guest curators, but will be based in city centres instead of holiday 
camps. After the festival makes its debut in Japan in February, the UK's 
inaugural I'll Be Your Mirror, curated by Portishead, will take place on 23-24 
July 2011, in London.

For more than 10 years, ATP has hosted holiday-camp festivals and one-off gigs 
everywhere from upstate New York to the Somerset coast. ATP has become 
synonymous with great shows, intimate parties, cosy pubs and real beds; it's as 
if organisers suddenly realised that cities have these things too. While there 
is no replacing Butlins, the opportunity to take the Tube home will be much 
welcome.

Named after the B-side of the Velvet Underground's All Tomorrow's Parties 
single, I'll be Your Mirror will debut in Tokyo on 27 February. It is a one-day 
event curated by festival organisers, with appearances by Dirty Three, Boris 
and Godspeed You! Black Emperor. Much more interesting is the July weekend, 
announced yesterday, which will be held at London's Alexandra Palace.

"[We have] been given the horrendous task of joining up with our favourite 
festival in the world and choosing a dream list of bands we would like to play 
with – at least the ones that aren't dead or in jail," explained Portishead's 
Geoff Barrow. The trip-hop group will headline both nights, featuring 
performances by Liars, Swans, the Books, DOOM and Beach House, as well as 
American hip-hop crew Company Flow, who are making their first UK appearance in 
a decade. The bill also includes The Passion of Joan of Arc, presumably a 
reference to the film-score collaboration by Portishead's Adrian Utley and 
Goldfrapp's Will Gregory.

Tickets to I'll Be Your Mirror go on sale this Friday, at £59 per day or £100 
for the weekend.
 