
I was about to write protesting against Labour's supposed campaign poster 
"Step outside posh boy" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/01/labour-gordon-brown-hard-man> 
(1 April), but then noticed the date. Unfortunately, the joke is close to the 
reality. Our major politicians do behave like this and they take weekly 
training sessions at prime minister's questions to keep their ends up. Such is 
the debasement and trivialisation of our political life. At least we shall have 
the possibility on election day of voting for candidates, Greens and others, 
who are intent on discussing and solving the issues of our society, and their 
global dimensions; candidates who are not merely motivated to give the other 
guy (posh or plebeian) a bloody nose.

Peter Avis

Brighton, East Sussex

• Loved the April Fool. Please can we have the massed ranks of the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> benches chanting "you're going 
home in a fucking ambulance".

Patrick McNamee

London

• "Step outside posh boy" is not original, since Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> United supporters are well 
used to this being shouted at us by rival fans. Sadly the Posh boys are rooted 
to the bottom of the Championship. Hopefully, the Cameroons will find 
themselves in a similar position in a few weeks.

Toby Wood

Peterborough, Cambridgeshire

• It's some months since you published a letter from me calling for Labour to 
"say what it means, and mean what it says". The new poster campaign shows we 
truly have a listening government.

Les Bright

Exeter, Devon 

• Can we take seriously the letter from 23 business leaders 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/election-2010/7541734/Business-supports-George-Osbornes-national-insurance-cut.html>
 supporting the Tory policy of scrapping national insurance increases – 
published on April Fool's Day.

Phil Bramall

Cardiff

• I loved the April Fool spoof. How could anyone be taken in by a police 
officer being threatened by an orange carton (Met officer cleared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/mar/31/g20-police-sergeant-cleared-baton-charge>
, 1 April).

Tom Challenor

London 

• About 12 stories could have been April Fools; Gordon Brown is so desperate I 
could see him adopting a "no-nonsense, hard-man" approach. But Loyd Grossman 
becoming a punk (Never mind the broccoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/31/loyd-grossman-new-forbidden>, 
G2, 1 April)? Please tell me that's not true.

David James

Crowthorne, Berkshire

• Perhaps I am growing cynical in my old age, but I could only spot one 
undoubtedly true story in yesterday's paper.

Alan Maycock

Liverpool

• Congratulations! Almost "fooled", but still not as good as San Serriffe.

Jean Dubberley

Bredwardine, Herefordshire
 