
For most of us, our first exposure to the joys of verse was when we listened 
to parents or teachers reciting nursery rhymes and learned to repeat them 
ourselves. The pleasure in rhyme, rhythm, image and repetition that kids derive 
from these poems is sometimes lost as we grow older, but for most of us it 
never fully goes away; it morphs into a delight in song, or indeed poetry.

Given the hold they can have over our imaginations, it’s hardly surprising 
many poets have drawn on nursery rhymes as a source of inspiration. Sometimes 
this results in a poem that is closely based on a particular rhyme, in other 
instances it can be more to do with a general tone.

One of the most popular examples of the latter is Robert Louis Stevenson’s A 
Child’s Garden of Verses, in which a poem such asThe Swing 
<http://www.lnstar.com/mall/literature/rls/TheSwing.htm> sounds like a nursery 
rhyme, but not any specific one. Of course, Stevenson was writing for children, 
unlike Lorine Niedecker, whose first book, New Goose, was a reworking of the 
Mother Goose rhymes for Depression- and second world war-era America. In poems 
such asRemember My Little Granite Pail? 
<http://genius.com/Lorine-niedecker-remember-my-little-granite-pail-annotated>, 
Niedecker used the nursery mode to reflect on the importance, the centrality, 
of the everyday world of small things.

Many of the most popular nursery rhymes have dark undertones 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20150610-the-dark-side-of-nursery-rhymes>: 
echoes of war, death, fire and famine abound. Written at around the same time 
that Niedecker was working on her New Goose poems, Julian Bell’sNonsense 
<http://wendyc.gn.apc.org/5-Songs-description.html> sits in this tradition, 
recasting Sing a Song of Sixpence as a complaint against financial inequity and 
aerial warfare. TS Eliot’s use of London Bridge is Falling Down at the end of
The Waste Land <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176735> is, if anything, 
even darker, especially when you remember that, earlier in the poem, the bridge 
was the site of Eliot’s vision of a Dantesque vestibule of hell.

In her poem Solomon Grundy <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/246150>, 
Alice Oswald takes the opposite tack, converting the fatal weekend of the 
original into a transformative, magical coming-of-age, in which the eponymous 
Solomon blooms, and is transformed into something very like a butterfly or a 
poet. InNovember, Late in the Day 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/241114>, John M Ridland 
takes the basic situation of Hey Diddle Diddle and also transforms it, but this 
time into a less overtly magical, domestic milieu. Mind you, there’s nothing 
wrong with a piping hot cup of tea on a cold winter’s night.

Lewis Carroll frequently rewrote well-known rhymes, and one of his most 
intriguing reworkings isTwinkle, twinkle little bat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twinkle,_Twinkle,_Little_Bat> . The pleasure to 
be had from reading this poem comes from two sources: first there is the mad 
logic of fitting something as deeply un-twinkly as a bat into the original, and 
second, the suspicion that Carroll had the Dormouse interject when it did 
because he couldn’t come up with any more rhymes to fit.

I’d like to finish this quick look at nursery-rhyme inspired poems with two of 
the very best. Elizabeth Bishop’sVisits to St Elizabeths 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/237932> uses the iterative structure of 
The House that Jack Built to record a series of visits to Ezra Pound in the 
hospital where he was incarcerated, having been found psychologically unfit to 
stand trial on charges of treason. Bishop uses the structure to build a rich 
picture of a complex situation through apparently simple means, and the poem is 
among her finest.

James Joyce’s The Ballad of Persse O’Reilly 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-ballad-of-persse-o-reilly/>, taken from 
Finnegans Wake, is an entirely different beast. Starting with the familiar 
story of Humpty Dumpty, Joyce weaves elements of Irish history and politics 
with the Wake’s dream logic to create a ballad that can be sung, but perhaps 
not fully understood, much like most nursery rhymes.

So this month’s challenge is to write a poem inspired by or based on a 
favourite childhood rhyme. Perhaps your sense of these poems is of innocent 
sweetness, or maybe you prefer to focus on the darker underbelly. One way or 
the other, why not share your rhymes here with the rest of us?
 