
'Shakespeare's African play'

Gregory Doran on Julius Caesar

In 1995, I was directing a production of Shakespeare's first Roman tragedy, 
Titus Andronicus 
<http://christhurman.net/academic-articles/item/sher-and-doran-s-titus-andronicus-importing-shakespeare-exporting-south-africa-2.html>
, with my partner Antony Sher in the lead role, in Johannesburg. It was just 
after the end of apartheid, and though the play has a reputation for being a 
gore-fest, it somehow became a cry for reconciliation. In the final moments of 
the play, the hero's brother, Marcus Andronicus, calls for an end to the 
carnage:"O, let me teach you how to knit again/ This scattered corn into one 
mutual sheaf." 
<http://www.opensourceshakespeare.org/views/plays/play_view.php?WorkID=titus&Act=5&Scene=3&Scope=scene>

It wasn't until we arrived in South Africa that I became aware of just how the 
country – and the continent – had taken Shakespeare to its heart. In 2001,the 
education department in Gauteng province banned some of Shakespeare's plays 
from the curriculum 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2001/apr/18/schools.classics>(Julius Caesar 
was deemed sexist because it "elevates men"; Hamlet was "not optimistic or 
uplifting"), and the response was rapid.Anthony Sampson, sometime editor of the 
influential Drum Magazine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2004/dec/21/pressandpublishing.booksobituaries>
, wrote of the way Shakespeare had helped Nelson Mandelaand other ANC activists 
incarcerated by the apartheid government 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2004/dec/21/pressandpublishing.booksobituaries>
. An Indian inmate, Sonny Venkatrathnam, had smuggled in a complete 
Shakespeare, disguising the cover with images torn from a Hindu calendar (the 
guards thought it was a prayer book). The book was circulated among his fellow 
prisoners, who underlined and autographed their favourite passages.

Mandela chose these lines, spoken by Julius Caesar on the morning before his 
death 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-features/9300978/Julius-Caesar-with-a-little-help-from-Idi-Amin-and-Mugabe.html>
:

Cowards die many times before their deaths;

The valiant never taste of death but once.

Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,

It seems to me most strange that men should fear;

Seeing that death, a necessary end,

Will come when it will come.

The play was more than a textbook for revolutionary theory: it gave the 
prisoners a deeper understanding of human courage and sacrifice. As Sampson 
wrote, "it reassured [them] that they were part of a universal drama".

When we were in Johannesburg, I asked the great South African actor John Kani 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/culturecritics/dominiccavendish/4589941/The-Tempest-How-a-legend-of-African-theatre-was-stabbed-11-times.html>
 why the play seemed to speak so eloquently to his continent. "Julius Caesar," 
he said, "is Shakespeare's African play." The idea that I should direct the 
play in an African context began to develop;that production is now on stage in 
Stratford-upon-Avon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/jun/07/julius-caesar-review> and has been 
filmed for the BBC, to be screened next week.

I hadn't realised how fully the play inhabits Africa until I heard the 
journalist Martin Meredith 
<http://authors.simonandschuster.co.uk/Martin-Meredith/65784135> speak last 
year. He pointed out that, in the first two decades of independence from a 
variety of colonial rules, the continent endured some 40 successful coups and 
countless attempts. Men who came to power as freedom fighters have all too 
often pulled power to themselves in one-party states – only to be overthrown in 
violent military coups, and frequently pitched into civil war.

This is almost the plot of Julius Caesar. Certainly there is no shortage of 
candidates for the role of Caesar himself, whether Idi Amin in Uganda, or 
Jean-BedelBokassa in the country he declared the Central African Empire 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/7803421.stm>, who modelled his 
coronation as an emperor on neoclassical, Napoleonic lines. There are many more 
– from Mabuto in the Congo toCharles Taylor in Liberia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/charles-taylor>, indicted at the Hague last 
month for crimes against humanity. And clearly Robert Mugabe displays all of 
Caesar's vanity, the same belief in his indispensiblity ("always I am Caesar").

It is facile to criticise Africa for not learning the lessons of history. 
Since independence, the continent has lived through, in a mere half a century, 
change it took Europe over two millennia to experience. We should also be 
careful not to disregard the pernicious role of the west, whether in 
mishandling its relationship with the continent, or exploiting its resources 
with arrant hypocrisy.

Our production does not seek to address the problems of Africa, or offer 
solutions – merely to allow Shakespeare's genius for human and political 
insight to be seen more freshly. Anyway, Shakespeare does not provide answers: 
he only asks questions. In Julius Caesar, as elsewhere, he's careful not to 
come down on any one side. He submerges us in the centre of the story; like the 
crowd in the forum listening to Mark Antony, we are swayed by each competing 
argument. Is Brutus a hero of the Republic, or the ultimate self-deceiving 
idealist? You decide.
 Heavy thought ... Ben Whishaw as Richard II 
'A siege without a battle'

Rupert Goold on Richard II

It hits me the moment I cross the threshold. The air is as heavy and silent as 
the huge asymmetric columns holding up the cathedral roof above me. I have been 
on thehill above St David's in Wales <http://www.stdavids.co.uk/> for the last 
20 minutes trying to get a signal, hopelessly jerking my phone over my head 
like a weather vane while the camera track was being laid. Somehow I have 
forgotten that today is the day.

It is the first week's shoot for our film of Richard II 
<http://theatre.revstan.com/2012/05/bbc-richard-ii-rupert-goold-talks-working-with-ben-whishaw-and-michael-jackson-influences.html>
: yesterday, we chased the tide up and down Whitesands beach from dawn until 
dusk, and perhaps that experience has made me complacent about a scene that 
seems more manageable – the one in which King Richard hands his crown to the 
usurping Henry Bolingbroke in the calm of a medieval cathedral.

Richard II is not a "major" Shakespeare play. Partly, I admit, that's what 
drew me to it: no one has made a film of it on this scale before – compared to, 
say, the more camera-friendly Henry V,shot by Laurence Olivier in 1944 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9fa3HFR02E> and Kenneth Branagh in 1989 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAvmLDkAgAM>. Before we began our shoot, I went 
to see my old university tutor. "It's not really Shakespeare at his best," he 
said. "In many ways it's a play about anticlimax: a duel that never happens, a 
siege with no battle, a coup without blood, initially at least." He smiled. "In 
that way it's a very modern piece." He might have added: very English, too.

But I'm not sure the BBC, who have commissioned our film, are really looking 
for a discreet study in bathos. Besides, there are other reasons Richard II has 
become one of my favourite plays, so much so that I have been wary of 
approaching it until now. Despite its flaws, its meandering narrative, it 
contains some of the most beautiful words ever strung together in English. And 
it has moments of absolute genius, above all the one we're about to film: the 
deposition scene, where the bankrupt king somehow turns his defeat by 
Bolingbroke into the strangest kind of victory. To my mind, this is one of the 
two greatest scenes Shakespeare ever wrote (the other being the mesmerising 
"corruption" scene at the heart of Othello,in which the scheming Iago convinces 
Othello once and for all that his wife has been unfaithful 
<http://www.shakespeare-literature.com/Othello/9.html>). The deposition scene 
is centred on two men, and so two actors, as nuanced and profound in its 
politics as its emotion.

The hall in front of me is hushed, almost reverent. The rest of the cast wait 
– David Suchet and David Morrissey, as well as a handful of local Welshmen with 
faces as medieval as the robes they are wearing (to call them extras would do 
them a disservice: : Suchet's camera double has gone so far as to grow an
immaculate, if redundant, Poirot moustache 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?hl=en&client=firefox-a&hs=Bp8&sa=X&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&biw=1753&bih=1011&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=-dNg8CTOxp56cM:&imgrefurl=http://agathachristiereader.wordpress.com/2011/05/15/poirot-review-1-6/&docid=QiOUtU4B2rxDKM&imgurl=http://agathachristiereader.files.wordpress.com/2011/05/poirot.jpg&w=300&h=408&ei=PPjaT8_UM4XG0QXyxYCECw&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=173&vpy=128&dur=50&hovh=262&hovw=192&tx=124&ty=146&sig=109830239008310929127&page=1&tbnh=159&tbnw=117&start=0&ndsp=44&ved=1t:429,r:0,s:0,i:72>
).

Everyone is watching to see how Ben Whishaw 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/videos/b/video-ben-whishaw-hamlets-advice-to-the-players/>
 andRory Kinnear 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/sep/19/rory-kinneary-hamlet-national-hytner>
, the two major Hamlets of the past decade, will approach the encounter: two 
young men, hugely gifted, yet both still on the ascent of their respective 
genius. They're as different asGielgud and Olivier 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/letters/8030886/Gielgud-and-Olivier-made-a-very-rare-double-act.html>
, or Federer and Nadal, but like them – and like Henry and Richard themselves – 
inspired and fascinated by the challenge they set each other.

Shakespeare's plays explore how often power is not wrenched but slips through 
our fingers in such moments. If the conflict is violent and emphatic then a 
victor can emerge: Macduff conquers Macbeth, like Ali conquering Foreman. But 
if the transition is managed, or feigned as somehow appropriate (inevitable, 
rather than the brutal realpolitik it is), then the victor is inevitably 
tarnished. Nowhere more so than in England, with its prudish sense of decency 
and fair-play. For Richard and Henry read Thatcher and Major, Blair and Brown, 
or the Milliband brothers..

I catch myself thinking: would it be better to do this on stage rather than 
film? In the theatre, Shakespeare rewards quick, light delivery, while the 
camera needs slow, heavy thought. That's partly why I have insisted on every 
scene being shot on location, as many as possible outside. Real stone, trees, 
the sea: these stop the acting becoming stagey, and locate it in something 
bigger.

The cathedral here at St David's has a history of its own, one even 
Shakespeare would have thrilled at. Richard himself spent many hours here; 
behind Rory there is a fresco from the life of the real Henry Bolingbroke. It 
is tiny and faded, hard to imagine as the silhouette of a king – but then we 
begin filming, and Ben walks in.

For once I let the scene run in its entirety, nearly 15 minutes, both cameras 
silently swallowing the tension, and this dance of political power seems 
utterly modern, finding its natural home on film.

• Julius Caesar is on BBC4 on 24 June; Richard II is on BBC2 on 30 June. The 
live production of Julius Caesar is at the Royal Shakespeare theatre, 
Stratford-upon-Avon, until 7 July, then touring. Details:rsc.org.uk 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk>. (These details were added on 21 June.)
 