
The basics

On an unknown, heavily forested planet surrounded by oodles of what look like 
giant moons (suggesting that someone has been watching a little too much 
Avatar), a body drops from the sky, complete with parachute and assorted 
weaponry. It belongs to anextremely buff Adrien Brody 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004778/>, who's playing a special ops guy who 
apparently has no idea where he is or why he has just been booted out of a 
spaceship on to an alien planet. Swiftly afterwards, various other highly 
dangerous soldiers, criminals and assorted weirdos begin falling from the 
clouds. Turns out that they have all been transported there to act as "game" 
for the Predators of the much-loved1987 Arnold Schwarzenegger movie 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093773/>. Chaos inevitably ensues.

The stakes

Let's be honest, this was a no-brainer for everybody involved. Robert 
Rodriguez, who's producing, got to dust off an extremely hokey screenplay he 
wrote more than a decade ago when studio 20th Century Fox was trying to entice 
Arnie back to the franchise. Director Nimród Antal gets a crack at a Hollywood 
blockbuster, and can always go back to directing stylish fare such as his
noirish comedy thriller debut, Kontroll <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0373981/>, 
if it all goes sideways. Brody already has an Oscar in the bag, but clearly 
aspires to being the thinking man'sJason Statham 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005458/>. He may be a bit funny-looking for an 
action star, but no amount of critical derision is going to stop the likes of 
Wes Anderson giving him regular screen time, so why not have a crack?

The buzz

Predators has been hyped to the heavens by fanboy-friendly sites such as Aint 
It Cool News <http://www.aintitcool.com/>, with Rodriguez intelligently 
fuelling the fires with plenty of video interviews and featurettes. The 
film-maker has been pitching this one as a sequel that will be to Predatorwhat 
Aliens was to Alien <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75860/alien>, and for 
the most part the blogosphere has swallowed that line. "I like that we're going 
into the Predator's homeworld not as an establishing shot, but as a place of 
primary action. That's genuinely killer ... potentially," wrote AIC's Harry 
Knowles last year. Meanwhile, theLA Times reported that Brody had been in full 
method mode 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/herocomplex/2010/07/predators-adrien-brody-robert-rodriguez.html>
 while on set, even sleeping in the jungle alone at night to get in the zone.

Flash forward to the film's release date (it arrived in UK cinemas last night 
and debuts in the US tonight) and the reviews are pretty damn good. The film's
"fresh" rating on rottentomatoes.com <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/predator/>
 is more than 70%, with most critics suggesting it's a passable revival of a 
franchise that looked dead in the water after theawful Aliens vs Predator movies
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/jan/18/actionandadventure.horror>, though 
not a patch on the original's trashy cool.

The bitching

The Guardian's Andrew Pulver is not playing ball 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/jul/08/predators-film-review>. "This is a 
stolid, uninspired imitation ... with Rodriguez's innovations largely confined 
to inconsequential details of who's hunting whom," he writes. "It doesn't get 
anywhere near the snap of the original, even though Arnold Schwarzenegger is 
thankfully nowhere to be seen."

"These aren't characters, they're cardboard cliches lining up for the body 
count,"agrees Entertainment Weekly's Chris Nashawaty 
<http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,20400097,00.html>. "As a fan of 
Schwarzenegger's macho, heart-of-darkness original, it gives me no pleasure to 
say that Predators is an uninspired mess of mediocre action scenes strung 
together until the final reel. But it gives me even less pleasure to add that 
that final reel leaves room for a sequel. The horror."

The fawning

"Predators is a pretty awesome flick," says Brad Miska of Bloody Disgusting 
<http://www.bloody-disgusting.com/film/2870/review>. "There's no question in my 
mind that Antal and Rodriguez are die-hard fans. While they missed the tone of 
the original, they captured everything else ranging from the colourful 
characters to the score and sound design (the gunfire gave me goose bumps). 
Predators is loaded with action, gore and freakin' cool Predators; this is what 
summer movies are made of."

"This is the sequel that John McTiernan and Arnold Schwarzenegger's 1987 
original deserved, as director Nimród Antal delivers enough hardcore sci-fi, 
explosive action and monster mayhem to justify its belated arrival," writes 
Time Out's Nigel Floyd. "Forget the official sequel and the lame Alien vs 
Predator spin-offs: this Predator sequel deserves one of its own."

The punters

Predators has been trending on Twitter 
<http://techcrunch.com/2010/07/08/twitter-ad-facebook/>, perhaps aided by Fox 
buying a "promoted" slot.

The viewer response seems to be mixed. "If anyone is gonna watch Predators, 
let me know because I'll watch it again! Damn good movie!" writesHt4everbond 
<http://twitter.com/Ht4everbond>. But YuriLowenthal 
<http://twitter.com/YuriLowenthal> complains: "140 characters is nowhere near 
enough to express how much I hated Predators."

The prognosis

This is an entertaining Predator movie, and there are more than a few moments 
to send a nostalgic chill down one's spine. But Antal doesn't quite seem to 
have the touch or understanding of pace to make the most of the standout 
moments: a panoramic CGI shot of an array of moons orbiting the unknown planet 
is fluffed, and a scene in which Brody covers himself in mud to mimic 
Schwarzenegger's ploy in the first film (to counteract the predator's thermal 
vision) is distinctly underwhelming. The actor simply walks into shot as though 
he's just popped back after a fag break – the whole thing lacks sparkle. The 
original Predator was a pulpy joy. But was its premise ever really worth more 
than one film? On this evidence, the answer would have to be no.
 