
Guardian writers’ predicted position: 12th (NB: this is not necessarily 
Dominic Fifield’s prediction but the average of our writers’ tips)

Last season’s position: 15th

Odds to win the league (via Oddschecker): 750-1

Early August, with the top-flight season looming ever larger and an assessment 
of the state of play at Crystal Palace is far from straightforward. At first 
glance both club and squad would appear to be considerably stronger than a year 
ago. The ownership structure has been revampedto reflect heavy investment from 
the American businessmen Josh Harris and David Blitzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/18/crystal-palace-us-investment-josh-harris>
. There was encouragement, too, from an early summer splurge in the market that 
reinforced three previously troublesome sections of the side.

Even with the club’s transfer record having been eclipsed once already to 
secure a recent England international, the sense is the most significant 
addition is still to come. Palace cannot rest easily just yet. This team have 
arguably lacked a consistent goalscoring presence since Glenn Murray landed 
awkwardly in the Brighton penalty area in thefirst leg of the 2013 play-off 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/10/crystal-palace-brighton-championship-playoff>
 and felt the ligaments in his right knee wrench. Strikers have since succeeded 
only in fits and starts, from a recovered Murray to an eager Dwight Gayle, the 
regularly hamstrung Marouane Chamakh to Connor Wickham, who, infuriatingly for 
all, has been just as injury prone. None has proved prolific.
Recent finishes 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/crystalpalace/giv-12515dtCPwAWJ6wEd>
Even those additions that were considered cost-effective gambles – Fraizer 
Campbell, Cameron Jerome, even Emmanuel Adebayor given the lack of a fee – 
never really paid off. They were probably risks worth taking, given Palace, 
still relatively new to this level and operating within the Premier League’s 
internal financial fair play guidelines, lacked the budget to splash cash. Yet, 
with the financial shackles now relaxed after three years in the elite and with 
the coffers bloated by the latest injection of television monies, ambition has 
been exposed. Back in the hierarchy’s post-season planning meetings, conducted 
in south London and on the Côte d’Azur, a belief had emerged that Palace’s 
intent might surprise a few. Eye-watering bids have duly been submitted for 
players from Merseyside to Marseille. The problem is, as yet, they have failed 
to land their man.

Instead, this summer has been transformed into a test of patience. Marseille 
accepted a bid of £31.6m for Michy Batshuayi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/crystal-palace-michy-batshuayi-marseille-bid>
, whosubsequently joined Chelsea for slightly more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-medical-33m-marseille>
. West Bromwich Albion were sounded out over the availability of Saido Berahino 
and onceStoke City had offered a deal worth £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/stoke-city-bids-saido-berahino-west-bromwich-albion>
, Palace tried the Chelsea tactic andmade clear they could submit one that 
would rise to £23m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/crystal-palace-bid-west-brom-saido-berahino>
. Jeremy Peace, who has made a habit of knocking back interest in his 
much-coveted forward, was still not inclined to accept. Not yet, anyway. That 
situation is likely to be revisited now Diafra Sakho appears destined for The 
Hawthorns, for all that Palace’s first game of the season is against Albion.

The real intrigue lies with Christian Benteke, a player who will always be on 
the fringes of Jürgen Klopp’s plans but would appear ready-made for Palace’s 
favoured system. Liverpool are willing sellers at the right price. Palace
initially offered a deal worth £25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/crystal-palace-25m-bid-liverpool-christian-benteke>
 andthen upped that to £27m, plus add-ons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/04/crystal-palace-up-bid-christian-benteke-liverpool>
 – but the haggling has yet to yield agreement. It would probably be in all the 
parties’ interests to compromise and it is far from inconceivable Benteke and 
Berahino will start September at the south London club. With so many trying to 
save face, however, such transfers can be protracted affairs. Palace have 
simply been made to wait while pre-season friendlies offered reminders of their 
need as incisive approach play was too often undermined by a familiar lack of 
presence in the opponents’ box. Wickham is the only fit senior striker. Keshi 
Anderson and Freddie Ladapo, players plucked from non-league, are raw, not 
ready.
Last season's results 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/aug/2016-08-02T09:46:54/embed.html>
The intent to strengthen bodes well. Palace are commencing a fourth 
consecutive season in the top flight and they have never enjoyed a five-year 
spell at that level. It had been a quarter of a century since the same manager 
even led them into successive campaigns in the elite, with the team’s toils 
since the turn of the year enough to convince Alan Pardew of the need to 
refresh and revive. Palace under Steve Parish and the previous ownership 
structure had progressed year on year since 2010: from Championship survival to 
mid-table,promotion via the play-offs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/27/crystal-palace-promoted-premier-league-kevin-phillips>
, then 11th- and 10th-place finishes at the higher level. Last season, with its 
early burst of form and second FA Cup final appearance, had briefly threatened 
to be the best yet. It ended up feeling like a reality check.

Pardew had offered a typically frank assessment while the Premier League 
campaign was fizzling out and long before Manchester United’sJesse Lingard 
jettisoned those aspirations of a first major trophy in extra-time at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
. Before his team’strip to Tyneside in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/30/newcastle-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
, the manager had surveyed the remaining games as “four fixtures to define our 
season either as one of the greatest Palace have ever had or as disappointing, 
if we lose the Cup final and finish in a low position”. Only one of those 
matches,at home to Stoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/crystal-palace-stoke-premier-league-report>
, was won. A 15th-place finish, which would have been cause for huge 
celebration only a few years ago, felt inadequate. The loss in the FA Cup final 
provided a numbing anticlimax to pursue the club into the summer. Pardew was 
probably proved right.

What grated was the sense this was a missed opportunity. There had been the 
early-season successes, the win at Stamford Bridge – albeit one made rapidly to 
look routine – and the steady progress that resulted in Palace spending 
Christmas Day level with Tottenham Hotspur and outside the top four only on 
goal difference. As meaningless a stat as it was, there was still something 
impressive about the 61 points accrued over the calendar year of 2015, a tally 
bettered by only five clubs. But if the rise was eye-catching, the collapse was 
almost cataclysmic. The league sequence from Boxing Day read two victories in 
21 matches, a prolonged stretch of dismal form the club had not endured since 
groping blindly through nine months without a home win to finish bottom in 1998.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fpremier-league-2016-17-preview-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7d8a0075853cbfa85109b6af8b52986e60b4cd%2F0_67_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%202016-17%20preview%20No5%3A%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fpremier-league-2016-17-preview-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%202016-17%20preview%20No5%3A%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fpremier-league-2016-17-preview-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7d8a0075853cbfa85109b6af8b52986e60b4cd%2F0_67_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Alan Pardew was convinced of the need to refresh his squad by Crystal Palace’s 
poor league form in the second half of last season. Photograph: Jordan 
Mansfield/Getty Images 
It was a reminder of the true depth of quality in a squad stretched by 
progress in both domestic cup competitions and how untimely injuries – Yannick 
Bolasie, Jason Puncheon, James McArthur and Wickham spent long periods on the 
sidelines – can derail even the most serene campaigns. “We have a lot of 
lessons to learn from this year,” Pardew had added before the 1-0 loss at St 
James’ Park. “Three years in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, and a Cup final, but 
people lose perspective about the size of this club. Our fans got carried away 
when we were flying at the top of the league with a fit squad and everything 
was good. We got injuries and our Cup run also affected that. We mustn’t let 
that happen to us again next year.”

It should be acknowledged that it was the hierarchy, rather than the 
supporters, who had sought to raise expectations, given their desire to 
reinvent this club. But now, with an opportunity to ward off a repeat collapse, 
they have been nothing but bold. The France No2 goalkeeper, Steve Mandanda, had 
been hugely impressive over nine years at Marseille and arrived for a bargain 
£1.4m, while James Tomkins –for £10m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/05/crystal-palace-james-tomkins-west-ham>
 – has plenty of Premier League experience and, at 27, is a centre-half who 
will recognise the opportunity for regular game-time offered by a switch across 
the capital.

Andros Townsend’s transfer, for what most in the elite would consider a paltry 
£13.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/crystal-palace-andros-townsend-alan-pardew>
, was the first of the summer’s club record bids. Where Palace were so blunted 
by Bolasie’s absence last season, with the onus thrust on the impressive 
Wilfried Zaha to compensate, now they have options and pace aplenty from wide. 
There would appear to be greater depth and versatility. A setup boasting a new 
first-team coach in the former Colchester manager Kevin Keen – Andy Hughes, to 
Huddersfield Town, and John Salako have moved on – potentially possess the 
ability to tweak their tactical approach.

Pardew experimented with three at the back – a formation Wales ensured is 
suddenly en vogue – over their three-game trip to the US in pre-season and 
seemed keen, too, to explore how to use a strike partnership in attack. Palace 
supporters still salivate over the prospect of that pair being Benteke with 
Berahino. The weeks ahead will prove whether those aspirations are realistic.
 