
I wrote in January this year that the new press regulator was simply the old 
press regulator being rebornwith a few extra bells and whistles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/08/ipso-press-regulator-pcc-bells-whistles>
.

In fact, the old bells and the old whistles are calling the tune in the new 
Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso), echoing the formerPress 
Complaints Commission <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> (PCC).

Before we consider the line-up, note first the lack of transparency. No formal 
announcement was made. No press release was circulated.The who-we-are section 
of the Ipso website <https://www.ipso.co.uk/IPSO/whoweare.html> doesn't name 
them.

So I am indebted to Martin Moore and Gordon Ramsey for digging out this 
information,which is up on the Inforrm blog 
<http://inforrm.wordpress.com/2014/11/04/ipso-new-appointments-further-increase-dependence-on-powerful-industry-figures-martin-moore-and-gordon-ramsay/#more-28308>
.

Now look at the line-up of the board of the Regulatory Funding Company (RFC), 
which holds the purse-strings ofIpso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>. 
It is composed of nine white corporate men.

They are led by Paul Vickers, Trinity Mirror's legal director, the man who 
failed to investigate phone-hacking at his own company with anything like 
appropriate rigour.

Then come a trio of national newspaper bigwigs: Murdoch MacLennan, chief 
executive ofTelegraph Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> (TMG); Christopher 
Longcroft, chief financial officer of Rupert Murdoch's News UK; and Paul 
Ashford, editorial director of Richard Desmond's Northern & Shell.

Regional papers are represented by Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, chief executive of 
Johnston Press; Mike Gilson, editor of the Belfast Telegraph; Brian McCarthy, 
Archant's finance director; and Ellis Watson, chief executive of DC Thomson.

Finally, there is a token magazine rep in Albert Read, deputy managing 
director of Condé Nast.

It is true that none of the former members of the PCC's funder, PressBof, are 
on the RFC. That would have been too blatant. But, as before, the 
behind-the-scenes control over the regulator's budget is being exercised by 
publishers.

And budget is hugely significant under the new setup because, if it is to 
operate more rigorously than the PCC with investigations, and also create an 
arbitration wing, then funds are very important indeed.

It is known that Ipso's chairman, Alan Moses, has previously complained about 
whether the funding is adequate.

And, before I move on, I ask again – what, no women? 

Turning to the editors' code committee, the sense of déjà vu is greater still. 
In the days of the PCC, the committee's chairman was the Mail group's 
editor-in-chief,Paul Dacre <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>.

And, lo and behold, Dacre has been reappointed to the same role he has held 
for six years. Same bell, same whistle.

And the committee's membership is remarkably similar to the one that has 
existed for years.It is, in fact, exactly the same. 
<http://www.pcc.org.uk/about/whoswho/committee.html>

Here they are (with their lengths of service in brackets): Ian Beales, 
committee secretary (23 years); John Witherow, Times editor (16); Ian Murray, 
Southern Evening Echo editor (13); Harriet Wilson of Condé Nast (10); Jonathan 
Grun, soon-to-retirePress Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/press-association> editor (8);

Neil Benson, Trinity Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> 
regionals' editorial director (6); Hannah Walker South London Press editor (5); 
Mike Sassi, Nottingham Post editor (4);
Damian Bates, Aberdeen Press & Journal editor (4); and Geordie Greig, Mail on 
Sunday editor (4).

There are two additions: Moses, Ipso's chairman, and Matt Tee, Ipso's chief 
executive. (And, yes, I do note there are two women).

Of course, the editors' code itself remains as it was in the days of the PCC.

So, in every respect, the new system of regulation is the same as that of the 
old. I know, Ipso can impose fines. I know, Ipso can launch investigations. I 
know, Moses was appointed independently of the RFC.

I'm also aware of the 12-member board and the 12-member complaints committee, 
which – with one exception – looks good on paper. That exception is Peter 
Wright, who labours under the title of editor emeritus at Associated 
Newspapers, and who – seehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/12/peterwright-mailonsunday>
 andhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/sep/09/peterwright-ipso> – 
should be disqualified on the grounds of his silence at the PCC about his 
former staff at the Mail on Sunday having been hacked.

In essence, there is no real structural difference between the PCC and Ipso. 

It's as if hacking never happened and the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> never happened. It is for 
the former judge, Moses, to prove otherwise in the coming months by exhibiting 
independence from his employers.
 