
Pressure is mounting in Japan on Toyota's embattled president, Akio Toyoda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-akio-toyoda-profile>, 
to reassure US drivers and restore confidence in Japanese exports, hours before 
he faces a grilling in the US congress over the safety recall of millions of 
cars.

Government officials today voiced concerns that fierce and prolonged criticism 
ofToyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> in the US could spark a 
wider backlash against Japanese goods, just as exports are beginning to show 
real signs of life.

Japan's exports rose by almost 41% in January compared with last year, 
according to figures released today. Exports to Asia leapt 68.1%, while those 
to the US grew 24%, the finance ministry said.

The foreign minister, Katsuya Okada, said he hoped Toyoda would reassure the 
American public when he testifies on Capitol Hill later today.

"I certainly would like to hope this matter will not undermine the trust of 
the Americans, not just [in] Toyota as a company, but Japan as a whole," Okada 
said in an interview with the Guardian. "It is essentially a matter of one 
enterprise ... there's very little the Japanese government can do."

In written testimony released before his appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/24/akio-toyoda-statement-to-congress>
 in front of the house oversight and government reform committee, Toyoda said 
he was "deeply sorry" for accidents caused by defective Toyota vehicles.

"As you well know, I am the grandson of the founder, and all the Toyota 
vehicles bear my name," he said. "For me, when the cars are damaged, it is as 
though I am as well. I, more than anyone, wish for Toyota's cars to be safe, 
and for our customers to feel safe when they use our vehicles."

Optimism over Japan's export recovery was tempered by a report warning that 
damage to exports of cars and vehicle parts, which accounted for about 15% of 
total exports last year, could trigger a fall in GDP.

A hypothetical 3% cut in Japan's car output would equate to a drop of 
0.12 percentage points, or ¥600bn, in nominal GDP, the Daiwa Research Institute 
said.

A fall of that size could lead to the loss of almost 50,000 jobs and have 
serious knock-on effects for other sectors, such as the electronics and service 
industries, it said.

Yesterday the government downgraded its view on exports for this month, partly 
as a result of the Toyota recall. The cabinet office said exports were 
"increasing moderately" – a weaker assessment than last month when it said they 
were "increasing".

The transport minister, Seiji Maehara, a critic of Toyota's handling of the 
recall, reminded the firm of its responsibilities as the global face of Japan, 
Inc.

"Toyota is not only a Japanese company but also a local US company, and its 
subcontractors are very much localised," he said.

"In that respect Toyota should be fully aware of its responsibilities as an 
American company and as part of the American economy and face the 
[congressional] hearings earnestly and sincerely."

Japanese TV showed clips of yesterday's testimony by Jim Lentz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-boss-grilled-congress-live>
, president of Toyota Motor Sales USA, but more airtime was devoted to the 
performances of Japan's women figure skaters at the Vancouver Olympics.

"Even if figure skating is really what's on people's minds, I think people 
will be interested in seeing how Toyoda-san will perform," Koichi Nakano, a 
professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo, told the 
Associated Press.

Japanese broadsheets echoed fears that Toyota's woes could spread to other 
sectors, given its place at the heart of the country's manufacturing tradition.

"Considering that Toyota represents Japan's corporate identity, a loss in 
confidence would potentially affect all Japanese products," said an editorial 
in the Nikkei business daily.

The Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's biggest-selling newspaper, said it hoped Toyoda 
would "take to heart his position as the de facto captain of this nation's 
manufacturing industry".

Shares in Toyota fell 1.5% to ¥3,275 in Tokyo today. They have lost about 20% 
of their value since 21 January, when the recall was expanded to cover millions 
of vehicles with "sticky" accelerators.
 