
Wiry contraptions hang from the ceiling, while globular fungal forms nestle on 
tables between the spidery legs of 3D-printed creatures. A post-apocalyptic 
confetti of scalpel blades, empty Pot Noodles and cans of Coke is scattered 
among this landscape of foreign objects, while a sleeping bag pokes out from 
under a desk – perhaps with someone still in it.

It is a familiar scene, repeated in the studios of UK architecture schools 
over the past few weeks, as bleary-eyed students prepare their portfolios for 
the final reckoning and begin sprucing up work for the summer exhibitions. The 
masochistic, sleep-deprived chaos may be nothing new, but beneath the usual 
end-of-year mayhem a deeper discontent appears to be brewing.

With the recent hike in tuition fees to £9,000 a year, along with the 
increased costs of field trips, living expenses and access to ever more 
elaborate model-making machines, architecture students can now expect to 
graduate, after a minimum of five years' study and two years' work placement, 
with debts of £100,000. And the reward? If they are lucky enough to find a job 
in the current climate, the salary of a newly qualified architect starts at 
£25,000. As consumers paying over the odds for professional training – when the 
value of that training, unchanged since the 1960s, is increasingly questionable 
– young architects are finding themselves in an ever more precarious position.

"The fees are so high that thinking independently is now a risk," says one 
final-year student at UCL'sBartlett school of architecture 
<http://www.bartlett.ucl.ac.uk/architecture>, which has topped the Guardian's 
university league table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/table/2013/jun/04/university-guide-architecture>
 for the third year running. "There is no time to sleep or go for a jog, let 
alone to think whether the project is truly meaningful."

Attending final presentations as an external critic, it has been striking 
quite how far students are marshalled under the prescriptive dogma of their 
tutors in a lot of schools, producing projects with astounding graphic flair, 
but with a tenuous grip on reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/may/30/architectural-education-professional-courses>
, and often little sign of a critical position. Taught by the same people who 
mark their work, many students said the safest thing was to keep their heads 
down and follow the prevailing agenda – or else literally pay for the 
consequences.

"It's a rotten system," says Max Lacey, who tried the Architectural Association
 <http://www.aaschool.ac.uk/> and the Bartlett, before leaving to complete his 
studies at what he saw as the more grounded realms ofLondon Metropolitan 
University <http://thecass.com/about1/school-of-architecture> and Kingston 
<http://fada.kingston.ac.uk/schools/architecture/schools_arch.php>. "People 
were designing things with no relation to the real world, all focused 
evangelically in favour of one particular style. It's an inbred, self-serving 
structure."

With all energies directed towards the climax of the final exhibition – 
conceived as a salesroom for students and tutors alike – the emphasis is too 
often weighted on creating a dazzling polished product, rather than the rigour 
of the process of getting there. Seductive alien imagery trumps the perceived 
banality of buildings, with the visual cacophony masking the lack of underlying 
spatial ideas.

"There is an erosive culture in many of these pseudo-conceptual schools," says 
Tom Emerson of the London practice6a Architects <http://www.6a.co.uk/>, who 
teaches atETH Zurich <http://www.arch.ethz.ch/darch/index.php?lang=en> in 
Switzerland, a university staffed by high-profile practising architects with 
substantial built portfolios – and lower tuition fees. "They set up a polar 
opposition between 'building' and being 'radical', as if to say: 'If you've got 
ambition, you can't be interested in buildings, cities, life and people.' In 
Switzerland there is a great deal more belief in what architecture can do for 
society. That's where our crisis comes from: in the UK there is very little 
confidence in what it means to be an architect."

The common retreat into introspective dreamworlds can be directly correlated 
against the dissolution of the architect's powers, which are increasingly 
superseded by specialist consultants for every stage of the process. From 
façade design to lighting, space planning to landscaping, the skills formerly 
handled by one office are now subcontracted elsewhere, leaving the architect 
progressively isolated. Some schools are trying hard to bridge the gap between 
education and practice, with live building projects and collaborative studios 
that engage with real development sites. But the question remains: does it 
really need to take seven years?

"Our generation got an enormous amount out of the length of the course," says 
Emerson. "But we didn't pay for it. When you come out debt-ridden, you think: 
'Did I need all of it, or could I have got what I needed in three or four 
years?'" He cites the example of former students who have gone on to get their 
part 2 qualification through working in practice, as an alternative to going 
back into education. "It turned out they didn't need to be in school to be able 
to develop an accomplished, critical project."

Learning by doing is a sentiment echoed by the UK architectural education 
review group, whoserecent report <http://people.bath.ac.uk/absaw/files/> 
recommended shortening courses, as well as letting students carry out their 
studies alongside paid work, to open up access into architecture beyond the 
privileged bow-tie wearing gentlemen of yore. "The existing three-part system 
is far too rigid to allow alternative pathways into the profession," says the 
group chair Alex Wright, who is optimistic that "there's a growing realisation 
that maintaining the status quo is no longer an option".

So why has the UK system continued to trundle along oblivious for so long, 
sticking to a model that emerged from the 1958 Riba conference on education?

"The difficulty is achieving consensus between all the statutory bodies," says 
David Gloster, head of education at the Riba, who insists that the institute is 
"in dialogue with schools to develop more flexible models that best suit the 
needs of 21st-century practice".

But pressure is beginning to grow. Terry Farrell, recently commissioned by the 
government to undertake a year-long andalarmingly vague review of architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/mar/25/government-architecture-review-terry-farrell>
, says his most pressing concern is education. "The most important thing is the 
length of the course," he toldBuilding Design 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/news/farrell-squares-up-to-universities/5055854.article>
, "and finding hybrid ways to learn."

Encouraging hybrid models is an encouraging step, but there is a danger that 
the desire to bring courses closer to practice could see architectural training 
become a purely technical pursuit.

Ryder Architecture <http://www.ryderarchitecture.com/>, a corporate purveyor 
of large sheds, whose work graces the pages of theBad British Architecture blog 
<http://badbritisharchitecture.blogspot.co.uk/2009/11/prestwick-academy-south-ayrshire-by.html>
, is in the process of launching a course, which it is looking to trial at UCL 
in 2015. Based on a bachelor in engineering, it will feature such topics as 
"leadership, project management, cost and risk management, sustainability and 
digital engineering", as well as covering legal aspects, contracts and 
programming. Its graduates will no doubt be capable of detailing a jazzy 
cladding system to liven up their latest shed, but are these really the people 
we want to be making our cities?

Everyone, it seems, is in agreement that something has to give, but there is 
reluctance to commit to what the replacement should be.

"We don't want to change one inflexible model for another," says Gloster. "We 
are resistant to one size fits all." No one has the answer yet, but at least 
students' plaintive pleas for relevant teaching are finally being taken 
seriously – and they may soon have an alternative to costly years trapped in 
fantasy factories.
 