
GERMANY, alone among what we used to call the Great Powers, seems to have 
celebrated the secular festival of All Fools with a jest of the traditional 
kind. A Berlin paper went out of its way yesterday to make an April Fool of 
some of its readers by publishing a “spoof” account of a visit by the PRINCE OF 
WALES to the German capital, an account which was supported by specially 
arranged photographs of a mock Prince of Wales in uniform in the streets of 
Berlin. It may well be that its readers were duly duped, for nothing appears to 
deceive the German public so quickly as a uniform and a prince.

There was the case of the “Captain of Koepenick 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Captain_of_K%C3%B6penick_%28play%29>” before 
the war, and within the past few months a pseudo-prince succeeded in imposing 
handsomely on several townships in the Republic of Germany. Perhaps people have 
a taste for such exploits beyond the Rhine, a taste which seems to have 
languished in this country in very much the same way that the taste for 
celebrating St. Valentine’s Day has languished.

With us the April Fool seems to have fallen from favour rather in the same way 
that the practical joke - which invariably meant a troublesome, and usually a 
witless, exploit - has gone quietly out of fashion. It is probably true to say 
that never again will large numbers of prominent citizens be formally but 
unofficially invited by some wag to witness on April 1 the “Annual Ceremony of 
Washing the White Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/mar/30/washing-lions-tower-london>” at the 
Tower of London; and it is certainly true to say that, if they were, nothing 
like so many would present themselves for that event as arrived on the morning 
of April 1, 1860.


We grow older and, if not staider, at least a little more subtle in the jests 
to which we lend ourselves. As a matter of fact, the game of making fools of 
people on April 1 is not a very ancient one; in Europe the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries appear to have witnessed its growth and rise to favour, 
and France and this island seem to have been the chief custodians of a rather 
mysterious tradition which is connected by some with the change from the Old 
Calendar, in which New Year’s Day, with its festivities, fell on March 25, to 
the New, which we follow at present.


If that should be the explanation France and England would seem to have grown 
out of their jokes about the change by this time.Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, to judge by the Berlin episode, 
still remembers the older usage and finds some flavour in the pranks connected 
with it.
 