
Legal actions over intrusions into privacy have reached a record level, 
according to a survey conducted by Thomson Reuters 
<http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=12264517>. Why? Because 
celebrities and other high-profile public figures are trying to restrict 
publicity about their lives.

The survey found that privacy claims have more than doubled over the course of 
the last five years, up from 28 in 2010 to 58 in 2015. And about one in five of 
those cases involved celebrities or politicians.

By contrast, the trajectory for defamation actions has been in the opposite 
direction. Ministry of justice (MoJ) statistics showed thatthe number of 
defamation cases taken to the high court in 2015 fell by 40% over the previous 
year 
<https://inforrm.wordpress.com/2016/06/04/judicial-statistics-2015-issued-defamation-claims-down-by-40-the-second-lowest-number-since-1992/>
.

So privacy is a replacement growth area for libel. The Thomson Reuters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/thomson-reuters> survey noted that privacy 
injunctions have become popular once again after a lull that followed the 
highest level in 2011.

In recent cases, media organisations have paid damages for breaches of privacy 
to actor Sadie Frost, former footballerPaul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne>, the husband of Cheryl 
Fernandez-Versini and the infant son of singer Adele.

Jonathan Cooper, a barrister with Doughty Street Chambers who edits the 
European Human Rights Law Review, said: “The debate over the use of privacy 
injunctions has reignited after a number of years in which their usage had 
tailed off.

“The media has expressed concerns that it is too easy for public figures to 
use this tool to control what was being published about their private lives.”

Aside from celebrity cases, more than a third of privacy claims involve 
information passed to a company, to government or a public body. More than a 
third of cases relate to the government or other public bodies.


People seek to assert a right to control what happens to information they have 
provided under a legal obligation or given voluntarily but for a specific 
purpose.

Cooper said: “As the ways in which we communicate and capture information 
become ever more complex, the bounds of privacy law will be developing.”

The drop in defamation claims is very marked indeed. The MoJ figures showed 
that 135 defamation claims were issued in London during 2015 compared to 227 in 
2014.

That 2015 figure is only slightly lower than that for 2013 but it is, 
nevertheless, the second lowest since 1992, prompting solicitor Mark Stephens 
to describe the fall as “phenomenal.”

Stephens, a dispute-resolution partner at law firm Howard Kennedy, believe the 
reason for the transfer from libel to privacy claims is that “people have 
realised that reputation management is a much more sophisticated dark art than 
lawyers are capable of dealing with.”

It would appear that defamation claims have become less attractive since the 
new defamation act came into force on 1 January 2014. Claimants now have to 
demonstrate that a publication has caused or is likely to cause their 
reputations serious harm.

Companies trading for profit also face the difficult task of showing that a 
publication has caused them serious financial loss.

The rule against prior restraint in defamation cases also means that courts 
are extremely unwilling to issue injunctions to block publication. But it is 
easier to obtain injunctions about information which is claimed to be private.


Stephens argues that the Max Mosley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley> 
privacy action against the News of the World’s publisher, for the falsely 
alleging that he was involved in a Nazi orgy, was something of a turning point. 
He chose to sue for breach of privacy rather than for libel.

“In reputation management a privacy claim is a far more effective claim than 
libel,” said Stephens.

But Hugh Tomlinson QC counselled that we should not “attach too much 
significance to year on year fluctuations” in claims’ figures.

He thought there may even be an “increase in journalistic responsibility” 
following theLeveson report <https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-report>. 
He said: “Gone are the days when an editor would publish a serious libel 
because it ‘sounds right.’”

Sources: PA Media Lawyer <http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=12264517>
 (which acknowledges help from Hardeep Singh)/Inforrm’s Blog 
<https://inforrm.wordpress.com/2016/06/04/judicial-statistics-2015-issued-defamation-claims-down-by-40-the-second-lowest-number-since-1992/>
 