
About 50 protesters threw Parliament House into disarray on Wednesday, forcing 
question time to shut down for more than 20 minutes as security guards 
struggled to remove them.

The protest against the government’s treatment of asylum seekers began in the 
public gallery in the House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/30/malcolm-tunbull-george-brandis-bill-shorten-nick-xenophon-building-watchdog-politics-live>
, with activists standing up and chanting: “Where is your moral compass? ... We 
will not stop until you close all the detention centres!”

The Speaker of the house, Tony Smith, was forced to postpone question time 
until the protesters were removed. Some of the protesters had superglued their 
hands to railings while others had unfurled banners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcb2b7174268daf6e98805326c8c723afc32f40b%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcb2b7174268daf6e98805326c8c723afc32f40b%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Protesters from the Whistleblowers, Activists and Citizens Alliance unfurl 
banners in the public gallery of the House of Representatives on Wednesday. 
Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP 
The group, from the Whistleblowers, Activists and Citizens Alliance, were the 
same group whodisrupted a speech by Malcolm Turnbull in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/17/close-the-bloody-camps-protesters-disrupt-malcolm-turnbull-speech>
.

After the protest, a member of the organisation, Samantha Castro, told 
journalists their motivation was the treatment of asylum seekers.

Malcolm Turnbull smiles on as his Validation Day turns into a hot mess | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/malcolm-turnbull-smiles-on-as-his-validation-day-turns-into-a-hot-mess>
“If the government had listened to the Australian public and our request to 
bring [asylum seekers] here and let them stay, we wouldn’t have to take such 
actions,” she said.

“We’d wish that they would listen to the parliamentary inquiries, that they 
would listen to the Senate, that they would listen to the submissions that had 
been taken to the Senate, but they’re not listening.

“After years and years of inquiries and petitions, nobody’s listening so we 
have to take this type of direct action.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e968a6b2701277c04be33448e0b0910e8ecb96%2F0_49_2172_1303%2F2172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e968a6b2701277c04be33448e0b0910e8ecb96%2F0_49_2172_1303%2F2172.jpg>
 A protester holds up the hand she superglued to the railings in the public 
galleries of the House of Representatives. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the 
Guardian 
The Turnbull government is now calling for a review of the security 
arrangements to Parliament House.


Christopher Pyne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne> 
said he also wants a “thorough investigation” to determine if the protesters 
were signed in by members of parliament. The protesters said they entered as 
members of the public, which doesn’t require a sign-in from someone who works 
in the building.

“This is the most serious intrusion into the Parliament since the riots 
organised by the ACTU in 1996,” Pyne said after question time resumed.

“Mr Speaker, as the Speaker and as the person responsible for the House and 
the chamber, I would request that you conduct a thorough investigation because 
obviously if people are signed in from the public to the building and, in many 
cases to the chamber, they are signed in by a member of Parliament.

“There may well be a trial of where the miscreants who disrupted the 
Parliament came from, and I think it would be important to determine that.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff235b051a5f01532d9ca472d0ae4c9fca1e7c8d3%2F0_172_3319_1992%2F3319.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff235b051a5f01532d9ca472d0ae4c9fca1e7c8d3%2F0_172_3319_1992%2F3319.jpg>
 Security guards escort a protester out of the House of Representatives on 
Wednesday. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, and the 
immigration spokesman, Nick McKim, left the building to meet with protesters in 
the public carpark after the protest was over. “Well done, well done. Good on 
you,” Di Natale said to one protester.

“The Greens wanted to come down and express our solidarity, to say that we 
stand with you, and we think there are many millions of decent Australians who 
share your concerns.”

When asked if the Greens had helped to organise the protest, Di Natale said 
they hadn’t. “No we didn’t play any part in organising it,” he said.

“But we’re so proud to stand with these brave people who have given a voice to 
those thousands of innocent people who have come to this country doing nothing 
other than looking for help and refuge, at a time when we have a government who 
has been prepared to inflict torture and harm on innocent children and their 
families.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd32cbb4210d452609ba9c51d231df7a4e7a685%2F0_118_2172_1303%2F2172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-refugee%20protesters%20disrupt%20parliament%20and%20shut%20down%20question%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafd32cbb4210d452609ba9c51d231df7a4e7a685%2F0_118_2172_1303%2F2172.jpg>
 Greens leader Richard Di Natale hugs a protester. Photograph: Mike Bowers for 
the Guardian 
Di Natale’s office later told Guardian Australia no one from the Greens had 
signed any of the protesters into the building beforehand. Protesters said they 
had all entered the building as members of the public.

The 50 protesters had come to Canberra in the days before, travelling from 
various cities including Melbourne, Sydney and Newcastle.

The activist group has been running a campaign to boycott and blockade Wilson 
Security <http://www.waca.net.au/merchants-of-misery>, the Australian 
corporation that holds security contracts for the detention centres on Manus 
Island and Nauru. They want to stop corporations profiteering from the 
detention of refugees. They also want to close the detention centres.

In 1996, the ACTU organised a barbecue on the lawns of Parliament House which 
resulted in a riot and the invasion of the Parliament. “Those people who were 
in the Parliament would remember it very well. A drunken riot,” Pyne said on 
Wednesday.
 