
Insurance company Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> 
has revealed that one of its employees was paid £8.4m in 2010 – more than any 
boardroom director.

In a disclosure required because of its new listing on the Hong Kong stock 
exchange, the insurer demonstrated that large pay deals are on offer across the 
City, not just in banks. It does not, however, need to identify the recipient 
of the top pay deal.

The insurer's annual report showed that the highest paid boardroom boss was 
Michael McLintock, head of its fund management arm M&G, whose total deal 
reached £5.4m after £3.3m of long-term incentive plans were paid on top of a 
£350,000 salary and £1m cash bonus.

McLintock, one of the most influential fund managers in the City, also 
received £2.3m in cash in 2010, although previous annual reports had disclosed 
this potential reward.

McLintock took home more than the £4.8m received by chief executive Tidjane 
Thiam <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tidjane-thiam>, who was criticised 
for his failed attempt to take over AIA, the Asian arm of US insurance giant 
AIG, last year.

Shareholders in the Pru were keenly watching the terms of the bonus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/20/pru-boss-facing-bonus-revolt> 
that would be handed to Thiam during a year when the insurer incurred £377m of 
costs in the course of the takeover, only for the deal to be pulled.

Thiam's £1.57m bonus was £50,000 lower than the possible maximum he could have 
been awarded of £1.62m – or 180% of his £900,000 salary. The chief executive, 
though, did not take any of the bonus in cash, as he could have done, and 
instead had all the bonus deferred into shares. This total package of £4.8m 
included the release of performance-related share deals from prior years.

The annual report shows that the Pru continued to pay its former chief 
executive, Mark Tucker, who now runs AIA.Tucker left in August 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/aug/13/prudential-interim-dividend-mark-tucker>
, when Thiam was promoted from finance director, but was handed £207,938 in 
January 2010. Deferred payments could pay out in coming years as is the case 
with Nick Prettejohn, who ran the UK arm until he lost out to Thiam for the top 
job. He received £808,000 in cash and also has long-term plans that are yet to 
pay out.

The Pru is also paying Clark Manning who "stepped down" as the head of Jackson 
National Life, the US business, at the end of the year, although he remains 
chairman until the end of April. Manning took home £4m in 2010 and will receive 
salary and benefits until the end of the year as he will remain in an advisory 
role. He is being replaced by Mike Wells, who is on a $1m salary.

McLintock is among the top five highest paid that must be disclosed by the 
Pru. The others do not need to be identified. In addition to the highest 
earner's £8.4m, the Pru paid one employee between £6m and £6.1m, another 
between £5.3m and £5.4m, and yet another £5m to £5.1m.
 