
The management of Prudential received a boost todaywhen the insurer revealed 
soaring profits and managed to cut the bill racked up duringits failed takeover 
bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jun/01/prudential-aig-takeover-timeline>
 for the Asian business of AIG, AIA.

The group also cheered investors with a 5% increase in its dividend to 6.61p a 
share and sought to reassure them that future payouts are safe, despite the 
£377m cost of the Asian adventure (£284m after a tax benefit). This was less 
than the initial estimate of £450m, thanks to lower advisory fees and currency 
fluctuations.

Credit Suisse, HSBC and JPMorgan were the main beneficiaries of £124m paid in 
underwriting and advisory fees.

Prudential's chief executive, Tidjane Thiam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tidjane-thiam>, ruled out another bid for 
AIA and other big takeovers. "We tried, it didn't work out. So we're back on 
the organic growth strategy, which is producing excellent results," he said.

He confirmed that the insurer remained committed to the fast-growing Asian 
market, where the company could face a bigger challenge from AIA under its new 
boss Mark Tucker, the formerPrudential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> chief executive.

While investors clamoured for heads to roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jun/21/prudential-insurance> after 
the AIA takeover collapsed in early June, pressure for the chairman, Harvey 
McGrath, and the CEO to resign is gradually easing.

Paul Mumford of Cavendish Asset Management, a shareholder, said: "I don't 
think it [the pressure] has gone away. It has lessened. If there are to be 
changes, it should be the chairman who goes. They need a stronger chairman on 
the board who makes sure this doesn't happen again."

A City analyst agreed. "There is a possibility that there will be a looking 
around process but I don't think anything's going to happen this year. Tidjane 
is safe, but for the chairman there's a 50-50 chance he will go."

Thiam said shareholder pressure for his resignation and that of McGrath in the 
wake of the botched deal had largely subsided.

"There's always a range of views, it's a diverse community. But overall I 
believe we have the support of the body of our shareholders and we can only 
operate on that basis," he said.

Prudential was forced to abandon its $35.5bn (£26.7bn) bid for AIA after 
shareholders balked at the price tag and AIGrejected its attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jun/01/prudential-deal-for-aia-under-threat>
 to negotiate a lower price.

In its first set of results since the collapse of the AIA deal, Prudential 
revealed a 41% rise in half-year operating profits to £968m under IFRS 
accounting rules, including £123m of hedging gains. This beat City forecasts of 
£724m. Pretax profit was £593m, compared with a loss of £76m a year ago.

"These results are strong in terms of underlying progress. There are no 
announcements on any management changes, and this is likely to disappoint 
some," said Redburn Partners analyst Lance Burbidge.

Prudential's performance was driven by its Asian and US operations, where new 
business sales jumped by 36% and 43% respectively, outstripping a 2% increase 
in the UK.

"All of our businesses are firing on all cylinders," said the group's finance 
chief, Nic Nicandrou.

Following the collapse of the AIA takeover, Prudential is once again facing 
calls for a break-up of the business along geographic lines in the UK, Asia and 
the US.

Nicandrou dismissed suggestions of a three-way split, saying: "What these 
results demonstrate is that the current structure and strategy are delivering 
excellent value. All components of the group play an important part in that."
 