
A new form of spatial control order is being introduced throughout England and 
Wales that severely limits citizens’ freedoms within the city.

Public Space Protection Orders, or PSPOs, came into existence last year under 
theAnti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/12/contents/enacted>. Similar to the 
much-deridedanti-social behaviour orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asbos> (asbos), PSPOs allow for broad 
powers to criminalise behaviour that is not normally criminal. But where asbos 
were directed at individuals, PSPOs are geographically defined, making 
predefined activities within a mapped area prosecutable.

Following on from my recent piece about growing concern over privately owned 
public spaces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/04/pops-privately-owned-public-space-cities-direct-action>
 (Pops) in towns and cities, this is an important and related issue because 
PSPOs are being applied primarily to public spaces – and because, asJosie 
Appleton of the Manifesto Club writes 
<http://www.manifestoclub.com/files/Manifesto%20Club%20briefing%20on%20Public%20Spaces%20Protection%20Order%20powers.pdf>
, the 2014 guidance “places minimal restrictions on the uses of PSPOs, leaving 
it open for these powers to be targeted against public activities that are 
merely considered unusual or unpopular, or with which the council disagrees”.

This year has already seen one PSPO battle in Hackney, where the council 
attempted to make rough sleeping a criminal offence within a designated area. 
Under pressure from local groups, and served with an 80,000-signature petition, 
the council withdrew the proposal in June. However, the Manifesto Cluboutlines 
dozens of other PSPOs <http://www.manifestoclub.com/youthPSPObriefing> that 
have gone into effect or are currently undergoing consultation.

Dover District Council created a PSPO in July requiring that dogs be kept on 
leads 
<http://www.dover.gov.uk/Environment/Environmental-Crime/Public-Spaces-Protection-Order/Public-Spaces-Protection-Order.aspx>
 under threat of criminal prosecution. In Kensington and Chelsea, consultation 
is ongoing on an order that would makedriving loud cars an offence 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/shopping-and-consumer-news/11762923/Kensington-and-Chelsea-cracks-down-boy-racers-from-Gulf-States-and-their-super-cars.html>
, targeted at rich foreigners cruising the area in Maseratis and Lamborghinis. 
In Oxford, the council passed a PSPO that prohibits people under the age of 21 
fromentering a specific tower block, Foresters Tower 
<http://www.oxford.gov.uk/Library/Documents/Environmental%20Development/PSPO%20-%20Foresters%20Tower.pdf>
. Bassetlaw District Council hascreated a PSPO 
<https://www.bassetlaw.gov.uk/news-and-events/news-archive/april-2015/council-uses-new-legislation-to-tackle-asb-in-worksop.aspx>
 that prohibits “under 16 year olds … gathering in groups of three or more”. 
Although PSPOs are often broad in spatial scope, they can be targeted directly 
at particular groups or activities.

It’s all part of the process of cleaning up the town centre; it’s all part of 
the regeneration of Croydon
Richard Sunderland  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441625866054%2Fa11ec6b5-dbba-4bca-9518-f9f6aade7cfb-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441625866054%2Fa11ec6b5-dbba-4bca-9518-f9f6aade7cfb-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Westfield and Hammerson retail development in Croydon. Photograph: PR image
I recently visited Croydon, where the council is considering an extensive 
PSPO. Peeking over the edge of the overpass at George Street and Wellesley Road 
from a traffic island, I asked Peter Underwood, a Croydon resident standing for 
the Green party in next year’s London Assembly elections, if we could walk the 
boundary of the proposed protection order. Looking east toward numberNo1 Croydon
 <http://www.no1croydon.co.uk/>, locally known as the 50p building, and then 
circling around, he looked back at me and said “how much time did you say you 
have?”

Ambling to a nearby wayfinding kiosk on the pavement, Underwood drew a line 
with his finger over the streets of the map, showing me that the proposed area 
will cover something like 4km of space in central Croydon – including not just 
the epicentre of theWestfield and Hammerson redevelopment 
<http://www.croydonguardian.co.uk/news/11879318.Westfield_and_Hammerson_buy_out_main_objector_to___1bn_Croydon_redevelopment_plan/?ref=mr>
 that will subsume the existing Whitgift and Centrale shopping centres in 2019, 
but also the Queen’s Gardens, Duppas Hill Park, Wandle Park, Park Hill, a 
swathe of residential areas ... and (at this point he tapped the map 
significantly) the Croydon council building. Underwood explained that, under 
the proposed PSPO, this could mean local people’s ability to protest outside 
the council offices is curtailed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441636031539%2Fff3afe35-15e1-4f5d-90bc-31451cd2cdf4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441636031539%2Fff3afe35-15e1-4f5d-90bc-31451cd2cdf4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Croydon town hall will be within the PSPO. Photograph: Bradley Garrett 
PSPOs are often aimed at the poor and the vulnerable, which is why community 
groups in Hackney fought that order with such vigilance. In Croydon, by 
contrast, a public engagement exercise, completed on 19 August, appears to have 
ended without much ado. In fact, the only reason I became aware of it was 
becauseRoland Karthaus 
<http://www.uel.ac.uk/research/profiles/ace/rolandkarthaus/>, an architect who 
teaches at the University of East London (UEL), had been working withPeter 
Bradley <http://www.speakerscornertrust.org/about-us/who-we-are/director/> from 
the Speakers’ Corner Trust to explore the possibility of creating anew 
speakers’ corner 
<http://www.speakerscornertrust.org/speakers-corner-projects/uk-projects/croydon/>
 as part of the Croydon redevelopment.

Bradley told me the council had initially been enthusiastic and supportive 
about the idea, and also generally about retaining public space on North End, 
Croydon’s high street. However, after the council began negotiations with the 
Westfield and Hammerson redevelopment team, it seemed to become more anxious 
about both.

Karthaus explained that “the simple principle of a speakers’ corner is that a 
member of the public may take up the opportunity to do or say whatever they 
wish, offensive or otherwise, providing it is within the law”. This may 
conflict with Croydon’s proposed PSPO, which could allow for criminalisation of 
public speech that could be considered “anti-social” or a “nuisance”. But Helen 
Parrott from Croydon Council assured me the local authority remains “supportive 
of Speakers’ Corner” and is “currently in discussion with the trust regarding 
its proposals for the borough”.

Given the new development, I wondered whether the proposed protection order 
was paving the way for North End to become privatised. Richard Sunderland from 
Westfield and Hammerson assured me that “North End will ultimately remain under 
the council’s control and management”. The council also verified this. I then 
asked Sunderland about the relationship between the redevelopment and the PSPO 
and he told me: “It’s all part of the process of cleaning up the town centre; 
it’s all part of the regeneration of Croydon.”

PSPOs represent a serious ramping up of the control of public space
Anna Minton  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441626025691%2Fa0874c17-af1c-4f21-baec-886c1c40b840-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PSPOs%3A%20the%20new%20control%20orders%20threatening%20our%20public%20spaces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fpspos-new-control-orders-public-spaces-asbos-freedoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F7%2F1441626025691%2Fa0874c17-af1c-4f21-baec-886c1c40b840-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Speakers’ Corner is an area where public speaking is allowed, and any subject 
is allowed. Photograph: Alamy 
Underwood, though, has long suspected the redevelopment triggered the proposed 
protection order. “Since they announced the development plans,” he said, 
pointing to a clutch of cranes and developer flags flapping over colourful 
construction hoardings, “we’ve been flooded with proposals – for the PSPO, for 
rerouting the tram system, for an additional flyover. The whole centre of 
Croydon will be ripped up and rebuilt.”

Underwood has attempted to rally public opposition to the protection order 
<http://insidecroydon.com/2015/08/04/social-cleansing-of-town-centre-underway-with-council-survey/>
, and observed that “the public engagement exercise did not ask residents 
whether they thought the PSPO was appropriate or necessary, but rather asked 
them what sorts of behaviours should be included”.

The broad implications of PSPOs for public space are concerning. As Janet 
Davis of the Ramblers writes 
<http://www.manifestoclub.com/files/Manifesto%20Club%20briefing%20on%20Public%20Spaces%20Protection%20Order%20powers.pdf>
, “we fear that PSPOs make it all too easy for local authorities to restrict 
access to public spaces”.Anna Minton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anna-minton>, author of Ground Control: 
Fear and Happiness in the Twenty-First Century City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/05/ground-control-anna-minton-review>
, takes it a step further and suggested to me that “PSPOs represent a serious 
ramping up of the control of public space. The privatisation of public space 
brings with it a host of undemocratic controls on access and behaviour – but 
PSPOs are at least as concerning, as they are a legislative means of 
restricting the right to behave freely under the law within city space, 
regardless of whether it’s public or private. I wonder if this legislative 
framework is the next step on from Pops.”

As was made clear in Hackney, there has been public apprehension about and 
opposition to these protection orders, which are beginning to resemble spatial 
asbos, but that is not slowing their deployment.

Standing on Croydon’s North End between a female street preacher with a 
portable PA system and a guy carving a dog sculpture out of beach sand on a 
tarp – both activities that could in theory be criminalised under the proposed 
PSPO – I asked Underwood why there had not been much of a pushback from Croydon 
residents about the PSPO. “It’s a fog sweeping in rather than a wall being 
built right in front of you,” he said, “so it’s hard to know at what point to 
kick off. For now, all we can do is keep trying to raise awareness.”

The privatisation of cities' public spaces is escalating. It is time to take a 
stand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/04/pops-privately-owned-public-space-cities-direct-action>
Greater public awareness on PSPOs is needed – in part because they effectively 
outsource policing to private security, allowing “an authorised person” to 
issue fines and initiate prosecution. Furthermore, fines can be given out where 
there may have been a contravention, not where one has definitely taken place; 
so the process is a bit like a forced plea bargain – if a private security 
guard, potentially employed by a property developer, thinks you may have 
violated the PSPO, you must pay the fine or face prosecution.

Croydon Council plans to run a formal consultation on its PSPO in the coming 
months. In the meantime, Bradley and Karthaus are continuing their discussion 
with the council about having a speakers’ corner as part of the North End 
redevelopment. As Bradley explained: “Places where people gather have never 
just been about the exchange of goods and services; they have also been places 
where beliefs and opinions are traded.”

If, following the German sociologist Jürgen Habermas, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/j-rgen-habermas> the public sphere is 
where individuals can come together to freely discuss and identify societal 
problems, and thus influence political action, then introduction of spatial 
protection orders – like the construction of privately owned public spaces – is 
a threat to the public sphere wherever they curtail our ability to do so.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 