
I wonder when Ukip’s first legal challenge to the Pub Landlord standing 
against Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2015/jan/14/al-murray-the-pub-landlord-challenge-nigel-farage-general-election-video>
 in South Thanet will come? After all, the anti-establishment party’s reflexive 
rush to hardline establishment tactics when mocked is too little celebrated.

Across the country, graffiti on Ukip campaign boards 
<http://www.sloughobserver.co.uk/news/roundup/articles/2014/05/20/100422-police-launch-investigation-after-six-ukip-campaign-boards-are-vandalised/>
 is repeatedly made a police matter. In Cambridge, at a Ukip councillor’s 
behest,cops visited a blogger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/12/police-ask-blogger-remove-legitimate-tweet-ukip>
 who merely tweeted a series of “fact-checks” of Ukip policy, despite the force 
admitting that “there was nothing we could actually identify that required 
police intervention”. And the party’s south-east chair demanded that the police
arrest protesters who call Ukip members “fascists” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/ukip-calls-for-police-to-arrest-protesters-who-call-us-fascists-ahead-of-showdown-with-antifascist-groups-in-brighton-9362483.html>
.

So, is the logo 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Fukp+logo&biw=1918&bih=1014&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=TTC5VJLOKYrX7Qb25oGoCQ&ved=0CCAQsAQ#imgdii=_&imgrc=QZ_f6AX-49B5WM%253A%3BtGntevybbLnIMM%3Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fpbs.twimg.com%252Fprofile_images%252F555051137280131073%252FcZ8-neN7.jpeg%3Bhttps%253A%252F%252Ftwitter.com%252Ffukpnews%3B1000%3B1000>
 of the Pub Landlord’s Fukp – Free United Kingdom party – unacceptably close to 
that ofUkip’s 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=ukip+logo&biw=1918&bih=1014&tbm=isch&imgil=ORPLI7QLj7LIiM%253A%253BQRPY4lvMNoH1vM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fen.wikipedia.org%25252Fwiki%25252FUK_Independence_Party&source=iu&pf=m&fir=ORPLI7QLj7LIiM%253A%252CQRPY4lvMNoH1vM%252C_&usg=__5n9Ghme9b2AA4c1nL_9iH_xMTYA%3D&ved=0CDgQyjc&ei=jjC5VKDsOJSw7AbBy4Aw#imgdii=_&imgrc=ORPLI7QLj7LIiM%253A%3BQRPY4lvMNoH1vM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fupload.wikimedia.org%252Fwikipedia%252Fen%252Fd%252Fd2%252FUKIP_logo.png%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fen.wikipedia.org%252Fwiki%252FUK_Independence_Party%3B325%3B325>
? Is there some arcane law preventing people standing under an assumed 
identity? HasNigel not technically copyrighted pint-holding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/14/nigel-farage-pub-landlord-al-murray>
? Presumably one of Ukip’s fearless defenders of our freedoms is already on the 
case.

Quite how long Farage will manage to laugh sportingly along at a much funnier 
caricature of himself is unclear. But the decision by the Pub Landlord’s 
creator,Al Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/al-murray>, to stand 
against him is as sublimely promising of hilarity as it is bravely committed. I 
can’t find anything not to love about it.

Politics can get ugly for showbiz people, to pervert the old adage, and Murray 
will need a lot of stamina (comic and otherwise), depending on how seriously he 
means to apply himself to the task. But he may just have alighted on a humane 
way to out-Ukip Ukip, at least for those wavering voters who might be laughed 
away from their flirtations with the party. What perfection his promise to 
brick up the Channel tunnel sounds – “probably have to get some Poles in to do 
it” – when compared with nasty (and, according to the polls, ineffective) 
dog-whistling by either Labour or the Tories.

It’s a brilliantly bonkers form of satire, really, and though it would be a 
bit of a stretch to suggest that this is the destination to which politics 
should be heading – for grotesquely exaggerated versions of particular 
politicians to stand against those politicians – there is no doubt that in 
skilled hands, comedy can refresh the parts other smears cannot reach. Cometh 
the hour, cometh the landlord.

I met Farage for a pint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jul/20/nigel-farage-marina-hyde-pint>
 and newspaper feature 18 months ago, during the course of which the Ukip 
leader giggled that Ed Miliband would probably drink “a fruit crush”. That may 
well have been his slightly fumbling way of essaying the Pub Landlord’s famous 
insistence on “a fruit-based drink for the lady”. Either way, Nigel is going to 
have to sharpen up his act in a manner he can’t possibly have predicted, with 
his much praised gift for self-mockery finally meeting a challenge worthy of 
its notices.

That such a man has been able to make serious waves says everything about the 
smallness of our politics as opposed to the stature of Farage. A former banker, 
he is one of this septic isle’s two leading faux rebels – the other one being 
Jeremy Clarkson, the anti-establishment prime ministerial tennis partner, 
Murdoch columnist and key member of the soi disantChipping Norton set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jan/08/chipping-norton-set-disbanded-alex-james-shatter-illusion-david-cameron-jeremy-clarkson>
, whose sole claim to rebellion is a biannual instance of casual racism.

Farage’s outsider pose is similarly comical. Someone who once had a spell of 
dealings with Madonna described her to me as a person who talks about sex a 
lot, but in the manner of a grown woman who still thinks sex is rude.

As time wears on, I can’t help feeling there is something of this to Farage, 
who still basically regards having a pint as looking cool. Which it is, when 
you’re 14 and can find somewhere to serve you, but should have lost at least a 
smidge of its self-admiring edge by the time you’re 50. The style of 
pint-toting pictures beloved of Farage really belongs on the social media 
accounts of the under-16s, above captions like “TRASHED DOT COM FORWARD SLASH 
WASTED!!!!! #bosh #ledge #howweroll”.

Do we get the rebels we deserve? I suppose so. In his splendid book The 
English Rebel, David Horspool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/22/the-english-rebel-david-horspool>
 points out how often rebels have come as much from within the establishment as 
the mob of peasants far below. Furthermore, he observes how often English 
rebels have tended to look nostalgically back, as opposed to radically forward. 
Many rebels resisted the Norman invasion for a long time, longing for 1065 and 
all that. “We seek no change,”declared one Chartist 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=KEs7FIEkqgIC&pg=PA289&lpg=PA289&dq=chartist+We+say+give+us+the+good+old+laws+of+England+unchanged&source=bl&ots=SKCnHitE0_&sig=YnFXlS-4aZYA7uXJnryTVdXsO1w&hl=en&sa=X&ei=ADS5VJbTFsSQ7Ab4jIDQBw&ved=0CCYQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=chartist%20We%20say%20give%20us%20the%20good%20old%20laws%20of%20England%20unchanged&f=false>
. “We say give us the good old laws of England unchanged.”

This yesteryear hankering is the nicer side of what Ukip does, and I was 
struck during my pint with Nige by how he was nostalgic even for the earlier 
days of Ukip. He got positively misty-eyed about high jinks at bygone party 
conferences, back when nobody paid attention to what they were up to – so you 
can only imagine how he’d get about his vision of Thanet circa 1965.

And so to Thanet. Quite what this poor district has done in a past life is 
unclear, but many of its residents must have been dreading the prospect of the 
next few months, in which politics will be done to them without mercy or 
respite. Even last October, a few months after Farage had confirmed he would 
stand, a portrait of Thanet in the London Review of Books found Ramsgate to be
“infested with journalists” 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n19/james-meek/in-farageland>, which is the absolute 
worst type of infestation (infestations of MPs being largely confined to a 
couple of central London buildings for most of the year).

Consequently, the author of the LRB piece found himself interviewing an 
18-year-old Ukip activist in a Caffè Nero beneath the nose of the producer of
Benefits Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/22/benefits-street-tv-programme-divided-the-nation>
 (there to make a film about Thanet). One can only imagine the London-sent 
horrors to be visited upon the constituency’s infrastructure once the election 
gets under way (and I speak as one of the horrors, obviously).

One of my fantasies is that the good burghers of Thanet will rightly judge 
that the media invasion is far more wantonly repulsive than anything eastern 
Europe can throw at them, and decline to send Mr Farage to Westminster.

With Ladbrokes offering odds of 66-1 on the Pub Landlord 
<http://www.bettingpro.com/category/political-betting/the-pub-landlord-odds-to-win-south-thanet-2015011400120/>
 winning the seat, it looks deeply unlikely that the voters will send him 
instead – but then, you’d hazard that he might anyway withdraw from the ballot 
on the eve of the election. The real fantasy scenario, in which he is actually 
elected, is obviously too horrible a fate to wish upon a man who is already 
performing a valuable public service.
 