
Public transport fares will be cut and the number of zones slashed from next 
year in an overhaul of south-east Queensland’s fare system.

Children under 15 will also get to travel free on weekends, while off-peak 
discounts will be extended.

The state government announced the changes in its “Fairer Fares” package on 
Sunday after an independent review into TransLink’s prices.

The number of zones will be slashed from 23 to eight and the cost of 
travelling in a single zone in peak time will drop to $3.20.

Public transport, private owners – the unexamined trajectory of privatisation 
| Mehreen Faruqi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/24/public-transport-private-owners-the-unexamined-trajectory-of-privatisation>
“In fact, 93% of public transport users across the south-east Queensland 
transport network will receive cheaper fares under my government,” said the 
premier,Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>.

The transport minister, Stirling Hinchliffe, said the remaining 7% were either 
those exploiting the “nine and free” scheme or travellers whose costs would 
remain the same.

The controversial system in which commuters travelled for free after their 
ninth trip will be replaced with a scheme where travel is half-price after 
eight trips.

Off-peak discounts will also be extended, with the morning peak period not 
starting until after 6am and the off-peak 20% discount to apply to all travel 
between 7pm and 6am, and 8.30am and 3.30pm.

Malcolm Turnbull backs public transport with $95m for Gold Coast light rail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/11/gold-coast-light-rail-to-get-95m-in-federal-funding>
Jobseekers and asylum seekers will also get concession fares from early next 
year, while seniors will retain their discounts.

Hinchliffe said the overhaul would cost the government $210m in forgone 
revenue, with savings to be found from the state’s transport department. But he 
said the figure was based on a conservative patronage increase of 0.175%.

“I think we will see a significantly better uptake of patronage as a result of 
these fairer fares,” he said.

Public transport fares in south-east Queensland will be frozen for the 
remainder of this year, while fares in regionalQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> will be frozen for the 
next 18 months.

 