
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> will today claim public 
support for a radical plan from Lord Darzi, the health minister, to amalgamate 
GP surgeries into "polyclinics", each offering a range of services to about 
50,000 patients.

The proposal - regarded by ministers as potentially the most radical reform of 
health services since 1948 - was designed to halve the number of patients 
needing hospital care by providing most routine treatment and diagnostic tests 
in super-surgeries run by teams of about 20 GPs.

Darzi, a leading cancer surgeon, developed the plan for the London strategic 
health authority last year before Gordon Brown asked him to head a 
reorganisation of the NHS throughout England. He is expected to tell Brown next 
month that the polyclinic model is needed in other conurbations across England, 
but may not be suitable everywhere.

Results of a statutory consultation on the London plan, seen by the Guardian, 
showed 51% of people and organisations were in favour of amalgamating almost 
all GP practices into 150 polyclinics, with 29% against and 20% undecided. 
Commissioners from 31 primary care trusts are expected to give the go-ahead 
next month for pilot schemes costing about Â£20m apiece. They would be built 
next year and start treating patients in 2010.

London mayor Boris Johnson criticised the proposal during his election 
campaign. He said it "threatens the closure or downgrading of existing 
services, breaking the Londoner's link with the family doctor". But the mayor 
does not control the NHS in London and his statutory responsibilities for 
promoting public health do not appear to give him power to veto the scheme.

NHS chiefs think polyclinics would benefit patients by providing most routine 
medical services locally. GPs would carry out more minor surgery and the 
clinics would be equipped to carry out a range of diagnostic tests. Roving 
hospital consultants would run outpatient clinics closer to people's homes. The 
polyclinics would also have longer opening hours.

Three-quarters of those responding to the London consultation wanted GP 
surgeries to be open for appointments in the evenings and at weekends.

David Sissling, director of the London NHS reform programme, said: "We are 
delighted with the outcomes of the consultation."

A spokesman for the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said it was pleased with the 
consultation but added: "What suits London will not necessarily be the best 
solution elsewhere. We have repeatedly made clear that how health services are 
organised locally are for the local primary care trusts to decide - in 
consultation with their populations and health professionals."
 