
ITV's chief executive has said the broadcaster is big enough to hold its own 
against the proposedPublicis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/publicis> 
Omnicom Group, which will control almost a third of the £3.6bn spent on TV ads 
in the UK a year.

Adam Crozier <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-crozier> said on Tuesday 
that ITV, the UK's biggest advertiser-funded broadcaster with 46% of the 
market, was quite capable of looking after itself.

WPP's Group M controls about 32% of all UK TV ad spend. The Publicis-Omnicom 
merger will create a second UK media buying powerhouse, with about 30% of the 
market.

"[My view] of the impact of the new entrant is that it is probably relatively 
neutral," Crozier said. "Media buying is pretty consolidated. [POG] together 
will be about 30%, less than Group M. We are perfectly capable given our scale 
of handling ourselves in the market."

Crozier said that a key argument given as a rationale for the POG merger, 
namely that two of the biggest ad companies in the world needed to merge to 
survive the inexorable rise of digital players such as Google, would add weight 
to ITV's argument that the mechanism controlling advertising airtime 
negotiations for its flagship channel should be scrapped.

Contract Rights Renewal was introduced a decade ago when Carlton and Granada 
merged a decade ago to createITV plc <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV>, a 
mechanism designed to stop the company being able to force unfair deals through 
because of its size and dominance of the UK TV ad market.

Various ITV chief executives have argued unsuccessfully since then that in the 
digital age CRR is outmoded and unnecessary.

"[The merger] is certainly not unhelpful in that argument [that CRR should 
go]," Crozier said. "This is further consolidation [in TV buying] and one 
reason they are doing it is because of the battle with Facebook and Google. We 
said a remarkably similar thing about ITV some time ago."

He said that he didn't expect any immediate movement in removing CRR, but 
hoped the Publicis-Omnicom merger would help pave the way.

A senior executive at another broadcaster said that POG creating another 
"gorilla" in the media buying market would help to curtail the power of Group M.

Currently the next biggest player in the UK TV buying market has well under 
20% share of ad spend.

"This is trying to address the problem of Group M's dominance – having two 
'Group Ms' takes away Sorrell's trump card, suddenly the playing field is 
levelled a bit," said the source. "It is creating more competition."

However, a former senior newspaper industry executive said that POG could only 
be bad for the sector because the new business partners' public statements 
about needing to up their game in digital ad trading means that "traditional" 
media will be squeezed as a result.

"People are naive if they believe that they will be able to use POG as some 
sort of battering ram against [WPP chief executive Sir Martin] Sorrell," he 
said. "The merger of 1+1 will not be 2, they will want tougher deals, it will 
be 1.5 and that will mean TV and newspapers will be squeezed to create client 
value in digital."

This insider added that the size of the UK TV and print markets, worth £3.6bn 
and £1.8bn annually respectively, meant that they would be the focus of tougher 
deals.

"I can't believe this bodes well for traditional media owners," he said. "The 
only way of funding what POG wants to do is to put more pressure where they 
have more control. TV and print is where media agencies make margin, are 
remunerated the most, so that is where they will look to drive tougher deals."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 