
The number of pupils taking academic subjects such as English and physics took 
a surprising fall this year, as the latest A-level exam results revealed a 
continuing decline in the proportion of entries awarded the highest grades.

While the overall A-level results for England, Wales and Northern Ireland were 
stable, the share of entries winning A* and A grades subsided for the fifth 
consecutive exam season. Some 25.8% were awarded As and above, compared with 
27% in 2010, the first year that the highest A* grade was introduced.

But the headline pass rate among all grades from A* to G remained unchanged at 
98.1%, thanks to government policy that fixes pass rates to previous results 
achieved by the same year group.

Northern Ireland and the south-east of England were the standout areas, with 
29% of entries gaining top grades, while London entrants gained 27.4%. The 
lowest performances came in the north-east of England, despite improved 
results, whileWales endured its weakest results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/wales-a-level-results-raise-concerns-pupils-falling-behind-rest-of-uk>
 since 2002.

Among state schools that were celebrating success was Cardinal Newman college 
<http://www.cardinalnewman.ac.uk/>, a Catholic sixth-form college in Lancashire 
with eight pupils accepted to Cambridge. The pupils had taken part in the 
university’s outreach programme targeting high-achieving state school students.

The results achieved by the college’s sixth formers included four A*s and an A 
for Sameeullah Shahabi, who will now go on to study medicine.

“The staff and students at Cardinal Newman never fail to impress me with their 
hard work and it has certainly paid off in spades this year,” said Nick 
Burnham, the college’s principal.

Traditional exam hothouses continued to excel: close to 56% of entries at 
Westminster school 
<https://www.westminster.org.uk/news/westminster-remove-pupils-achieve-best-ever-level-pre-u-results>
 in London gained A*s, the best result in the school’s history.


But the stable results masked a small but surprising shift away from the types 
of academic subjects favoured by universities – the so-called “facilitating 
subjects”, including English – reversing a trend of recent years.

What A-level results day tells us about British students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/a-level-results-british-students-grades>
Arts subjects such as drama and music tumbled in terms of entries, and English 
was down 5%. But it was the steep decline in entries for French, down by 6.5% 
on the year, as well as German and Spanish, that set off alarm bells over the 
poor state of language teaching and take-up in Britain’s schools.

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
called for a national strategy to address the decline, while a spokesperson for 
the Russell Group universities warned: “If the UK is to engage fully with the 
wider world in business, diplomacy and academia we need more young people 
studying languages.”

Vicky Gough, schools adviser at the British Council, welcomed the small 
increase in numbers studying the likes of Japanese and Arabic, but added: “It 
is worrying that the more traditional languages have suffered a downturn.

“The reality is that language-learning matters to the UK now more than ever. 
Not only do language skills boost job prospects but as one of the first 
opportunities that our young people have to connect with another culture, they 
are vital for the country’s place in the world too.”

On a more positive note, the percentage of students getting A*s in modern 
foreign languages has gone up, after an investigation into why languages appear 
to attract harsher marking than other subjects.

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> minister Nick Gibb 
said he expected the uptake of languages to increase. “There has been a slight 
decline in modern foreign languages but the introduction of the EBacc has 
arrested the historic fall of foreign languages at GCSE and we expect this will 
grow the pool of young people who are equipped to go on to study languages at 
A-level.”

Among science and technology subjects, the Institution of Engineering and 
Technology flagged up falls in the number of students taking the engineering 
gateway subjects – maths, physics and design and technology (DT) – as harming 
economic growth if the UK did not produce more engineers.

“If we don’t reverse this trend, thousands of young people are effectively 
closing the door on an exciting, creative career as engineers. We are also at 
risk of stifling economic growth if we do not produce the future engineers we 
so critically need,” said Prof Will Stewart of the IET.

The Institute of Physics (IoP) and the Wellcome Trust both expressed worries 
about the uptake of physics. Charles Tracy, head of education at the IoP, noted 
that just 35,000 students now took A-level physics.

“The continued decline in physics entries in raw numbers and as a percentage 
of all entries is worrying,” said Prof Sir John Holman, education adviser at 
the Wellcome Trust.

“We need to better understand the factors that are affecting both A-level 
choices and the attainment of the pupils taking science courses, because the 
country cannot afford a decline in the science base at this critical time for 
the economy.”

The number of entries for all A-level exams fell by 1.7%, but that was despite 
a 3% fall in the number of 18-year-olds in the school-age population – meaning 
that fewer pupils took moreA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>.
 