
Apart from his choice of footwear, the Puss of Puss in Boots 3D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144626/puss-in-boots> seems to have no 
connection with hisprecursor of fairytale 
<http://www.its-behind-you.com/storypussinboots.html>. Yet though the two 
felines' deeds may differ, their stories share one feature: both narratives 
seek to endowhumanity's favourite pet 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=the-taming-of-the-cat> with 
mythic status. This is a mission of long standing.

The ancient Egyptians held cats to be sacred. Bast 
<http://www.touregypt.net/godsofegypt/bast.htm>, a goddess with the head of a 
cat, was entrusted with the protection of lower Egypt and provided with one of 
the country's most splendid temples. Several ancient religions exalted cats as 
all-knowing guides for humans. TheNorse god Freyja 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=Freyja+cat&hl=en&safe=off&sa=X&rlz=1G1TSEH_ENUK358&biw=941&bih=625&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=CBlXB6ISEWDtbM:&imgrefurl=http://www.odinistpressservice.com/2011/08/06/freyja%25E2%2580%2599s-cats-perspectives-on-recent-viking-age-finds-in-thegjandadalur-north-iceland/&docid=4AnvCvh6d_CBiM&imgurl=http://www.odinistpressservice.com/wordpress/wp-content/freyja_030.gif&w=275&h=229&ei=bTrdTrytIInBswaf_thN&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=204&vpy=192&dur=4321&hovh=183&hovw=220&tx=129&ty=95&sig=117862180997899118416&page=1&tbnh=118&tbnw=142&start=0&ndsp=18&ved=1t:429,r:1,s:0>
 even chose them to draw her chariot. In Malaysia, people believedcats would 
guide their souls <http://pio.tripod.com/magicpaw/catmyths.html#Ngariman> to 
paradise.

The fairytale that first brought us Puss in Boots also presented its hero as a 
benefactor of mankind.In the definitive version 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29021/29021-h/29021-h.htm#The_Master_Cat_or_Puss_in_Boots>
, written by retired civil servant Charles Perrault in 1695, Puss secures 
wealth, power and the hand of a princess for his low-born master. His 
DreamWorks counterpart saves a whole city from being devastated by a monstrous 
goose.

Unfortunately, the beast currently ripping your sofa to shreds is unlikely to 
harbour comparable ambitions. If the dog is a man's best friend â€“ 
stout-hearted, obedient and faithful, then the cat is something else.

If he's leaving your soft furnishings alone just now, maybe it's because he's 
depositing something unwelcome on your pillow, orspraying 
<http://www.purrfectcatbehavior.com/> in some corner that you'll never be able 
to reach. Alternatively, she may be out demolishing your neighbour's garden or 
exterminating the local wildlife. Asurvey by the Mammal Society 
<http://www.mammal.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=256:domestic-cat-predation-on-wildlife&catid=51:survey-reports&Itemid=289>
 found the nation's cats accounting for around 57m mammals, 27m birds and 5m 
reptiles and amphibians over a mere five-month period. And unlike other 
predators,cats enjoy torturing their victims 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gLjpO0Ilors> before they finally dispatch them.

You can't blame them for their halitosis, caterwauling or propensity to vomit 
on the carpet. Doubtless theydon't mean to transmit toxoplasmosis 
<http://www.clubpet.com/what_is_toxoplasmosis.htm> to pregnant women. Yet they 
do often give the impression that they're going out of their way to mistreat 
their human hosts.

Your cat may not intend to knock your favourite chinaware to the floor when 
she jumps up onto the mantelpiece. Yet if she notices that this grabs your 
attention,she may delight in repeating the trick 
<http://animals.howstuffworks.com/pets/how-to-solve-cat-behavior-problems5.htm>
. If you want to play and she doesn't, you can forget it. Your role is to
minister to her requirements <http://www.arcatapet.com/item.cfm?cat=11865>, and 
she can't be bothered to pretend otherwise. Should you actually need her 
cooperation,you're out of luck 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/eduardoleon/why-cats-suck-when-you-need-them-most-ga9>.

Nonetheless, people have been inviting cats into their lives for more than 
9,000 years 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2004/04/0408_040408_oldestpetcat.html>
. In Britain today,over 10m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/feb/06/cat-and-dog-population-uk> of 
the things infest about five million homes. Unlike other domesticated animals, 
they didn't inveigle themselves into our households by being useful. Why then 
do so many people put up with them?

Of British cat owners asked their reasons in 2008, 58% 
<http://www.pfma.org.uk/pet-population-2011/> cited "companionship" or "love". 
Presumably they must have meant their love for their pet, rather than its for 
them, given the typical feline disposition. Cats do indeed seem able to inspire 
almost limitless devotion, however unrequited this may be.Owners have been known
 <http://www.fabcats.org/behaviour/overdependent/humancatbond.html> to put out 
seven different bowls of food each day to give Kitty a bit of choice, to get up 
at 3am to cook fish because that's when Kitty wants it, or to leave the heating 
on all night in case Kitty gets cold even though this makes them too hot to 
sleep themselves.

Still, in spite of having to do so much in return for so little, these 
infatuates convince themselves that the relationship is working.A Swiss study 
<http://en.scientificcommons.org/20081280> in 2003 found that cats are as good 
as human partners at cheering up the morose. As Kipling noted,the cat walks by 
himself <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9IbTHL-AXH8>; yet he holds humanity in 
his thrall. How does he do it?

The answer may be presumed to lie in the bottomless cunning of felis catus 
<http://www.sms.si.edu/irlspec/felis_catus.htm>. No other creature is so 
manipulative. A cat can cajole his owner into picking up a fallen toy simply by 
staring at it and tossing glances in her direction. Yet clever though he is, he
isn't easy to train 
<http://www.helium.com/items/118153-why-cats-are-difficult-to-train>: you see, 
there's nothing in it for him.

A University of Sussex study found that to impose their will on their owners, 
cats deploy a particular kind of purr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jul/13/cats-purr-food-research>. It's 
different from the regular version, and incorporates a note with the same 
frequency as a baby's cry. The resulting sound is very hard for human beings to 
ignore.

Perrault's fairytale acknowledged its hero's guile, even as it sought to 
applaud him. Though Puss advances his master's interests, he does this through 
trickery and deceit. In the end, his apparent altruism turns out to be a ruse 
to secure a life of leisure for himself.

DreamWorks, on the other hand, gives us the cat of our delusions. The 3D Puss 
is surrounded by cheats prone to greed and betrayal. He, however, luxuriates in 
courage, loyalty, honesty and compassion. Only one of his characteristics 
chimes with those of our sharp-clawed household delinquent. It's his prodigious 
love of himself.
 