
One thing keeps getting lost from sight in the phone-hacking scandal: the 
criminal activity of police officers, their corrupt relationship with private 
investigators and the insouciance of their superiors (John Yates evidence on 
phone hacking mocked by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/12/john-yates-evidence-mocked-mps?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 13 July). Phone hacking and blagging is repugnant, deeply upsetting to its 
victims and much of it may be illegal. Bribing a police officer to supply 
confidential information is unquestionably a crime; those contracting the 
service, those receiving and paying for the information and the policemen who 
provide it all commit criminal acts. None of the very senior serving or former 
officers of theMetropolitan Police <http://content.met.police.uk/Home> 
interviewed by the home affairs select committee appeared to have the slightest 
concern about the clear evidence of widespread corruption within their own 
ranks.

Mike Gatehouse

Brecon, Powys 

 

• In the interests of public confidence in the Met, all criminal 
investigations relating to whether the police have acted unlawfully over phone 
hacking should be placed with another police force.

Keith Darvill Leader, Havering Labour group, Bob Littlewood Leader, Redbridge 
Labour group, Joshua Peck Leader, Tower Hamlets Labour Group, Paul Dimoldenberg 
Leader, Westminster Labour group

• In defence of his assistant commissioner, John Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/john-yates>, Paul Stephenson said: "We need to 
give him credit for his courage and humility in acknowledging that if he knew 
then what he knows now, he would have taken different decisions." Only Yates's 
failure to examine what was already in his hands prevented him from "knowing 
then what he knows now". No credit due whatsoever.

Eddie Dougall

Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk

• Having seen the video of Andy Hayman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/andy-hayman> giving evidence to the home 
affairs committee, it's just as well he aspired to being a journalist rather 
than an actor.

Michael Miller

Sheffield 

• The Met claim that the main reason their earlier investigation of phone 
hacking allegations was unsuccessful was "lack of co-operation" from theNews of 
the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>. If law 
enforcement in this country is now reliant on the co-operation of the 
criminals, we really are in trouble.

Ian West 

Telford, Shropshire

• You report there was anger inside Scotland Yard "at the treatment by MPs of 
senior officers and former officers". Could you tell your informant that there 
is quite a lot of anger outside Scotland Yard about our taxes being used to pay 
for the antics of these clowns.

Ian Jewesbury

London 
 