
A rightwing authoritarian leader who attacks civil liberties, stigmatises 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, indulges in chauvinistic 
nationalism, is in bed with rapacious oligarchs, and who is admired by the 
European and American hard right. Leftwing opposition toVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> should be, well, kind of an 
obvious starting point. NowBBC One’s Panorama has broadcast allegations that 
the Russian leader <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06z9584> has secretly 
amassed a vast fortune. However accurate, there is no question that Putin is 
close to oligarchs such asRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, who profited as 
post-Soviet Russia collapsed into economic chaos thanks to western-backed “
shock therapy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shock_therapy_(economics)>”.

After Litvinenko, more sanctions against Russia would be pointless – and 
hypocritical | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/22/litvinenko-sanctions-russia-putin-russian>
Last week, a British public inquiry concluded that ex-Russian spy Alexander 
Litvinenko was likely to have been murdered at the personal behest of Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
. We don’t know exactly who is behind all the murkykillings of journalists in 
Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/sep/15/russian-journalists-murder-cpj-report>
, but we know that some of those critical of the government – likeAnna 
Politkovskaya <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, who 
courageously opposed Putin’s war inChechnya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya> – met violent ends.

Putin has become something of an icon for a certain type of western 
rightwinger. Donald Trump is a fan: when Putin called the rightwing demagogue a 
“very colourful, talented person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/20/donald-trump-defends-vladimir-putin-endorsement>
”, Trump called it a “great honour” and described Russia’s strongman as “a man 
highly respected within his own country and beyond”. When challenged on the 
alleged role of Moscow in the murder of journalists, Trump engaged in what is 
typically known as “whataboutery <https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/whataboutery>” 
(or the “look over there!” approach to debate), responding: “Our country does 
plenty of killing also.” Last year, a delegation of French rightwing MPsvisited 
Russia to fight “disinformation from western media” 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/08/18/the-inevitable-putin-le-pen-alliance-is-so-on.html>
, andMarine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, leader of 
the far-right National Frontwhich was given a multimillion-euro loan from a 
Russian bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/08/russia-europe-right-putin-front-national-eu>
 – is a Putin fan. Our own Nigel Farage assailed opposition to Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine, suggesting Putin was“on our side” in the war against 
terrorism 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/11098811/Nigel-Farage-Stop-opposing-Vladmir-Putin-in-Ukraine-and-join-forces-to-defeat-Islamic-terrorists.html>
, while Ukip MEP Diane Jamescelebrated him as a strong leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/10/ukip-diane-james-praises-vladimir-putin>
 and for being “very nationalist”.

We don’t have to choose between critiquing our own foreign policy and opposing 
unjust foreign governments

Sure, the west’s attitude towards Putin is hypocritical. When Putin prosecuted 
his savage war in Chechnya, there wasnone of the western outrage later meted out
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1366059/Blair-supports-Putins-war-against-Chechnya.html>
 when the Russians annexed the Crimea. Bill Clinton oncelavished Putin for 
having “enormous potential” 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/bill-clinton-to-tony-blair-putin-2016-1?r=US&IR=T>
; Tony Blair, meanwhile, continues to call for the west to workwith Putin 
against Islamic fundamentalism 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/tony-blair-urges-west-to-cooperate-with-putin-against-islamist-extremism-1416946054>
 and last yearattended a Putin “vanity summit” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/tony-blair/11684447/Tony-Blair-speaks-at-Putins-vanity-forum...-and-considers-a-job-with-Ukraine.html>
.

But for the left, opposition to Putin should go without saying. Those who 
claim the left as a whole is soft on Putin are disingenuous at best: as, 
indeed, this article illustrates. But why are some silent, or even indulgent? 
Firstly, some profess a fear that – by critiquing those who are already 
supposedly bete noires of the west – the left will provide cover for western 
military expansionism. We become cheerleaders for western foreign policy, in 
other words, feeding the demonisation of foreign foes that is a necessary 
precondition for conflict. Secondly, it is seen as hypocritical: look at, say, 
the calamities of Iraq or Libya. Should we not focus on what our governments 
get up to, rather than what foreigners get up to elsewhere, which is in any 
case well covered by the mainstream press and political elite?

Yes, there is something rather absurd about the baiting of the anti-war left 
for not protesting against, say, Putin or North Korea. The baiters are always 
free to organise their own demonstration (I would be happy to join), and 
protest movements can only realistically aspire to put pressure on governments 
at home, whether it be on domestic policies or alliances with human rights 
abusers abroad (whether that be, say, the head-chopping Saudi exporters of 
extremism, or Israel’s occupation of Palestine). In democracies, protests that 
echo the official line of governments are rare. If the west was actively 
cheering Putin on and arming him to the teeth, we might expect more vociferous 
opposition.

Putin will be rubbing his hands at the prospect of Brexit | Guy Verhofstadt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/putin-rubbing-hands-brexit-david-cameron-eu>
But for universalists – those of us who believe democracy, freedom, human 
rights and social justice are universal principles that all humans should 
enjoy, irrespective of who or where they are – that shouldn’t be good enough. 
We shouldn’t have to wait for a possible western-Russian alliance in, say, 
Syria to speak out. We should express our solidarity with Russia’s embattled 
democrats and leftists. We don’t have to choose between critiquing our own 
foreign policy and opposing unjust foreign governments. In a sense, critics of 
western foreign policy have more of a responsibility to speak out. While 
supporters of, for example, the Iraq calamity can be more easily batted away by 
Putin apologists, nobody can accuse people like me of hypocritically failing to 
critique western foreign policy.Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is ruled by a human rights abusing, 
expansionist, oligarchic regime. The Russian people – and their neighbours – 
deserve better. And the western left is surely duty-bound to speak out.
 