
Child sexual abuse survivors will be able to launch fresh lawsuits against 
churches and schools that forced them into unfair settlements under new laws 
passed inQueensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, 
the first of their kind in Australia.

The state parliament’s move to abolish the 21-year age limit on sexual abuse 
claimants was extended with an 11th hour amendment on Tuesday night, allowing 
courts to set aside past secret settlements by institutions that used the age 
limit to negotiate lower payouts.

Advocates hailed the legislation around past settlements as a pioneering 
victory in a longstanding battle for justice, saying it should be adopted for 
victims in all Australian jurisdictions.

Child abuse campaigner 'livid' about Queensland bill to end time limits on 
civil claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/child-abuse-campaigner-livid-about-queensland-bill-to-end-time-limits-on-civil-claims>
It was won despite the opposition of the Palaszczuk government, which had 
cited “unintended consequences”.

The amendment to allow the setting aside of past settlements was put forward 
by the Liberal National opposition and passed with the support of the 
crossbench.

Advocates credited an original push by independent MP Rob Pyne through a 
private member’s bill asthe catalyst on the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/queensland-may-allow-child-sex-abuse-victims-to-revive-previously-settled-claims>
, with the LNP backing some of his reforms.

The attorney general, Yvette D’Ath, said it “set a significant precedent, that 
a parliament is willing to give the courts the very wide discretion to reopen 
and void deeds”.

“My concern is that institutions may not want to enter into settlements into 
the future if they believe that those deeds are not going to be full and final 
settlement, that in fact the courts can at any time in the future reopen those 
based on a parliament already showing once that they are willing to reopen,” she
told parliament 
<https://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/hansard/2016/2016_11_08_DAILY.pdf>.

One advocate and survivor, who asked not to be named, said clearing the way 
for past settlements to be set aside represented “an amazing win: an 
Australia-first”.

But other survivors would be bitterly disappointed with parliament’s refusal 
to extend the new laws to non-sexual, serious physical abuse, as had already 
been done in New South Wales, he said.

Allan Allaway, an advocate named by the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, as a 
longstanding friend and inspiration for the reforms, is one of those survivors 
of severe physical abuse whose case has been left outside the reform.

Allaway told the Guardian on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/child-abuse-campaigner-livid-about-queensland-bill-to-end-time-limits-on-civil-claims>
 he was “livid” that victims of physical and psychological abuse in 
institutions would not be given the benefit of the new scope to seek justice.

The government later indicated on Tuesday it was willing to extend the 
definition of abuse to serious physical abuse. But the opposition did not 
support the move, arguing sexual abuse should be treated differently to 
physical assault because of the length of time it took sexual abuse survivors 
to come to terms with their treatment.

Queensland’s statute of limitations on compensation claims for child sexual 
abuse has been used by institutions to limit out-of-court payouts to thousands 
of dollars, far less than those awarded by a court.

In one case, a Brisbane Grammar schoolboy victim of paedophile Kevin Lynch, 
whoseabuse was so severe he suffered organic brain damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/06/brisbane-grammar-insurer-threatened-not-to-cover-sexual-abuse-payouts-inquiry-told>
, was given $45,000 plus costs – less than two years’ school fees – in 
compensation.

Bill Potts, the president of the Queensland Law Society, said the removal of 
the age limit on sexual abuse claims would “go a long way to healing decades of 
injustice and suffering”.

“This is not about money, but rather acknowledging the life-long pain and 
suffering of child abuse victims and providing just compensation so they can 
receive counselling and the help they need as a result of the betrayal suffered 
in their youth.”


 