
What’s the name of this show? Queen Sugar <http://www.queensugarown.tv/>.

When does it premiere? The “two-night premiere” is on 6 and 7 September at 
10pm ET onOWN <http://www.oprah.com/app/own-tv.html>.

If it is on OWN, is Oprah Winfrey <http://www.oprah.com/app/own-tv.html> 
involved?You bet she is. She serves as executive producer along with the writer 
and directorAva DuVernay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay>, who 
made the Oscar-nominated movieSelma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/05/selma-review-civil-rights-drama>. 

Does Oprah appear in it? She was originally slated to, but she does not. She 
does appear in OWN’sGreenleaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/21/greenleaf-oprah-winfrey-religious-drama-review-own>
, which proved to be one of the hits of the summer.

What is this show about? When a sugar farmer in rural Louisiana dies 
unexpectedly, he leaves his debt-riddled farm to his three adult children, all 
of whom are dealing with struggles of their own. They have to try to get along 
and keep things afloat.

Who are these kids? The most prominent is the oldest daughter, Charley 
(Dawn-Lyen Gardner), a wealthy NBA player’s wife with an MBA and a 15-year-old 
son. They live the life of luxury in LA and she’s even thinking of joining a
Real Housewives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/16/real-housewives-interview-scott-dunlop>
-esque reality show. As she’s leaving for the funeral, her husband is embroiled 
in a rape scandal with several of his team-mates.

Nova (True Blood’s Rutina Wesley) is a journalist and activist who lives in 
New Orleans but doesn’t return home very often. She grows pot illegally but 
gives it away to those who need it medicinally and is embroiled in an affair 
with a Big Easy cop. She’s also really into some kind of spiritual juju that’s 
a mix between Christianity and something darker.

Ralph Angel (Kofi Siriboe) is her only son and a recent parolee who needs both 
his father’s and Aunt Violet’s (Tina Lifford) help raising his son Blue (Ethan 
Hutchison) because his mother is an addict. We’re not sure why he was put away, 
but his temper threatens to put him back into jail.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy1GVEAVv4E&media=>
So, let me guess: by the end of the first episode, they’ve decided to run the 
business together and reclaim the family’s pride? Not exactly. Actually, it 
takes three episodes to get there. One of the great things about Queen Sugar is 
that the pace is as languorous as a summer’s day drinking lemonade in a rocking 
chair on the porch. It defies the quick plotting that a network show would 
demand and gives the characters room to explore their emotions. It’s not slow, 
necessarily, but it is deliberate.

Is it any good? Yes, it is. The stories here aren’t especially original: the 
poorer siblings being resentful of their more successful sister, a family 
defending their small business against a greedy landowner, a wronged woman 
falling in love with a down-to-earth man after her marriage ends. It’s clear 
how all of these things are going to play out, but it says something about the 
power of the performances and the storytelling that they are still engaging and 
emotionally resonant.

What other shows is it like? I would compare it to something like Parenthood 
<http://www.nbc.com/parenthood?nbc=1> or Brothers & Sisters 
<http://abc.go.com/shows/brothers-and-sisters>, a conventional family drama 
where the incidents are small but packed with meaning and history. The most 
startling moment involves a tractor being repossessed.The Great British Baking 
Show <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> has 
scarier stakes. Instead of going for the storytelling churn of something like
Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/25/lee-daniels-taraji-p-henson-empire>
, this takes a much more grounded approach, providing storylines that are 
specific to this family and community but will also resonate across the 
spectrum.

What does DuVernay’s direction add? She wrote the pilot and directed the first 
two episodes, and her style is both beautiful and delicate, rooting the action 
in struggles that might otherwise seem mundane. Often she focuses her camera on 
something unlikely: an abandoned house in the background, an old, beautiful 
tree next to a farmhouse, or a tattoo on a person’s neck. The attention to 
these incidental details is almost romantic and often breathtaking. The style 
and the performances DuVernay elicits keeps the show from looking as cheap as 
Greenleaf at its worst.

Is there anything bad about it? Sometimes the show meanders. It’s fine to take 
the scenic route to get somewhere, but it’s not always clear what the 
destination is. The dialogue is also a bit of a problem, with the 
colloquialisms and character’s nicknames seeming forced rather than organic.

Should I watch this show? Of course you should. It seems as though Oprah and 
OWN have finally found their groove, and this should be the show to cement the 
channel’s reputation as a place to find meaningful stories that wouldn’t be 
told anywhere else. While Sundance’sRectify 
<http://www.sundance.tv/series/rectify> uses a slow pace and smart family drama 
to transcend into the sublime, Queen Sugar is not quite there. But it is a 
solid effort chock full of characters to care about. We’ve always enjoyed 
Oprah’s favorite things, and this should be no different.
 