
Queensland’s tree-clearing reforms could hinge on the vote of parliamentary 
speaker Peter Wellington amid hopes in the Palaszczuk government that fellow 
independent Billy Gordon will resist pressure to block the changes.

The government argues that, without its proposed controls to halt a resurgence 
in clearing in Great Barrier Reef catchments, Unesco could as early as next 
year revisit itsdecision not to list the natural wonder as “in danger” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/29/great-barrier-reef-shouldnt-be-on-in-danger-list-for-now-says-unesco>
.

It needs the support of both crossbenchers Wellington and Gordon to pass the 
laws, which are likely to be voted on in parliament on Thursday.

The vote would follow landmark commonwealth intervention to halt land clearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/coalition-split-over-intervention-in-queensland-land-clearing>
 on a north Queensland property for assessment under national environmental 
laws over concerns of possible run-off polluting reef waters.

One MP said Gordon was facing “strong pressure” from influential constituents 
in his far north seat of Cook to oppose the reforms, which would hand the 
minority Palaszczuk government its first major legislative defeat.

Coalition split over intervention in Queensland land clearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/coalition-split-over-intervention-in-queensland-land-clearing>
But a well-placed government source was confident that Gordon would ultimately 
back the laws, despite lobbying by powerful Cape York figures who claim the 
changes would frustrate Indigenous community development.

Gordon said he would not be “saying anything substantive” about the proposed 
laws until Tuesday.

Gordon’s backing would leave the key decision with Wellington, who in 2012 
voted in favour of the former Newman government’s relaxation of clearing laws. 
Clearing has sincedoubled to almost 300,000 hectares a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/08/queensland-tree-clearing-figures-spur-call-for-tighter-laws>
.

Wellington, now a key Palaszczuk government ally, told Guardian Australia on 
Monday it was “a bit early at this stage” to decide his vote as he did not know 
if any amendments would be proposed.

He said he still had “a whole range of meetings scheduled with stakeholders 
from right across the spectrum”.

“There’s a lot happens in the last week when both sides start to flag 
amendments and propose alternatives so we’ll wait and see what happens,” he 
said.

Steven Miles, the minister for the environment and the Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef>, said he expected 
that if parliament blocked the clearing laws the UN’s world heritage committee 
might reconsider its decision to keep the reef on the world heritage list.

Miles said addressing land clearing was “a key commitment” in Australia’s 2050 
long-term conservation plan for the reef.

“That’s both because land clearing drives sediment in to the reef, suffocating 
coral and sea grass, and because deforestation is a key driver of climate 
change which causes bleaching like we saw over summer,” he said.

“Both the commonwealth and Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> governments committed 
to that plan – specifically to strengthen our vegetation management legislation 
to protect remnant and high-value regrowth vegetation, including in riparian 
zones.

“Now the global community is watching to see that we implement it.”

Miles said that, by blocking clearing controls, the state Liberal National 
party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-national-party> 
opposition was “consciously choosing to put the reef’s world heritage listing 
back at risk, back where it was when they were in government”.

“After the bleaching event over summer we cannot afford to give the impression 
we’re turning our back on the plan,” he said.

The chairman of the Cape York Land Council, Richie Ah Mat, said the clearing 
controls would “wreak devastation” for Indigenous communities in the cape, 
locking them “onto small islands of cleared town land surrounded by a sea of 
land they own but can’t use for agriculture or other development”.

Queensland farmers bulldoze thousands of hectares of native vegetation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/queensland-farmers-bulldoze-thousands-of-hectares-of-native-vegetation>
Provisions to enable clearing for Indigenous use under the Cape York Peninsula 
Heritage Act 2007 were “excessively onerous” and not a single project had ever 
been approved under them, Ah Mat said.

But conservationists said this was because not a single application had ever 
been made.

Tim Seelig, head of the Queensland Conservation Council, said Ah Mat was 
“neglecting to mention the fact they’ve done nothing to test the process”.

Other key Cape York opponents of clearing reforms include Noel Pearson, who 
has clashed with the Palaszczuk government over its intervention in his Cape 
York Academy-run school in Aurukun. Pearson was involved in negotiations over 
Indigenous clearing rights under the 2007 Cape York Act.

Guardian Australia has been told the government, following a cabinet meeting 
on Monday, did not have any plans at this stage to amend its bill.

This follows suggestions it could soften provisions around the retrospective 
nature of offences and reversing the onus of proof on landholders, forcing them 
to prove that did not engage in unlawful clearing.
 