
Time-travel is a recurring trope in pop film and TV culture. Whether it’s 
Marty McFly in Back to the Future, Tom Cruise in Minority Report, or the 
forthcoming Timeless and Frequency, it is something couch potatoes love to nerd 
out to.

While Oprah Winfrey and director Ava DuVernay’s Queen Sugar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Py1GVEAVv4E> series isn’t a sci-fi fantasy, it 
does deal with time travel on a symbolic level. The show, based on the novel of 
the same name by Natalie Baszile 
<https://www.colorlines.com/articles/queen-sugar-author-natalie-baszile-planting-sugar-cane-riding-zydeco-trail-and-blessing-tv>
, follows the family drama of the three Bordelon siblings: Charley, an NBA wife 
and business mogul in Los Angeles; Ralph Angel, a single-father parolee with 
tough luck and a troubled past; and Nova, a journalist and activist with a 
complicated personal life. The trio reunites back at their familial home in St 
Josephine, Louisiana, due to the death of their father Ernest, who left them 
his sugarcane farm.

The central narrative is their family drama, but Queen Sugar also tackles the 
African American nostalgia for – or fear of – symbolic time travel. Going back 
to the south creates ambivalence in black characters. It’s a reconnection to 
ancestral and spiritual roots, but also means confronting the pain of a place 
in which their ancestors were dehumanized.

Though research has shown that the idea of time as linear is more framing than 
fact (born from Eurocentric visions of “the progress narrative” andhow science 
was also “colonized” during colonization 
<https://medium.com/@chanda/decolonising-science-reading-list-339fb773d51f#.3b7lpuvrf>
), people born within western civilization’s cultural influence tend to look at 
the past as “regressive” and the future as “progressive”. Within US history, 
this conception has a geographic “north” versus “south” element. Therefore, in 
the general US historical imagination, for black people, leaving the south was 
tantamount to travelling to the future. Staying in the south was being stuck in 
limbo, and going back to the south, like going back in time, is inherently 
regressive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471353dc1110f4918c3915465d9429ea7663bb7a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Queen%20Sugar%3A%20why%20it's%20a%20time%20travel%20show%20for%20black%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Queen%20Sugar%3A%20why%20it%27s%20a%20time%20travel%20show%20for%20black%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F471353dc1110f4918c3915465d9429ea7663bb7a%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The series alludes to the idea of going back to the land. Photograph: Patti 
Perret/Oprah Winfrey Network 
Charley Bordelon’s move from liberal urban Hollywood to the rural Louisiana 
highlights the difficult transition in her life, but also calls on different 
historical instances in which black people had to go back to the land (during 
and in the aftermath of the Haitian Revolution, Reconstruction-era 
sharecropping, worker camps,the Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ABpWhY5Xzk>, for instance). So while 
nostalgia is a universal human emotion, romanticizing the past is deeply 
racialized within American history.

To give a different example, westerns are rooted in mainstream America’s 
nostalgia of “home on the range” living, frontierism, manifest destiny, and 
prosperity gospel (the idea that social, political, or economic power or the 
lack thereof is directly correlated with divine will, favoritism, or a person 
or group’s faith). But for Native Americans, westerns bring back memories of 
their physical and cultural genocide.

Our nostalgia is a megaphone for racial subjectivity of American history (but 
also any racially diverse country’s history) and the blind spots it can cause. 
In a piece for the New York Times, James Baldwinonce wrote 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/03/29/specials/baldwin-dream.html> “It comes 
as a great shock to see Gary Cooper killing off the Indians, and although you 
are rooting for Gary Cooper, that the Indians are you.”

Queen Sugar screens at a time where racial subjectivity is clear in the 2016 
presidential election, where the call for change and the desire to “go back” 
(literally or symbolically) collide.

Donald Trump’s campaign slogan is “Make America Great Again”. This phrase 
appeals to mainstream white voters, but it undoubtedly awakens the historical 
anxieties of black people especially. The word “again” begs the question that 
if America is not great now, then what time period is the Trump campaign is 
referring to? And for many minorities, the answer doesn’t matter, since 
backwards time-travel for them is regressive. Comedian Louis CK’s joked on how 
African Americans would avoid going backwards if time machines existed,calling 
time travel a “white privilege” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wyQTAIiCa4Y>. 

As a show deeply informed by its diverse depictions of blackness, Queen Sugar 
taps into the “progress narrative” historical zeitgeist of African Americans. 
The death of Ernest Bordelon, the father of the three siblings, sparks their 
return to St Josephine, but it also augments their need to conquer their 
individual struggles (Charley caught up in her husbands sexual assault scandal; 
Ralph Angel struggling to be a good father as an ex-convict whose son’s mother 
is a recovering drug addict; Nova wrestling with her political life as 
journalist and activist with her role as “the other woman” in a complicated 
affair).

These anxieties are amplified not only through the racial tension shown in the 
episodes (for example, a genteel white landowner who wants to buy the farm, 
black adolescents locked up in adult prisons, or white repo-men who come to 
take their father’s tractor), but the actual setting: a sugarcane farm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a92b1e061f04a1a4c88dcd086ee0574ffa5ccd%2F0_0_4800_3200%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Queen%20Sugar%3A%20why%20it's%20a%20time%20travel%20show%20for%20black%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Queen%20Sugar%3A%20why%20it%27s%20a%20time%20travel%20show%20for%20black%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fqueen-sugar-ava-duvernay-black-audiences-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a92b1e061f04a1a4c88dcd086ee0574ffa5ccd%2F0_0_4800_3200%2F4800.jpg>
 All of the Bordelon siblings are chasing different types of “progress” in 
their lives. Photograph: Skip Bolen/Oprah Winfrey Network 
 In many literary or visual media with a narrative conflict between 
characters, the setting is a conflict as well. Indiana Jones running from a 
giant bolder, or Matt Damon, who has to “science the shit” out Mars’ terrain to 
stay alive in The Martian, are examples of this.

While a sugarcane farm isn’t a trap or another planet, it augments the 
internal and external conflict of the characters. Charlie has business acumen, 
but her affluent California upbringing distances her from the complex work it 
entails to grow sugar cane. Ralph Angel has the physical stamina, good 
intentions, and eagerness to help, but his impulsiveness causes him to make bad 
decisions. And as of now, Nova is playing a facilitator role in running the 
farm, as she’s busy working on a watchdog story digging into a criminal justice 
scandal affecting young, black male Louisianans (something her brother may have 
been a victim of).

All of the Bordelon siblings are chasing different types of “progress” in 
their lives. But their efforts are impeded by the different forces of the past, 
and the sugarcane farm is a physical proxy for these things: Ernest’s death, 
his struggles as a black farmer, the complicated relationships they have with 
him and between themselves, and all the historical struggles (both within US 
racial history and locally in St Josephine) they inherited once they inherited 
the farm.

But aside from the setting, DuVernay and her writing team augment it through 
the characters and the choices she made while adapting Baszile’s novel. In the 
book, Charley is an inner-city art teacher and widower (her husband got shot in 
a hold up from refusing to give up his stuff) drowned in student loans. While 
her move to Saint Josephine is still informed by her father’s death and the 
racial and gendered tension of her presence, this backstory gives the 
relocation a more redemptive, “starting a new life” quality to it; that 
although the adjustment is tough, the move is ultimately good for her and her 
daughter.

But in the show, Charley is recast as a rich NBA wife and business owner going 
through a career and marriage crisis. This greatly increases the conflict 
inherent in the move: the dramatic lifestyle change in going from liberal, 
cosmopolitan, multi-cultural Hollywood to the conservative, rural Louisiana. 
This astute backstory alteration heightens the tension of both Charley’s 
adjustment, the setting as an obstacle and the conflict within her family.

The Bordelon tribe’s complicated relationship is a metaphor for the themes 
that arise in many African Americans’ complicated relationship with American 
history: pain, hope, sense of responsibility, baggage, searching for home, 
displacement, gif-and-a-curse dichotomies, double consciousness and more. If 
the series so far is any indication, Queen Sugar will continue to wrestle with 
the themes of time and space travel in complex and interesting ways.
 