
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> drivers will be allowed to 
operate legally in Queensland from September.

The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, said on 
Facebook her government would legalise the service from 5 September, with 
“sweeping reforms” that would create a level playing field.

“We want to put a premium on passenger safety and ensure all operators follow 
a new, fair set of rules, with the best interests of consumers at heart,” 
Palaszczuk said.

But it was also important to support the existing taxi industry, the premier 
said. Palaszczuk announced a $100m industry assistance package, including more 
than $4m in waived taxi fees over the next year.

The dark side of Uber: why the sharing economy needs tougher rules | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/18/uber-airbnb-sharing-economy-tougher-rules-australia>
“Unlike some other states, including New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/17/nsw-legalises-uber-compensation-plan-being-prepared-for-taxi-drivers>
, we will do it without imposing a new tax on passengers,” she said.

“We had to find the balance between Queenslanders who make millions of ride 
bookings each year and their right to better affordability, choice of service 
and consistency in safety, and transitioning the taxi industry into the digital 
era.”

The move is likely to anger taxi operators who have campaigned strongly 
against the push to legalise Uber.

The emerging industry has caused tensions to flare between cabbies and Uber 
drivers, with the taxi industry accusing Uber of undercutting its business 
because it does not have to pay significant licence fees.

In April laws cracking down on Uber drivers 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-21/taxi-drivers-vs-uber-ride-sharing-drivers-face-heftier-penalties/7344300>
 came into play and the following month it was revealed $786,405 in penalties 
had been handed out.

The state’s peak motoring body, RACQ, has long supported making so-called 
ride-sharing services legal so that drivers can secure proper insurance cover.

Gold Coast taxi drivers fear they will be the hardest hit by Uber’s approval 
and have threatened legal action against the government over what they say is 
an inadequate compensation package.

Gold Coast Cabs chief executive Gordana Blazevic said 65% of the work on the 
coast was via bookings. She said cabbies in her region would struggle against 
Uber drivers who did not have the same expenses in running part-time vehicles.

 The government’s $20,000 compensation per licence (maximum two per person) is 
only for individuals and trusts and licences under a company names will receive 
nothing.

Blazevic said most cab licences were held under company names and Gold Coast 
Cabs alone held 21 licences.
 