
Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk> has 
intervened to dissuade producers of the SBS program Struggle Street from 
filming in her own Queensland electorate and stop “families being ridiculed on 
national television”.

The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
premier’s move highlights a new level of civic opposition to the controversial 
program, which has left SBS racing to secure locations for a second series 
after councils in Brisbane and Melbourne denied producers filming permits.

The first series of Struggle Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/06/struggle-street-review-must-see-tv-undersold-by-sensationalism>
, set in Mount Druitt west of Sydney, was labelled “poverty porn” by critics 
last year after a sensationalist promo showing a participant farting loudly was 
screened by SBS.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430800668300%2FA-scene-from-Struggle-St-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Struggle%20Street%20reality%20TV%20series%20promo%20lands%20SBS%20in%20hot%20water%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Struggle%20Street%20reality%20TV%20series%20promo%20lands%20SBS%20in%20hot%20water%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430800668300%2FA-scene-from-Struggle-St-001.jpg>
Struggle Street reality TV series promo lands SBS in hot water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/may/05/sbs-mount-druitt-struggle-street-promo-video-doco>
The 'stars' of Struggle Street shouldn't be made to pay for their trust | Jon 
Owen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/commentisfree/2015/may/07/the-stars-of-struggle-street-shouldnt-be-made-to-pay-for-their-trust>
Produced by KEO Films Australia for SBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs>
, Struggle Street featured several families in the underprivileged area coping 
with various mental health, housing and drug issues.

The mayor of Blacktown, Stephen Bali, campaigned for the program to be taken 
off air,organised a garbage truck blockade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/06/struggle-street-protest-brings-garbage-truck-blockade-to-sbs-sydney-offices>
 and claimed the producers falsified scenes and provided inducements including 
food and drinks for the participants.

In April SBS announced the second six-part series, to be aired in 2017, would 
focus on social and economic disadvantage on a national scale and would be 
filmed in both Queensland and Victoria.

The series has financial backing from Screen Australia and Film Victoria which 
both claim it provokes an important discussion of the issues.

However, Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> 
council and Brimbank council, in Melbourne’s south, have both rejected 
applications for filming permits over fears the suburbs of Inala and Sunshine 
will be tarnished with negative stereotypes.

The producers would still be able to shoot the series on private properties, 
as the permits are only needed to film on council land.

The Brisbane lord mayor, Graham Quirk, wrote to KEO’s production manager on 
Tuesday to refuse a permit amid his “grave concerns” that the community of 
Inala would receive the same treatment as Mount Druitt.

Administrators of Brimbank council announced the same day they had refused 
KEO’s application over similar concerns.

Palaszczuk, who represents the seat of Inala, said she backed Quirk “100%” and 
the “last thing” the suburb needed was “to see a SBS show in there that takes 
the mickey out of people”.

Palaszczuk told reporters on Wednesday she had been “speaking to producers at 
length” to try to dissuade them from filming in Inala.

“They want to go ahead with it obviously, but we don’t want it to go ahead,” 
she said. “There is a very clear, firm view, the lord mayor doesn’t want it to 
go ahead, as the local member and as premier of this state, I don’t want to see 
it go ahead – we don’t want to see families ridiculed on national television.”

Palaszczuk, whose grandparents settled in Inala as post-war Polish migrants, 
said: “Out in Inala we are a very proud people.”

The director of programs for Keo Films, David Galloway, said Struggle Street 
was candid and powerful.

“We anticipate stories of resilience, community support and family love in 
what will be compelling and insightful storytelling that doesn’t shy away from 
the realities of hardship faced by millions of people across the country,” 
Galloway said when the second series was announced.

KEO still planned to film the second series in Queensland and Victoria 
exploring, through personal stories, challenges such as industry downturn and 
transition, unemployment and other socail issues.

However, Quirk wrote in his letter to KEO that the first series tainted the 
people of Mount Druitt “with the stigma of poverty, drugs, abuse and 
dysfunction”.

“I believe an informed and balanced assessment of social and economic 
disadvantage is in the public interest, however targeting a particular suburb 
in the manner you did in series 1 of Struggle Street is not,” he said.

Quirk said that while council “cannot interfere with your right to deal with 
individuals on their own property, we will not actively assist you with your 
production in council owned or controlled locations”.

John Watson, the chair of administrators of Brimbank city council, said it was 
“bitterly disappointed” the production company had chosen the area to film.

“Based on the previous program we don’t believe that they will accurately 
reflect our community,” he said.



 A spokeswoman for SBS said that “Struggle Street was not a series about 
specific areas of the country”.



“The areas that we will film in are areas where challenges reflect universal 
socioeconomic issues and where we can get first-hand stories that help 
audiences to engage with the broader issues.

“We are still in the early stages of production. Series two filming will take 
place in several locations in Queensland and Victoria. Brimbank is just one of 
a number of councils we’ve approached for filming permits.”

After episode one aired there was a largely positive response as well as a 
record audience for SBS. Episode one of Struggle Street was the No 1 show in
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> and the network’s 
most popular program since the football world cup in 2014.
 