
Quentin Tarantino, who courted fresh controversy this week for comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/quentin-tarantino-on-race-and-black-critics-the-hateful-eight>
 about Ava DuVernay’s Martin Luther King Jr biopic, Selma, not long after 
publiclyslamming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/31/quentin-tarantino-says-cate-blanchetts-arty-films-dont-have-shelf-life>
 the films of Cate Blanchett, has issued a clarification, admitting he has 
never seen the film.

Quentin Tarantino tells 'black critics' his race is irrelevant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/quentin-tarantino-on-race-and-black-critics-the-hateful-eight>
In a New York Times interview 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/quentin-tarantino-bret-easton-ellis-interview.html?_r=1>
 with American Psycho author Bret Easton Ellis, Tarantino discussed DuVernay’s 
film being snubbed at the 2015 Academy awards – most notably for a best 
director nomination for DuVernay.

In the profile, Tarantino was quoted as saying, “She did a really good job on 
Selma but Selma deserved an Emmy,” before Ellis followed up this quote by 
reasoning why Tarantino’s filmDjango Unchained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/django-unchained> was a superior work to 
DuVernay’s film.

‘‘Django Unchained, with its depictions of antebellum-era institutionalized 
racism and Mandingo fights and black self-hatred, is a much more shocking and 
forward-thinking movie thanSelma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma>,” 
wrote Ellis.

In a Facebook exchange with film reporter Anne Thompson, published on Indiewire
 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/thompsononhollywood/quentin-tarantino-never-saw-selma-he-writes-exclusive-20151014>
, Tarantino admitted he had never actually seen Selma, and that the quote from 
the New York Times article cited in other media outlets was “wrong.”

“If you look at the article, it was Bret who was talking about Selma, not me,” 
he wrote to Thompson. “I did say the line ‘it deserved a Emmy,’ but when I said 
it, it was more like a question.”

Tarantino meant to imply “it’s like a TV movie?”, he clarified to Thompson. 

“There was no slam intended. Both Bret and myself come from the seventies and 
eighties when there were a lot of historically based TV movies: the King 
mini-series written by Abby Mann staring Paul Winfield; Crisis at Central High 
with Joanne Woodward. And Judge Horton and the Scottsboro Boys. These were 
great TV movies. I’d be honored to be placed next to those films.

“However, I haven’t seen [Selma]. Does it look like a seventies TV movie? Yes. 
Does it play like one, I don’t know, I haven’t seen it.”

Tarantino’s seeming dismissal of DuVernay’s critically adored film (Selma has 
a 99% “fresh” rating onRotten Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/selma/>
) caught fire on the internet after the profile was published.

The Quentin Tarantino race debate isn't black and white
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/tarantino-race-debate-isnt-black-and-white>
Women and Hollywood’s Melissa Silverstein put it bluntly on Twitter: 

On Wednesday, DuVernay responded 
<https://twitter.com/Variety_Cynthia/status/654465310771253248> to Variety’s 
Cynthia Littleton at the New York premiere ofOprah Winfrey’s new series, Belief 
<http://www.oprah.com/belief/Oprah-Winfrey-Presents-Belief>: “Everyone is 
entitled to their opinion. He has his. Obviously I disagree with him, and I 
like my movie.”

Tarantino’s next film, The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>, opens in limited release on 
Christmas Day before going into wide release in January.

 * This article was updated on 15 October with DuVernay’s response.


 