
The Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> 
is putting up fierce resistance to using gender quotas to ensure more women are 
elected on their side of parliament.

“Oh no, we don’t want quotas,” they say. “We select candidates based on merit.”

To which I have two words: Jamie Briggs. Sorry, make that two more words: 
Chris Jermyn.

You’ll remember Jamie Briggs stepped down from the Liberal frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
 after an incident with a female colleague in Hong Kong. And during his 
turbulent campaign in the seat of McEwen, Chris Jermyn wasaccused of using a 
phoney address 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-liberal-candidate-chris-jermyn-may-have-broken-the-law-by-enrolling-with-phoney-address-20160615-gpjvna.html>
 on electoral rolls.

Let’s debunk this notion that the current Liberal party preselection processes 
are truly merit-based. If that is true, then then it holds that white males are 
superior beings to everyone else. That’s the only conclusion to be drawn from 
the Liberals’ claim of merit selection and swathes of white men sitting on the 
Liberal party’s front and back benches.

“We don’t need quotas,” the Liberals say. “We have a target: 50% of our MPs 
will be women by 2025.”

Julie Bishop backs calls for Liberals to put more women into parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/17/julie-bishop-supports-rank-and-file-plebiscites-to-get-more-liberal-women-elected>
Well, that is impressive. 2025 is only nine years away! How is that going, by 
the way? The Liberal party must have made some great strides forward at the 
election a few weeks ago.


They didn’t. As has been widely reported, the Liberal party is going 
backwards. That’s right, despite an ambitious target, the Liberal party lost 
women at this election. Fourmarginal seats lost to Labor 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/liberal-party-loses-way-on-path-to-equity-for-women-mps/news-story/922529d9979ea43b8126a1ebc2e88f95>
 were previously held by women, and a fifth woman is likely to lose her 
precarious Senate spot as well. Adding insult to the injury, in conservative 
seats like North Sydney, Berowra, Mackellar, Murray, Brisbane, Fairfax and 
Goldstein, the Liberal party has been merrily preselecting men.

Labor brought in gender quotas in 1994: 40% of winnable seats must be 
contested by women. At its 2015 national conference Labor stretched itself to 
45% by 2022 and 50% by 2025, and expanded those quotas to apply to party 
positions and delegations to conferences, including union delegations.

State branches use different strategies to ensure the quota is met. NSW Labor 
adds a “loading”, whereby a female candidate gets an additional 20% added to 
her vote. Other states, like Western Australia, use central selection 
committees.

Today women make up 39% of Labor MPs in the federal parliament. If Cathy 
O’Toole wrests the seat of Herbert from Ewen Jones (there are currently 12 
votes in it, with over 800 left to count) the percentage goes over the 40% 
mark. The NSW branch’s representation in the federal caucus is already 50/50 
male and female.

The use of quotas for more than two decades produces not only parity but a 
pipeline of female talent. Consider that every female premier in Australia’s 
history has headed a Labor government. Every Australian chief minister, save 
one – Kate Carnell in the ACT – has been Labor.

The first government led by two women in Australia was Labor (Keneally/Tebbutt 
in NSW), and so is the second (Palaszczuk/Trad in Queensland). The first female 
attorney-general, Nicola Roxon: Labor. The first female prime minister, Julia 
Gillard: Labor.

Let’s also debunk this notion that a quota system means that a woman will 
forever be marked down for “making it” only because of the quota. What a quota 
system does is force a party to seek meritorious candidates in places they 
wouldn’t usually look. Quotas change culture and behaviour, removing barriers 
to entry.

The Liberal party’s current target of 50% female MPs by 2025 is a goal without 
an action plan. Liberal MPs know this. The minister for defence, Marise Payne, 
took her own party to task 
<http://www.afr.com/news/defence-minister-marise-payne-chastises-her-own-party-over-female-representation-20160714-gq67bd>
 over the loss of female representation in the parliament: “Quite frankly ... 
if there is a strategy ... it’s clearly not working.”


Perhaps the Liberal party’s resistance to quotas – which have clearly worked 
for Labor – speaks to a conservative/progressive divide.

Conservatives think that anything is possible if an individual works hard 
enough and puts in the effort. Conservatives are far less likely than 
progressives to recognise structural discrimination. Such acknowledgement would 
undercut their world view, including their self-estimation that all their 
success has come because of their superior intellect, talent and work ethic, 
not because they won the lottery of life to be born white and male.

And that’s just conservative men. What about women like Julie Bishop and 
Michaelia Cash who have managed to push through to be among the very few who 
reach senior positions? Bishop and Cash won’t even describe themselves as 
“feminist”. Are they that disdainful of identifying with an oppressed class? “I 
got here,” they seem to be saying, “and if you can’t, maybe it’s not because 
you are a woman. Maybe it’s because you just aren’t as talented as me.”

This is where we need to face a raw truth: there are always women who don’t 
mind being one of the special few who make it in a man’s world. I don’t know 
Bishop and Cash well enough to say that they fit that category. I hope that 
they don’t. But in my experience there are women who have crashed through the 
glass ceiling who are just as threatened as some men by the notion that the 
system should change to give more women a fair go.

Many years ago I realised that there are, generally, two types of women in 
politics: the ones who celebrate any woman’s success as a chance to help more 
women get ahead, and the ones who think a particular woman’s success comes at 
the expense of every other woman in caucus. The latter group buys into the 
notion that there are only going to be a few “women’s spots” in cabinet, and 
the path to success is to tear other women down to grab one of those coveted 
places.

Throughout my career I was grateful for the women who helped me learn and gain 
experience and succeed. They were women who didn’t buy into the notion of 
“women’s spots”.

And now Jamie Clements: equal numbers is the only way to create a culture of 
respect | Lucy Clark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/and-now-jamie-clements-equal-numbers-is-the-only-way-to-create-a-culture-of-respect>
Here’s another possible conclusion about the Liberal party’s disdain for 
quotas: the conservative side ofAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> is just more 
misogynist. One conservative woman told me that its a “vicious environment”, 
and if there was something a man could use against a female colleague – such as 
the fact that a quota helped her get preselected – he would.

I led one of the toughest political parties around – the NSW branch of the 
ALP. We play politics hard. We’ve had our ownissues  
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/nsw-labor-slammed-over-hostile-sexualised-environment-for-women/news-story/728bf59d8566b15405399dc5ab137823>
when it comes to a female-friendly culture. But quota-baiting? It’s not even a 
thing.

Other conservative women say it’s hard enough to be the only woman in a room. 
It would be even harder, they say, if the men thought you were only there 
because of a quota.

I wonder if they’ve ever considered that maybe the room would be easier if 
more women were there?

Bring on 2025.

 