
I wouldn’t ever want to complain about all the reading I had to do as a judge 
of theFolio prize <http://www.thefolioprize.com/>. How wonderful to be paid to 
read – assuming, of course, that reading’s your thing (I hardly want to do 
anything else). But there is no denying that some weeks I felt wary of the 
boxes of books that glowered at me from a corner of my sitting room. Gobble a 
lot of fiction very quickly – we read 80 novels and short story collections in 
about four months – and you soon find yourself suffering from the literary 
equivalent of a food intolerance. Oh no, you think, not another novel about X 
or Y. At these moments, only one thing keeps you going: the faint hope that the 
book in question might turn out to be the greatest novel ever written about X 
or Y.

This is the first stage of the process, and it’s good when it’s over. Stage 
two happens without your noticing. As the weeks tick on, a list of books forms 
in your mind, one to which you grow unreasonably attached. Once this has 
happened, you’re already at the beginning of stage three: the Great Letting Go. 
It sounds dumb now, but I agreed to judge the Folio prize thinking it would be 
simple. We judges had merely to find the best book; excellence would be our 
only standard. Somehow, I failed to register that I would not be sitting in a 
room with four other Rachels, all with the same likes and dislikes as me. At 
the first judges’ meeting, during which we drew up our long list, I felt 
something close to panic as my darlings were thrown out, scythed by the 
passionate dislike or, worse, the indifference of my colleaguesWilliam Fiennes 
<http://williamfiennes.com/>, Mohsin Hamid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/21/mohsin-hamid-why-migration-is-a-fundamental-human-right>
, AM Homes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/am-homes> and Deborah Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/deborah-levy>. After the shortlist meeting, 
I had to walk home the long way to burn off the adrenaline. Not even knowing 
that everyone else was feeling exactly same – we all sustained casualties – 
made it any the less excruciating.

Stage four – picking one winner from a shortlist of eight – is the worst. A 
weird omertà surrounds literary prizes; no one ever dares to suggest in public 
that a jury was split. Why? It simply can’t be the case that the winner is 
always the one every single judge wanted to see blazing through. Nor is this a 
bad thing; I took the prolonged agony of our final meeting – it lasted three 
hours – as a sign of the greatness, the essential rightness, of our shortlist. 
It was, in any case, a torture that only added to the sweetness last Monday 
night whenAkhil Sharma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/26/akhil-sharma-family-life-books-interview>
 went up to receive his prize. In the moment, doubts fall away. Watching him – 
he blinked disbelievingly, as if even now he could jinx it – I felt exhausted, 
but content. How brilliant thatFamily Life 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/family-life.html>, a funny, savage, 
masterfully controlled novel about an Indian boy whose brother befalls a 
terrible accident soon after their family’s arrival in America, will now find 
so many new readers. It is a book they will find easy to like, even to love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fpleasure-pain-picking-folio-prize-winner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427292228590%2Fba4eae98-3fb4-43a8-af0b-01d81234cb6a-1519x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rachel%20Cooke%3A%20the%20pleasure%20and%20pain%20of%20being%20a%20Folio%20prize%20judge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fpleasure-pain-picking-folio-prize-winner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rachel%20Cooke%3A%20the%20pleasure%20and%20pain%20of%20being%20a%20Folio%20prize%20judge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fpleasure-pain-picking-folio-prize-winner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427292228590%2Fba4eae98-3fb4-43a8-af0b-01d81234cb6a-1519x2040.jpeg>
 Akhil Sharma with his award for the ‘funny, savage’ Family Life. Photograph: 
Robin Mayes/PA 
Stage five. The dust settles. The days feel baggier, more expansive, without 
those cairns of books. Yet I can’t stop going over it all. I still wish that 
those who run theFolio prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/folio-prize> 
had not decided to make public the 80 titles we were reading (books that were 
nominated by members of the Folio academy, all of whom are writers). Prizes 
should be about supporting authors, not making their lives more painful. How 
miserable not to appear on such a huge list – one that is no use at all to the 
reading public either, being so unmanageably long. I hope they will think again 
about this, and that academy members who agree with me will make their feelings 
known.

I worry about what we might be losing. The British social history novel seems 
doomed so far as our prize culture goes; impossible to imagine a writer such as 
David Lodge enjoying the same career today. Character is also on the wane; 
21st-century writers prefer to build their stories around themes (perhaps this 
is one reason I fell so hard for, among others, Colm Tóibín’s breathtakingNora 
Webste <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/nora-webster.html>r). My hunch is that, 
in the future, well-supported American writers are, for a variety of different 
and complex reasons, going to do very well out of the Folio and the Booker 
combined, and that this will have consequences for writing and publishing in 
this country. It may also, in the end, affect the way that we, as British 
readers, talk to and think about ourselves. It’s vital to look out into the 
world, but we need sometimes to look within, too.

Against this, however, must be set the fact that writers really are growing 
new forms in the laboratories of their minds. There is daring out there, if you 
look for it. No one could read our shortlist and not feel excited. I cherish 
the fact that in the last few months I’ve read so many truly astonishing things 
(books I might not otherwise have picked up in a million years). Sometimes, 
walking to the bus stop, I think of Michel Faber’sThe Book of Strange New Things
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/26/book-of-strange-new-things-michel-faber-review>
, in which a Christian pastor travels to a far-off planet to convert its alien 
population, whose language he cannot speak and whose faces he cannot read. Even 
now, I never know whether to smile, or to frown.
 