
The following correction was printed in the Guardian's Corrections and 
clarifications column, Saturday 27 November 2010

This article said that his defeat of Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> on 24 November put Rafael 
Nadal through to the semi-finals of the ATP World Tour Finals. Not quite. That 
happened with his defeat of Tomas Berdych on Friday 26 November.



In the land of the one-eyed tennis player, the two-eyed man is king â€“ not that 
Novak Djokovic could altogether blame a shifting contact lens and mysterious 
irritation in his right orb for his defeat byRafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal>, who is through to the 
semi-finals of the ATP World Tour Finals.

The Spaniard was back to near his best last night in a match of high quality 
and flickering drama.

Djokovic, who complained about the irritation early in the first set and was 
still uncomfortable at the end, rarely hit a rhythm against the world No1. Long 
after the match, he was still at a loss to know exactly what had caused the 
discomfort.

When Nadal wrapped it up 7-5, 6-2, it signalled a return to his best after 
suspicions he had arrived here undercooked. He dropped a set in the first round 
againstAndy Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> on Monday 
and there were legitimate concerns that shoulder problems would rob him of his 
potency. All went well last night.

They broke each other in the first set, but the traffic was one-way in the 
second, with Djokovic clearly inconvenienced. When the Serb belted a sit-up 
forehand into the net after an hour and 52 minutes his discomfort was over.

"I really feel sick talking about it, to be honest," Djokovic said. "It has 
never happened to me before. From the five-all I could not play. I could not 
see a ball, especially the return. It was just terrible."

Nadal said: "I'm very sorry for him but, for me, it was a very important 
victory. It was more distracting for him than me. I am in a good position."

Earlier, Tomas Berdych snuffed out Roddick's stuttering charge, pulling away 
to win 7-5, 6-3.
 