
Raffaele Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito>, the 
Italian who was cleared last year of the 2007 murder of British exchange 
student Meredith Kercher, is seeking more than €500,000 (£382,000) in 
compensation for wrongful imprisonment after spending nearly four years in jail.

The 32-year-old and his former girlfriend, Amanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox>, had both been facing more 
than 20 years in jail for Kercher’s murder before being cleared in a stunning 
decision by Italy’s highest court last March.

Sollecito’s request for compensation, which could see the Italian state pay up 
to €516,000, will be decided by a court in Tuscany. It is the maximum amount 
Sollecito could have asked for.

Sollecito was arrested just days after the murder. Kercher was Knox’s roommate 
in Perugia,Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, and had been 
studying on an Erasmus programme before she was stabbed to death in the flat 
the two women shared.

Sollecito defiant after exoneration and says he will defend his 'dignity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/raffaele-sollecito-defiant-that-he-is-not-a-and-will-defend-his-dignity>
Sollecito and Knox were found guilty after an investigation that judges later 
found had been botched, then found not guilty after spending about four years 
in jail. Another court then heard the case against the pair again and found the 
couple guilty, before they were finally acquitted by the high court in Rome.

Although prosecutors argued for years that the crime could not have been 
committed by a single person, only one man – Rudy Guede, a drifter from Ivory 
Coast – was found guilty in the end. Guede is about halfway through a 16-year 
prison sentence after a fast-track trial in 2008.

In the legal rationale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/07/amanda-knox-acquitted-because-of-stunning-flaws-in-investigation>
 for Sollecito and Knox’s acquittal, which was released months later, the high 
court judges said the investigation into Kercher’s murder had been marred by 
“stunning flaws”. The panel of judges said there was not enough evidence to 
prove the pair had committed the crime and there was a lack of biological 
traces.


Knox verdict: Italian justice system has failed, says Meredith Kercher's family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/28/knox-verdict-italian-justice-system-has-failed-says-meredith-kerchers-family>
“The trial had oscillations which were the result of stunning flaws, or 
amnesia, in the investigation and omissions in the investigative activity,” the 
judges wrote.

The judges’ findings are likely to play in Sollecito’s favour. The murder 
trial, which received sensational media coverage, particularly in the UK and 
US, was seen as an indictment of the notoriously slow-moving Italian justice 
system. In the US, the decision to find Knox guilty after she had been cleared 
was seen as contravening protections against defendants being tried more than 
once for the same crime, or double jeopardy.

In the immediate aftermath of his acquittal in March, Sollecito spoke of his 
anguish. “For seven years I have had a suspended life, I have lived with the 
fear of being arrested but knowing I am innocent,” he told Italian newspaper La 
Repubblica.
 