
Raffaele Sollecito <https://www.theguardian.com/world/raffaele-sollecito> said 
that he burst into “tears of joy” on being acquitted of the murder of British 
student Meredith Kercher on Friday, and that he now wants to build his future 
after more than seven years “living in fear”.

Sollecito was waiting at home late on Friday night when his sister phoned from 
Rome’s high court. “My father and I burst into tears of joy,” he said, on 
realising judges had quashed his 25-year sentence.In the surprise verdict, 
Italy’s court of cassation also ruled his American former girlfriend Amanda 
Knox innocent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
.

Meredith Kercher murder: Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito acquitted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/27/meredith-kercher-amanda-knox-and-raffaele-sollecito-acquitted>
With police waiting outside his home in Puglia, in the heel of Italy’s boot, 
Sollecito was well aware he would be immediately arrested had the conviction 
against him been upheld.

Now, for the first time since his original arrest in November 2007, days after 
Kercher was found stabbed to death in the Perugia home she shared with Knox, 
Sollecito said he would finally be able to move on.

“For seven years I have had a suspended life, I have lived with the fear of 
being arrested but knowing I am innocent,” he told Italian newspaper La 
Repubblica. Sollecito described living “with the anguish that the next day 
could be the last as a free man” after being “catapulted into a new hell” 
following the murder of Kercher.

Both Sollecito and Knox spent four years in prison before being freed in 2011, 
a decision which was followed by a retrial and subsequent guilty verdict last 
January.

Despite being stopped near the Austrian border just hours after his murder 
conviction was upheld in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/31/raffaele-sollecito-detained-italy-austria-border-reports-amanda-knox>
, Sollecito said he never planned to go on the run. “Even in the moments in 
which the desperation was at its heaviest, I didn’t think of escape,” he said.

Amanda Knox is free because she's rich and American, says Patrick Lumumba
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/28/amanda-knox-free-rich-american-patrick-lumumba-meredith-kercher-murder>
The length of time Sollecito spent in jail has prompted speculation that he 
could now demand compensation, a decision he said would be left to his lawyers. 
Newspaper Corriere della Sera on Sunday said the Italian’s legal team may seek 
as much as €500,000 (£366,000).

Sollecito said he wanted to “finally begin to build a future. Now that my 
innocence has been recognised I can do that.”

His optimism stands in stark contrast to the reaction of Arline Kercher, 
Meredith’s mother, who said she remained “under shock” after Friday’s ruling. 
“Those two young people were already convicted twice by different courts for 
the murder of Meredith. I wasn’t expecting that now they could be definitively 
acquitted,” she told La Repubblica.
 