
Nobody who ever encountered her would expect Dame Anita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick> to want to be remembered 
by a nice headstone and a few bunches of wilting flowers.

Tonight, on what would have been her 65th birthday, her family will launch 
what is planned as an annual "day of activism" in her memory.

The voice of the founder of the Body Shop chain will be heard again, demanding 
that people follow her example, and get involved with Amnesty International or 
other human rights groups, hug a tree, or fight homelessness. Every year the 
Roddicks hope legions of people will be inspired to give a day of their lives - 
at least - to some worthy cause.

"I don't want to be defined as the founder of the Body Shop or as a woman 
suffering from hepatitis C," she said in an interview weeks before her death. 
"There's so much more to my life than that. I want to be defined as an 
activist."

Her family - including her daughter Sam, who followed a horsedrawn hearse 
through the streets of London only a few weeks ago to launch a campaign against 
sex slavery - have invited 1,500 people, representatives of more than 40 
campaigning organisations, to fill Westminster's Central Hall tonight and 
launch I Am An Activist Day, an event planned before her death, which will now 
become her lasting memorial.

Dame Anita died last month of a brain haemorrhage, aged 64, a consequence of 
the hepatitis C she contracted decades ago from a blood transfusion. When her 
condition was diagnosed three years ago, she became a campaigner for fellow 
sufferers. She was working up to a few weeks before she died on a documentary 
on her life of activism. She came from a simple standpoint, she said: "It's 
obscene to die rich. That's it." She did die rich, but the vast bulk of her 
money will go to the causes she championed.
 