
Ralph Fiennes smiles almost all the time. Big grin, plenty of teeth, crow’s 
feet, the works – ever so sweet and appealing once you relax into the 
assumption that it’s genuine. To think of meeting Fiennes is to expect 
something different: high seriousness, angst, maybe some sadism. Said Steven 
Spielberg, who cast him inSchindler’s List 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/schindler-s-list>: “He has a charm which can 
cut off and become deadly calm.” Also: “I saw sexual evil.”

Could Hail, Caesar! be the most Coen-y Coen brothers film yet?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/oct/09/george-clooney-scarlet-johansson-coen-brothers-hail-ceasar>
I don’t clock a lot of that. The oddest it gets is when Fiennes pauses, 
without warning, mid-answer and stares at his shoes – once for so long you 
begin to feel a bit giddy. Actually, it was only 22 seconds (and he was 
considering whether we should scrapTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>). Still, deployed strategically, such 
sudden silence is a potent reminder of his capacity for stagecraft.

At almost 53, the man who built a career by brooding on the big screen 
(Wuthering Heights, The English Patient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/30/english-patient-best-british-films>
,The End of the Affair <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/feb/11/3>) and 
being intense in the theatre (Ibsen 
<http://www.oldvictheatre.com/whats-on/2016/themasterbuilder/>, Shakespeare, 
Chekhov,Beckett 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/24/theater/reviews/24firs.html?_r=0>) beams 
away like a Christmas tree. After 25 years, he’s dropped the poker face and 
gone all loosey-goosey – a phrase he’s fine with, by the way. “Oh yes! I like 
that!”

Last year came the breakthrough: Monsieur Gustave, the classily tarty 
concierge inThe Grand Budapest Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/the-grand-budapest-hotel-wes-anderson-review>
. At Venice last month, the premiere ofA Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/07/a-bigger-splash-review-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-luca-guadagnino-venice>
, in which Fiennes sluts up a storm as Harry - a rude, charming, usually nude 
record producer. Next February, he’ll be a withering director inthe Coen 
brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/coenbrothers>’ Hail, Caesar! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/oct/09/hail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445879421955%2F47ddc437-cc79-4dc3-be5b-f66f421731bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20loosey-goosey%3F%20%20%E2%80%98I%C2%A0like%20that!%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20loosey-goosey%3F%20%20%E2%80%98I%C2%A0like%20that%21%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445879421955%2F47ddc437-cc79-4dc3-be5b-f66f421731bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ralph Fiennes as Harry, with Tilda Swinton, in new film A Bigger Splash. 
Photograph: Allstar/Frenesy Film Company 
All comedies. Yet even in Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>, 
the new James Bond movie – as ramrod rigid MI6 head M – Fiennes manages to keep 
it light and bag the film’s biggest laugh.

He’s been tickled by the reception so far.“It’s such a guy thing in the end! I 
was taken to see a Bond film with my father when I was about eight or nine, and 
I thought it was fantastic. But I have a sense that my mother was exasperated 
that I found it interesting. It’s just male escapism, male fantasy. I think 
it’s best to not take it too seriously.” He looks at me kindly.

Yet Sam Mendes’s movie does encourage such an approach. The film’s plot hinges 
on an initiative to ditch field agents in favour of virtual espionage. A 
bristling M explains the importance of the likes of Bond: unlike drones, they 
can look someone in the eye and make a decision about whether to kill them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445519565711%2FKP_569296_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spectre%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spectre%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Fspectre-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445519565711%2FKP_569296_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch the Guardian Film Show’s review of Spectre. 
Stirring stuff, thinks Fiennes, but probably bobbins. “I do like the fact Sam 
has tried to root it in something real and relevant, but it doesn’t bear very 
meticulous inspection. I like the principle. And it felt like quite a good line 
to say; that a licence to kill is also a licence not to kill. But the Bond 
films work on dialogue that you buy into at the moment because the real world 
is much more complex.”

As I understand it, real spies don’t go by the same name their whole lives

As well as being cheerfully off-message about the concept of Bond (“as I 
understand it, real spies don’t go by the same name their whole lives”), 
Fiennes is also quite sceptical about the plot’s proposition. “I heard someone 
say Edward Snowden did a lot of damage to us – serious, serious damage,” he 
says softly, then recommendsan article in the Telegraph defending GCHQ 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/terrorism-in-the-uk/11949030/British-spies-need-our-data-and-we-should-let-them-have-it.html>
.

But has tech reduced our capacity for compassion? Diminished the skills spies 
rely on? “Yes, absolutely. It could be that we’re eroding this energy between 
people. How we listen. How we engage.” He becomes briefly nostalgic about a 
time before answering machines. “How we feel them and respond. All that 
instinctive stuff between people. And as an actor you’re absolutely dependent 
on eye contact.”

As an interviewee, too, he’s pretty keen on it. When I take a breather and 
switch to looking at his fingers, he raps my knuckles with an abashed camp 
that’s pure Gustave: “I see you watching my hands; I’m feeling very 
self-conscious now.”

Rated: the best James Bond films – and the ones that die another day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/23/rated-best-james-bond-films-007-spectre>
When Fiennes filmed a movie in Russia recently, he was amazed actors weren’t 
required off camera when shooting closeups. “But the way that you hold on to 
the reality of a scene is the face and the eyes of the other person!” How 
strange, I say. And are Russians in general less reliant on eye contact? “No!” 
The room booms with amusement. “Generalisations like that are terrible, 
terrible, terrible! Journalists are really guilty of: Russians this, Russians 
that! Terrible!” He looks ecstatic.

Yet, without wanting to criticise, if anyone is “Russians this, Russians that” 
it’s Fiennes. He’s a fan. Soonhe’ll shoot a Rudolf Nureyev biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/23/ralph-fiennes-to-direct-but-not-star-in-rudolf-nureyev-drama>
 there (his third film as director and the first in which he won’t also star), 
and he invokes the land a lot. Being there is liberating, he says. He feels – 
mime of torso opening – something else open up inside him.

“Being a bit older and having been round the block a bit, you’re aware of all 
this English alertness to who someone is and where they’re from.” In Russia, 
and in New York, “it’s lovely to be away from those coordinates.”

But the legacy of communism also offers, he thinks, a caution against the 
nanny state we’d do well to heed. “We’re sitting here on the back of 
generations of choice and argument and the ability to say what we want.” 
Britain ought to be proud not only of its democracy but of its legacy – 
including, for instance, top-drawer public schools. He did a Q&A at Eton a few 
years ago and was really impressed. “Why can’t the whole state have access to 
that? Why? When we spend all this money on something like Trident.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fralph-fiennes-drama-sport-shakespeare-romeo-and-juliet-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429629140361%2Fcrop_KP_190437_640x480.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20what%20drama%20and%20sport%20have%20in%20common%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fralph-fiennes-drama-sport-shakespeare-romeo-and-juliet-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20what%20drama%20and%20sport%20have%20in%20common%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fralph-fiennes-drama-sport-shakespeare-romeo-and-juliet-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429629140361%2Fcrop_KP_190437_640x480.jpeg>
 Ralph Fiennes on getting kids to discover Shakespeare – video 
Fiennes has given thought to what Spectre says, for all his flippancy. He 
calls it “a very intelligent commercial for an England that is not pompously 
imperialistic. It has humour, wit, self-deprecation, but somewhere a very 
strong patriotic feeling that’s not too earnest.”

There’s truth here. There’s also projection. Fiennes – whom his brother 
described as living “like a monk who’s won the lottery” – shares a mix of 
traditionalism and progressiveness with many of his characters. M, who dines 
solo atRules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/24/marina-oloughlin-top-50-uk-restaurants>
, is a cousin to Gustave and even to Harry: British chins kept up even as 
civilisation crumbles around them.

They are all also, of course, men of a certain age, elegant relics with 
younger models snapping at their feet, pushing them towards the scrapheap. Can 
Fiennes relate? “Yes! You should seeThe Master Builder 
<http://www.guardianboxoffice.com/tickets/master-builder> [the Ibsen he’s in 
next]: ‘I hate the young; the young are knocking at the door.’ I can empathise 
with it, absolutely. It’s weird I’m about to be 53. You suddenly realise you’re 
playing these parts now. There’s a sense of surprise about how things have 
moved on.”

Fiennes’s other great good fortune these days is that he’s no longer so 
shockingly gorgeous. And the further he moves from Bradley Cooper towards 
Leonard Rossiter the better. In there’s flesh, there’s something about him 
approaching embarrassment; an unhappy aspect in a leading man (no wonder J-Lo 
romcomMaid in Manhattan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/mar/07/artsfeatures4> was such a 
horror).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445879280672%2F7fd6bcca-f3f5-46b6-8c7b-c2942542561d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20loosey-goosey%3F%20%20%E2%80%98I%C2%A0like%20that!%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ralph%20Fiennes%3A%20loosey-goosey%3F%20%20%E2%80%98I%C2%A0like%20that%21%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fralph-fiennes-spectre-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F26%2F1445879280672%2F7fd6bcca-f3f5-46b6-8c7b-c2942542561d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Fiennes as M in Spectre. Photograph: Allstar/United Artists 
Recent roles have fitted better, Fiennes thinks. He compares them to “the gift 
of a garment”. “You go: ‘That’s perfect, I love that. That feels like that’s 
me.’ I remember wearing trendy clothes when I was younger thinking: I want to 
be sharper. They were all an attempt to be something else.”

He fiddles with his jacket: bespoke blue linen, complex cross-hatching on the 
cuffs. He loved Harry but his biggest kinship is with Gustave. “His humour and 
his independence – he’s a single person, and I liked that about him. His 
mixture of decency and vanity that I thought was human and real.”

He sighs gently through the smile. He’s worried, he says, about our habit of 
immortalising an actor “at a certain fixed time” in their career: Laurence 
Olivier at around 40, Sean Connery as Bond, Jimmy Stewart after the second 
world war.

So when would he like to be fixed in our minds?

“I don’t want to be a fixed thing! Hahahahahahahahaha!” (His good humour is 
off the chart here.)

Isn’t it inevitable?

“I think somehow,” he says slowly, “I like this time. This sort of middle age. 
I don’t know why. I don’t want to analyse it too much.”

Might he try? “I feel slightly easier in my own skin than I did 20 years ago. 
Less anxious.” He smiles again, impeccably zen, in on a joke and eager that 
everyone else join him. “You see the inevitability. Of everything.”

• Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre> is out now. A Bigger 
Splash <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash> and Hail, Caesar! are 
out next year.The Master Builder 
<http://www.guardianboxoffice.com/tickets/master-builder> opens at the Old Vic, 
London, in January.
 