
“Secrets and lies. We’re all in pain. Why can’t we share our pain? I’ve spent 
my entire life trying to make people happy. And the three people I love most in 
the world hate each others’ guts, I’m stuck in the middle and I can’t take it 
anymore!”

So comes a powerful emotional outburst by husband, brother and uncle Maurice, 
played by Timothy Spall in Mike Leigh’s life-affirming family drama, Secrets 
and Lies (1996). It is a moment of tear-jerking catharsis when years of hidden 
feelings and secret problems boil to the surface. Secrecy, however, is somehow 
inevitable in human behaviour, but this week, the first key question is – if 
you have a secret, why write and perform and song about it? Isn’t that a 
paradox? Yes, and that’s the whole point. Because song, like any creative 
endeavour, is a form of release from an internal process, and songwriters are 
compelled, by nature, to expunge their hidden feelings.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzX1sPoZVZk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzX1sPoZVZk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzX1sPoZVZk&media=>
 A key clip from Secrets and Lies (1996) - Beware spoiler alert if you haven’t 
seen the film 
Music’s history, turned to high volumes of tension, is peppered with difficult 
relationships, not only with sexual partners, but also between performers, and 
it is those jealousies, frustrations, fears, deceptions, desires and secret 
activities which can end up expressed in the oblique, passionate, loud or 
subtle form. How many secrets and lies, or indeed truths, then, for example, 
have come out in song form about the tensions and behaviour between Jagger and 
Richards, Lennon and McCartney, Morrissey and Marr, and so many more? Did Paul 
Simon write and sing with Art Garfunkel on a song relating to their split, 
before the latter even knew what it meant? How many secrets are revealed in 
work that makes up the pop soap opera of Fältskog, Ulvaeus, Lyngstad and 
Andersson? Or through the work of the elusive Bowie, Dylan or Bush? Or the 
combustible chemistry and chaotic affairs of McKie, Nicks, Buckingham and 
Fleetwood?
 Kate Bush, notably secretive for decades, and remaining so, even after her 
first tour for 35 years last year. Photograph: Trevor Leighton/PA 
Then there are even bigger secrets. “Secrecy is the first essential in affairs 
of the state,” said the ruthless Cardinal Richelieu. But when secrecy rules, 
something is always rotten. And something reeks in Shakespeare’s fictional 
Denmark, where Hamlet is driven mad by a secret – the murder of his father by 
his uncle who then married his mother. He is torn whether to reveal it by 
words, or the action of revenge - to be or not to be, to do or not do, to act 
or not act. Secrecy is the pivot of his psychology, the doortrap of his 
tragedy. In the modern world, there is now another dilemma – to spy or not to 
spy.

Barack Obama, at the beginning of his first term as US president was 
determined to be a torch of open government. He wanted to cast off the shady 
era of the Bush administrations where the truth was often cloaked in the alleged
vested interests <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jul/22/usa.politics> 
of Cheney and Halliburton. “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants,” 
he said, and talked of “accountability through transparency”. Heissued a memo 
on the Freedom of Information Act to federal departments 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/freedom-information-act>, the 
data.gov <http://www.data.gov/> website was set up in 2009 and Obama was 
something of a pioneer in the promotion open data, the seedbed of so good stuff 
such as open-source inventions, analysis of information to improve society’s 
health, the environment, transport and energy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421952710129%2F921aaba0-9d1c-4870-bf51-9d237fad7c0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20secrets%20and%20secrecy%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20secrets%20and%20secrecy%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421952710129%2F921aaba0-9d1c-4870-bf51-9d237fad7c0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Edward Snowden, the whisteblower who revealed secrets about the surveillance 
programme of the US National Security Agency. Photograph: The 
Guardian/AFP/Getty Images 
But, paradoxically, Obama also found himself presiding over intelligence 
services that not only spied on allies, but also millions of innocent people 
online, as revealed in theEdward Snowden surveillance revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/01/edward-snowden-intelligence-leak-nsa-contractor-extract>
. Now the burning issue is whether, as David Cameron hopes,online encryption 
may be banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/15/david-cameron-ask-us-barack-obama-help-tracking-islamist-extremists-online>
 to help counter-terrorist intelligence, but without it theinternet could not 
properly function 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/13/cameron-ban-encryption-digital-britain-online-shopping-banking-messaging-terror>
. What a tangled web the world of online secrecy weaves.

So how can we keep a secret? And if so, how then can we stop secrets from 
doing harm, and only good, or eating us up? Some perfomers begin to believe 
their own secrets of success, and it is reflected in their later material. Many 
such dilemmas are expressed in songs, so perhapsGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell> was right in all sorts of 
ways, when he wrote, in Nineteen Eighty-Four: “If you want to keep a secret, 
you must also hide it from yourself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421952556193%2Fa04388a7-0e59-4aa6-b851-2a9a89cee226-781x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20secrets%20and%20secrecy%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20secrets%20and%20secrecy%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-secrets-and-secrecy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421952556193%2Fa04388a7-0e59-4aa6-b851-2a9a89cee226-781x1020.jpeg>
 Satin secrets … Billie Piper from Secret Diary Of A Call Girl Photograph: ITV2 
So then, let’s open up a world of secrets and secrecy in song nominations. 
They might contain the sexy or seedy, as in the TV drama, Secret Diary of a 
Call Girl. But secrets can also be positive and practical, such as trade 
secrets, or entertaining and skilful, such as those of the Magic Circle. Good 
secrecy can cover nice surprises, or help keep relationships alive, with a 
little spark of mystery. Then there are historical secrets, those carried to 
the grave, or, ones that may be unlocked, such as in the BBC’sSecrets of Bones 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03vrtkp>. Or, on another track, the so-called 
“secret squirrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-wheels-gb-cycling>” 
team of boffins and technicians of the British cycling team and the humorous 
rumour about their “magic wheels”. Secrecy and competitiveness ride together in 
sport, industry and many other places. The squirrel team’s inventiveness 
echoes, though in a less serious context, the workings ofAlan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
 and his war-time team of whirring wheels and information, who also strove, 
with success, to be a split second ahead of rivals.

You ain’t seen me, right? If there’s one thing about secrets, they will always 
out. This week’s secret sorcerer and captain of the covert is returning RR 
regularattwilightlarks 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/attwilightlarks/public>. So reveal your 
secret songs in nominations in comments below, and optionally in the Spotify 
playlistby last orders (11pm UK time) on Monday 26 January for the big reveal 
of results onThursday 29 January. Eureka! Voila!

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.

Please note. Next week - 29 January 2014 - there will be a special edition of 
Readers Recommend. More details soon …
 