
In several ways, literary Cincinnati and Anthony Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope> share a mother.

In financial straits, Fanny Trollope came to Cincinnati in 1828, arriving to 
find a boomtown with cultural ambitions, but also an uncouth outpost whose 
rising fortune was built upon its status as “Porkopolis”. Pigs roamed fetid 
streets, snuffling at the garbage Trollope, like her neighbors, was now 
expected to hurl through windows. Cincinnati had little by way of high-toned 
divertissement. A potential exception was the Western Museum, whose curator, 
aware that he couldn’t attract the public with arrowheads and mastodon bones, 
had begun importing wax figures. Trollope, an eager impresario, plunged in, 
devising an entertainment, “The Invisible Girl”, that featured her son Henry 
(spouting Latin and Greek) as the girl’s disembodied voice. Soon after, she 
dreamt up “Infernal Regions”, a tour “in very bugaboo style” throughDante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dantealighieri>’s underworld. Wildly 
popular, it would endure a quarter-century. To protect the waxwork denizens, 
often mauled by terrified spectators, they wired the mannequins; the viewer who 
ignored warnings would get a nasty shock, the price of seeking succor in hell.

My hero Fanny Trollope by Lucy Ellmann
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/05/fanny-trollope-lucy-ellmann-hero>
Emboldened, Trollope embarked on America’s first department store. Her Bazaar, 
a four-storey hodgepodge a friend called a “queer, unique, crescented Babel”, 
housed not only retail space for imported items (here her disaster-prone 
husband failed her again, squandering her nest-egg on unsellable junk) and for 
gimcracks cheaply available elsewhere, but also a coffeehouse, saloon, 
ballroom, and exhibition gallery. Here was an emporium to capture the attention 
and dollars of Cincinnati. Unfortunately, the heating system produced reeking 
hydrogen sulfide, a failing she ended up having to advertise, announcing that 
she would henceforth use oil and spermaceti.

As the Bazaar trundled toward its doom, Trollope contracted malaria, and in 
1830 she returned to Britain. She exacted revenge inDomestic Manners of the 
Americans 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/domestic-manners-of-the-americans.html>, a 
witty, scathing account of local mores, and especially of American hypocrisy 
about slavery. In Cincinnati, Trollope’s philippic incited outrage at Old World 
snobbery, but also (a familiar tale in 19th-century America) a fever for 
improvement and approval. In coming years, any bumpkin who spat in a theater 
might be scolded with “A Trollope, a Trollope!” Within five years, 
Cincinnatians had founded both theMercantile Library 
<http://new.mercantilelibrary.com/> (a still-vital cultural hub) and the 
Semi-Colon Club <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-Colon_Club>. The latter 
included Harriet Beecher Stowe, who arrived in Cincinnati – where she would 
live two decades – in 1832. She was profoundly influenced by Trollope’s 
virulent antislavery novelThe Life & Adventures of Jonathan Jefferson Whitlaw 
<http://www.amazon.com/Life-Adventures-Jonathan-Jefferson-Whitlaw/dp/1278131493>
 (1836), and the two became correspondents. A plumbline stretches, then, 
between Trollope and Cincinnati’s most famous novel,Uncle Tom’s Cabin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/uncle-tom-s-cabin-5.html>, which Lincoln 
supposedly called “the little book that started this great war”.

Don't blame Uncle Tom
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/mar/30/race.society> 
 Trollope and Stowe had witnessed firsthand the escape of desperate fugitive 
blacks across the Ohio river into the city, and Toni Morrison’s magisterial
Beloved <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/08/fiction.tonimorrison> 
(1987) also hinges on the city’s status as Underground Railroad destination. 
Morrison’s tale of slavery, infanticide, and their shadows derives from the 
case ofMargaret Garner <http://library.cincymuseum.org/aag/bio/garner.html>, 
who fled to Cincinnati with her family across the frozen river in January 1856, 
and then – hunted down by slavecatchers – slit her infant daughter’s throat 
rather than see her returned to bondage.

Cincinnati native Edmund White’s Fanny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview7> 
tells, in the playful, astringent voice of Trollope herself, the story ofFanny 
Wright <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Frances-Wright>, the young radical 
who enticed her to the New World. (See also his pathbreakingA Boy’s Own Story 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Boys-Own-Story-Picador-Books/dp/0330281518>.) Less 
directly: the fabulist Steven Millhauser set some early work, including the 
novellaThe Little Kingdom of J. Franklin Payne 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Little-Kingdoms-Novellas-Vintage-Contemporaries/dp/0375701435/ref=la_B000AQ3L6Y_1_13?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1438855904&sr=1-13>
, in Victorian Cincinnati, and one may see echoes of Trollope’s pleasure-palace 
misadventures in the rococo contrivances of the Grand Cosmo in his 
Pulitzer-winningMartin Dressler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/340472/> (1996).

 Cincinnati is often cited as Sinclair Lewis’s model for Zenith, the 
hyper-conformist midwestern city inBabbitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/11/100-best-novels-babbitt-sinclair-lewis-robert-mccrum>
 (1922), and Lewis did live there as he researched. Another novel about 
capitalism run rampant in which Cincinnati may serve as an encrypted setting is 
Richard Powers’sGain <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gain.html> (1998), in 
which Clare & Co. is rival to (and based on)Procter & Gamble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/proctergamble>, the consumer-products 
behemoth that started as a soap company making use of Porkopolis’s plentiful 
byproducts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-cincinnati%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357536559%2F690d30bb-21ff-40e4-9e77-a99d603358c2-1016x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Cincinnati&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-cincinnati%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Cincinnati&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-cincinnati%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357536559%2F690d30bb-21ff-40e4-9e77-a99d603358c2-1016x1020.jpeg>
 Not “Porkopolis” in there ... Interior of the Public Libray of Cincinnati, 
1874. 
The city’s distinguished poetry history owes much to the University of 
Cincinnati’sGeorge Elliston Endowment 
<http://www.artsci.uc.edu/departments/creative_writing/graduate_program/elliston_poetry_fund.html>
. Before creative writing entered the academy, Elliston brought luminaries to 
campus for a year, and in the 1950s alone the list includedJohn Berryman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/24/happy-100th-birthday-john-berryman-poetry>
,Robert Lowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/03/robert-lowell-hero-jonathan-raban>
,Stephen Spender <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephen-spender>, and 
Robert Frost <https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-frost>. The series still 
brings excellent poets to town for brief or extended visits. Other poets with 
Cincinnati ties include such diverse talents asNikki Giovanni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/22/usgunviolence.poetry>, Richard 
Howard <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/richard-howard>, Andrew Hudgins 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/andrew-hudgins>, Kenneth Koch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/sep/06/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, andWilliam Matthews <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/william-matthews>.

Austin Wright’s literary thriller Tony and Susan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright> 
(1993) has in recent years had a renaissance in the UK, and Leah Stewart’sThe 
History of Us 
<http://books.simonandschuster.com/The-History-of-Us/Leah-Stewart/9781451672633>
, an acutely observed (Trollopean!) novel about a professor who must return to 
Cincinnati, the hometown she thought she’d escaped, created a stir in 2013. 
Other fiction writers with either residency or roots in Cincinnati include
Thomas Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/31/thomas-berger>, 
Michael Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/feb/07/michael-cunningham-life-writing>
,Christopher Bollen 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-ca-jc-christopher-bollen-20150510-story.html>
,Brock Clarke 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/04/books/review/the-happiest-people-in-the-world-by-brock-clarke.html>
, andChris Bachelder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/19/fiction.shopping3>. And native 
Curtis Sittenfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/books/curtis-sittenfeld> has 
lately undertaken, as part of theAusten Project <http://theaustenproject.com/>, 
a contemporary version of Pride & Prejudice.Eligible 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2014/07/if-pride-and-prejudice-took-place-today-jane-would-have-to-be-40/373874/>
 isn’t expected until next year, but rumor has it that in Sittenfeld’s telling, 
the Miss Bennets will be nearing 40 ... and the role of Meryton will be played 
by Cincinnati.

 * Michael Griffith’s most recent novel is Trophy 
<http://www.amazon.com/Trophy-A-Novel-Michael-Griffith/dp/0810152185>. He is 
fiction editor ofCincinnati Review <http://www.cincinnatireview.com/#/home/> 
and may be found on Twitter@Griffithnonpapa 
<https://twitter.com/griffithnonpapa>.

Readers recommend

 * Cuesta Benberry’s work: “I am very interested in the work by Cincinnati 
nativeCuesta Benberry 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/10/arts/design/10benberry.html>, a historian 
who was born in the 1923 and died only recently,” saidDorothysWords 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15217754>. “She wrote several books, 
the most beautiful of which isAlways There: The African-American Presence in 
American Quilts 
<http://www.amazon.com/Always-There-African-American-Presence-American/dp/1880584026>
. Though she never put her hand to actually making a quilt, she discovered the 
art and messages embedded in these heirloom pieces of art. It’s a very 
interesting story that speaks to African Americans’ struggle to feel their art 
was ‘good enough’ to show to others, to feel proud of their heritage and 
abilities, and to one woman’s realization of the rich human experience that was 
sewn into the artfully assembled scraps of fabric.”

 * Ones to watch: “There are some fantastic authors and poets working in and 
writing about Cincinnati today that deserve recognition. Mr. Griffith’s 
colleague at the Cincinnati ReviewDon Peteroy 
<http://www.cincinnatireview.com/blog/tag/don-peteroy/> is one to watch. He and 
his wifePhoebe <https://phoebereevespoet.wordpress.com/>, a poet, are at the 
heart of Cincinnati’s young writers scene and genuinely great people. 
Cincinnati is also home to Lisa Brandstetter Holt,Reyna Hawk 
<https://reynahawk.wordpress.com/>, Julie Griffith and a host of others,” said 
LawrenceParlier <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15221987>.  