
Have you ever read a book which has made you step back and see the world from 
another perspective, one you may not have even considered previously? In a new 
YouGov opinion poll commissioned by Amnesty International UK, parents were 
asked to select the pastime from a list of activities that they thought 
developed their child’s empathy the most - and reading has reached the top 
spot. More than half of 964 parents polled (53%) thought reading a book helped 
their children put themselves in someone else’s shoes, with just 12% saying TV 
and just 3% believing playing a computer game was the best way to develop 
empathy.

Gender non-conformity: breaking the binary in teen fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/30/gender-non-conformity-lgbt-teens-ya-teen-books>
Although the poll has been conducted for parents, it’s no surprise that this 
research compares with previous academic findings linking empathy and reading 
amongst children and teens.

As books spotlight the psychology of the characters and often focus on complex 
relationships and situations they can be a key element in teaching the 
unwritten rules of social communication and understanding emotions.

RJ Palacio: what is kindness?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/12/rj-palacio-what-is-kindness>
Here is the full list of books which parents picked as helping children learn 
to identify with others:

1. The BFG <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bfg-9.html> by Roald Dahl (17%)

2. To Kill a Mockingbird 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/to-kill-a-mockingbird.html> by Harper Lee 
(16%)

3. The Secret Garden 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/oxford-children-s-classics-the-secret-garden.html>
 by Frances Hodgson Burnett (14%)

4. Goodnight Mister Tom 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/goodnight-mister-tom.html> by Michelle 
Magorian (13%)

5. Charlotte’s Web <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlotte-s-web-5.html> 
by EB White

6. Winnie the Pooh <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-5.html> 
by AA Milne andThe Adventures of Huckleberry 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/adventures-of-huckleberry-finn-18.html> Finn 
by Mark Twain (9%)

7. Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-philosopher-s-stone-16.html>
 by JK Rowling (7%)

8. Noughts and Crosses 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/noughts-and-crosses-8.html> by Malorie 
Blackman andRoll of Thunder, Hear My Cry 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/roll-of-thunder-hear-my-cry-6.html> by 
Mildred D Taylor (2%)

You might be surprised that books such as RJ Palacio’s Wonder 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wonder-5.html> and Lisa Williamson’s The Art 
of Being Normal <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-being-normal.html> 
didn’t make the list of novels chosen parents. These stories are memorable, 
emotional and relevant, and although they may not have been the ones that 
parents had in mind whilst discussing empathy, they’re the books doing the job 
for a 2016 audience. We’d love you to tell us the books you think are the best 
for helping you empathise with other people and why.

Carnegie medal and Kate Greenaway shortlists 2016 announced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/15/carnegie-medal-kate-greenaway-shortlists-2016>
These findings come as Amnesty UK are set to make a special book commendation 
in theCarnegie and Kate Greenaway awards shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/15/carnegie-medal-kate-greenaway-shortlists-2016>
, in a new partnership with the professional librarian’s body CILIP. The 
Amnesty CILIP Honour will be the first ever human rights commendation for 
children’s books, bestowing the award to the books which most distinctively 
demonstrate or celebrate freedom.


Do share the books which have helped you step into someone else’s shoes via 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianteenbooks>, Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> or by good old email: 
childrens.books@theguardian.com.

Aysegul, via email
The Book Thief by Marcus Zusak: this book not only creates empathy for the 
direct victims of the Nazi regime, most particularly the Jews, but also allows 
us to see the good-hearted citizens of Germany at that time who were oppressed 
by the same regime. It basically gives a voice to goodness, purity and 
friendship. The bond between Max (the fugitive) and Liesel is especially moving.
 