
I think I was 10 when I first read Alan Garner. Maybe nine. It was, anyway, 
some time before I first listened toThe Queen Is Dead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/album/d8dde278-482c-3cc8-a530-fea70476f3a5>, 
readThe Catcher in the Rye 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780241950432/the-catcher-in-the-rye>
, watchedBill and Ted's Excellent Adventure 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0096928/> and turned into someone pretty similar 
to the person writing this article.

I feel as if I could easily talk to that later, Morrissey-obsessed former 
self, even if I'd be over-keen on offering him patronising advice and telling 
him not to be so scared of girls. But I'd have a harder time with the person 
who came before and was so enchanted by Alan Garner's storytelling. I remember 
that boy, his brown glasses and white Gola trainers. I can still recall the 
things he did, and the way he felt. But I'm no longer exactly sure that I can 
plug into his way of thinking.

So, for instance, I clearly recall what it was like to first pick up those 
books, with the summer holidays stretching out before me, reclining on a floral 
garden chair, and disappearing, for days on end, into a land of magic, mystery 
and menace. I can remember thinking how much fun it would be to tramp out over 
Alderley Edge and take on the Morthbrood. I can remember – clearly –the cover 
of my Armada Lion paperback 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/61awF5dttmL._SL500_AA300_.gif>, and 
scouring it for clues about the contents of the book. I can remember the 
sadness of reaching the final page, and the happiness of knowing there was a 
sequel and that I had all the time in the world in which to read it.

But – sadly – I am unable to recapture or recreate those feelings. You can't 
go home again, after all 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_Can%27t_Go_Home_Again>. I feared before I 
started re-reading The Weirdstone of Brisingamen that I might even taint those 
precious memories; that the wild old magic I experienced so keenly the first 
time around would no longer be there, and that I would feel yet more cut off 
from my boyhood. I worried, in fact, that I might not even like the books any 
more: that they might have to be relegated to the same place as model 
aeroplanes,Panini stickers 
<http://www.paninionline.com/collectibles/institutional/bt/uk/> and toffee 
bonbons. Something I enjoyed at the time, but can't begin to understand now. 
Might these old favourites now seem hopelessly childish?

But then, as has already been pointed out by one Reading Grouper 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17469770>, childish 
doesn't necessarily mean bad – or even bad for adults – when it comes to books. 
The joy of reading my daughter Roald Dahl and the Tiger Who Came to Tea has 
already taught me that much. What's more, Alan Garner occupies an interesting 
hinterland between childish and adult fiction. As the author himself neatly put 
it: "I do not think consciously of children [when writing] … I do know that 
children read me more intelligently than adults do." Even though you might have 
to be under 12 to appreciate fully the immersive power of Brisingamen, there's 
still plenty to latch on to as an adult.

It wasn't all plain sailing. This time around, I was taken aback by how 
quickly things started happening. Colin and Susan barely have time to tuck down 
their first meal in Cheshire before they're meeting wizards, facing off with 
witches and speeding into delirious adventure.Satantango it is not 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/may/09/satantango-laszlo-krasznahorkai-review>
. Clearly, as a child, I didn't require quite so much information about 
motivation as I do now.

But once I was used to the pedal-to-the-metal pacing, Garner's spell began to 
work again. His language, for instance, and especially his choice of words, is 
frequently exquisite. What better name for the great spirit of darkness than 
Nastrond? The word makes him almost visible. Thanks to Garner's vivid 
descriptions, it's just as easy to imagine the old paths and hilltops on 
Alderley Edge. It made me as keen to visit rural Cheshireas Lawrence Durrell 
did Alexandria 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/reading-group+lawrence-durrell> – and 
that's in spite of the Wags and lurking evil.

On the subject of the latter, there's something splendidly chilling and 
unsettling about the books. The mists on the slopes, the darkness in the caves, 
the exposure in open spaces, the claustrophobia of the mines: these things are 
beautifully rendered. Even the elves are badass, bad-tempered and ugly, while 
that most innocent of creatures, the mountain rambler, becomes entirely 
malevolent. I found the children's ally, the wizard Cadellin, a dark presence 
even before the surprise ending (about which I shall endeavour to say no more). 
Garner's young protagonists do not have an easy path, and that makes following 
them all the more interesting.

In short, revisiting the books has been a real pleasure, so far. I'm happy to 
say that I feel closer to my younger self after reading them. He was right! Or 
so it seems to me.

But what about you? How has re-entering Garner's alternate reality been? And 
perhaps more interesting still, if you are a first-time reader, free from 
nostalgia, how do you find them?
 