
Discoveries can happen in solitude, but more often where more than one person 
is involved. So for a sociable experiment typical of the friendliness of 
Readers Recommend, DarceysDad undertook to stay at treefrogdemon’s house to see 
what might occur if they went song searching together to compile a list from 
last week’s topic. But what did these two top regulars find out?


DarceysDad: Things I discovered this week - rugby union is strangely popular. 
AndSmog’s Bill Callahan has some very dark places in his head. “I can hold a 
woman down on a hardwood floor,/ And this was my cold discovery.” I don’t want 
to dwell on that, so let’s immediately make a more consensual discovery.John 
Mayer goes on a wonderfully warm and sexy expedition; the sound of a lazy 
uninterrupted afternoon in bed that those of us with kids can barely remember.


Discovering that you’re going to have a child is described by Creed’s Scott 
Stapp. This song has a major place in my own affections, as I first heard it at 
precisely the moment “I just heard the news today, It seems my life is gonna 
change, I take her hand, we stand in awe, we’ve created life”. I discovered my
writing partner disapproves of rock bands using orchestras just for added pomp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/apr/02/readers-recommend-songs-with-orchestral-string-instruments-results>
, so she’s not pleased I picked the “With Strings” version!

treefrogdemon: Things I discovered this week – I really do not like Creed’s 
With Arms Wide Open. Yet it’s one of DsD’s absolute favourites! Oh well.Alabama 
Shakes’s debut album came out in 2012, but their sound is very reminiscent of 
60s R’n’B and soul: no bad thing! It’s an assured and happy song.The Bhundu Boys
’ Babamunini Francis, though, tells of a tragedy in the making as we work out 
that “Uncle Francis” is not all he seems.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-discovery-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfcc0f18bed6783aae420a18e240ae1af1676a9%2F0_25_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20discovery%20%E2%80%93%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-discovery-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20discovery%20%E2%80%93%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-discovery-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfcc0f18bed6783aae420a18e240ae1af1676a9%2F0_25_2920_1751%2F2920.jpg>
 The Bhundu Boys in 1987. What can we discover about ‘Uncle Francis’? 
Photograph: Nils Jorgensen/Rex Features 
DarceysDad: Can tending the wrong grave for 23 years be regarded as a tragedy? 
That more people haven’t discoveredHalf Man Half Biscuit’s Nigel Blackwell‘s 
lyrical wit most definitely is. And did any of you know ofKev Hopper before 
this week? RR regular vastariner discovered him in a long-forgotten Chart Show, 
and shared him with us. Kev’sscientific discovery sounds useful too 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/60603753>, which is more 
than can be said forAlice Donut’s. It seems it’s only a short step from Cow 
Placenta to Armageddon.

treefrogdemon: Hanno The Navigator was a real person 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanno_the_Navigator>, a Carthaginian explorer 
from the sixth century BC or so, whose scary encounters with the natives whilst 
sailing down the west coast of Africa are described byAl Stewart. 


Meanwhile the wrecked Athens Queen falls prey to a set of scavengers who loot 
all the goodies they discover aboard her and, it’s hinted byStan Rogers, aren’t 
above doing the actual wrecking themselves. Whatever. I’ll have some of what 
they’re having. And talking of a life on the ocean wave, you can call me Cook – 
Captain Cook – for I believe I’ve discovered Australia!Paul Kelly’s song 
Everything’s Turning To White is based on aRaymond Carver 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Carver> story also used in the films 
Short Cuts and Jindabyne. The song tells of a discovery made by a group of 
friends on a fishing trip, and a different one made by the wife of one of them 
on their return. They are big discoveries.


Listening to the Audreys’ Small Things we work out that the things discovered 
are not small at all – though they may be disdained and disregarded. I hesitate 
to say that this is a common feature of women’s lives...Hell, no I don’t: this 
is a common feature of women’s lives.

DarceysDad: Finally, there is one discovery we all have yet to make: what’s on 
the other side? Whatever it is,Death Cab For Cutie’s lovers are determined to 
find out together. Though I discovered treefrogdemon is a brilliant host, I’m 
not sure the experience made us THAT close!

treefrogdemon: Finally again, it was brilliant having DsD to stay and making a 
playlist with him. I discovered he likes margaritas.


The playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXOVseJ5JIiI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXOVseJ5JIiI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXOVseJ5JIiI&media=>
 Songs about discovery A-list playlist 
1. Smog – Cold Discovery

2. John Mayer – Your Body Is A Wonderland

3. Creed – With Arms Wide Open

4. Alabama Shakes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes> – I Found 
You

5. Bhundu Boys – Baba Munini Francis

6. Half Man Half Biscuit – Tending The Wrong Grave For 23 Years

7. Kev Hopper – The Sound Of Gyroscopes

8. Alice Donut – Cow’s Placenta To Armageddon

9. Al Stewart – Hanno The Navigator

10. Stan Rogers – The Wreck Of The Athens Queen

11. Paul Kelly – Everything’s Turning To White

12. The Audreys – Small Things

13. Death Cab For Cutie – I Will Follow You Into The Dark
 