
“Less is more,” said the architect Ludwig Mies Van Der Rohe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/27/mies-van-der-rohe-google-doodle>
, minimalistic in his buildings, but certainly not his name. But how is 
minimalism made in song form? Be sparse, spare, pare, shear, prune, soften or 
shorten? The writer Nathan Morris summed it up: “Edit your life frequently and 
ruthlessly. It’s your masterpiece after all.”

So this week we’re all about music that’s trimmed down to its fighting weight. 
As John Cage said: “I want to get clean and mean and minimalist.” But what are 
minimalist songs? This need not be restricted at all to experimentalists like 
Cage, who created 4’33’’ of silence accompanied by the sounds of a coughing, 
shuffling, restless audience. Nor to those composers with whom the term 
minimalist is more formally associated –Michael Nyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-nyman>, La Monte Young and his 
“drone music”, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, and John Adams. Much of 
their work is characterised by iterations of simple phrases, often in a form 
known as systems music, but this repetitious technique can be found across a 
huge spectrum of artists. That could be in simple melodies from classical to 
pop, beats and basslines from reggae to dance, or anything else, before and 
since.


So instead your choices of minimalistic songs can be far broader and 
subjective. You might find it perhaps in a clean, clear sound, or perhaps in 
sparseness of lyrics or akin to the purity of thought sought by poetry or 
mathematics. As the poetWalt Whitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/walt-whitman> said: “Simplicity is the glory 
of expression.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845306358%2F5a04367b-9327-405a-be29-ffaee3307cc6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845306358%2F5a04367b-9327-405a-be29-ffaee3307cc6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Clean machines … do Kraftwerk come into the category of minimalism? 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
So where else is minimalism? Alternatively in the stripped back style of an 
acoustic singer-songwriter, perhaps Jon Hopkins, Bill Wells, Aiden Moffat, or 
Gillian Welch, or the direct simplicity of delivery, or a word, message, image, 
or single sound. Or in electronic music, perhaps in everything from and 
inspired by German bands Kraftwerk or Tangerine Dream, or krautrock’s 
repetitious momentum, dance music or experimental artists such asLaurie Anderson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/laurie-anderson>. In short, if it expresses 
sparse simplicity to you, it counts. The palette is broad, but it is all about 
finding the level that works. As the Estonian composer Arvo Pärt explained, 
there is a balance between how “you can kill people with sound. And ... maybe 
there is also the sound that is the opposite. The distance between these two 
points is very big. And you are free – you can choose. In art everything is 
possible, but everything is not necessary.”


Miles Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/music/miles-davis>, for example, 
began his career playing fast, furious, and with clever complexity, but in his 
more mature years his skill was as much about when he didn’t play as when he 
did. In all music the space between notes can count just as much, and 
experience increases this art.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845655038%2F4c067b5b-8d7f-41f8-acf5-3a6c555e62bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845655038%2F4c067b5b-8d7f-41f8-acf5-3a6c555e62bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Original minimalism: Tate Modern’s Kazimir Malevich exhibition, featuring his 
famous Black Square painting of 1915. Photograph: Sarah Lee/Guardian 
As well as jazz, your inspiration may also come in work that stretches way 
before the pop, rock or electronic era. Minimalism was first used as a term in 
English to describe a 1913 painting by the Russian Kazimir Malevich, of a black 
square on a white background, and then his more famous Black Square of 1915. 
What was this all about? A reaction to an increasingly complex and difficult, 
changing world? The century was later awash with minimalistic painters from 
Josef Albers, to Barnet Newman andMark Rothko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rothko>, all of whom will have 
influenced designers and art-studying musicians.


And in France, the artist Yves Klein created his 1949 Monotone Symphony, a 
20-minute sustained chord followed by a 20-minute silence, probably not the 
most fascinating listening, but highly influential. Alternatively your song 
choices may come from or be influenced by the Japanese wabi-sabi tradition of 
simplicity reflected in everything from beautiful gardens to art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845795239%2F612a3bb3-dd38-4e81-b666-3997ed1a60d2-1660x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20minimalist%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Freaders-recommend-minimalist-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435845795239%2F612a3bb3-dd38-4e81-b666-3997ed1a60d2-1660x2040.jpeg>
 Eccentric minimalist … Kenneth Williams in 1985. Photograph: Steve 
Bent/Associated Newspa/REX 
Japanese or otherwise, your song choices might express something about minimal 
possessions or a seeking a simple life. I have a friend who only wears black 
and limits himself to only owning 20 books and 20 CDs. When he purchases 
anything new for his collection, a book or CD must be plucked from the shelf to 
allowing the new one in, and the ejected item is sometimes left for a random 
stranger to find on a bus. It’s not a process, nor a regular dilemma I could 
live with, surrounded as I am at home by thousands of books and music in all 
formats. But some people do seek out minimal lives. The comic Carry On! actor
Kenneth Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/apr/08/kennethwilliams>
, for example, liked his apartment to be kept extremely sparse with hardly any 
possessions at all, maybe just a chair and table and bed. Perhaps it helped him 
find clarity. For what is minimalism about after all, but an attempt to make 
sense of the world and a path towards calm and happiness?

Minimal caveat: we’ve previously had short songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/aug/18/1>, and songs with 10 words or 
fewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/03/readers-recommend-songs-with-10>
, and songs aboutausterity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/20/readers-recommend-songs-austerity-results>
, but these are all at a very different angle to this topic. So place your 
choices in comments below and optionally in the Spotify playlist, where this 
week’s master of minimalism,nilpferd 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/nilpferd>, will pare down the nominations 
for a tight, taut list published nextThursday 9 July, with deadline for 
suggestions beinglast orders (11pm BST) this Monday 6 July. That’s it. In short.

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify or 
SoundCloud are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 