
“Are we going to be a resort town for the super-rich from all around the 
world, or a functional, integrated city?” wonders the essayist and comedian 
Charles Demers near the end ofVancouver Special 
<http://www.bcstudies.com/?q=book-reviews/vancouver-special>, his witty and 
deeply anxious meditation on the past, present, and future of Canada’s “most 
livable” city. To live in Vancouver right now is to accommodate yourself to the 
slightly uncanny feeling that your future here depends less on anything you do 
than on the invisible hand of the global market.

Or not so invisible: from the pretty west-side neighbourhoods where Teslas 
practically outnumber Toyotas, to the humbler precincts where a crappy bungalow 
will still set you back a million and a half dollars, just about every corner 
of Vancouver bears the imprint of global capital. The flood of foreign 
investment since the late 1990s — mainly in the form of property speculation, 
first from nervous Hong Kong residents, pre-handover, and, much more 
intensively over the past few years, from newly prosperous China — has 
transformed the city. Forget the Vancouver Canucks and the ski hills whose 
clean, well-lighted slopes beckon from the North Shore suburbs; real estate, as 
Douglas Coupland observes inCity of Glass <http://coupland.tripod.com/cg1.html>
, his wry hometown homage, is “Vancouver’s biggest sport … disturbingly central 
to the civic psyche”.

If this particular anxiety doesn’t much concern novelists and poets, remaining 
for now the imaginative domain of elegant worriers like Demers (as well as 
noted urbanists theReal Housewives of Vancouver 
<http://www.slice.ca/the-real-housewives-of-vancouver/>), it’s because 
Vancouver, at barely 130 years old, has always been a city in transition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80d6a2966a7893ed4aabe6e5eab7ae9e93a30289%2F0_533_2100_2459%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Vancouver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Vancouver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80d6a2966a7893ed4aabe6e5eab7ae9e93a30289%2F0_533_2100_2459%2F2100.jpg>
 Alice Munro … came to a sober provincial town in the 1950s. Photograph: 
Rex/Sipa USA 
Nobel laureate Alice Munro, arriving in the 1950s, found a sober provincial 
town that little resembled the shiny not-quite-metropolis of luxury condos and 
esoteric sports cars we know today. Its moody weather and mountain vistas, as 
commanding then as they are now,weren’t much to her taste 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/11/travel/11footsteps.html>. Some of that 
chilly perspective can be found in the beautiful and melancholy stories ofThe 
Love of a Good Woman 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/11/01/reviews/981101.01gorrat.html> (1998) 
and Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage (2001). She decamped to 
nearby Vancouver Island in the early 60s, on the cusp of a breakthrough in her 
writing just as the city was on the cusp of the countercultural era from which 
its popular image as an easygoing mecca of progressive politics and potent pot 
first took root.

The image endures, even as the Vancouver brand, now global, thanks to the 
Economist <http://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2015/08/daily-chart-5> 
and the2010 Winter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/mar/01/winter-olympics-sexiest-athlete>
, has evolved to include yoga, dim sum, andthe entertainment-industrial complex 
<http://www.tourismvancouver.com/do/explore/sightseeing/filmed-in-vancouver/>. 
Timothy Taylor’s novelStanley Park 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8645.Stanley_Park> explores the tension 
between local and global through the travails of Jeremy Papier, a chef 
determined to make a mark on the city’s gastronomical scene with his “radically 
rearguard” locavore cuisine. To keep his struggling restaurant afloat, Papier 
sells a majority stake to the owner of a global coffee conglomerate, flames 
out, and finds redemption in an illegal pop-up restaurant. If that sounds a 
little on the nose, Taylor enlivens the material with a restless curiosity and 
knack for well-turned phrases.

Madeleine Thien chronicles the lives of immigrant families in the brilliant, 
subtle stories of Simple Recipes. Coupland’s Hey! Nostradamus imagines a 
Columbine-like school shooting in the sleepy suburb of North Vancouver. Doretta 
Lau’s fresh and funny collection How Does a Single Blade of Grass Thank the 
Sun? includes a story where people are assailed by text messages from their 
future selves and another that turns a gang of stereotype-flaunting Asian 
teenagers loose on Vancouver’s unsuspecting suburbs. On the nonfiction front, 
Alisa Smith and JB Mackinnon’s locavore manifesto The 100 Mile Diet merits 
mention for its quintessential Vancouverness.

But the city’s progressive politics and proud multiculturalism belie a darker, 
troubled history. From the rise of the racistAsiatic Exclusion League 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asiatic_Exclusion_League> in the early 1900s, to 
the brutal crackdowns on organised labour during the Clutch Plague and 
internment of Japanese-Canadian residents during the second world war, to the 
ongoing neglect ofFirst Nations communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/07/canada-first-nations-vote-native-canadian-politics-election>
, Vancouver has been shaped by class and cultural conflict, by its successive, 
anxious encounters with otherness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa438414a2ff972bf92f60200ed949c15aa4901c9%2F16_153_1027_616%2F1027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Vancouver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Vancouver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Freading-cities-books-about-vancouver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa438414a2ff972bf92f60200ed949c15aa4901c9%2F16_153_1027_616%2F1027.jpg>
 Joy Kogawa … witness to one of Vancouver’s shameful chapters. 
In her autobiographical novel Obasan 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9723.Obasan>, Joy Kogawa recreates one of 
these shameful chapters from the perspective of a Japanese-Canadian girl called 
Naomi Nakane. Hers is one of the thousands of families forcibly relocated from 
the city and interned as “enemy aliens” in camps hundreds of miles from home. 
Told in a restrained, lyrical style, the novel traces with tenderness and 
dawning trepidation Naomi’s childhood journey from innocence to tragedy. A 
staple of high school English classes, Obasan still has the power to turn this 
reader into a hot mess of tears.

The Jade Peony <http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-312-15556-8>, by Wayson 
Choy, offers a different perspective on the same era. An intergenerational tale 
set in Chinatown during the 1930s and 40s, it follows Jook-Liang, Jung-Sum, and 
Sek-Lung, siblings who are Canadian by birth but second-class citizens by the 
laws of the day. Resented but less reviled than their Japanese neighbours, the 
trio are torn, to various degrees, between the “old ways” of their parents and 
grandparents and the contradictory promises of assimilation.

Lee Henderson’s The Man Game is a sort-of historical novel that conjures 1880s 
Vancouver, whose opium dens, brothels, and logging camps full of migrant 
labourers anticipate the depredations of the Downtown Eastside, the city’s 
still-open wound where poverty and addiction fester in the shadow of 
gentrification more than a century later. The elegant linked stories of Nancy 
Lee’s Dead Girls have as their backdrop the arrest and trial of a serial killer 
reminiscent of Robert Pickton, the real-life predator who in the 90s and early 
noughties stalked and killed sex workers in the area, many of them First 
Nations women. Unfolding with frosty precision, these stories unsettle.

Conspicuously absent here is the Great Vancouver Novel. The city has inspired 
many good books, but no municipal epic — no Crossing the Brooklyn Ferry or 
Ulysses or evenIn the Skin of a Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview31>
,Michael Ondaatje’s great prose poem about Canada’s other “most livable” city 
(and Vancouver nemesis), Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/09/reading-cities-books-about-toronto>
. What seems to unite Vancouver’s literary output is an almost compulsive need 
to historicise coupled with an aversion to myth-making. Whether this is a 
function of the extreme youth of the city or a (very) Canadian modesty about 
grand narratives, I couldn’t tell you. But who knows? Maybe, just maybe, the 
present real-estate crisis will turn out to be the muse Vancouver needs. 
Assuming anyone can afford to stay and write the thing.

 * Tyler Stiem is a Vancouver writer and photographer. His reportage, travel 
writing, and radio documentaries have appeared in Newsweek, Vice, the Globe and 
Mail, Walrus, VQR, Hazlitt and on CBC Radio.You can find him on Twitter 
@strange_shores <https://twitter.com/strange_shores>. 
Readers recommend

 * Malcolm Lowry wrote scathingly of Vancouver development/gentrification, and 
lovingly of the then-undeveloped Indian Arm, from his Dollarton cabin, in his 
short fiction andOctober Ferry to Gabriola 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1179956.October_Ferry_To_Gabriola>. –
OldCreoleBonVivant <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1970330> 
 * I recently enjoyed Adrian Barnes’s Nod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/08/science-fiction-roundup-reviews>
, set in a post-apocalyptic West End and downtown, with key scenes on the 
Lions’ Gate Bridge and on a freighter commandeered from English Bay! –
OldCreoleBonVivant <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1970330> 
 * Douglas Coupland’s Girlfriend in a Coma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1998/nov/14/fiction.douglascoupland> is 
quite a good depiction of 70’s West and North Van. –OldCreoleBonVivant 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1970330> 
 * And a favorite kids’ book: Mister Got to Go 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/858661.Mister_Got_to_Go> by Lois Simmie, 
set in and around the Sylvia hotel to the steady beat of perpetual rain. And 
raccoons. –OldCreoleBonVivant <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1970330> 
 * Hands down the book Vancouver 
<http://www.abebooks.co.uk/book-search/title/vancouver/author/nicol-eric/> by 
the late reporterEric Nicol. A mixture of humour and history, tells the story 
of Vancouver from the time when the Whoi-Whoi lived at what is now Lumberman’s 
arch, through the sixties. –interiorbc 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10583005> 
 * A small but interesting novel about Vancouver is One Hundred Days of Rain 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24735401-one-hundred-days-of-rain> by 
Carelin Brooks, a meditation on the break-up of a marriage and all the 
variations of rain that fall on the city. –jmschrei 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10032217> 
 * Another Vancouver book worth checking out is Amber Dawn’s How Poetry Saved 
My Life: A Hustler’s Memoir 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/16057339-how-poetry-saved-my-life>. It’s a 
tough, funny, and sometimes sad of account of her journey from sex worker to 
successful writer. She’s also a great reader, if you ever get a chance to see 
her live. –strange_shores <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15501941> 
 * Burning Water <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1670872.Burning_Water>, 
for which George Bowering won a Governor General’s Award for it in 1980. It’s 
an hilarious and masterful revisioning of Vancouver’s “discovery” of the city, 
a land already inhabited, thank you very much. –mountainsandsea 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11857614>  