
With origins in the National Jazz festival of 1961, Reading festival is the 
world's oldest music event still in action and has been one of the most 
significant marks on the rock calendar since the 1970s, with the addition of 
Leeds festival in 1999. Although it's a far cry from its formative musical 
inclinations, this year's lineup is an eclectic mix of rock, rap and general 
raucousness. Here are some of the things to look forward to this year.

Eminem's big return

Although the festival is quite right to proclaim one of the most successful 
rappers in history as a "global superstar",Eminem's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem> star has waned somewhat since he 
headlined here in 2001. Drugs, rehab and criticism of his flow have perhaps 
taken the edge off the talent that once trailblazedwith Stan 
<http://www.muzu.tv/eminem/stan-music-video/195779/> et al. However, with the 
expected 70-80,000 strong crowd, including many too young to see him in his 
heyday, the stage is set for a giant comeback.

Something unashamedly modern

Reading on mobile? Click to view 
<http://player.muzu.tv/player/getPlayer/i/292933/vidId=1865006&la=n>

Although this festival generally shuns the nostalgia trail of reunited acts, 
many of the big name bands on the main stage this year (Nine Inch Nails,System 
of a Down <http://systemofadown.com/>, Deftones, Green Day) could have come 
straight from a 2003 lineup. Foals and Alt-J are among the more postmodern acts 
on the bill. Elsewhere, while 2013 hasn't exactly been overburdened with new 
acts making a genuine breakthrough,Haim <https://www.theguardian.com/music/haim>
 andAlunaGeorge <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alunageorge> will lead the 
charge in the tents at Leeds from Friday afternoon. Chvrches,Savages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/03/savages-audience-post-punk>, 
Drenge <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/20/drenge-review>, Palma 
Violets,the Strypes 
<http://www.muzu.tv/the-strypes/blue-collar-jane-music-video/1830065/> and 
Night Engine are among other rising stars to be caught over the weekend.

An alternative to rock

Reading and Leeds is a traditionally rock-orientated festival, and the culture 
forms at least some part of the DNA of bands as diverse as Green Day, White 
Lies, Bring Me the Horizon,Johnny Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnnymarr> and Biffy Clyro. However, this 
year's bill has more dance music than usual.Disclosure 
<http://www.muzu.tv/disclosure/white-noise-music-video/1764289/>, Skrillex, 
Chase and Status and Diplo'sMajor Lazer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/11/major-lazer-free-the-universe-review>
 show that big beats aren't confined to the dance tent.

Something off the wall

There's always a large contingent of unsigned acts at Reading and Leeds, which 
means there's every chance of seeing something completely unknown but amazing. 
In 2008, a bloke from Newcastle calling himselfRazmataz Lorry Excitement 
<http://breakingmorewaves.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/razmataz-lorry-excitement-year-short-on.html>
 pulled a huge crowd of curious onlookers with his berserk electro-punk pop 
party. The unsigned stage is always worth keeping an eye on.

Decent weather

The late August timing means Leeds/Reading often falls victim to inclement 
conditions. The festival's 2006 headliners Muse played ina mega monsoon 
<http://www.musewiki.org/Leeds_Bramham_Park_2006_(gig)> that suited Matt 
Bellamy'sapocalyptic pronouncements 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/bizarre/2604754/Muse-rocker-Matt-Bellamys-end-of-the-world-fear.html>
 perfectly. But this year it would be nice to have some proper hot sunshine for 
a change.

Real ale

With more young people drinking real ale than ever before, the last couple of 
years has seen the event following the boutique festival trend in offering 
alternatives to corporately sponsored lagers. Hopefully this year's fare will 
find room for beers with names such as Old Fart, Moose Drool andButtface Amber 
Ale 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/11/06/the-funniest-beer-names-o_n_779928.html>
.

Finally seeing the secret gig

This festival has the tradition of a big band making a secret appearance, with 
the likes of Kaiser Chiefs (2007, as Hooks for Hands) and Green Day (2011) 
playing an unannounced show before. Despite attending every single Leeds 
festival apart from one, I've managed to miss the lot of them. If my antennae 
for the unexpected performance is working as badly as usual, it's likely that I 
will find out 10 minutes after showtime thatDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> just played the Lock Up stage to 
10 punters and a dog.
 