
Below is this week’s playlist – the theme and tunes picked by a reader from 
the comments afterlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-fear-and-being-scared>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the format of the weekly readers 
recommend series at the end of the piece.

Never underestimate the ability of Guardian readers to come up with an 
eclectic list of tracks for any given subject. It’s the end ofmy second stint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/readers-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience>
 at the helm and once again I have been overwhelmed by the quality and 
diversity of nominations.


I had thought this topic might produce a fair amount of head-scratching, but 
recommendations came thick and fast, so let’s get straight to the first of this 
week’s playlist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&media=>
 The YouTube list. 
“I’m not someone who’s prone to overstate things,” says misterbadexample 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85867760> of the the 
Jompson Brothers’ On the Run 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VEjgsMKYOUo&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=1>
, “but this is definitely one of the finest rock songs ever written.” A bold 
claim indeed. It is undeniably a classy track, polished in a good way, and with 
lyrics such as “Runnin’ from the truth, runnin’ from a lie, I try to get away, 
but I just can’t hide”, it fits the theme very nicely.

Next we have one of my favourite bands, the Doors, with People Are Strange 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6Tto1JnLXc&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=2>
. “Going for the common or garden kind of uneasy fear here!”says nominator 
Bemilu <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85867814>. Indeed, 
fear of other people could be said to be the root cause of many of the world’s 
problems. The Doors’ music strikes me as a kind of missing link between 50s 
rock’n’roll and the post-Beatles era. This is one of their finest.

Next up is the mighty Bob Dylan with Masters of War 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=exm7FN-t3PY&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=3>
, in which we find the lyric “You’ve thrown the worst fear that can ever be 
hurled, fear to bring children into the world”. “He deserves the Nobel prize 
[in literature] for this one poem alone,”says nominator PatLux 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85868446>. Whatever the 
man himself may feel concerning his latest garland (by some accounts,not so much
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/21/bob-dylan-unacknowledges-nobel-prize-literature-win-removed-website>
) it’s certainly merited in my book too.

Fear comes in many forms. At number four, courtesy of nominator Tincanman, we 
have the wonderfulJazmine Sullivan with Lions, Tigers and Bears 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3v7dmok7bI4&index=1&list=RD3v7dmok7bI4>. 
“She’s not afraid of ferocious beasts, crossing wild rivers, climbing mountains 
and all manner of physical tests,”says tincanman 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85868231>. “But says ‘I’m 
scared of (loving you)’.” With its wonderfully restrained instrumentation and 
that gorgeous voice, you won’t have a hard time falling in love with this track.

Which brings us to Kim Churchill, with an astonishing song entitled Fear the 
Fire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O89H2LEkrfI&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=5>
. “I’m not certain whether to take this literally,”muses nominator severin 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85867917>, “or to read it 
as being about the fear of hell. He always sounds great whatever the exact 
meaning.” He certainly does. This song, which manages to sound both sparse and 
all-encompassing, builds nicely and hits hard, without ever crossing the line 
into self-conceit.

Tying in nicely with the release of Adam Curtis’s latest documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/21/hypernormalisation-adam-curtis-playlist-worriedaboutsatan-pye-corner-audio-gavin-miller>
, at number six with haveRush, with The Weapon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PHlLk5m0S4o&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=6>
, a song which, in the words ofnominator philipphilip99 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85873559>, “explores fear 
as a tool of political influence and its effect on the individual”. Although 
enjoying something of a resurgence these past few years, prog rock has a pretty 
bad rep in some parts, but not on my watch.

“Does being unnecessarily fearful somehow attract the very thing you fear?” 
wonders nominator suzi 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85876601>, whose choice of 
Azalea Flower 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jm34YhekCjU&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=7>
 byKarine Polwart makes number seven. “The protagonist is fearful and nervous,” 
suzi explains. “She’s alone in the house … It doesn’t end well.” Sometimes our 
fears are justified. One of the strengths of folk music lies in its exploring 
of universal themes; this roots-tinged song does that very well.

On the other side of the tracks, we have industrial rock powerhouse, Sulphur, 
withScarred 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzO18ys6qrs&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=8>
.

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4293669> Thesubhuman  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4293669> 23 October 2016 12:26am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85985508> 
I don't know much about this band beyond the fact it's weird what you can find 
at carboot sales amongst the jars of homemade bramble jelly and old Rupert 
annuals.Wiki tells me guitarist Rob Holliday has also played with Marilyn 
Manson and The Prodigy. Which should suffice to tell you this is not one to 
ease you into a gentle Sunday morning chillout zone.

I'm so fucking scared
I'm so fucking scared of you
Are you scared of me too?


Sulpher-Scarred <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzO18ys6qrs>

 Well that’s good enough for me. Electro blips, reverse tape loops and guitars 
ramped all the way up to 11. “Are you scared of me too?” sing Sulphur. I am now.

Of all the bands I expected might crop up, Abba was not among them, yet here 
they are at number nine with deliciously creepyThe Visitors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4kiu375TKDE&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=9>
,courtesy of nominator Vaughaninjava 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85898727>. “I hear the 
doorbell ring and suddenly the panic takes me …” Exactly who or what the 
narrator is afraid of is never explicitly stated, but the tension is palpable. 
This nomination is seconded by Ianeddie, whoadds the vivid description 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85915113> “tight vocals 
and that throbbing synth like your own heartbeat when you panic in the silence”.

So we arrive, all too quickly, at the last track on this week’s playlist, and 
what a good one it is. Nominatorsteenbeck 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85923655> is the provider, 
with his recommendation ofFela Kuti’s Fear Not for Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A7aiIO13u6Q&list=PL3Yv36aUktyQUWX0kDkMzpvhv5ysmKGxW&index=10>
. Surely a big influence on Miles Davis’s 70s recordings, Kuti’s music is never 
less than mesmerising and the message here is strong: “The secret of life is to 
have no fear, now we all have to understand that.”

Amen to that.

Note: not all songs appear on the Spotify playlist as some are unavailable on 
the service.

Readers recommend: share your songs about the American west
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-the-american-west>
New theme

The theme for next week’s playlist is the American west. You have until 11pm 
on 31 Octoberto submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 