
As we enter the final sprint to Booker day, the argument is hotting up as to 
which of the six runners deserve the 2013 prize. There's no doubt which simon92 
would choose.He writes:  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/27737084>

Eleanor Catton's extraordinary second novel is a thing of wonder. Nominally 
part of the neo-Victorian tradition exemplified by the sexual revisionism of 
Sarah Waters and Michel Faber, Catton's huge novel is rather the finest modern 
application of precisely the effects achieved by the greatest novels of the 
nineteenth century. With its omniscient narrator, finely delineated cast of 
characters and brilliant and true turning of aphorisms, the Luminaries is a 
Booker novel that can be happily recommended to followers of good tales, as 
well as fine writing.

He continues his championship in the comment thread on our Booker husting video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2013/oct/10/booker-prize-2013-eleanor-catton-the-luminaries-video>
, though that's not strictly the subject of this column, so I'll leave it for 
those who are interested to look it out.

The week's other big books news was the awarding of the Nobel prize in 
literature to Alice Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, so I went looking for reader reviews of her work. I could find only one, 
written last year byEkareno, of the Oslo English Book Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14456140>. It was of 
the collection Too Much Happiness, and Ekareno reports:

We admired the way Munro keeps her stories at just the right length, but 
manages to give a full-length portrait of her characters. Her skill of using 
small details to paint a big picture is quite impressive. Reading her stories 
is like looking through the wrong end of a telescope: you see the whole world 
with all its detail, only it is very small. We all had different favourite 
stories, which goes to show that they are all quite good (except "Too Much 
Happiness" which none of us liked).

How's that for telling 'em? I look forward to more appraisals of Munro's work 
over the coming weeks.

Elsewhere, James Robert Metcalf filed a flurry of reviews, the most 
enthusiastic of which was of James Salter's All That Is. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/27684808> He wrote:

Perhaps the only thing more powerful than Salter's elegant narrative 
simplicity in his latest novel is the verity of his prose. Seizing a man's life 
with both hands, and managing to scoop up no small amount of other characters 
while in the act, the author of All That Is has deftly and with the utmost 
emotional mindfulness written a book whose narrative verve and wisdom will find 
an echo in every reader.

Actually, not quite every reader, as an earlier review, by swithering,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/26777471>makes clear. 
She writes:

Salter's strengths include languid sentences and cuts across time but he's 
best known for what James Meek terms (with admirable tact) his "mobility and 
occasional ambiguity of perspective." I tussled with this ambiguity of 
perspective while plodding through All That Is, attempting to recalibrate my 
bafflement over its sometimes-sloppy craft and lack of irony with its mostly 
positive critical reception.

It's differences like this that make me want to rush out and get my own copy. 
And that's all for this week. As ever, drop me a line if I've mentioned your 
review and I'll find a book from the cupboards.
 