
There is confusion in Austria as to whether the authorities will tear down or 
redesign the house in Braunau am Inn where Adolf Hitler was born in 1889. Some 
reports say it is to bereplaced by a new building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/adolf-hitlers-first-home-to-be-torn-down-and-replaced-with-a-new-building>
, others – based on a statement released by the interior minister, Wolfgang 
Sobotka – that it is to bereconstructed to make it unrecognisable 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/17/hitlers-birthplace-may-be-torn-down-to-stop-it-becoming-neo-nazi/>
. An architectural competition is expected to attract international bids, with 
the aim of cleansing the structure of any association with the Nazi leader, 
thus diminishing the attraction for neo-Nazis. Either way, the foundations will 
remain.

The question of what to do with Nazi structures has vexed authorities for the 
past 70 years. TheFührerbunker in Berlin, the subterranean chambers where 
Hitler took his own life, was buried under a Berlin car park by East German 
authorities. However, while the bunker is no longer visible above ground (its 
inner chambers are still intact), most people familiar with Berlin would have 
little trouble locating it, helped perhaps by the local authorities’ decision 
to build a plaque in 2006 toguide World Cup fans 
<https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/F%C3%BChrerbunker>.

In reality, the ghosts of these places rarely go away – as the town of Braunau 
will likely find out long after it has converted Hitler’s birthplace into a 
labour office or a cultural centre (just two of the options proposed by 
Sobotka).

Size and impracticality have often prevented the demolition of Nazi 
structures: theWolfsschanze, or Wolf’s Lair, where Hitler spent more time than 
anywhere else; the Eagle’s Nest, his mountain retreat chiselled out of a 
rockface in Bavaria; and the Nazi rally grounds in Nuremberg are just three 
examples of Nazi sites that are now popular tourist attractions.

Reclaiming prominent structures has often been the most popular way of dealing 
with them.Prora <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prora>, the abandoned, concrete 
Nazi holiday resort that stretches for 2.8 miles along the Baltic coast, was 
for decades a headache for authorities – too big to destroy, too ugly to use. 
But, helped by Germany’s booming property market, it has now been turned into a 
luxury resort of beachside apartments. No one questions the morality of 
holidaymakers enjoying them exactly as the Nazis had intended, although the 
idea is, for some, sinister. Similar treatment was given to the colossal 
Olympia stadium – built for the 1936 Olympics – which was renovated to great 
fanfare in 2004. Werner March, the architect who built the stadium for the 
Nazis, also built theWaldbühne, or Forest Stage, a 22,000-seat amphitheatre 
used today for everything from rock to classical music concerts.

How Austria decides to deal with the Braunau house will be a test of courage.
 