
About 120,000 people come to Abbey Road every year to walk across the zebra 
crossing and write their name on the wall outside. "About half of them wander 
into reception and ask for a tour," says David Holley, the managing director of 
the studios. He shrugs: "We have to turn all of them away. We hate doing it, 
but we have no choice. However, this month that's going to change."

Abbey Road does feel less like a functioning recording studio and more like a 
glorious theme park for film and music fans. Since opening in 1931, it has seen 
more true luminaries - first of the musical kind, more recently from the film 
world - than perhaps any other building in England.

"People think of the Beatles when you say Abbey Road, and they always will," 
says Holley. "But we want to show off some of the other work we do here too. 
The Star Wars films, all the Lord of the Rings films, Braveheart, Eyes Wide 
Shut, Gangs of New York, all the Harry Potters, Aliens, Bond films, Indiana 
Jones, they've all been through here." Holley reels off titles, smiling despite 
himself at the staggering list of names. John Williams, Philip Glass, Ennio 
Morricone, Michael Nyman, John Barry, Danny Elfman - essentially every name 
you've ever connected with a classic film score has written and conducted, 
arranged and edited their music here.

Cinematic scores have been recorded at Abbey Road throughout its history. But 
over the past 25 years film work has become the studio's bread and butter.

"The first film we did here during the modern era was Raiders of the Lost 
Ark," he says. "That was 25 years ago. The anniversary seemed like a perfect 
excuse to open our doors to the public." So Holley hit upon the idea of turning 
Studio 1 into a temporary cinema, and screening some of the best films that 
have been recorded there. Studio 2 - the favourite studio of the Fab Four - 
will become a temporary exhibition space, showing archive photography from the 
75-year history of the studio.

"Until the mid-70s there was a house photographer working here every day, 
snapping every artist who came in to record," says Holley. "We have a vast 
archive of music and film photography, much of which has never been seen 
publicly. Lots will be on show and we've got some limited edition prints up for 
sale."

The films showing in this month's retrospective are classics, but it's the 
studios themselves that will be the centrepiece for many visitors. "It's about 
more than just seeing a film in a cool venue," he says. "It's about getting 
into this environment, where a lot of great music has been made, and soaking up 
the atmosphere. It's the first, and probably the only time the public will be 
given that opportunity."
 