
Recriminations have begun against the 66 Labour MPs who voted to bomb Isis in 
Syria, with the former London mayorKen Livingstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/livingstone> suggesting they would be 
legitimate targets for deselection.

Hilary Benn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn>, the shadow 
foreign secretary, was the main focus of anger for protesters as he was accused 
online of warmongering and bringing shame on his late father, Tony Benn, who 
had strong roots in the anti-war movement.

Stella Creasy <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stella-creasy>, MP for 
Walthamstow, north-east London, where campaigners had marched outside her 
office, was also targeted with hundreds of negative and sometimes abusive 
messages. She has promised to hold a public meeting on Sunday to explain her 
decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsyria-labour-mps-recriminations-vote-airstrikes-benn-livingstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71012520bf00aaea3d34b9ee6017b275d2f2840%2F394_157_1671_1003%2F1671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Recriminations%20begin%20against%20Labour%20MPs%20who%20voted%20for%20Syria%20airstrikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsyria-labour-mps-recriminations-vote-airstrikes-benn-livingstone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Recriminations%20begin%20against%20Labour%20MPs%20who%20voted%20for%20Syria%20airstrikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsyria-labour-mps-recriminations-vote-airstrikes-benn-livingstone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71012520bf00aaea3d34b9ee6017b275d2f2840%2F394_157_1671_1003%2F1671.jpg>
 Stella Creasy, MP for Walthamstow, has promised to hold a public meeting on 
Sunday to explain why she voted for airstrikes. Photograph: Ben Pruchnie/Getty 
Images 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, the Labour 
leader, released a statement saying he would not tolerate abuse against MPs 
from any side. The bullying of Labour MPs “flies in the face of everything” he 
believed in, he said, and there was no place in the party for those who engaged 
in abusive behaviour.

Corbyn and John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, have said there is no room 
for deselection of MPs and emphasised the inclusive, broad nature of the shadow 
cabinet.

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader and Tom 
Watson, his deputy who has called for new social media guidelines, will also 
email members before the end of the week, making clear that the party will not 
tolerate bullying or harassment.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmcdonnell-benn-syria-airstrikes-blair-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McDonnell%3A%20Benn's%20speech%20on%20Syria%20airstrikes%20reminds%20me%20of%20Blair%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmcdonnell-benn-syria-airstrikes-blair-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McDonnell%3A%20Benn%27s%20speech%20on%20Syria%20airstrikes%20reminds%20me%20of%20Blair%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fmcdonnell-benn-syria-airstrikes-blair-video&media=>
McDonnell: Benn’s speech on Syria airstrikes reminds me of Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/mcdonnell-benn-syria-airstrikes-blair-video>
However, some within the Labour anti-war camp believe deselection is a 
legitimate response to the decision of some MPs to vote for the airstrikes on 
Isis in Syria.

Livingstone, a backer of Corbyn and co-chair of the party’s defence review, 
told LBC radio that the new, kinder politics was all very well but people had 
the right to try to get an MP they agreed with. “If I had an MP who had voted 
to bomb Syria then I would be prepared to support someone who was challenging 
them, as long as they were good on the other issues,” he said.

A Labour spokesman said Livingstone’s views do not represent those of the 
party.

Throughout the debate, MPs have been lobbied by Stop the War – which Corbyn 
chaired until recently – and Momentum, the movement of Corbyn supporters set up 
after the leadership campaign, to vote against the bombing.

Following the vote, the Stop the War Coalition condemned the “whining 
complaints from those MPs who apparently do not like being lobbied”.

Some MPs have agonised over Syria. But many are fighting other wars | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/03/hidden-politics-syria-vote-airstrikes-war>
“If an MP is not robust enough to withstand emails and tweets, they should 
really not be voting for bombing other people – those who wish to be alone with 
their consciences would do better to consider a life of religious 
contemplation. Stop the War will continue to hold to democratic account all 
those MPs who vote for war,” the group’s chairman, Andrew Murray, and convener, 
Lindsey German, said.

Deselection was openly being discussed by visitors to the Facebook pages of 
grassroots Momentum groups – including for areas that cover pro-airstrike MPs 
Harriet Harman and Neil Coyle in Southwark, Chuka Umunna in Lambeth, and Heidi 
Alexander and Jim Dowd in Lewisham.

However, a spokesman for Momentum stressed that the movement was “not a threat 
to MPs who voted for bombing” and that local groups would be barred from 
campaigning for deselection.

In a statement, the groups said: “We have made clear that we will not campaign 
for the deselection of any MP and will not permit any local Momentum groups to 
do so. The selection of candidates is entirely a matter for local party members 
and rightly so.”

The spokesman also said Momentum “strongly disapproves of anyone who engages 
in abusive behaviour towards MPs or anyone else, and threatening or bullying, 
whether they are outside the Labour party [as most are] or inside it”.

Syria airstrikes: Britain launches 'offensive operation' after vote to bomb 
Isis targets – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/dec/03/syria-airstrikes-britain-launches-bombing-against-isis-targets-rolling-report>
“We specifically asked our supporters to emulate Jeremy Corbyn, and to keep 
their messages about the issues and to refrain from any personal attacks,” he 
added.

However, some MPs called on the leadership to do more to deal with a vocal 
minority encouraging the 66 to be targeted, especially if they are in any way 
connected to the Labour party.


Two Labour MPs told the BBC’s Today programme that Corbyn was effectively 
permitting the bullying by failing to clamp down on some activists associated 
with threats towards MPs.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20'We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20%27We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&media=>
Hilary Benn speech in full: ‘We must now confront this evil’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
Wes Streeting, the Ilford North MP, who voted against military intervention, 
told the BBC: “Given how much this is being facilitated by Momentum and the 
organisation set up in the wake of Jeremy’s leadership campaign, I don’t 
believe that Jeremy Corbyn as an individual somehow encourages the bullying of 
Labour MPs, but I think at the moment he’s in danger of permitting it by not 
showing strong enough leadership and clamping down on this.

“It’s completely inconceivable for anyone to argue that there hasn’t been a 
well-organised, systematic and well-resourced attempt to bully MPs into voting 
against airstrikes on Syria.”

Ann Coffey, MP for Stockport, who voted in favour of airstrikes, said she 
received messages calling her a “warmonger” and a “red Tory” and warning that 
she would have “blood on her hands”, which she believes is from an email 
account previously associated with Momentum.

“If you have that at the top of the party, what you have is permission to 
target MPs, permission has been given to target us,” she said.

But senior Labour sources rejected the suggestion that there was more that 
Corbyn could do to deal with troublemakers. “Jeremy has repeated that there is 
no place in the party for abuse almost every single day,” the source said.

“There is a procedure to deal with such behaviour by Labour members and that 
is through the NEC. If there are threats from people outside the party then the 
procedure is not to moan to the media, it is to go to the NEC.”
 