
For our first 29 years in this house we didn’t see a single red squirrel in 
the garden,but since May this year they have become daily visitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/28/country-diary-solved-mystery-absent-red-squirrels>
. The wooden feeder boxes on the apple trees have been a big attraction, and 
watching the squirrels push up the lids with their heads and reach in to get 
the peanuts can often be amusing.

However, some of them persist in visiting a wire feeder that was put out for 
birds, despite the difficulty of getting the nuts out. When the squirrels are 
at the feeders, I have noticed that a couple ofmallard 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/m/mallard/index.aspx>
 immediately head over to the bottom of the tree, to pick up any nuts or 
fragments they might let drop.

Someone in the strath told me that they had seen squirrels gnaw discarded deer 
antlers. On theIsle of Rum <http://www.isleofrum.com/> I had observed red deer, 
both stags and hinds, doing this to get calcium and other minerals – but 
squirrels? That intrigued me. So I took ared deer antler 
<http://stagantlers.co.uk/deer-antlers/red-deer/> from my collection and tied 
it to the apple tree between the two feeders.

A roe deer doe transforms the scene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/23/roe-deer-doe-transforms-scene-country-diary-highlands>
Nothing happened for a few weeks until, one September morning, a squirrel at 
one of the wooden boxes suddenly darted along the branch and started gnawing 
away at the antler. Since then, I have seen two different squirrels getting 
their mineral “fix” there.

The apples on this tree are still small and green looking but, given the way 
theblackbirds <http://www.garden-birds.co.uk/birds/blackbird.htm> have been 
attacking the ones that fell off in the high winds, they are clearly ripe 
enough for them. Last week, to my surprise, I saw a squirrel pull an apple off 
a branch and disappear with it.

I am now experimenting with larger apples split in two and pinned near the 
antler. Hopefully, the squirrels will take to them, as it means that once this 
tree’s crop has gone over we can buy some and put in their place. A red 
squirrel larder of peanuts, antler and apples.


 