
Reed Elsevier, the Anglo-Dutch publishing and events group, has sold 
employment website Totaljobs toAxel Springer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/axel-springer> for £110m.

Axel Springer, which owns Germany's biggest selling newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/mar/09/bild-drops-page-one-girl-naked-ambition?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in tabloid Bild, has acquired Totaljobs Group for €132m (£110m).

The deal has been struck by StepStone, Springer's European jobs website, which 
said that Londonbased Totaljobs Group is the biggest online recruitment 
business in the UK.

Jens Müffelmann, head of electronic media at Axel Springer, said that the deal 
makes the German company the "clear number one" in the British online job 
portal market.

"The Totaljobs Group is an excellently managed and profitable online company … 
the acquisition is an important milestone in the company's history."

Reed Elsevier is transitioning its operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/16/reed-elsevier-revenue-growth?INTCMP=SRCH>
 away from advertising-reliant businesses.

"Reed Business Information is increasingly focused on paid content and data 
services," said Mark Kelsey, chief executive of RBI. "To compete in an 
increasingly global market and fully achieve [TotalJob's] future potential [it] 
will benefit from the scale, focus and international coverage that StepStone 
brings".

RBI is also home to 100 trade magazines including Farmers Weekly and Flight 
International. It recently put US show business magazine Variety up for sale. 
Its Australian magazine operation is also up for sale.

Reed Elsevier <https://www.theguardian.com/business/reedelsevier> put the RBI 
division up for sale in 2008, but pulled the deal when the recession hit.

In early March Axel Springer partnered with General Atlantic to "create the 
conditions necessary for a growth offensive in the area of digital 
classifieds". The two companies have launched Axel Springer Digital 
Classifieds, in which Axel Springer holds a 70% stake, which will be the home 
of businesses such as StepStone and Totaljobs.com.

Totaljobs Group was founded in 1999 and employs 340 staff and operates seven 
job boards.
 