
As summer fades into autumn the harbour begins to feel like a departure 
lounge. Migration is in full swing, with birds flying in to wait for a window 
in the weather before they risk crossing the Channel.

Britain's migrating birds are drastically declining, RSPB says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/16/britains-migrating-birds-are-declining-in-number>
Whinchats <https://www.bto.org/volunteer-surveys/chat/about/identify> flit 
from fencepost to fencepost along the footpath, wheatears perch on the rocks by 
the sea wall, and blackcaps and common whitethroats skulk in the bramble scrub.
Swallows 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/s/swift/identification.aspx>
 congregate on the wires and house martins skim over the fields hawking for 
insects, while swifts soar high above them, dark specks against the 
cumulonimbus clouds.

Just as paparazzi stalk airport terminals in search of a passing VIP, I’m also 
on the lookout for a star traveller.Ospreys 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/ospreys> regularly stop off here during their 
migration, with some individuals hanging around for a week or more. For a bird 
that subsists on an almost exclusively pescatarian diet, the harbour’s 
fish-rich waters provide a welcome place to rest and refuel before continuing 
on the 3,000-mile journey south to the wintering grounds in west Africa.

I notice a large bird soaring and circling above the islands. At first glance 
I pass off the flash of white breast feathers and arched wings with drooping 
primary feathers as just another gull, but as it flies closer I see a 
distinctive dark mask of Zorro-style eye band and chocolate brown upper 
plumage. Hovering kestrel-like, the osprey’s bright yellow eyes scan beneath 
the rippling waves. Suddenly it plunge-dives, wings swept back, legs 
outstretched.

Missing Scottish osprey found 3,000 miles away in Senegal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/04/missing-scottish-osprey-found-3000-miles-away-in-senegal>
There is a splash as the raptor hits the water, half submerging. For a moment 
it struggles to break from the surface. With two powerful strokes of its wings 
it shakes the water from its oily feathers and emerges from an explosion of 
rainbow droplets, a writhing flounder locked in its talons.

Deftly manipulating its prey to align it head-first to maintain an aerodynamic 
profile, the osprey flaps across the water with steady wingbeats. Alighting on 
a channel marker it holds down the slippery flatfish with its Velcro-like foot 
pads and toes, twisting and tearing off bite-sized strips of pearly white flesh 
with its hooked black beak.


The Birds of North Wales, this year’s memorial lecture in honour of the late 
Country Diary writerWilliam Condry (thecondrylecture.co.uk 
<http://www.thecondrylecture.co.uk/>), by Jonathan Elphick, is at 
Tabernacle/MoMA, Machynlleth, 1 October, 7pm for 7.30; £5 including 
refreshments (no need to book)
 