
Refugee activists have used parliament as a stage for dramatic protests to 
demand closure of offshore detention centres for the second day in a row.

On Thursday, two climbers from the Whistleblowers, Activists and Citizens 
Alliance (Waca) abseiled down the edifice of Parliament House, while others 
stood in the waters of the fountain, dyed red to represent blood, carrying 
signs calling for the camps’ closure.

On the same day parliament approved changes to increase security, after Waca 
activists interrupted question time on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/pro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time>
, with some gluing their hands to furniture to delay being dragged out of the 
lower house by security staff.

Pro-refugee protesters disrupt parliament and shut down question time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/pro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time>
Protesters in the fountain carried signs criticising the Liberals as “world 
leaders in cruelty” and the Labor party for providing “no opposition to 
cruelty”.


Two professional climbers hung from parliament with the main banner that read 
“Close the bloody camps now #justiceforrefugees”, one of whom wasinvolved in 
the group’s protest at the Melbourne Arts Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/19/two-women-climb-melbourne-arts-centre-spire-to-fly-letthemstay-banner>
 in February, where they scaled the landmark spire, as part of Let Them Stay 
protests.

The parliament protest started at 8:30am and lasted about two hours.

In a statement the Australian Federal Police said the two abseilers ended 
their protest after negotiations with police, which onlookers could hear 
included a threat to cut them down.

It said the two abseilers will be summonsed to appear before court. Those in 
the pond came out of their own accord and were asked to move on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frefugee-protesters-abseil-down-parliament-house-and-dye-fountain-red%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db629e6c00e9e31a5fcefb1004130d74e4667e6%2F0_0_3500_2397%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20protesters%20abseil%20down%20Parliament%20House%20and%20dye%20fountain%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frefugee-protesters-abseil-down-parliament-house-and-dye-fountain-red%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20protesters%20abseil%20down%20Parliament%20House%20and%20dye%20fountain%20red&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frefugee-protesters-abseil-down-parliament-house-and-dye-fountain-red%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db629e6c00e9e31a5fcefb1004130d74e4667e6%2F0_0_3500_2397%2F3500.jpg>
 Pro-refugee protesters stand in the fountain in front of Parliament House as 
fellow protesters abseil down the edifice of Parliament House to hang a banner 
opposing Australia’s offshore detention of asylum seekers. Photograph: 
STRINGER/Reuters 
Speaking at the protest, Waca spokesman Phil Evans said the action “continues 
the call for urgent action on refugees”, including closing offshore detention 
camps and bringing all refugees and asylum seekers in them to Australia.

Evans confirmed no charges were laid over Wednesday’s protest, nor were the 
group given paperwork banning them from the parliamentary precinct.

Asked about their treatment by security on Wednesday, he said it was “fine ... 
and pales in comparison to the treatment of people onManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> and Nauru” who are 
being “tortured raped and abused”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fprotesters-against-australias-immigration-policies-halt-question-time-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protesters%20against%20Australia's%20immigration%20policies%20halt%20question%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fprotesters-against-australias-immigration-policies-halt-question-time-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protesters%20against%20Australia%27s%20immigration%20policies%20halt%20question%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fprotesters-against-australias-immigration-policies-halt-question-time-video&media=>
Protesters against Australia’s immigration policies halt question time on 
Wednesday in the House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/30/protesters-against-australias-immigration-policies-halt-question-time-video>
The Greens senator Lee Rhiannon attended the protest and gave a gift of 
chocolates to the activists. Asked about the appropriateness of the protest, 
she noted it was non-violent and argued “they should be here”.

Hamid Kehazaei left critically ill on Manus because Australia delayed 
transfer, inquest told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/hamid-kehazaei-left-critically-ill-on-manus-because-australia-blocked-transfer>
“The problem lies with the human rights abuses, the mental health problems, 
the anguish. We’re breaking our international obligations … that’s where the 
laws are being broken.

“These people are courageous, they are showing what the parliament should do.”

Rhiannon said she only found out about the protest an hour ago, in effect 
denying any coordination between the Greens and protesters.

Over the last three years offshore detention facilities on Manus Island and 
Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> have been plagued by reports of 
shocking conditions, poor management and deteriorating mental health of asylum 
seekers.

The Guardian’s publication of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 showed the devastating trauma and abuse inflicted on children on Nauru.

An asylum seeker was beaten to death by guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/21/men-accused-of-reza-baratis-death-in-manus-detention-centre-stand-trial>
 in a wave of unrest on Manus Island in February 2014, and on Nauru in May 2016
an asylum seeker self-immolated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 in front of staff from the UN high commissioner for refugees.

On Thursday in a radio interview with 2GB, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> criticised 
refugee protesters who disrupted question time, accusing them of “denying 
democracy”.

“And it tells you a lot about the Greens party in particular that they praised 
them. Imagine that, they praise people who interfere with democracy who wanted 
to shut down the parliament.”

The Nauru files: cache of 2,000 leaked reports reveal scale of abuse of 
children in Australian offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
On Thursday parliament approved a security upgrade including fencing off the 
sloped lawns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/parliament-house-lawns-may-be-closed-off-in-security-clampdown>
 leading up to the roof of parliament.

Turnbull said erecting a glass barrier in front of the public gallery would be 
considered but he was personally “very reluctant” to do so.

He said it would interfere with the sense parliament was the people’s house, 
and suggested instead that security should “do a better job of checking who is 
coming in and more quickly moving out if they do the wrong thing”.

Turnbull said he was surprised no charges had been laid over Wednesday’s 
protest, but that was a matter for the police.

“There’s got to be a strong message sent that if you want to come into this 
place and disrupt the people’s house in that way, then there has to be a very 
strong message sent that that is not acceptable.”
 