
The bottleneck of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/02/idomeni-greece-refugee-march-abruptly-cut-short>
 in Greece escalated on Sunday as regional officials spoke of a humanitarian 
crisison the state’s northern border, where 14,000 men, women and children were 
estimated to be trapped as a result of Macedonia sealing the frontier.

As the EU’s chief immigration policy maker, Dimitris Avramopoulos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/europe-braces-major-humanitarian-crisis-greece-row-refugees>
, predicted that approximately 100,000 migrants and refugees would reach the 
country this month alone,Alexis Tsipras’s leftist-led government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/greeces-refugee-crisis-pm-says-country-is-overwhelmed>
 demanded that Europe share the burden of handling the crisis. About 3,000 
people are landing on Greek shores from Turkey every day, officials say.

“Europe is in the midst of a nervous crisis, primarily for reasons of 
political weakness,” the prime minister told top cadres in his Syriza party on 
Sunday. Tsipras criticised the decision ofeastern European and Balkan states to 
tighten restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/05/austrian-expatriates-greece-stinging-condemnation-refugee-crisis>
, a move that has left 36,419 people now stranded in Greece, according to new 
government figures.

With the government ill-prepared for such numbers, officials are scrambling to 
manage the flows. More than 5,000 people quarantined onAegean islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/thousand-refugees-locked-in-stadium-overnight-kos>
 – which have borne the brunt of the influx – are restless to get toAthens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/27/greece-refugees-warehouse-of-souls-athens-eu-afghanistan>
 , itself under immense pressure to house the new arrivals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fgrowing-refugee-bottleneck-greece-warning-humanitarian-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6bbdd07c4872db3886455a84d9dd8cc752ced1e%2F0_268_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20bottleneck%20in%20Greece%20leads%20to%20warning%20of%20humanitarian%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fgrowing-refugee-bottleneck-greece-warning-humanitarian-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20bottleneck%20in%20Greece%20leads%20to%20warning%20of%20humanitarian%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fgrowing-refugee-bottleneck-greece-warning-humanitarian-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6bbdd07c4872db3886455a84d9dd8cc752ced1e%2F0_268_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 People rush to collect firewood at the makeshift camp at the Greek-Macedonian 
border. Photograph: Dimitar Dilkoff/AFP/Getty Images 
“We have to prepare ourselves for a big number,” the migration minister, 
Yannis Mouzalas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/up-to-70000-migrants-may-soon-be-stranded-in-greece>
, said in an address before the governing party’s central committee. “We are 
creating 10,000 new places [to accommodate them] every week.”

Reception facilities are being set up in abandoned military barracks, public 
buildings, disused Olympic stadiums, hotels, parks and summer camps.

By the weekend more than 20,000 men, women and children had gathered in 
northern Greece, with the vast majority amassed around Idomeni, on the border 
the country shares with the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia. “We can no 
longer shoulder this strain by ourselves,” said Apostolos Tzitzikostas, the 
governor of the Greek region also known asMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia>. “It’s a huge humanitarian 
crisis. I have [asked] the government to declare a state of emergency in the 
area. This cannot continue for much longer.”

NGOs said as many as 14,000 asylum seekers and migrants living in flimsy tents 
in animprovised camp on the border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/teargas-fired-as-refugees-try-to-breach-greece-macedonia-border>
 were having to make do with 24 showers and 140 toilet cubicles. Children, 
including newborns, had been rushed to hospital with influenza and dysentery 
problems.

Double crisis deepens despair in Greece’s ‘warehouse of souls’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/27/greece-refugees-warehouse-of-souls-athens-eu-afghanistan>
Tensions mounted on Sunday as several local communities said they would take 
court action to stop hosting facilities being established for refugees. Amid 
the worst economic crisis in modern times, withpoverty and unemployment levels 
at record heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/greece-refugees-gather-in-athens-hope-despair>
, many Greeks have found it hard to accept that their country is no longer a 
transit nation, but one where Syrians, Afghans, Iraqis and Iranians are likely 
to settle for years to come.

“In this time of compounded humanitarian and security crises, Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is being pummelled by its 
geography,” said John Sitilides, a geopolitical strategist in Washington DC.

Trapped in a geopolitical vice and with the country reeling from its longest 
recession in post-war history, Greece’s social fabric could easily be torn 
apart.

“The opportunity for nativists such as Golden Dawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/21/eu-refugee-crisis-golden-dawn-greek-neo-nazi-europe>
 to further exacerbate social and economic tensions for political gain is 
alarmingly significant,” Sitilides said, referring to the neo-fascist party 
that is Greece’s third biggest political force.
 