
I remember a conversation I had shortly after the completion of my book The 
Bone Sparrow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/417146/s/the-bone-sparrow/>
. “This is great,” the man said. “So, when are you going to start writing for 
adults?”

I had one of those moments where the world seemed to slow as my brain tried to 
grasp the meaning of such a seemingly simple question. However, my answer 
seemed to bewilder the man as surely as his question had bewildered me. “Why 
wouldn’t I write for children?”

It was at this point that we both took a small step backwards and excused 
ourselves before the social awkwardness became too intense, but it was an 
interaction that stuck with me.

The Day the War Came – a poem about unaccompanied child refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/28/the-day-the-war-came-poem-about-unaccompanied-child-refugees>
I write in response to the voices that whisper to me. These are the voices 
that tell the stories that excite my imagination and keep poking at me 
tirelessly until I succumb and write them down. I don’t think about the “target 
audience”, I leave that up to the publishers and booksellers. I have been told 
that some of my books should be sold as “adult books” instead of children’s 
fiction or YA. I think it is wonderful if my books resonate with adult readers. 
Some of the greatest stories and most beautiful writing I have read as an adult 
reader was from children’s books. But having an adult readership should never 
mean taking those stories out of the hands of non-adult readers. Because a 
large part of why I write the stories I do, is because it seems that far too 
many adults have forgotten a very important, very human part of themselves. A 
part which exists deeply within every child I have ever met, no matter their 
circumstances. And it is that distinctly human trait which excites me.

Don’t get me wrong – I have nothing against adults. I am, after all, one 
myself. But many of us have forgotten how to imagine. That’s not to say that 
adults are incapable of imagining, it’s just to say that too many of us don’t 
take the time to do it. We tell children off for daydreaming in class, or tell 
them to get down from the trees or out of the mud, or to stop playing imaginary 
football and to do something useful instead. We impose arbitrary rules about 
what is important to spend time thinking about, as though the mind should be 
limited and controlled instead of being free to explore and create and delight 
in the unknown.

#3000chairs: the empty chairs of Syrian child refugees – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/may/03/3000chairs-empty-chairs-of-syrian-refugees>
I have many friends who were avid readers in their youth, only to tell me now 
that they just don’t have the time anymore. I understand. But without reading, 
without letting our minds build a world different to anyone else who reads 
those very same words - a world which only we can create, without imagination, 
we are losing the very soul of society.

Without imagination, a story can’t come to life; we can’t step inside someone 
else’s shoes, or minds, or families, or experiences; we can’t conceive of a 
whole new world or universe or existence and see that space in our mind’s eye 
as clearly as any other space we have visited. Without imagination, the only 
reality is the one we happen to be stuck in right at this very moment. Without 
imagination, there is no hope.

Perhaps this is why it is so easy for many adults to ignore the lives of 
others, or be unable to consider how our actions can affect another person, far 
away, out of sight, and of whom we know nothing about. Without imagination, 
that far away person becomes simply a number. A shadow of a human being.

Jon Walter’s top 10 refugee heroes in children’s fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/18/jon-walters-top-10-refugee-heroes-in-childrens-fiction>
But all you non-adults out there understand the way the world really works. 
You recognise the magic that infuses every day life. You embrace and explore 
and investigate the unusual and the extraordinary. You understand that when the 
government refuses to help and welcome however many thousands of lost children 
- victims of war and terrible luck, innocent children who have done nothing 
wrong - you understand that these children actually exist. You understand that 
they exist just as much as the person sitting next to you.

You understand that when the United Nations declares that at the moment, there 
are more than 59.5 million people who have been forcibly displaced, that means 
there are 59.5 million stories and lives and real, actual people. When you hear 
that over half of those people are children, you understand the childhood those 
30 million children are missing out on. When you discover that in this year so 
far, there have been more than 2000 drowning deaths of asylum seekers in the 
Mediterranean, you understand that that is 2000 lifetimes worth of stories and 
ideas and inventions and solutions and beauty that the world will never know.

If you close your eyes, you can imagine the way the ground is slippery-cold 
and rough against the soles of feet. You can see the bright glare of the sun 
which pushes through closed eyes. You can feel the fear, the hunger, the 
sadness, and excite in the lightening quick ability to find joy in the darkest 
of places.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Frefugee-week-the-bone-sparrow-zana-fraillon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6a38fb84841c08907aa6342daeda7e0886d127%2F0_0_814_1250%2F814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugee%20week%3A%20too%20many%20adults%20have%20forgotten%20a%20very%20human%20part%20of%20themselves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Frefugee-week-the-bone-sparrow-zana-fraillon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugee%20week%3A%20too%20many%20adults%20have%20forgotten%20a%20very%20human%20part%20of%20themselves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Frefugee-week-the-bone-sparrow-zana-fraillon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6a38fb84841c08907aa6342daeda7e0886d127%2F0_0_814_1250%2F814.jpg>
All you non-adults out there are brave enough and insightful enough to take 
the time to imagine. You understand that all the people affected by our 
choices, are real people with lives and feelings and families, not just a 
number on a page of statistics or dots on a map. You are strong enough and 
courageous enough to question the truth behind the silences and to shine your 
torches into the darkest places. And above all, you believe and understand that 
the world we live in doesn’t have to be this way. It all starts with imagining 
a different reality. It all starts with children.

 * Zana Fraillon’s The Bone Sparrow is published on July 14, you can pre-order 
it from the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/417146/s/the-bone-sparrow/>
. Find more aboutRefugee week here <http://refugeeweek.org.uk/>.

The publishers of The Bone Sparrow have partnered with Book Aid International 
and are running a “book for a book” campaign throughout the hardback 
publication of The Bone Sparrow. For every book bought Hachette Children’s 
Group will donate a book to a refugee camp library.
 