
In reviews on Yelp <http://www.yelp.com/biz/moffitt-cafe-san-francisco-4>, San 
Francisco's Moffitt Café averages four-and-a-half out of five stars. 
"Unbelievable variety, farm to table fresh food, wide produce selection, and 
great prices!" enthuses one customer. “I'm really happy with eating here, they 
have SO many options,” gushes another.

Not bad reviews ... especially for a hospital cafeteria. Moffitt Café, also 
known as “the Moffitteria," is the main dining hall of the University of 
California at San Francisco (UCSF) Medical Center. Since undertaking a $6.5m 
café renovation in 2010, the nutrition and food services department at UCSF has 
been working to renovate the menu as well, attempting to integrate eating 
choices that are tasty, healthy and good for the environment.

Even though a short hospital stay is unlikely to change anyone's bad eating 
habits, it's "a big educational opportunity," says food-service project manager 
Jack Henderson. "We need to lead by example, because we are a teaching 
institution."

The medical center has become a leader in a growing movement amongst hospitals 
countrywide to add more fresh, organic and sustainable foods to their patient 
and cafeteria trays. Seven years ago, Henderson, along with food service 
representatives from several other San Francisco Bay Area healthcare systems, 
joined with Physicians for Social Responsibility, a nonprofit organization, to 
brainstorm ways to change hospital food.

Creating a food community

The group realized that, by pooling their purchasing power 
<http://sfbaypsr.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/SF-Bay-Area-Hospital-Leadership-Team-PowerPoint-Presentation.pdf>
, they could prod the mainstream food distribution chain to include more 
sustainably produced items - and, in the process, maybe turn the stereotype of 
bad hospital food on its head.

Part of the solution has also been buying higher-quality ingredients, but in 
smaller amounts. In an innovative plan cooked up with Lucia Sayre of Physicians 
for Social Responsibility in 2008, UCSF and a few other hospitals trimmed 
conventional meat purchases by at least 20% in 12 months. They then used the 
savings to buy sustainably raised meats and produce, which are often pricier.

Sayre is also an organizer for Health Care Without Harm 
<https://noharm-uscanada.org/issues/us-canada/healthy-food-health-care>, a 
global coalition that has since adopted the Bay Area meat-reduction strategy as 
part of a national campaign promoting healthy food in health care. Nearly 500 
hospitals across the US have joined the Health Care Without Harm campaign — and 
more than 150 of them have been cutting meats or switching to sustainable 
sources for it.

Between its move toward less conventional beef, its establishment of "Meatless 
Mondays," and its efforts to reduce food waste, the UCSF Medical Center's food 
services department has managed to divert a significant portion of its budget 
to more sustainable food sources. In 2014, sustainable edibles — ranging from 
local, organic yogurt and strawberries to cage-free eggs and antibiotic-free 
chicken – comprise roughly 25% of its $5.3m food budget.

Serving multiple missions

While most restaurants only have to focus on making attractive entrees, the 
UCSF Medical Center also has to keep an eye on a variety of patient needs. Not 
surprisingly, changing its menu has taken "a lot of gradual, progressive, hard 
work,"says Dan Henroid 
<http://sfbaypsr.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Dan-Henroid.UCSFMC_NFS_Balanced_Menu_Conference_October_2013.pdf>
, director of nutrition and food services at the Medical Center. A major 
challenge has been ensuring food safety and meeting nutritional requirements, a 
critical issue for an institution that serves sick patients.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F20%2F1403281704642%2F3ef1f217-6211-4922-8c3e-0158776374c6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rehabilitating%20hospital%20food%3A%20aiming%20for%20healthy%2C%20sustainable%20and%20savory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rehabilitating%20hospital%20food%3A%20aiming%20for%20healthy%2C%20sustainable%20and%20savory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F20%2F1403281704642%2F3ef1f217-6211-4922-8c3e-0158776374c6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 At UCSF's Moffitt Cafe, receipts come with nutritional information. 
Photograph: Sarah Rice/Fern 
Another challenge is size. The UCSF Medical Center's kitchen staff prepares 
around 1,500 patient food trays a day, along with thousands of meals for 
cafeteria patrons, Henderson says. An operation of that size has a major carbon 
footprint, and the food-service supervisors are tasked withmeeting 
sustainability goals 
<http://sustainability.universityofcalifornia.edu/policy.html> set by the 
broader University of California system.

One way they've done this by challenging the industrialized system of food 
production. The kitchen staff has been buying more locally produced foods, 
which means fewer fossil fuels burned for transport. Their move to cut back on 
conventionally raised beef also translates into fewer greenhouse gas emissions 
from industrial cattle feedlot operations.

Making such changes is also tricky because Henroid and his staff have to 
navigate complicated institutional purchasing contracts, which provide huge 
volumes of food products at discounted prices. Under its contract with a 
national group purchasing organization, UCSF is obligated to buy most of its 
edibles from distributor US Foods. Unfortunately, the supplier offers 
relatively few sustainable ingredients in its catalogs.

The Bay Area hospitals' strategy has been "to put enough gentle pressure" on 
distributors to make sustainable foods more available, Sayre says. When the 
largest healthcare facilities in a region pool their purchasing dollars to ask 
for an aggregated volume of a particular organic food item, they can be 
"incredibly influential," she says.

How market pressure can make a greener burger

A good example of the hospital group's gentle pressure is the new $4.50 
grass-fed beef burger that Moffitt Café debuted in February. Last year, a UCSF 
task force, concerned about the overuse of the medicines in livestock, called 
for the university to completely switch to antibiotic-free meats.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F20%2F1403281561292%2Ffe052ed3-a221-4ecd-bb53-57ed186b9e3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rehabilitating%20hospital%20food%3A%20aiming%20for%20healthy%2C%20sustainable%20and%20savory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rehabilitating%20hospital%20food%3A%20aiming%20for%20healthy%2C%20sustainable%20and%20savory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fbay-area-hospital-food-healthy-grass-fed-organic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F20%2F1403281561292%2Ffe052ed3-a221-4ecd-bb53-57ed186b9e3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Moffitt Cafe's grass-fed hamburger Photograph: Sarah Rice/Fern 
At the time, Henroid's department was buying antibiotic-free beef patties from 
Oregon through US Foods, but he wanted a vendor that offered a lower price 
point and stronger marketing support. Ultimately, he convinced US Foods to 
start carrying patties from Uruguay-basedEstancia Beef 
<http://www.estanciabeef.com/>, which grazes its cows on pasture and doesn't 
routinely dose them with antibiotics.

Volume buying was key to this process: Henroid negotiated a favorable pricing 
deal with Estancia after identifying six hospitals in the Bay Area and Southern 
California that were interested in buying a collective 80,000 pounds of the 
company's stew meat and ground beef products each year. All told, they 
represented a potential $120,000 in annual orders.

US Foods agreed to stock the Estancia products when UCSF committed to buying 
20,000 pounds a year. "Our commitment has opened the door for others to now be 
able to buy these products," says Henroid, noting that many other hospitals, 
schools and colleges also order from US Foods' California catalogs.

Another example of collective purchasing power is the university's 
collaboration 
<https://noharm-uscanada.org/documents/farm-fresh-healthcare-project-how-guide> 
with the nonprofitCommunity Alliance with Family Farmers <http://caff.org>. 
Ariane Michas, manager for the alliance, worked out an arrangement that lets 
the hospitals, as well as other customers, buy from smaller growers via two 
produce distributors that were already supplying the institutions.

The partnership has already borne fruit. In the past two growing seasons, 
UCSF, the San Francisco VA Medical Center and four other hospitals served 
67,000 pounds of green beans, pesticide-free strawberries, squash and other 
crops that were grown by 10 local family farmers. And the benefits go both 
ways: With the financial commitment from the hospitals, the family farmers can 
plan better for the seasons ahead, Michas says.

"It's been really good," says UCSF's Henderson. One local grower, Coke Farms, 
had to increase its acreage devoted to organic strawberries by more than 30% 
"because they couldn't keep up with us," he says.

Given that the US healthcare industry spends an estimated $12bn a year on food 
procurement, Sayre hopes other hospitals will replicate the Bay Area's 
pooled-purchasing strategy to shift the mainstream marketplace towards more 
sustainable foods. In some areas, the process has already begun. Healthcare 
institutions in Los Angeles, San Diego, Portland and New England have started 
taking the same team-based approach.

This story was produced by the Food & Environment Reporting Network 
<http://thefern.org/>, an independent non-profit news organization focusing on 
food, agriculture and environmental health.

The food hub <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/food> is funded 
by Origin Green. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>
 