
Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat politicians will come together to 
call for a national campaign to defeat online misogyny as research reveals the 
scale of abuse aimed at women on social media.

Yvette Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> is joining 
forces with the former Tory minister Maria Miller, former Lib Dem MP Jo Swinson 
and Labour’s Jess Phillips to launch an online public consultation in an 
attempt to create a national conversation about tackling the growing scale of 
online abuse.

Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> expressed its 
backing for the campaign but acknowledged that it does not always take down 
misogynistic comments.


To coincide with the launch, the campaign has released research by Demos 
revealing the huge scale of social media misogyny. The study monitored the use 
of the words “slut” and “whore” by UKTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> users over three weeks from 
the end of April. It found that 6,500 individuals were targeted by 10,000 
aggressive and misogynistic tweets in that period.

Internationally, more than 200,000 aggressive tweets using the same words were 
sent to 80,000 people in the same period – and according to the study, more 
than half of the offenders were women.

The Reclaim the Internet consultation will be launched on Thursday via an 
online forum <https://ideas.reclaimtheinternet.com/>. Cooper is calling for 
contributions from individuals, organisations, employers, union members, 
victims, police and tech companies.

The campaign comes after research for the Guardian’s project the web we want 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>
 revealed that of the 10 most abused writers online, eight were women and the 
other two were black men.

Cooper said the Reclaim the Internet event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/17/online-sexism-not-tolerated-yvette-cooper-reclaim-the-internet>
, to be held at the Commons on Thursday, amounted to a “call to arms”. She is 
due to appear alongside unions and women’s groups as well as representatives 
from Facebook and Twitter.

Online sexism should not be tolerated, says Yvette Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/17/online-sexism-not-tolerated-yvette-cooper-reclaim-the-internet>
The Labour MP said she took her inspiration for Reclaim the Internet 
<http://www.reclaimtheinternet.com/> from the reclaim the night movement of the 
1970s, in which women organised street protests demanding action against 
harassment, intimidation and violence. “Forty years ago women took to the 
streets to challenge attitudes and demand action against harassment on the 
streets,” she said. “Today the internet is our streets and public spaces.


“Yet for some people online harassment, bullying, misogyny, racism or 
homophobia can end up poisoning the internet and stopping them from speaking 
out. We have responsibilities as online citizens to make sure the internet is a 
safe space. Challenging online abuse can’t be done by any organisation alone … 
This needs everyone.”

Contributors will be asked to provide ideas on five key areas:


 * The role of the police and prosecutors. 
 * The role of organisations and employers. 
 * The responsibility of social media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, 
as publishers. 
 * The role of individuals across society to tackle trolls and support victims.
 * Empowering and educating the next generation. 
Celebrities are among the most frequent targets for abuse. The Demos research 
reveals those targeted the most internationally during the three-week period 
were the American rapperAzealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>, Katie Hopkins, 
LegendaryLeaTV – an online gamer – and Hillary Clinton.

However the teaching union NASUWT, which supports the campaign, said it was 
teachers not celebrities who were increasingly being targeted by social media 
abuse from pupils and their parents.


Half of 1,300 teachers questioned in a survey said they had been targeted on 
social media in relation to their work, according to the union. More than half 
of those who had suffered abuse said it had come from parents – an increase 
from 40% in 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fyvette-cooper-leads-cross-party-campaign-against-online-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ff198de7e57ac310f554b05be6236ebf20c60a%2F0_82_4462_2680%2F4462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Research%20reveals%20huge%20scale%20of%20social%20media%20misogyny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fyvette-cooper-leads-cross-party-campaign-against-online-abuse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Research%20reveals%20huge%20scale%20of%20social%20media%20misogyny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fyvette-cooper-leads-cross-party-campaign-against-online-abuse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33ff198de7e57ac310f554b05be6236ebf20c60a%2F0_82_4462_2680%2F4462.jpg>
 Yvette Cooper said Thursday’s event at the Commons was a ‘call to arms’. 
Photograph: Luke Macgregor/Reuters 
The union added that it was seeing significant increases in the number of 
teachers receiving abuse from pupils – 55% compared with 48% in 2015 – and 
effective response to the aggressive harassment via social media remained 
unacceptably low.

One male assistant headteacher, who did not want to be named, said he had 
reported threatening abuse from parents on Facebook to the police and to the 
tech giant.

“One parent threatened to smash my face in in a post on Facebook and another 
accused me of being homophobic because we did not expel a pupil who had made 
homophobic comments to her son,” he said.

“Teachers have always had negative comments from some parents but the use of 
social media whips it up into a mini fury. Other parents will ‘like’ the abuse, 
or add their comments. We have reported it to the police and to Facebook, but 
Facebook has a lot to answer for in their lack of meaningful response and lack 
of support.

“Facebook does not take the comments down. They say they don’t breach their 
rules.”

Alex Krasodomski-Jones, researcher at the centre for the analysis of social 
media at Demos, said the study showed that while the digital world had built 
new opportunities for public debate and social interaction, it had also built 
new battlegrounds for the worst aspects of human behaviour.

“This study is a bird’s-eye snapshot of what is ultimately a very personal and 
often traumatic experience,” he said. “While we have focused on Twitter, who 
are considerably more generous in sharing their data with us, it’s important to 
note misogyny is prevalent across all social media. This is a stark reminder 
that we are frequently not as good citizens online as we are offline.”

 Nicola Mendelsohn, Facebook’s vice-president for Europe, the Middle East and 
Africa, said: “I’m aware of the work that Yvette Cooper is spearheading today. 
I’m very supportive of it. We do a lot of work in this area already, working 
with organisations like Women’s Aid, and there is absolutely no place on 
Facebook for anything like that.”

But asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme to confirm that Facebook did not 
take down misogynistic comments as soon as they were made, Lady Mendelsohn 
said: “We take down content where there is bullying or violence or things like 
that. We absolutely do take that content down.”

Mendelsohn also acknowledged that Facebook was wrong to ban an advert 
featuring a photograph of a plus-sized model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/23/facebook-bans-photo-plus-sized-model-tess-holliday-ad-guidelines>
 that it deemed “undesirable”.
“We get it wrong sometimes. We got it wrong in that respect. We apologised and 
the ad is back up and running,” she said.
 