
Thirty years have passed since the city editor of the Daily Telegraph and a 
couple of mates sat planning a brand new morning paper – and they got one thing 
right from the start. They called it theIndependent, a name with enduring 
relevance but also one with a 1986 time and place. We were bang in the middle 
of the Thatcher pomp-and-circumstance era then. Neil Kinnock was striving to 
dump Derek Hatton and the Militant tendency. IRA attacks came thick and fast. 
Newspaper comment, like the electorate, seemed polarised and polemical. Why not 
plonk something calmer and gentler in the middle?

Any attempt to fit Indy fortunes into some political narrative has many loose 
ends, of course – not least the appalling series ofGuardian printing problems 
that gave co-founderAndreas Whittam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith> a helping hand and 
turned his initial search for readers leftwards, away from intendedTelegraph 
territory. Nevertheless, you can see how the more hopeful early years of Blair 
pushedIndy progress into reverse. Just as you see how the failures of 
IDS-Hague-Howard made Westminster confrontation seem irrelevant: no more boom 
and bust-up.

That isn’t remotely the situation today. Messrs Calm and Gentle have taken 
early retirement. On Monday, the digital spirit of the oldIndy must do battle 
in the scabrous, often savage land of the net, battling for survival against 
the likes of Vice, BuzzFeed, Vox and Gawker. At least Andreas didn’t go 
Arianna’s way and call his baby The WhittamSmithPost. Good luck to the online 
Indy – and good luck to theIndependent, wherever and whenever its name fits the 
news.

■ Correction of the week (a New York Times interview with the daughter of film 
star Natalie Wood): “An earlier version of this article, relying on information 
supplied by Natasha Gregson Wagner, inaccurately reported Ms Gregson Wagner’s 
age. She is 45, not 46. She did not realise she was 45 until her husband read 
this article and alerted her to the mistake.”
 