
Eastern European countries have approved the discreet sale of more than €1bn 
of weapons in the past four years to Middle Eastern countries that are known to 
ship arms toSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, an investigation 
has found.


Thousands of assault rifles such as AK-47s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/29/why-jihadi-terrorists-swapped-suicide-belts-kalashnikov-ak-47s>
, mortar shells, rocket launchers, anti-tank weapons and heavy machine guns are 
being routed through a new arms pipeline from the Balkans to the Arabian 
peninsula and countries bordering Syria.

The suspicion is that much of the weaponry is being sent into Syria, fuelling 
the five-year civil war, according to a team of reporters from theBalkan 
Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN) 
<http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/article/making-a-killing-the-1-2-billion-euros-arms-pipeline-to-middle-east-07-26-2016>
 and theOrganised Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP) 
<https://www.occrp.org/en/makingakilling/>.

Arms export data, UN reports, plane tracking, and weapons contracts examined 
during a year-long investigation reveal how the munitions were sent east from 
Bosnia, Bulgaria, Croatia,Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic>, Montenegro, Slovakia, 
Serbia and Romania.

Rights groups condemn removal of Saudi Arabia from UN blacklist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/07/rights-groups-condemn-removal-of-saudi-arabia-from-un-blacklist>
 Since the escalation of the Syrian conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
 in 2012, the eight countries have approved €1.2bn (£1bn) of weapons and 
ammunition exports to Saudi Arabia, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates and Turkey 
– key arms markets for Syria and Yemen.

In the past, the region had virtually no track record of buying from central 
and easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. But 
purchases appear to be escalating, with some of the biggest deals approved in 
2015.

 Arms export licences were granted despite fears from experts and within 
governments that the weapons could end up with the Syrian armed opposition, 
arguably in breach of national, EU and other international agreements.

 Eastern and central European weapons and ammunition, identified from videos 
and photos posted on social media, are now being used by western-backedFree 
Syrian Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2012/apr/11/free-syrian-army-in-pictures>
 units, but are also in the hands of fighters from Islamist groups such as 
Ansar al-Sham, the al Qaeda-affiliatedJabhat al-Nusra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/syria-al-qaida-group-jabhat-al-nusra-terror-attacks-russia>
, Islamic State, factions fighting for the Syrian president, Bashar-al-Assad, 
and by Sunni forces in Yemen.

 Markings on some of the ammunition identifying the origin and date of 
manufacture reveal significant quantities have come off production lines as 
recently as 2015.

 Responding to the findings of the investigation, Patrick Wilcken, an arms 
control researcher at Amnesty International, and Bodil Valero, the European 
parliament’s rapporteur on arms, said at least some of the transfers probably 
breached EU, international and national laws on arms exports.

 “The evidence points towards systematic diversion of weapons to armed groups 
accused of committing serious Human Rights Violations,” said Wilcken. “If this 
is the case, the transfers are illegal under … international law and should 
cease immediately.”

Origins of the trade route

 The weapons pipeline opened in the winter of 2012, when dozens of cargo 
planes, loaded with Saudi-purchased Yugoslav-era weapons and ammunition, began 
leaving Zagreb bound for Jordan. Soon after, the first footage of Croatian 
weapons emerged from Syria.

 Croatia’s government has consistently denied any part in shipping weapons to 
Syria, but Robert Stephen Ford, the US ambassador to Syria between 2011 and 
2014, said Zagreb had concluded a deal in 2012 that the Saudis bankrolled.

This was just the beginning. Arms dealers in eastern Europe procured assets 
from their own countries and brokered the sale of ammunition from Ukraine and 
Belarus, even attempting to secure Soviet-made anti-tank systems bought from 
the UK.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed23abb4858684145d20c4cbf8d424b163a4b03%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20the%20%C2%A31bn%20of%20weapons%20flowing%20from%20Europe%20to%20Middle%20East&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20the%20%C2%A31bn%20of%20weapons%20flowing%20from%20Europe%20to%20Middle%20East&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed23abb4858684145d20c4cbf8d424b163a4b03%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Free Syrian Army fighters prepare to launch a mortar. Photograph: Reuters 
Since 2012, BIRN and OCCRP say, €806m worth of weapons and ammunition exports 
were approved by the eastern European countries toSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, citing national and EU arms 
export reports and government sources.

 Jordan secured €155m worth of export licences in this period, the 
investigators say, while the UAE acquired €135m and Turkey €87m, bringing the 
total for those four years to just under €1.2bn.

 In a confidential document obtained by BIRN and OCCRP from November 2013, a 
senior official at Serbia’s defence ministry revealed concerns that deliveries 
to Saudi Arabia would be diverted to Syria.

Jeremy Binnie, the Middle East arms expert for the publication Jane’s Defence 
Weekly, said: “The militaries of Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and the UAE and Turkey 
use western infantry weapons and ammunition, rather than Soviet-designed 
counterparts. It consequently seems likely that large shipments of such 
materiel being acquired by – or sent to – those countries are destined for 
their allies in Syria,Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> and 
Libya.”

 The weapons are delivered by air and by sea. By tracking the movement of 
aircraft and ships, BIRN and OCCRP were able to follow the flow of arms in real 
time.

 Detailed analysis of airport timetables, cargo carrier history, flight 
tracking data and air traffic control sources helped pinpoint almost 70 flights 
that very likely carried weapons to Middle Eastern conflicts in the past year.
Arms shipments 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/arms_trade-zip/giv-12515OmAN8QAYvGEg/>
Belgrade, Sofia and Bratislava emerged as the main hubs for the airlift. 
Serbia’s aviation authority confirmed that 49 of the flights were transporting 
weapons in a response to a freedom of information request.

EU flight statistics provide further evidence of the scale of the operation. 
They reveal that planes from Bulgaria andSlovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/slovakia> have delivered thousands of tonnes 
of unidentified cargo since the summer of 2014 to the same military bases in 
Saudi Arabia and the UAE pinpointed by BIRN and OCCRP.

 Arms bought by the Saudis, Turks, Jordanians and the UAE for Syria are routed 
through two secret command hubs – called military operation centres (MOCs) – in 
Jordan and Turkey, according to Ford.

 The weapons are then transported by road to the Syrian border or airdropped 
by military planes. The Saudis are also known to have airdropped materiel, 
including what appeared to be Serbia-made assault rifles, to their alliesin 
Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/saudi-arabia-campaign-leaves-80-of-yemen-population-needing-aid>
.

Middle East states almost double small-arms imports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/arab-states-almost-double-small-arms-imports-report>
 “Each of the countries involved in helping the armed opposition retained 
final decision-making authority about which groups in Syria received 
assistance,” Ford said.

 The Saudis and Turks are also known to have provided weapons directly to 
Islamist groups not supported by the US and who, in some cases, are fighting 
MOC-backed factions.

 Washington has also bought and delivered large quantities of military 
materiel from central and eastern Europe for the Syrian opposition in an 
attempt to counter the spread of Isis.

 Since December 2015, three cargo ships commissioned by the US military’s 
Special Operations Command (Socom), in charge of the covert supply of weapons 
to Syria, have left Black Sea ports in the Balkans for the Middle East, 
according to American procurement documents and ship tracking data.

 Some 4,700 tonnes of Warsaw Pact weaponry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jul/09/armstrade.iantraynor> – 
including heavy machine guns, rocket launchers and anti-tank weapons, as well 
as bullets, mortars, grenades, rockets and other explosives – have been 
delivered from Bulgaria and Romania to military facilities in Jordan and 
Turkey, according to procurement documents and ship tracking data. The latest 
US-chartered ship left Bulgaria on 21 June carrying about 1,700 tonnes of the 
same materiel to an unidentified Red Sea port.

 SOCOM said in a statement the “munitions are to support Special Operations 
and its missions worldwide.

 “We will not confirm types of equipment which may be used for training and 
equipping partnered foreign forces in support of Special Operations missions.”

Two weeks after a March 2016 delivery, Kurdish groups published on Twitter and 
Facebook a photo of a warehouse piled with ammunition boxes in northern Syria, 
claiming to have received a supply of US-brokered weapons.

Reading the fine print

End-user certificates – official documents drawn up when receiving an export 
licence – issued by the Saudi defence ministry to a Serbian arms dealer, as 
well as a cache of contracts obtained by BIRN and OCCRP, revealed the scope of 
the buy-up for Syrian beneficiaries.

It ranged from hundreds of ageing T-55 and T-72 tanks to millions of rounds of 
ammunition, multi-launch missile systems and rocket launchers, although it is 
not clear what was delivered. Weapons and ammunition listed include materiel 
from the former Yugoslavia, Belarus, Ukraine and Czech Republic, much of which 
is present in large quantities in Syria.

An export licence issued to a Slovakian company in January 2015 granted it the 
right to transport thousands of rocket-propelled grenade launchers, heavy 
machine guns and almost a million bullets worth €32m. The materiel was, again, 
produced across eastern Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75da5a924da3793df3f6f515a49438d458c8261b%2F0_13_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20the%20%C2%A31bn%20of%20weapons%20flowing%20from%20Europe%20to%20Middle%20East&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20the%20%C2%A31bn%20of%20weapons%20flowing%20from%20Europe%20to%20Middle%20East&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fweapons-flowing-eastern-europe-middle-east-revealed-arms-trade-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75da5a924da3793df3f6f515a49438d458c8261b%2F0_13_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
 The Serbian prime minister, Aleksandar Vučić. Photograph: Regis 
Duvignau/Reuters 
The Serbian prime minister, Aleksanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/18/tony-blair-advising-serbian-government>
r Vučić 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/18/tony-blair-advising-serbian-government>
, said at a press conference in June that his country could increase production 
fivefold and still not meet the demand for arms. “Unfortunately in some parts 
of the world they are at war more than ever and everything you produce, on any 
side of the world you can sell it,” he said.

Secrecy surrounding arms deals and a dearth of publicly available data means 
that the exact items being delivered to the Middle East are often unknown, but 
evidence collected, including UN and national arms export reports and weapons 
contracts, reveals that much of it is Cold War-era weaponry not in use by the 
militaries of Saudi Arabia, Jordan, UAE or Turkey.

BIRN and OCCRP’s analysis of social media shows Czechoslovak, Yugoslav, 
Serbian, Croatian and Bulgarian weapons being used in training and on the 
battlefields of Syria, Yemen and Libya.

A Free Syrian Army commander from Aleppo, who asked to remain anonymous to 
protect his safety, told BIRN and OCCRP that weapons from central and eastern 
Europe were distributed from centrally controlled headquarters. “We don’t care 
about the country of the origin we just know it is from eastern Europe,” he 
said.

 He said groups fighting pro-Assad forces rather than Isis were struggling to 
access arms. “If you say that you are fighting Isis you will get whatever you 
want but if you say that you are fighting against the regime no one cares about 
you.”

Arms trade experts have told BIRN and OCCRP that sales of weapons to Saudi 
Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/13/eu-criticises-british-arms-sales-saudi-arabia>
 and other countries supplying Syrian rebels are likely to be in breach of 
national and EU law, as well as the international Arms Trade Treaty. But no 
clear sanctions mechanism exists to punish countries that do not meet these 
legally binding agreements.


 Valero told BIRN and OCCRP that countries exporting weapons to Saudi Arabia 
from eastern Europe should feel ashamed.

British-made cluster bombs are turning up in Yemen. Will Cameron tell us why? 
| Kate Allen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/23/british-cluster-bombs-yemen-cameron-killing-civilians-inquiry>
She said EU member states – such as Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bulgaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bulgaria>, Romania and Croatia – are bound 
by the union’s common position on arms exports, while candidate countries also 
must align with the rules. This requires governments to carry out risk 
assessments on the likelihood of weapons being diverted to conflict zones and 
non-state actors.

“Countries selling arms to Saudi Arabia or the Middle East region are not 
carrying out good risk assessments and as a result are in breach of EU and 
national law,” she said. “I think these countries could be taken to the 
European Court of Justice.”

Darko Kihalic, the head of the Croatia’s arms licensing department at the 
Ministry of Economy, told BIRN and OCCRP that Zagreb follows the legally 
binding EU Common Position on arms exports and other international treaties.

Kihalic dismissed media reports that showed Croatian weapons were ending up in 
war zones saying it did not constitute proof. But asked whether he was aware 
that Croatian weapons bought by Saudi Arabia were turning up in Syria, he said: 
“There is nothing more for us to check as the document says that their ministry 
of defence or police forces will use it [the weapon] and that they won’t resell 
it or export it.”

Saudi Arabia is not a “blacklisted” country, he said. “Are there misuses? 
There probably are.”

Valero and Wilcken, from Amnesty International, strongly opposed this view.


 “All these states do have clear, legally binding responsibilities to stop the 
transfer of arms where there is a risk that they will be used for serious 
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law, and to take 
mitigating measures to prevent diversion to unauthorised end users,” said 
Wilcken.

 In March, the Netherlands became the first EU country to stop arms exports to 
Saudi Arabia, citing mass execution andcivilian deaths in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/27/yemen-deaths-93-civilian-this-must-change>
.

Additional reporting by Lindita Cela, Jelena Cosic, Jelena Svircic, Atanas 
Tchobanov, Dusica Tomovic and Pavla Holcova.

 