
Poohsticks, the timeless game made famous by Winnie the Pooh, Piglet and 
Christopher Robin, is not a game of chance, according to scientists – and 
there’s even a formula to win.

The game, in which competitors drop sticks into a river upstream off a bridge 
and see which comes out downstream first, is first mentioned in the book The 
House At Pooh Corner byAA Milne <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aa-milne> 
published in 1928.

The research was commissioned to celebrate the release of The Poohsticks 
Handbook: A Poohstickopedia, written by comedy writer Mark Evans and 
illustrated by Mark Burgess, and featuring Winnie the Pooh and friends. It 
reveals the secrets to finding the perfect Poohstick, according to a top 
scientist, and names the best places in the country to play.

The formula contradicts most Britons (57%) who believe Poohsticks is a game of 
sheer luck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8e84674bf062db3897713e0dc3366db3e8ba9b%2F0_0_2731_4000%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20to%20pick%20the%20perfect%20Poohstick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20to%20pick%20the%20perfect%20Poohstick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8e84674bf062db3897713e0dc3366db3e8ba9b%2F0_0_2731_4000%2F2731.jpg>
 A drawing by EH Shepard of Winnie the Pooh and friends playing Poohsticks, 
which featured in the book The House at Pooh Corner. Photograph: Philip 
Toscano/PA 
Egmont Publishing joined Dr Rhys Morgan, director of engineering and education 
at the Royal Academy ofEngineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/engineering>, to equip the 39% of 
people who already take time sourcing the perfect Poohstick with the formula to 
ensure they pick the speediest stick to sail to victory.

It comes after a survey of 2,000 British parents revealed that 41% of players 
take the time to personalise their sticks to ensure they take no chances in 
knowing exactly who wins.

It turns out that just 11% of Britons naturally pick the right sort of stick, 
with a third of people (30%) heading straight for a long and thin stick, which 
according to Dr Morgan is only half right.

The scientist, a father of two and avid Poohsticks player himself, said the 
main variables that need to be considered when designing the optimum Poohstick 
included cross-sectional area, density/buoyancy, and the drag coefficient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee0549c7ef9f8b852d57b3de03b53bc1d09804e%2F0_2410_3407_2043%2F3407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20to%20pick%20the%20perfect%20Poohstick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20to%20pick%20the%20perfect%20Poohstick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Frevealed-how-to-pick-perfect-poohstick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee0549c7ef9f8b852d57b3de03b53bc1d09804e%2F0_2410_3407_2043%2F3407.jpg>
 A wrought iron bridge crosses the river Wandle in Morden Hall park. 
Photograph: Malcolm Park / Alamy/Alamy 
The perfect Poohstick would be tubby and long, fairly heavy (but not so heavy 
it will sink to the bottom of the river), with quite a lot of bark to catch the 
flow of the river like paddle.

The top 12 Poohsticks-perfect bridges, as recommended by VisitEngland: 

 * Sheepwash bridge, Ashford-in-the-Water, Derbyshire 

 * Morden Hall park, London 

 * Heale Gardens, Salisbury, Wiltshire 

 * Packhorse bridge, Watendlath, Cumbria 

 * Mottisfont, Romsey, Hampshire 

 * Little Wittenham bridge, Abingdon, Oxfordshire 

 * Mathematical bridge, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire 

 * New Lower bridge, Boscastle, Cornwall 

 * Bridge over Bourne Eau, Bourne, Lincolnshire 

 * Cantlop bridge, Shrewsbury, Shropshire 

 * Essex bridge, Shugborough, Staffordshire 

 * Hutton-le-Hole, Ryedale, North Yorkshire
 