
The Associated Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press> news 
agency entered a formal cooperation with the Hitler regime in the 1930s, 
supplying American newspapers with material directly produced and selected by 
the Nazi propaganda ministry, archive material unearthed by a German historian 
has revealed.

When the Nazi party seized power in Germany in 1933, one of its first 
objectives was to bring into line not just the national press, but 
international media too. The Guardian wasbanned within a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2015/apr/08/manchester-guardian-germany-war-hitler-archive-1933>
, and by 1935 even bigger British-American agencies such as Keystone and Wide 
World Photos were forced to close their bureaus after coming under attack for 
employing Jewish journalists.

Associated Press, which has described itself as the “marine corps of 
journalism” (“always the first in and the last out”) was the only western news 
agency able to stay open in Hitler’sGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, continuing to operate until the US 
entered the war in 1941. It thus found itself in the presumably profitable 
situation of being the prime channel for news reports and pictures out of the 
totalitarian state.

In an article published in academic journal Studies in Contemporary History 
<http://www.zeithistorische-forschungen.de/1-2016/id=5324> , historian Harriet 
Scharnberg shows that AP was only able to retain its access by entering into a 
mutually beneficial two-way cooperation with the Nazi regime.

The New York-based agency ceded control of its output by signing up to the 
so-calledSchriftleitergesetz (editor’s law), promising not to publish any 
material “calculated to weaken the strength of the Reich abroad or at home”.

This law required AP to hire reporters who also worked for the Nazi party’s 
propaganda division. One of the four photographers employed by the Associated 
Press in the 1930s, Franz Roth, was a member of the SS paramilitary unit’s 
propaganda division, whose photographs were personally chosen by Hitler. AP has 
removed Roth’s pictures from its website since Scharnberg published her 
findings, though thumbnails remain viewable due to “software issues”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F044b98ebad1bca292817b35274f1d8aabcb756c0%2F17_10_2057_2798%2F2057.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20Associated%20Press%20cooperated%20with%20the%20Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20Associated%20Press%20cooperated%20with%20the%20Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F044b98ebad1bca292817b35274f1d8aabcb756c0%2F17_10_2057_2798%2F2057.jpg>
 The Nazi party booklet ‘The Jews in the USA’ used an AP photograph of New York 
mayor Fiorello LaGuardia. Photograph: AP 
AP also allowed the Nazi regime to use its photo archives for its virulently 
antisemitic propaganda literature. Publications illustrated with AP photographs 
include the bestselling SS brochure “Der Untermensch” (“The Sub-Human”) and the 
booklet “The Jews in the USA”, which aimed to demonstrate the decadence of 
Jewish Americans with a picture of New York mayor Fiorello LaGuardia eating 
from a buffet with his hands.

Coming just before Associated Press’s 170th anniversary in May, the newly 
discovered information raises not just difficult questions about the role AP 
played in allowing Nazi Germany to conceal its true face during Hitler’s first 
years in power, but also about the agency’s relationship with contemporary 
totalitarian regimes.

While the AP deal enabled the west to peek into a repressive society that may 
otherwise have been entirely hidden from view – for which Berlin correspondent 
Louis P Lochner won a Pulitzer in 1939 – the arrangement also enabled the Nazis 
to cover up some of its crimes. Scharnberg, a historian at Halle’s Martin 
Luther University, argued that AP’s cooperation with the Hitler regime allowed 
the Nazis to “portray a war of extermination as a conventional war”.

In June 1941, Nazi troops invaded the town of Lviv in western Ukraine. Upon 
discovering evidence of mass killings carried out by Soviet troops, German 
occupying forces had organised “revenge” pogroms against the city’s Jewish 
population.

Franz Roth’s photographs of the dead bodies inside Lviv prisons were selected 
upon Hitler’s personal orders and distributed to the American press via AP.

“Instead of printing pictures of the days-long Lviv pogroms with its thousands 
of Jewish victims, the American press was only supplied with photographs 
showing the victims of the Soviet police and ‘brute’ Red Army war criminals,” 
Scharnberg told the Guardian.

“To that extent it is fair to say that these pictures played their part in 
disguising the true character of the war led by the Germans,” said the 
historian. “Which events were made visible and which remained invisible in AP’s 
supply of pictures followed German interests and the German narrative of the 
war.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8919368d6fda6806677b95cf9775703ec5d36f%2F18_11_2331_2763%2F2331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20Associated%20Press%20cooperated%20with%20the%20Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20Associated%20Press%20cooperated%20with%20the%20Nazis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fassociated-press-cooperation-nazis-revealed-germany-harriet-scharnberg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8919368d6fda6806677b95cf9775703ec5d36f%2F18_11_2331_2763%2F2331.jpg>
 Nazi party newspaper Völkischer Beobachter, using photographs by AP 
photographer Franz Roth. Photograph: AP 
Approached with these allegations, AP said in a statement that Scharnberg’s 
report “describes both individuals and their activities before and during the 
war that were unknown to AP”, and that it is currently reviewing documents in 
and beyond its archives to “further our understanding of the period”.

An AP spokesperson told the Guardian: “As we continue to research this matter, 
AP rejects any notion that it deliberately ‘collaborated’ with the Nazi regime. 
An accurate characterisation is that the AP and other foreign news 
organisations were subjected to intense pressure from the Nazi regime from the 
year of Hitler’s coming to power in 1932 until the AP’s expulsion from Germany 
in 1941. AP management resisted the pressure while working to gather accurate, 
vital and objective news in a dark and dangerous time.”

The new findings may only have been of interest to company historians, were it 
not for the fact that AP’s relationship with totalitarian regimes has once 
again come under scrutiny. Since January 2012, when AP became the first western 
news agency to open a bureau in North Korea, questions have repeatedly been 
raised about the neutrality of its Pyongyang bureau’s output.

In 2014, Washington-based website NK News alleged  
<https://www.nknews.org/2014/12/the-associated-press-in-north-korea-a-potemkin-news-bureau/>
that top executives at AP had in 2011 “agreed to distribute state-produced 
North Korean propaganda through the AP name” in order to gain access to the 
highly profitable market of distributing picture material out of the 
totalitarian state. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea comes second from 
bottom in thecurrent World Press Freedom Index <https://index.rsf.org/#!/>.

A leaked draft agreement 
<https://www.nknews.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/apdraftagreementdecember2011.pdf>
 showed that AP was apparently willing to let the Korean Central News Agency 
(KCNA) handpick one text and one photo journalist from its agitation and 
propaganda unit to work in its bureau. AP told the Guardian that “it would be 
presumptuous to assume ‘the draft’ has any significance”, but declined to 
disclose further information on the final agreement.

Significant events, reported in the international media, were not covered by 
AP’s Pyongyang bureau, such as the six-week public disappearance of North 
Korean leader Kim Jong-un in September and October 2014, the November 2014 Sony 
Entertainment hack that had allegedly been orchestrated by a North Korean 
cyberwarfare agency, or a reports of a famine in South Hwanghae province in 
2012.

When the French news agency Agence France-Presse signed an agreement to open a 
bureau in Pyongyang in January this year, AP’s former Pyongyang bureau chief
Jean Lee commented <http://38north.org/2016/02/jhlee021216/> that it was a sign 
of the regime’s “increased confidence in its ability to keep foreign 
journalists under control”.

The AP spokesperson denied that the agency submitted to censorship. “We do not 
run stories by the Korean Central News Agency or any government official before 
we publish them. At the same time, officials are free to grant or deny access 
or interviews.”

Nate Thayer, a former AP correspondent in Cambodia who published the leaked 
draft agreement, told the Guardian: “It looks like AP have learned very little 
from their own history. To claim, as the agency does, that North Korea does not 
control their output, is ludicrous. There is naturally an argument that any 
access to secretive states is important. But at the end of the day it matters 
whether you tell your readers that what you are reporting is based on 
independent and neutral sources”.
 