
The City of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> skyline is to be 
dominated by a newcomer after the latest version of a tower formerly known as 
the Pinnacle or Helter Skelter received the green light from planners.

The revived building, officially known as 22 Bishopsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/22-bishopgate-skyscraper-london-skyline-development>
 – or simply 22 – will be the tallest building in the Square Mile at 278 metres 
(912ft), eclipsing the nearby Heron tower at 231m. It has been redesigned for 
its new owners without the distinctive curly design at the top that earned it 
its original nicknames. It is also 10m shorter – but because it retains much of 
its width for most of its height it has 30% more floor space than the 
originally planned Pinnacle, which was defeated by the financial crash and 
recession.

After construction came to an abrupt halt four years ago when funding dried 
up, the tower was left as a nine-storey shell, dubbed the Stump. Earlier this 
year,a consortium led by France’s Axa Investment Managers’ real estate arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/19/londons-half-built-pinnacle-set-to-reach-new-heights>
 bought the site near Liverpool Street station for an initial £220m from a 
group of Middle Eastern investors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcity-of-london-to-get-new-skyscraper-as-the-pinnacle-gets-planning-permission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6970dd96dbd487e9eaea2a996c405b3d268194%2F21_0_682_1024%2F682.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reworked%20Pinnacle%20to%20set%20new%20heights%20for%20City%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcity-of-london-to-get-new-skyscraper-as-the-pinnacle-gets-planning-permission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reworked%20Pinnacle%20to%20set%20new%20heights%20for%20City%20of%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcity-of-london-to-get-new-skyscraper-as-the-pinnacle-gets-planning-permission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6970dd96dbd487e9eaea2a996c405b3d268194%2F21_0_682_1024%2F682.jpg>
 22 Bishopsgate (pictured centre in this artist’s impression) would tower over 
Tower 42, left, the Cheesegrater, right, and the Gherkin, far right. 
Photograph: Hayes Davidson 
The City of London’s planning and transportation committee has granted 
permission for the newly designed office tower sooner than expected. 
Construction is expected to start early next year and finish in early 2019.

The tower was approved despite objections to the plans from members of the 
public, Royal Parks, the London boroughs of Tower Hamlets and Islington and the 
charity Historic Royal Palaces. The charity criticised the new design, which 
unlike the Pinnacle with its slender tapering top is “broad shouldered” and 
will overshadow the Tower of London, it said.

Brushing aside the concerns, the City of London concluded 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1447780787897/22-Bishopsgate-London-EC2N.pdf> that 
the “proposal accords with the development plan as a whole [and] that it would 
preserve the setting of listed buildings”.

Its chief planning officer, Annie Hampson, said: “This is a substantial 
high-quality tower; 22 Bishopsgate exemplifies many of the qualities we are 
looking for in our landmark buildings – it is elegant, calm, and open to the 
public … Tall buildings in the City’s eastern cluster near transport hubs are 
an effective way of creating the increase in office space and employment needed 
for a growing London.”

Lipton Rogers has been retained as the project’s developer and the old 
concrete stump is being taken down by Australian contractor Brookfield 
Multiplex, but the previous foundations and basements will be used, which will 
speed up construction.

22 Bishopsgate – and the steroidal towers set to ruin London's skyline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/22-bishopgate-skyscraper-london-skyline-development>
The 62-storey tower will provide office space for more than 12,000 people and 
up to 100 companies, along with shops and services such as doctors and 
drycleaners. The Axa-led consortium plans to rent the 124,000 sq metres (1.33 
million sq ft) to financial firms, technology companies and small and 
medium-sized businesses, including start-ups.Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> has already held informal 
discussions with potential tenants and will start formal marketing next year.

There will be bars and a restaurant at the top, along with a public viewing 
gallery that will be free to visit, with a dedicated entrance and lifts.

The new design scrapping the expensive curved-glass panels at the top was the 
work of PLPArchitecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>
. It is the same team, led by Karen Cook, that came up with the original 
designs while they were working for Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates of the US, but 
they left that practice in 2009 to set up their own firm. About £400m had 
already been spent on the Pinnacle before the new owners took over, and the 
total cost could be up to £1.5bn.

The building will loom above a number of other recent City skyscrapers, 
including the Cheesegrater on Leadenhall Street and the Walkie Talkie on 
Fenchurch Street. But the Shard across the river remains western Europe’s 
tallest building at 309 metres.

Bruce Dear, the head of London real estate at law firm Eversheds, said: “For a 
global city, London is low rise. It only has 15 towers over 150 metres. New 
York has 188 and Hong Kong, the high-rise world champion, has 302. So 22 
Bishopsgate is very welcome. There is plenty more room in the cockney clouds. 
We need a high-rise revolution if London is to remain the world’s most 
desirable work and urban living space.”
 