
An important 18th-century portrait of the 5th Earl of Carlisle by Sir Joshua 
Reynolds has been accepted for the nation in lieu of £4.7m inheritance tax.

The full-length portrait of the lavishly dressed aristocrat has hung at one of 
Britain’s grandest stately homes,Castle Howard in North Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/castle-howard> – made famous as the 
backdrop for Brideshead Revisited – for more than 200 years.

Arts Council England <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>
 announced on Wednesday that it had been accepted into public ownership in lieu 
of a tax liability. It has been allocated to Tate Britain, where it will at 
some point be displayed, but will initially remain in its original setting.

Tate Britain’s director, Alex Farquharson, described it as a magnificent 
painting, the first full-length male portrait by Reynolds to join the gallery’s 
collection.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Freynolds-painting-accepted-by-nation-in-lieu-of-47m-inheritance-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfa0b277f2fc8e6926cbe42b92478b655b8db40%2F287_1182_3157_3946%2F3157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reynolds%20painting%20accepted%20in%20lieu%20of%20%C2%A34.7m%20inheritance%20tax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Freynolds-painting-accepted-by-nation-in-lieu-of-47m-inheritance-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reynolds%20painting%20accepted%20in%20lieu%20of%20%C2%A34.7m%20inheritance%20tax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Freynolds-painting-accepted-by-nation-in-lieu-of-47m-inheritance-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfa0b277f2fc8e6926cbe42b92478b655b8db40%2F287_1182_3157_3946%2F3157.jpg>
 Detail from Portrait of Frederick, 5th Earl of Carlisle. Photograph: Arts 
Council 
“A glamorous portrait in oil of the earl and his beloved dog Rover, it is an 
outstanding example of the type of painting for which Reynolds is most highly 
acclaimed.

“I am delighted that this work will now enter the national collection, the 
greatest collection of British art in the world.”

Frederick Howard (1748-1825) became the 5th Earl of Carlisle on his father’s 
death in 1758. The Reynolds portrait, painted in 1769, depicts him aged 20, 
newly returned from a hedonistic grand tour of Europe.

It shows him dressed in formal robes surrounded by classical architecture, and 
marks his formal entry into society and his position as head of one of the most 
powerful families in England.

Reynolds, the first president of the Royal Academy of Arts and the leading 
British portrait painter of the 18th century, was the natural choice for such 
an important commission.

Howard was a man who liked to enjoy himself, often losing large amounts of 
money at gaming tables. He was also the reluctant guardian of the young “bad 
boy” poet Lord Byron, who fell out with him after Howard refused to introduce 
him in the House of Lords.

In his satirical poem English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, Byron wrote bitterly:
“No Muse will cheer with renovating smile/The paralytic puling of Carlisle.” 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/previctorian/byron/reviewers.html>

Carlisle was also the man who supervised the completion of Castle Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/castle-howard> and was a cultivated 
patron of the fine arts, filling the house with his remarkable collection of 
Old Masters.


The Reynolds painting has been passed down through the family and its offer to 
the acceptance in lieu scheme (AIL) followsthe sale last year of art works and 
furniture by the castle’s present custodians to help secure the estate’s 
long-term future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/29/brideshead-refreshed-castle-howard-trustees-sell-off-artworks>
. The sale raised £12m.

The acceptance in lieu scheme was created in David Lloyd George’s people’s 
budget of 1910, withhundreds of outstanding objects and collections given as a 
way of settling tax bills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/17/acceptance-in-lieu-gifts-tax>.

Edward Harley, the chairman of the AIL panel, said: “The acceptance in lieu 
scheme has been enriching our heritage for over a century; I am delighted that 
this masterpiece by Reynolds, one of the most important painters of the day, 
has entered our national collection under the scheme.”
 