
Another part of the new press regulator, the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation, has been revealed with the appointment of the board of directors 
of Ipso's regulatory funding company (RFC).

One stand-out name on the list is Paul Ashford, editorial director of 
Richard's Desmond's media company, Northern & Shell.

One of the crises that undermined the Press Complaints Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc>, Ipso's predecessor, was Desmond's 
decision to pull his newspapers and magazines out of the system.

It is also noticeable that two of the biggest newspaper-owning companies, the 
Telegraph Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> 
and the Daily Mail & General Trust, are not represented on the board.

Critics of the PCC regarded both groups - in company with Murdoch's 
organisation - as the behind-the-scenes string-pullers (and therefore 
controllers) of self-regulation, a contention which has always been hotly 
disputed by the industry.

Aside from Ashford, the other two national newspaper appointments are 
Christopher Longcroft, chief financial officer of Rupert Murdoch'sNews UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> and the Trinity Mirror's 
secretary and legal director, Paul Vickers, who has played the leading role in 
the construction of Ipso.

The four regional newspaper representatives are Ashley Highfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashleyhighfield>, chief executive of 
Johnston Press; Ellis Watson, chief executive of DC Thomson; Brian McCarthy, 
finance director with Archant; and Michael Gilson, editor of the Belfast 
Telegraph (which is owned by the Irish-based Independent News & Media).

The sole magazine representative is Albert Read, the deputy managing director 
at Cond√© Nast Publications.

The board was, according to a press release issued today, "nominated by a wide 
spread of publishers who have signed contracts withIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>." They will serve until the company's 
annual meeting in 2015.

Vickers said: "I am very pleased that the industry has shown its support for 
the new system by nominating a group of directors with such deep experience and 
complementary skills. The building blocks for the new self-regulatory system 
are fitting into place."

The next "block" will be the imminent announcement of a chairperson for the 
main Ipso board. The man or woman is being selected by the appointments panel 
chaired by Sir Hayden Phillips.

The RFC's first task will be to work with the Ipso chair to agree a budget for 
the regulator and then to raise the necessary subscriptions from the industry.

One other important "block" is the creation of a code of ethics. That, too, is 
expected to be revealed soon.
 