
Richard Morris, who has died aged 71, was one of the founder members in 1974 
of the history of art department at Warwick University, and he remained there 
for the rest of his teaching career. He arrived for interview in late spring 
1973, was given the job, and immediately bought a house a couple of miles from 
the university. He measured its rooms, and when he returned that summer from 
Canada (where he had been a lecturer at the University of Victoria), with 
Jenny, his wife, and their small children, he brought his favourite Canadian 
wallpaper to decorate his new home.

Richard was born in Berkeley, Gloucestershire, son of Alberto and Mary, and 
went to Wycliffe school and Selwyn College, Cambridge, before completing his 
doctoral thesis in 1972 on DecoratedArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> in Herefordshire at the 
Courtauld Institute, London, under the direction of Peter Kidson. Accompanied 
by Jenny (nee Gibbs), whom he had married in 1968, he went to Canada because 
there were not enough jobs for medievalists in the UK.

He was the ideal person for the new department at Warwick, where the degree 
course had been designed to allow students to study in Venice during their 
final year. Richard quickly built his own course on English Gothic architecture 
around a series of weekly site visits to cathedrals, parish churches and 
castles in the vicinity of the university, often driving the university bus 
himself.

These trips were for generations of Warwick undergraduates an indelible 
experience. They began early and required intense looking, clambering over the 
vaults and service galleries of buildings such as Worcester Cathedral or 
Tewkesbury Abbey. The concentrated examination of structures which he instilled 
in his students, and the attention to minutiae of gothic mouldings and 
brickwork, prepared them exceptionally well for the intensity of the Venetian 
term in their third year.

Richardâ€™s doctoral work was on decorated architecture, a variant of cathedral 
gothic in which English architects and their profoundly innovative designs were 
to lead European architectural development. Latterly, his interests in 
vernacular architecture expanded significantly. He wrote influential papers on 
the architecture and patronage of Tewkesbury and the Despenser family and an 
important discussion of the royal enthusiasm for Arthurian mythology that 
coloured the reigns of Edward I and his successors.

Richard became a senior lecturer in 1979 and a reader in 1995. He served as 
head of department and on a considerable number of outside bodies. He was a 
member of the Society of Antiquaries, a long-term member of the cathedral 
fabric committees at Hereford and Lichfield, an archaeological consultant to 
Tewkesbury Abbey, and a council member of the Ancient Monuments Society. At 
Warwick he established the Warwick Mouldings Archive, a computerised archive of 
moulding profile drawings that has become a national resource.

He was a wonderful colleague, invariably cheerful, utterly dependable and 
always with the best interests of his students closest to his heart.

He is survived by Jenny, their sons, James and Tom, and daughter, Kate, and 
two grandchildren, Elfie and Oswin.
 