
Take off your shoes and hunker down. Pipilotti Rist’s new show is called Worry 
Will Vanish. For a while, it does. I go through the blue curtain atHauser & 
Wirth London 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2302/pipilotti-rist-worry-will-vanish/view/>
 and make a nest of the duvets that scatter the carpet. Music washes the room 
and a cascade of images flood two walls from floor to ceiling. Images drift and 
shred and morph and flow. It is all oversaturated, rich and ripe, as fertile 
and overabundant as aHenri Rousseau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/01/1> jungle. Part of me wants to 
sleep through it. The rest of me can’t, because you never know what’s going to 
come next, and there’s too much going on to take it all in on a single turn of 
the kaleidoscopic, high-definition loop.

One minute I’ve a worm’s-eye view of leaf litter and dew-spangled grass, the 
next the camera is taking me up someone’s nostril. There are spider nets up 
there. Now I’m in some sort of tunnel, embarking on an adventure in proctology, 
a journey into the caves of the human interior. What might we come across up 
there?

Lie back and enjoy it. Take deep breaths. You’re doing very well. Lit from 
inside, human skin pulses with veins and arteries, like the lines on a leaf 
with the sun striking through. Here comes the money shot: the artist, naked but 
for a pair of spectacles, leaps with joyous abandon, her breasts bouncing, 
patched-in and solarised over a backdrop of plant life. She’s only there for a 
minute and then she’s gone, replaced by what looks suspiciously like one of 
those tricksy decorative arrangements of fernsAndy Goldsworthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/17/andy-goldsworthy-interview-folkestone-triennial-times-square-rain>
 used to do. Phew. At least that bit didn’t last long. Give me the endoscopy 
tunnel-of-love any day.

Some of this stuff is real, some computer-generated. Gurgling throats and lips 
puckering like sphincters float by. Erect tongues dive into water. Body parts 
seem interchangeable. I wish mine were. Somewhere in all this, an intergalactic 
spaceship heaves into view, jets flaring. It’s only a kitchen gas hob, but by 
now everything looks unworldly. It’s the excess of it all that stops Rist’s 
work looking like a pop video. The music plays on, interrupted at one point by 
themournful cry of the loon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hnlze_cIYZs>. 
Unless it was me, whimpering under the duvet.

The next day, I journey to Hauser & Wirth’s spread at Bruton, in Somerset 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/>, where Rist spent a year in residence 
leading up to this double show. Between the immaculately restored farm 
buildings, Rist’s bunting made of underpants and knickers –last seen outside 
the Hayward Gallery in her 2011 exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2011/oct/05/artist-pipilotti-rist-eyeball-massage-video>
 – flap against the winter sky. They work much better here, if the word “work” 
has any meaning in this context. Sensibly shoed country walkers look up, 
mystified, on their way to visit the gardens and the restaurant. As the light 
fails, the dozens of pairs of bloomers and underpants, called Hiplights (or 
Enlighted Hips) glow from within.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpipilotti-rist-hauser-and-wirth-adrian-searle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417195852590%2F7b279879-5e7e-4833-9284-d538d2a13e18-2060x1584.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rich%20and%20ripe%3A%20Pipilotti%20Rist%E2%80%99s%20arty%20tunnels%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpipilotti-rist-hauser-and-wirth-adrian-searle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rich%20and%20ripe%3A%20Pipilotti%20Rist%E2%80%99s%20arty%20tunnels%20of%20love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpipilotti-rist-hauser-and-wirth-adrian-searle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417195852590%2F7b279879-5e7e-4833-9284-d538d2a13e18-2060x1584.jpeg>
 Worry Will Vanish (still, detail), 2014. Video audio installation Courtesy the 
artist, Hauser & Wirth and Luhring Augustine, New York Photograph: Hauser & 
Wirth and Luhring Augustine, New York 
Rist fills two galleries here. Mercy Garden complements Worry Will Vanish. 
This time, you lie on sheepskins, lulled by the pleasant scent of lanolin and 
banjo music. Human presence is provided by a young male farmer whom Rist met on 
her residency. Much of Mercy Garden is filmed in the surrounding countryside, 
on the Somerset-Dorset border, and in thegarden-meadow at Bruton, brilliantly 
laid out by Dutch garden designer Piet Oudolf with more than 26,000 herbaceous 
perennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2014/sep/23/piet-oudolf-field-hauser-wirth>
. The film also takes us to the sea, the camera floating and diving. It could 
be the Dorset coast, but it might equally be Antigua. Who cares. I thought I 
saw a dugong or a sea slug, but it was a young man’s submerged loins and penis, 
bubbles caught in pubic hair.

Rist is really good at rhythm and pace and visual surprise. Peonies are in 
bloom, poppies flower red and hot, and everything is vivid and a little bit 
trippy. Even the nettle patch looks inviting, so salad-fresh you could dance 
naked right through it. Hands fondle plant stems, fingers brush flower heads 
and stroke lengths of barbed wire. Again there are mouths and lips and tongues, 
a merging of inner and outer worlds, and a sense of the world being tasted and 
licked, caressed and imbibed. You could feel quite smothered were it not for 
Rist’s sense of delight and bodily pleasure in the work she makes.

In a second installation, Sleeping Pollen, a number of mirrored spheres hang 
at different heights, slowly revolving. Some contain hidden projectors, casting 
pictures of plants and drifts of pollen on to the darkened walls. I feel 
weightless in here, like a spaceman with hay fever.

Hauser & Wirth Somerset isn’t far from Glastonbury, with its cottage industry 
of mystical hocus-pocus, ley lines and manufactured myths. Don’t point that 
aromatherapy candle at me. I hate new-agey hippy shit, but I’m a sucker for 
Rist’s post-human dives into a fully modified nature. What’s not to love?

 * Worry Will Vanish 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2302/pipilotti-rist-worry-will-vanish/view/>
 is at Hauser & Wirth London until 10 January 2015;Stay Stamina Stay 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2293/pipilotti-rist-stay-stamina-stay/view/>
 is at Hauser & Wirth Somerset until 22 February 2015.
 