
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view the video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/feb/28/arbitrage-richard-gere-nicholas-jarecki-video>

You were gorgeous then, I tell Richard Gere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-gere>. He looks crossly over his 
glasses. "Were?" he says. Were – and are. "Thank you," he says, mollified. Two 
minutes into the interview and we're already unexpectedly into homoerotic 
territory. He looks back at a 40-year-old photograph of himself on my phone.

In the photo, it's June 1973 and Richard Gere is Danny Zuko, hair-slicked 
hottie bad boy of Grease, the role he played for six months at the New London 
Theatre, Drury Lane. It's decades before Gere started working that 
distinguished grey mane that serves him so well nowadays. It's a lifetime ago 
before that urban myth involving a gerbil and an emergency room. Long before he 
became the highest paid lover in Beverly Hills (inAmerican Gigolo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75765/american-gigolo>). Before he made 
Debra Winger and a good percentage of cinema audiences come over all 
unnecessary in navy whites scarcely concealing a buff butt (inAn Officer and a 
Gentleman <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/88433/officer-and-a-gentleman>
). Before he saved Julia Roberts from a life of prostitution (Pretty Woman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/81528/pretty-woman>). Before Andy Garcia 
blew him away in the final reel (Internal Affairs). Before he was married to 
Cindy Crawford and thenCarey Lowell <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000508/>. 
BeforeDaniel Day-Lewis beat him to the 2013 best actor Golden Globe 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2012/dec/13/awards-season-2012-13-nominees-winners>
. And certainly before he realised – as ideally we all will some day –the 
Buddhist truth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2002/jun/07/artsfeatures.dvdreviews> that 
renunciation is what will free us from the suffering brought about by desire.
 Richard Gere as Danny in Grease on the West End in 1973. Photograph: V&A 
Museum 
Behind him is a clutch of bobby-soxers looking besotted. In the foreground 
Gere is draped over a mic with dangerous eyebrows, razored sideburns and a 
quiff only a fool wouldn't covet. He looks as if he's crooning something really 
raunchy, though perhaps notBillericay Dickie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T-JIzWFfsPk>. Forget John Travolta, who played 
Zuko in the 1978 movie. Does Gere still have that killer leather jacket? "Nah. 
Probably couldn't even fit into it now." He looks back at the picture and 
smiles wistfully, nostalgically. "Oh how funny! I gotta send this to my son. 
Will you send it to me?"

The picture, incidentally, is from the Victoria and Albert Museum's microsite 
memorialising post-1950 US musicals <http://www.vam.ac.uk/users/node/9058>. 
What does he remember of London 40 years ago? "I don't think I'd been out of 
the US and this job happened and it was one of those moments where you think: 
'I'm starting the next part of my life somehow.'" On Broadway he had 
understudied the guy who created the role, Barry Bostwick, but starring in the 
West End transfer was his big break.

"We did previews in Chichester and I  remember the Triumph motorcycle factory 
was there and I saved up enough per diem to buy a Triumph motorcycle and drove 
it out of the factory." This can't be right: the Triumph factory was in 
Coventry. No matter, it was either Warwickshire or Sussex through which Gere 
rolled in biker pomp. "I was a kid – 23? I had my Triumph motorcycle and London 
and the jacket and it's all new to me. I'm on top of the world. Grease was a 
big hit. It was one of those moments."

Gere says he's loved to work in England ever since. He filmed John 
Schlesinger's Yanks <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yanks> in Twickenham and 
Yorkshire. He played lavishly bearded King David inBruce Beresford's biblical 
epic <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_David_%28film%29> that, for some 
doubtless plausible reason, was shot here. He also shot some scenes of the 
adaptation of Graham Greene'sThe Honorary Consul 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Honorary_Consul_%28film%29> opposite Michael 
Caine and Bob Hoskins in England. "I always felt at home here, though I could 
never figure out how my Brit actor friends – because I knew how much they were 
making – how they could have a car, go to restaurants and live in nice flats."

And now he is back in this rain-soaked dime of a country in glummer 
circumstances. He's here to do the press for his new movie. We're in a 
sixth-floor suite at Claridge's, so even if Gordon Ramsay is potty-mouthing 
sous chefs in the kitchen below, we can't hear him. Bliss. But what's that 
incessant metallic noise? Gere tapping spoon against teacup. He's taut, 
restless – if he is going to reach the imperturbable stillness of mind after 
the fires of desire, aversion and delusion have been finally extinguished, it 
won't be today. Like any intelligent life form, he finds these junkets irksome. 
The same muppet hacks with the same lame questions in different hotels. "I do 
the movie for free, but this I get paid for," he says grimly. "Only three hours 
to go."

In Arbitrage <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145813/arbitrage>, he plays 
Robert Miller, a hedge-fund magnate whose world falls apart on his 60th 
birthday. Miller's $413m in the hole, facing 1,000 years in jail for fraud and, 
worst of all, he just blew up a car wreck containing his mistress's corpse so 
he doesn't get fingered for infidelity. But here's the twist: despite his 
jerk-off mansion, jerk-off suits, jerk-off billions and the fact that he's a 
jerk cheating on adorable Susan Sarandon with uninteresting Laetitia Casta, we 
can't bring ourselves to hate him. Robert Miller is no boo-hiss Wall Street git 
à laGordon Gekko <http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0012282/quotes>. "To tell the 
truth I can't remember anything about Gordon Gekko apart from him saying: 
'Greed is good.'" No one can, but his surname suggests he's bad. "Yeah, 
reptilian. This is the anti-reptilian, probably."
 Richard Gere in Arbitrage. Photograph: Green Room Films/Sportsphoto 
Ltd/Allstar 
Gere has been getting heat from friends who resent him playing a billionaire 
hoodlum as unreptilian, perhaps even human. He's unrepentant. "It's very easy 
to hate these guys. They're the punching bag, but it would be too easy to play 
him that way – it wouldn't be interesting. Philosophically we enable those 
guys. As much as we hate them, we hate ourselves because we gave them the rope 
to hang ourselves with." So we should stop bashing bankers because they're just 
projections of what disgusts us about ourselves? "It takes our sense of 
responsibility out of the picture. We don't have to take responsibility because 
they are so bad. The fact is they are us and we're so complicit in the process."

This character is the flipside to the corporate raider he played in Pretty 
Woman. "That was a silly romantic comedy. You never saw him as a bad guy." Our 
feelings towards Miller, by contrast, are rarely so straightforwardly 
sympathetic. We're conflicted – we're revolted by and implicated in his crimes. 
Miller, Gere claims, is today's everyman. "He is educated, has possibilities, 
has money, has all the things you're supposed to want, but there is something 
bereft about life choices and moral responsibility."

This is what lured the 63-year-old Gere back to play his most substantial role 
in years <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/feb/22/arbitrage-richard-gere>. 
The taut script and its topical message overcame his doubts about working with
first-time director Nicholas Jarecki 
<http://www.fastcocreate.com/1681599/how-nicholas-jarecki-hacked-his-way-to-his-first-feature-film>
, an NY film school graduate and, more importantly, son of two Wall Street 
traders. "Nick knows this world very well. You can see he's not bluffing it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxYn9AoHHR_8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxYn9AoHHR_8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxYn9AoHHR_8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view the video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xYn9AoHHR_8>

"There is a diary that was supposedly written in Ancient Egypt and there was 
some controversy about whether it was real, and one expert said it's absolutely 
not. Why not? Because in the diary they're always talking about camels. Someone 
who has camels in their lives constantly doesn't talk a lot about camels. They 
don't even see them. It's the same with this. If this was a bad TV movie, it 
would be pointing fingers at the obvious. But venality is part of the texture 
of the movie, not upfront."

Camels? What Gere means is that Arbitrage is a thriller that gives us an 
insider's perspective rather than being, asOliver Stone's 1987 Wall Street 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89165/wall.street> surely was, an 
outsider's pantomimic rant. And yet, because Gere brings baggage to the film, 
some decline to take it seriously. When the lights went down at the press 
screening for Arbitrage, a woman behind me shouted: "Go on then Richard, show 
us your gear!" Classy. In the old days she would have had her press card 
shredded in front of her for a stunt like that.

Such reactions are a shame, because this is Gere's best work for a while. He 
convincingly portrays a suave, soigné, moral invertebrate. Was his Buddhism 
relevant to his decision to take this role? Did he want to play Miller because 
he's destroyed by the very thing he should renounce: desire? Gere laughs. "It's 
relevant to everything I do. We were talking about camels. Buddhism is the 
camel of my life. It's there everywhere.

"I don't think you have to be Buddhist to get it, quite honestly. I'm more 
interested in secular ethics, about what we all have in common. What is good? 
What is happiness? What is our duty to the community? What is our duty to 
ourselves?"

At the start of his film, it's Miller's 60th birthday party and he makes a 
speech before his extended family: "It's taken me 60 years to realise what's 
important – it's you guys." The ensuing 100 minutes expose that lie. "He's a 
liar, a huckster, a conman and a fraud. I recognise that. Acting is a fraud – 
but if you don't fill it with truth then it has no power. I have to believe the 
lie. He does the same thing."

But he betrays everything he affects to hold dear? "Look at Clinton. Same 
thing. He betrayed his wife, betrayed his child, betrayed his friends." Gere 
clearly has a thing about Bill Clinton. And not a good one. "Look at him now. 
If you have that life force that is always moving on and allowing things to 
happen, and never questioning your feelings – and obviously Clinton has that – 
there's something unfinished about you.

"Bill Clinton says this in his book. 'I never grew up. I didn't go to the next 
step.' It's like 'I'm feeling it so it must be right. I identify with it, give 
myself to it.'" He's talking about Clinton's sexual disgrace? "Yeah. There's a 
boyish quality to it. I'm not sure that's something we want in our leaders. One 
would think an adult could harness that energy and use it in a constructive, 
meaningful way. But the Millers and the Clintons of this world do not."
 Richard Gere meets the Dalai Lama in 2007. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty 
Images 
So when did Gere take that step into maturity? He seems to have harnessed his 
desire in a constructive way, or at least parlayed his celebrity into doing 
good. He'scampaigned for human rights in Tibet 
<http://www.savetibet.org/biography/richard-gere>, for ecological causes and 
Aids awareness 
<http://www.amfar.org/articles/around_the_world/richard_gere_on_fighting_aids_in_india/>
 and supportsSurvival International <http://www.survivalinternational.org/>, 
which is dedicated to protecting the rights and lands of tribal peoples. Yes, 
he was involved in an obscenity rumpus afterhe kissed Bollywood star Shilpa 
Shetty in 2007 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-448932/Kisses-Richard-Gere-plunge-Shilpa-Shetty-India-row.html>
, but the free-snogging Hollywood interloper could, a judge later ruled, come 
to India whenever he wanted.

"I haven't quite got there myself," says Gere of maturity. "Hope you never 
will," chips in his PR minder, saucily. Gere laughs: "You don't want to lose 
that energy but there's an unseemliness at a certain age when you're run by it, 
when you're not in control, that's really kind of foul." But, as the Dalai Lama 
orGilles Deleuze <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/deleuze/> might put it, 
aren't we all desiring machines and when we stop desiring we're dead?Didn't he 
tell Lisa Simpson that Buddhism teaches that suffering is caused by desire 
<http://images2.wikia.nocookie.net/__cb20071213212803/simpsons/images/6/62/She_of_Little_Faith_Promo_Card.gif>
? "Well that's what we have to look at. How can I use desire in such a way that 
I might be proud of it at the end of my life? There is a way but you have to do 
it consciously, you have to work at it. At some future date I will be there."

Gere is also to be seen among a parade of stars in Movie 43 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/29/movie-43-review>, a film the 
Chicago Sun-Times calledthe "Citizen Kane of awful" 
<http://www.suntimes.com/entertainment/movies/17804431-421/theres-awful-and-then-theres-movie-43.html>
. In Gere's skit, he plays a company boss whose new product is the "iBabe", a 
life-sized replica of a nude woman that functions as an MP3 player. But it has 
a design flaw: a fan built into its genitals is mangling the penises of teenage 
boys who attempt to have sex with it. It's that kind of film (gross-out maestro 
Peter Farrelly is one of its co-directors).

What can he say about Movie 43? "Other than apparently it's a piece of shit? 
Nothing. I haven't seen it." So how come he – like Kate Winslet, Halle Berry, 
Gerard Butler and Hugh Jackman – got embroiled in it? "The guy who put it 
together [producer Charles Wessler] is the godfather of my stepdaughter, a 
close friend of my wife. He said: 'Please would you spend half a day on the 
movie?' He showed me the skit and it was quite an innocuous thing, so I did it. 
I haven't even thought about it since, to tell you the truth. Never will see 
it."
 Richard Gere with wife Carey Lowell at this year's Golden Globes. Photograph: 
Steve Granitz/WireImage 
What's odd about this is that Gere is generally picky nowadays about what 
roles he takes. "They don't send me stuff now unless the script is good because 
I don't want them to waste my time. There's not that much space left in my 
brain so I don't want to put any more in there if it's not of value." He says 
he has seen nothing he wants to do for a while. It takes a lot to prise Gere 
from Bedford, his domestic fastness in upstate New York where he lives with 
actor and ex-model Lowell.

It's nearly time for Gere's next muppet. Remember meditating with Lenny and 
Carl at the Springfield Buddhist Temple in 2001 
<http://simpsons.wikia.com/wiki/She_of_Little_Faith>? Gere giggles. "That was 
fun, I did it for my stepdaughter. I thought if she loves me now, she's really 
going to love me after seeing me in The Simpsons." And it was funny. "Who's 
Buddha?" asked Lenny. "It's a good thing Buddhism teaches freedom from desire,"
snaps Gere <http://m.imdb.com/title/tt0701206/quotes>, "'cause I've got the 
desire to kick your ass."

One question remains. When Carl asks if he did all those situps in An Officer 
and Gentleman, Gere replies that he just did one and they repeated it thousands 
of times. What really happened? "We were doing pushups. And we were all in 
great shape. So we did one take – 40, 50, 100 pushups. Still pumping away. OK, 
cut. Take two. And we look at each other – exhausted, incredulous. So we get 
pumping again. 40, 50. Cut! We gotta do it again. A light problem.

"By the fourth take we decide when the cameras roll we'll start at 92, 93, 94. 
And that's what you see in the movie." So what we see is a con? "Acting is like 
high finance – it often involves fraud." Is that a job for a grownup Buddhist? 
"I enjoy my job. I have the best job in the world. I have no doubt in my mind I 
have the best job in the world." Maybe when Gere's maturation process is 
complete he'll feel otherwise.

Arbitrage is released on Friday 1 March
 