
It is a dreamlike, or possibly nightmarish, art installation – a huge, 
menacing, fluorescent Richard Branson and a jazz saxophone played discordantly 
by an apparently naked man. The work by Benedict Drew opens to the public at the
Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/09/liverpool-key-role-pre-raphaelite-art-exhibition-walker>
on Friday.

It is owned by the Arts Council Collection (ACC), this year celebrating its 
70th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/15/arts-council-collection-announces-70th-anniversary-commissions>
, and its unveiling coincided with the launch of a new exhibition and 2017 
programme. Leading figures in the art world gathered at the Walker to hear 
details of new plans for ACC exhibitions at four national partner galleries: 
the Walker, the Towner in Eastbourne, Birmingham Museums Trust and Yorkshire 
Sculpture Park.

Jill Constantine, head of the collection, said it was an important day that 
resonated with the ACC’s founding principles: “One of the original aims of the 
collection was to disseminate art as widely as possible across the country and 
we hold that true today.”

The collection has been acquiring works to support artists at the early stage 
in their careers since 1946 and currently has about 8,000 works by more than 
2,000 artists. It makes more than 1,000 loans to over 100 venues each year with 
regular touring exhibitions.

The secret life of building sites: the show that puts cranes and cement-mixers 
centre stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/18/building-site-lisbon-architecture-triennale-review>
Constantine said 1.5 million people had encountered a work from the collection 
last year, not counting the works lent to hospitals, universities and 
libraries. The new national partners programme would allow deeper relationships 
and mean even more people seeing works. “We want people to understand that this 
is their collection, come and see it, enjoy contemporary art,” she said.

The collection has an acquisitions budget of £230,000 a year, at least £50,000 
of which is ringfenced for artists working outside London. It was from that 
budget that the ACC this year bought Drew’s work. Called Kaput, it takes up two 
rooms at the Walker. In one is the giantRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> head with orange cables 
protruding from his eyes, apparently controlling foil-covered beating heart 
sculptures.

There is also noisy industrial feedback, the saxophonist and a low platform on 
which viewers can glimpse the Virgin spacecraft Branson wants to send to the 
moon. Drew said the work was exploring how “the once utopian idea of space 
tourism was lost to the ultimate oligarch adventure, fronted by Virgin 
Galactic”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frichard-bransons-big-head-and-naked-sax-player-star-in-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc01054d0268cd0dc2b07c2b2dc7935efeef1e70e%2F0_166_5728_3437%2F5728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Branson's%20big%20head%20and%20naked%20sax%20player%20star%20in%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frichard-bransons-big-head-and-naked-sax-player-star-in-art-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Branson%27s%20big%20head%20and%20naked%20sax%20player%20star%20in%20art%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Frichard-bransons-big-head-and-naked-sax-player-star-in-art-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc01054d0268cd0dc2b07c2b2dc7935efeef1e70e%2F0_166_5728_3437%2F5728.jpg>
 Felix the Cat by Turner prize winner Mark Leckey. Photograph: David Sillitoe 
for the Guardian 
Elsewhere at the Walker are other works from the ACC, including a huge 
inflatable Felix the Cat by Mark Leckey; and works by artists from north-west 
England – Mary Griffiths, Joe Fletcher Orr, Paul Rooney, Jason Thompson and 
Jesse Wine.

Ten minutes walk away, at Liverpool’s Bluecoat, a solo exhibition by Keith 
Piper opens on Friday <http://www.thebluecoat.org.uk/events/view/events/3420> 
with an ACC commission as its centrepiece – a video work called Unearthing the 
Banker’s Bones (2016).

Next year, highlights of the new national partners programme will include an 
exhibition at the Walker called Coming Out, exploring sexuality and gender 
identity in the 50 years since male homosexual acts were partially 
decriminalised in England and Wales.

At Yorkshire Sculpture Park <http://www.ysp.co.uk/>, works by artists 
including Tracey Emin and Grayson Perry will be in a show exploring childhood 
experience and memory.

At Birmingham museum and art gallery <http://www.birminghammuseums.org.uk/bmag>
, there will be an art and technology show. And at Eastbourne there will be an 
exhibition looking at how artists have responded to the materiality and idea of 
light.

The driving aim is to get more people to see more of the works not everyone 
who pays UK taxes knows they own.

“We are a bit elusive in our identity because we don’t have a public gallery,” 
said Constantine. “But we do a huge amount of work with museums and galleries 
across the country and we can be a vital lifeline for galleries, especially in 
the current climate. We’ve been collecting for 70 years and I don’t think there 
is a work that has never been lent.”

 