
Over 100 Scottish artists, including three Turner-prize winners, a Booker 
winner and a winner of the Costa award have written an open letter protesting 
at the "deepening malaise" atCreative Scotland 
<http://www.creativescotland.com/>. It is the latest iteration of what now 
looks like an unbreachable rift between the Scottish arts community and their 
national funding body.

Signatories amount to the bulk of the Scottish arts establishment. As well as 
the artist Douglas Gordon, and novelists James Kelman and AL Kennedy, they 
include the Scots national poet Liz Lochhead, master of the Queen's music Sir 
Peter Maxwell Davies, and writerAlasdair Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alasdairgray>.

The artists write of Creative Scotland's "ill-conceived decision-making; 
unclear language [and] lack of empathy and regard for Scottish culture". They 
accuse it of a "confused and intrusive management style married to a corporate 
ethos that seems designed to set artist against artist and company against 
company".

Playwrights David Harrower, Zinnie Harris and David Greig are signatories, as 
is poet Don Paterson. Prominent artists include Richard Wright,Martin Boyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/martin-boyce>, David Shrigley, Karla 
Black and Nathan Coley. Writers Ian Rankin and Andrew O'Hagan have also signed.

(Scroll down for the letter in full.)

Trust between artists and the body, which handles an Â£83m budget, is "low and 
receding daily", they say. Concerns raised publicly and privately "have gone 
unanswered or been met with defensiveness, outright denial, or been ascribed to 
problems with 'communication'."

The crisis began in the summer, when artists expressed dismay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/jul/09/arts-body-scottish-culture> that 49 
arts organisations had been taken off regular funding and placed on one-year, 
project-based grants, denying them, argued the organisations, the necessary 
stability to flourish.

But the problems went much deeper, as fears began to grow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2012/jul/09/arts-funding-row-scotland>
 about Creative Scotland's perceived lack of transparency; a reliance on the 
language of business and the commercial sector; and a focus on "strategic 
commissioning", which, it was argued, gave too much power to Creative Scotland 
and removed agency from artists. Privately, some expressed fears that they 
would be "punished" for speaking out against the body. A host ofblogs 
<http://www.roannedods.com/investing-in-a-creative-future-response-to-andrew-dixons-blog>
 andopen letters 
<http://www.front-step.co.uk/2012/05/30/letter-to-creative-scotland/> began to 
be addressed to Creative Scotland's chief executive Andrew Dixon and its 
chairman, Sir Sandy Crombie. Culture minister Fiona Hyslop also expressed 
concerns to the funding body.

It had been hoped that pressure exerted on Creative Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> by members of its board over the 
summer would lessen the crisis, but frustration has only increased. The open 
letter does not call on Dixon or his most senior colleague, creative director 
Venu Dhupa, to step down, but the crisis is now so deep that resignations seem 
increasingly likely.

The artists call for a "fresh start" with a seven-point list of demands, 
including the end of "business-speak and obfuscating jargon in official 
communication" and a revisiting of Creative Scotland's priorities with an eye 
to "social and cultural as well as commercial values".

A spokesperson at Creative Scotland said: "We are totally committed to working 
collaboratively with the arts and culture sector, we are listening very closely 
to what that sector is telling us and we are taking positive action as a result 
across a number of operational and strategic areas."

The letter in full:

Dear Sir Sandy

We write to express our dismay at the ongoing crisis in Creative Scotland. A 
series of high-profile stories in various media are only one sign of a 
deepening malaise within the organisation, the fall-out from which confronts 
those of us who work in the arts in Scotland every day.

Routinely, we see ill-conceived decision-making; unclear language, lack of 
empathy and regard for Scottish culture. We observe an organisation with a 
confused and intrusive management style married to a corporate ethos that seems 
designed to set artist against artist and company against company in the search 
for resources.

This letter is not about money. This letter is about management. The arts are 
one of Scotland's proudest assets and most successful exports. We believe 
existing resources are best managed in an atmosphere of trust between those who 
make art and those who fund it. At present, this trust is low and receding 
daily.

In his address to Holyrood, Mr Dixon asked why more artists do not address 
their concerns to him directly: the answer is straightforward; they have. 
Letters of concern have been sent by representative groups from theatre, dance, 
the games industry, visual arts and literature. Individual voices have also 
been raised from many quarters both privately and in public. These concerns 
have gone unanswered or been met with defensiveness, outright denial, or been 
ascribed to problems with "communication".

It is time for a fresh start. We ask that the board of Creative Scotland 
considers the following requests with the utmost urgency. We ask that you:

1. genuinely acknowledge the scale of the problem;

2. affirm the value of stable two to three year funding for small arts 
organisations;

3. end the use of business-speak and obfuscating jargon in official 
communication;

4. revisit CS policies with an eye to social and cultural as well as 
commercial values;

5. collaborate with artists to re-design over-complicated funding forms and 
processes;

6. ensure that funding decisions are taken by people with artform expertise;

7. establish an effective system of dealing with complaints as swiftly as 
possible.

We do not sign this letter lightly but we feel we are in an unprecedented 
situation. We call on you to act swiftly to make what changes are necessary to 
the organisation to repair trust and restore communication before any further 
damage is done to Scotland's cultural landscape and international reputation.

Yours sincerely,

Sam Ainsley, Davey Anderson, Peter Arnott, Clare Barclay, Anne Bevan, Karla 
Black, Martin Boyce, Katrina Brown (Dr), Tam Dean Burn, Roddy Buchanan, John 
Byrne, Lorne Campbell, Richard Campbell, Jo Clifford, Nathan Coley, Deborah 
Crewe, Jeannie Davies, Peter Maxwell Davies (Sir), Chloe Dear, Finn den Hertog, 
Ella Hickson, Roanne Dods, Jude Doherty, Jaqueline Donachie, Joe Douglas, Rob 
Drummond, Oliver Emmanuel, Catrin Evans, Rob Evans, Graham Fagen, Andy Field, 
Pat Fisher, Luke Fowler, Fiona Fraser, Vivian French, Janice Galloway, Andrea 
Gibb, Suzy Glass, Douglas Gordon (Prof), Mickey Graham, Alasdair Gray, Stephen 
Greenhorn, David Greig, Kris Haddow, David Harding OBE, John Harris, Zinnie 
Harris, Ben Harrison, David Harrower, Lewis Hetherington, Corrina Hewat, Mark 
Hope, Philip Howard, Kieran Hurley, Chris Hunn, Callum Innes, Kathleen Jamie, 
David Paul Jones, James Kelman, AL Kennedy, Laura Cameron Lewis, Liz Lochhead, 
Ali Maclaurin, Linda Maclean, James Macmillan, Caoihin MacNeill, Aonghas 
MacNicol, Willy Maley (Prof), Andy Manley, Michael John McCarthy, Nicola 
McCartney, Francis McKee, Bernard McLaverty, Alan McKendrick, Linda Mclaughlin, 
Becky Minto, Alexander Moffat OBE, Gerry Mulgrew, Rona Munro, Andrew O'Hagan, 
Janice Parker,Don Paterson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/don-paterson>, 
Toby Paterson, Mary Paulson Ellis, Aonghas Phadraig Caimpbeul, Philip Pinsky, 
Karine Polwart, Lynda Radley, Ian Rankin, Robin Robertson, Fiona Robson, Muriel 
Romanes, Lesley Anne Rose, Lisa Sangster, David Shrigley, Ross Sinclair, Gerda 
Stevenson, Pete Stollery (Prof), Richard Wright
 