
What price new politics to go with this new political season? The season past 
was, by general consent, the most demeaned of the modern era. Public confidence 
in the British political system, admittedly never high, took a huge hit from 
the expenses scandal. So surely the autumn party conferences that begin this 
weekend will be crackling with the necessary damage-repairing energy? Dream on.

For some party leaders, the new season just seems to mean politics as usual. 
With an election looming, they are digging in for a partisan war through to 
polling day. Fair enough, up to a point. The issues that divide them are 
serious, especially the economic ones. But this instinct may come across, as 
the bankers do in their own comfortable corner of the forest, as crazily 
oblivious to the lessons of the recent past.

Gordon Brown's speech to the TUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2009/sep/16/gordon-brown-tuc-spending-cuts>
 this week was trapped in just such a time warp. It was entirely about 
spending. With minor changes, it could have been made by any Labour leader at 
any TUC conference at any time in the postwar era. There was not one word in it 
about democracy or political reform. It was as if the expenses scandal had 
never happened and the old politics had merely resumed. This is probably how 
Brown actually sees it.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, as ever, is 
more alive to the public mood than Brown. At least his press conference speech 
this week contained a section, right at the beginning, entitled New Politics. 
At least he mentioned the need to clean up politics and talked about openness 
and accessibility. But the substance does not match the words. A solitary Tory
open primary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2009/sep/16/davidcameron-conservatives>
, rightly celebrated by Cameron this week, does not make government more 
accountable or parliament more representative. It is a gimmick.

Neither response measures up to the scale of public dissatisfaction with 
British politics. This is the year in which73% of voters 
<http://www.ipsos-mori.com/Assets/Docs/Polls/Trust-in-Professions-Computer-Tables_Nov%202008.pdf>
 told pollsters that they don't trust politicians,83% 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/siteFiles/resources/PDF/Liberal%20moment.pdf> said 
MPs put themselves and their parties ahead of their constituents or the 
national interest, and 84% thought MPs who made bogus claims should be 
expelled. But it was also the year in which73% wanted fixed-term parliaments 
<http://docs.google.com/gview?a=v&q=cache:5a94C1XtRsoJ:www.yougov.co.uk/extranets/ygarchives/content/pdf/DT-toplines_27-29MAY.pdf+73%25+fixed-term+parliaments+telegraph+yougov&hl=en&gl=uk>
, 75% wanted the power to recall their MP, 74% wanted the right to referendums, 
69% wanted an elected House of Lords, and only 20% opposed a new electoral 
system for the House of Commons.

Surely the party conferences in such a year ought to be dominated by the task 
of responding to that appetite for a new politics? Even the TUC, rarely a 
byword for innovative thinking, voted yesterday to look at electoral reform. 
But don't hold your breath for the main party conferences to emulate their 
call. It will be a surprise if eitherLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> or the Tories allow a proper and 
open debate this time on how politics might be mended.

Party conferences are deeply unresponsive events. They ought to be parliaments 
of the experienced and committed, arenas in which leaders and members connect, 
talk with and listen to one another and the wider electorate. They ought to be 
full of political fibre as well as fire, exchanges of ideas and agenda-setting 
forums for shared partisan approaches to the issues of the day – such as 
political reform.

Yet party conferences no longer come near to these ideals, if they ever did. 
As political events, they are not unimportant; ask the party leaders. And they 
still have a galvanising purpose, especially in a pre-election year. But modern 
parties are not what they were and, in the case of Labour and the Tories – we 
will come to the Lib Dems later – the conferences have become little more than 
bland cheerleading and money-raising shows. For the two largest parties, 
conferences are where debate and democracy go to die. They have become an 
important part of what is wrong with our politics.

Not that there was ever a golden age. Neither of the main parties has a truly 
democratic conference tradition. Access to the speaker's podium was ruthlessly 
controlled. At Labour,union block votes 
<http://ppq.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/8/2/207> decided every policy 
issue. With the Tories, there were generally no votes at all, merely deference. 
Old-style Labour conferences could be brutal bloodletting events. Old-style 
Tory ones could be insufferably narrow-minded. Both were fascinating but 
flawed. No one should want to turn the clock back to either of these relics of 
a bygone culture.

Like so much that is regrettable about modern politics, party conferences have 
become what they are for ostensibly good reasons. They changed from 
deliberative events that were to an extent autonomous from the party leader, 
into promotional events controlled by the leadership. Call it the rise of 
political management if you like. But the change took place because principled 
leaders felt it necessary, and because most of the rank and file willingly 
acquiesced in their own loss of control for what they believed to be the good 
of their party.

Labour would never have regained electoral credibility in the 1980s and 90s 
without a collective determination to stop the party conference being an annual 
act of public self-mutilation. TheConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> would not have recovered 
without taking the process even further. But success has come at a huge price. 
Modern party conferences have become like corporate AGMs, expensive events 
whose true aims are the assertion of authority and the concealment of 
embarrassment. Modern parties are so structured around control that they are 
incapable of serious public debate.

Bits of this apply to the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> too. The Lib Dem 
conference in Bournemouth next week is a far cry from the old Liberal 
assemblies of the 1970s. Control, deference and promotion of the leader all 
play their part. The men all wear suits, even here. But the Lib Dem conference 
is a recognisably democratic event in a sense that the other conferences can no 
longer claim to be. Policies are proposed, amended, debated and voted on in an 
impeccable manner.

Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> announced 
yesterday that this is a liberal moment. You may or may not agree with that. 
Yet this is certainly a moment for new politics, and the Lib Dems are the only 
one of the three large UK-wide parties that deserves to be called democratic 
and whose conference is not from beginning to end a stitch-up. Call it the 
luxury of permanent opposition if you will. But if parties cannot be democratic 
in a democracy, something is very wrong with the system.
 