
High style and the Olympics do not always make comfortable bedfellows – just 
ask the Norwegian curling team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/picture/2014/jan/23/norwegian-curling-team-style-zig-zag>
 – but the podium look for spring/summer 2016 is unmistakably athletic. Expect 
to see tracksuits, vests and bright diagonal stripes, as Rio 2016 fever takes 
hold of fashion-aware wardrobes.

The starting pistol was fired at Paris fashion week, where the French label 
Chloé had fashion editors swooning over its luxe tracksuit tops. If autumn 2015 
wasdefined by Gucci’s furry loafer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/07/super-furry-gucci-loafers-why-these-daft-shoes-are-autumns-defining-item>
 – a surreal shoe that reflected the season’s fondnessfor brainy, faux-vintage 
glamour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/25/milan-fashion-week-guccis-smart-revamp-ensures-brains-restore-fawn>
 – the tracksuit looks likely to characterise spring/summer 2016.

“It’s such an easy look,” says Justin O’Shea, the buying director of the 
luxury online retailerMyTheresa.com <http://mytheresa.com/>, who believes the 
eyebrow-raising £1,000 price tag for the Chloé top will not put a certain kind 
of customer off, even if an Adidas zip-up might suffice for the rest of us. 
“Everyone wants to be comfortable at the moment,” he says. “There were 
tracksuits at Gucci and Hillier Bartley. You can guarantee Karl Lagerfeld will 
be putting them on the Chanel catwalk soon.”

The tracksuit is also a winner in menswear, according to Simon Chilvers, the 
style director atmatchesfashion.com <http://matchesfashion.com/>: “It’s set to 
become the rollneck for next season, a great layering piece under a lightweight 
coat or jacket and it ticks the 1990s box, which is a headline trend for 
spring/summer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e38fe0408796e8bfd5264a13c036d0d2801a44e%2F90_120_1870_2806%2F1870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e38fe0408796e8bfd5264a13c036d0d2801a44e%2F90_120_1870_2806%2F1870.jpg>
 Lacoste’s latest collection is inspired by athletes draped in their national 
flags. Photograph: Thomas Concordia/WireImage 
Other designers are in on the game, too. Lacoste, the outfitters to the French 
Olympic team, presented a spring/summer 2016 collection of zip-up polo shirts 
and oversized jackets, inspired by athletes draped in their nations’ flags. 
Stella McCartney, the designer dressing the GB Olympic team, showed checked 
racerback vests, polo shirt dresses and mesh creations in flag-like primary 
colours. In May,the world’s most valuable luxury brand 
<http://wwd.com/fashion-news/fashion-scoops/louis-vuitton-cruise-show-2016-rio-de-janeiro-10296832/>
, Louis Vuitton, will take hundreds of the fashion world’s most influential 
buyers and editors to Rio to present its cruise collection.

Olympic-inspired style is not always wholesome, triumphant and upbeat. The 
hotly tipped Russian menswear designer Gosha Rubchinskiy, for example,took the 
1984 Olympics that were boycotted by the USSR as his starting point 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/article/25237/1/get-to-know-gosha-rubchinskiy-ss16>
 for spring/summer 2016. Models wore oversized shorts, shell-suit tops and 
vests tucked into tracksuit bottoms; a Soviet flag was waved in the finale. 
“There are so many parts of the Olympics which aren’t clean cut – whether it’s 
the drug taking or other problems – so someone like Gosha might take that 
view,” says O’Shea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7edde1d086d1ddb967d1c275b61568c6f98e6b0%2F131_116_2561_1536%2F2561.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7edde1d086d1ddb967d1c275b61568c6f98e6b0%2F131_116_2561_1536%2F2561.jpg>
 Gosha Rubchinskiy has looked to the 1984 Olympics for inspiration, 
specifically the Soviet Union’s boycott of the Games. Photograph: 
SIPA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Designer fashion’s preoccupation with sport ties into the wider “athleisure” 
trend, a convergence between fashion and activewear that has sold brilliantly 
in recent years. According to the market research firmEuromonitor 
<http://www.euromonitor.com/>, global sales of sports-inspired clothing were up 
6% year on year in 2014 to $22bn. Euromonitor’s apparel and footwear analyst, 
Bernadette Kissane, says the boom is tied to “changing consumer attitudes 
towards health and wellness and an upsurge in sports participation”, much of 
which was precipitated by the 2012 Olympics. Kissane believes the trend is set 
to continue. “Firstly, comfort can provide more momentum for a trend, and 
secondly, athleisure is being driven by a permanent change to people’s 
lifestyles, rather than being merely a fad,” she said.

Athleisure: Beyoncé + Topshop = surefire style trend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/01/athleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear>
On the high street, 2016 brings a series of athleisure launches, including the 
first fitness range by Ted Baker andBeyonce’s much-anticipated 
athletic-influenced line with Topshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/01/athleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear>
, due in April. Appropriately enough for a trend epitomised by a £1,000 
tracksuit top, buying sports clothes does not mean actually getting sweaty in 
them, according to Tamara Sender, the senior fashion analyst at research firm 
Mintel. “Growth is very much being driven by a fashion trend for sporty styles 
of clothing,” she said. “Mintel’s consumer research shows that just over half 
of consumers buy sportswear items for not participating in a sport.”

Three style makers of 2016 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba3cf0722c1d34ebdcf5292881a6372ac4d76c35%2F0_101_2987_4473%2F2987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba3cf0722c1d34ebdcf5292881a6372ac4d76c35%2F0_101_2987_4473%2F2987.jpg>
 Alicia Vikander at the the UK premiere of The Danish Girl earlier this month. 
Photograph: Karwai Tang/WireImage 
Alicia Vikander

The Swedish actor, Louis Vuitton muse and likely Oscar nominee for her role in 
The Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/the-danish-girl-review-eddie-redmayne-transgender-venice-film-tom-hooper>
 is set to rule the red carpet in 2016. More dropped waist than corset, more 
art gallery owner than beauty pageant contestant, her clothes are glamorous in 
a thoughtful, individual way that reflects everything fashion currently wants 
to be.
 Demna Gvasalia will present his first Balenciaga collection in March. 
Photograph: Balenciaga 
Demna Gvasalia

Once an insider name to know in fashion, this Georgian designer and head of 
the cult design collective Vetements will present his first collection for the 
historic fashion house Balenciaga in March. Expect his pared back, off-kilter, 
often awkward aesthetic to infiltrate the mainstream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787a18c1ca191e849fa94e1a8959590b9aad5fc6%2F0_117_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rio%20Olympics%20set%20the%20pace%20for%20spring%2Fsummer%202016%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Frio-olympics-set-pace-spring-summer-2016-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787a18c1ca191e849fa94e1a8959590b9aad5fc6%2F0_117_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
 Eddie Edwards could become an unlikely style icon thanks to next year’s biopic 
of the ski jumper. Photograph: Jonathan Utz/AFP/Getty Images 
Eddie the Eagle


An unforeseen consequence of the Eddie the Eagle biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/15/eddie-the-eagle-trailer-sky-jumper-video>
, set for release in April, is the realisation that Eddie Edwards, played by 
Taron Egerton, is something of a style template – for menswear in spring/summer 
2016 at least. It’s all in the primary-coloured 1980s sportswear and oversized 
gold-rimmed glasses.
 