
Rio Tinto <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rio-tinto> has reported a loss 
for 2015 after prices for iron ore and copper plummeted.

 The world’s second biggest mining company has scrapped its promise to 
maintain or lift its dividend annually for this year onward owing to a tough 
outlook.

 The firm has held its 2015 full-year dividend at $2.15 a share – although 
below the higher market forecasts – at a time when its peers are expected to 
cut or suspend their payouts to shore up their balance sheets.

 Rio reported a net loss of $866m (£599m), hammered by $1.8bn in write-downs 
which related mainly to its Simandou iron ore project in Guinea, west Africa.

'Substantial' Australian job losses planned at BHP mining spin-off South32
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/substantial-australian-job-losses-planned-at-bhp-mining-spin-off-south32>
 The group’s underlying earnings slumped 51% to $4.54bn down from $9.31bn a 
year earlier, hit by weaker iron ore, copper and aluminium prices. That was in 
line with analysts’ average forecast of $4.534bn.

Its share price in London slipped along with other commodities companies 
including BHP Billiton, Anglo American and Glencore as the FTSE endured another 
shaky opening on Thursday. Rio was the biggest faller on the FTSE 100 in early 
trading, down more than 7%.

“In light of the significant deterioration in the macro-economic environment 
and the resultant market uncertainty, the board believes that it is no longer 
appropriate to maintain the progressive dividend policy,” the company said.


Mining <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining> firms are under pressure 
from credit rating agencies to curb spending, including cutting dividends, to 
help them weather the worst market conditions in almost two decades.

 Rio’s chief executive, Sam Walsh, said the deterioration of the global 
economy had generated widespread market uncertainty.

He called for a shift in how the company spends its money: “We are embarking 
on a new round of proactive measures to cut our operating costs by a further 
$1bn in 2016 followed by an additional goal of $1bn in 2017.”

Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s have warned they may cut miners’ credit ratings. 
S&P said it might downgrade Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton if both companies 
retained their “progressive dividend” policies, under which they promise to 
never cut their payouts.

 Rio said for 2016 the company intended to a pay a full-year dividend at least 
$1.10 a share.

 The company is in a stronger position than its rivals as it has reduced net 
debt over the past three years. Its net debt stood at $13.8bn as of the end of 
December, $700m better than the $14.5bn pro-forma position at the end of 2014. 
Analysts were expecting net debt of $14.8bn.

“We don’t run our business on hope, we run it with foresight and focus,” Walsh 
said.
 