
The Guardian-inspired plan to make Roadrunner 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vZUSF0Zd_Yw> by Jonathan Richman and the Modern 
Lovers <https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/aug/10/modern-lovers> 
the official state song of Massachusetts has hit an obstacle in the form of 
Aerosmith-loving state legislators, who have countered with a proposal that 
Aerosmith'sDream On <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sZfZ8uWaOFI> receive the 
honour.

An article by the Guardian's Laura Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/20/popandrock5>, in which she drove 
along every road mentioned in every version of Roadrunner,inspired the movement 
to enshrine the song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/24/laura-barton-article-massachusetts-roadrunner>
 about driving "Route 128 when it's late at night". After reading Barton's 2007 
article about Roadrunner and the state,Joyce Linehan 
<http://www.dotnews.com/2011/influencer-ashmont-hill-joyce-linehan> – an active 
figure in both Massachusetts music and politics – began to lobby for the tuneto 
be named the state's official song 
<http://www.boston.com/ae/music/2013/02/17/with-new-bill-jonathan-richman-roadrunner-could-become-official-rock-song-massachusetts/344ErUjqbNFuCQ7uhfFj1O/story.html>
. As her campaign gathered steam a local politician, Martin Walsh, filed a 
supporting bill with the state legislature.

Not everyone felt the same love of the Modern Lovers' anthem. In the wake of 
Walsh's bill, two other state representatives, Josh Cutler and James Cantwell, 
have filed their own proposal: that Aerosmith's Dream On, not Richman's 
Roadrunner, become Massachusetts' official state rock song. "With all due 
respect, Aerosmith is the bestselling American rock band of all time," Cantwell 
told theState House news service 
<http://www.southcoasttoday.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=%2F20130225%2FNEWS%2F130229909>
. "No band is more closely associated with Massachusetts."

On his first point, Cantwell is factually incorrect: the Eagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eagles>, not Aerosmith, are America's 
biggest-selling rock band. And regardless of whether Aerosmith are "closely 
associated" with Massachusetts, Dream On is not: whereas Roadrunner has the 
line "I'm in love with Massachusetts", Aerosmith's 1973 hit is about dreaming, 
and singing, and hoping that the good Lord will take you away.

Asked about this proposal, 61-year-old Jonathan Richman told the Boston Globe 
<http://bostonglobe.com/arts/music/2013/02/16/with-new-bill-jonathan-richman-roadrunner-could-become-official-rock-song-massachusetts/viTqBMMzP1RfzsocTQrh2J/story.html>
: "I don't think the song is good enough to be a Massachusetts song of any 
kind."

• This article was amended on27 February to correct a reference to a Boston 
newspaper from the Phoenix to the Globe.
 