
History, science, poetry and fiction books are vying for the £25,000 Warwick 
prize for writing 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/cross_fac/prizeforwriting/2013/>. The shortlist 
is led by Robert Macfarlane's "intricate, sensuous, haunted"The Old Ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/31/old-ways-robert-macfarlane-review>
, about walking the pathways of the British Isles, and Jim Al-Khalili's
Pathfinders: The Golden Age of Arabic Science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/23/arabic-science-jim-alkhalili-review>
, a history of the "bubbling invention and delighted curiosity of the Islamic 
world".

"I like to think of the Warwick prize as capacious," said Ian Sansom, 
professor of English and comparative literary studies at Warwick University and 
chair of the judges for the biennial prize. "We hope to draw on works of all 
kinds with intellectual, scientific and imaginative energy and clarity." The 
prize is unusual in that nominations are invited from members of staff and 
students, and whittled down by the judges to the six books on the shortlist.

Alice Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald>, winner of the 
2002 TS Eliot prize, is shortlisted forMemorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/memorial-alice-oswald-review>, a 
reworking of Homer's Illiad memorialising every solider's death to create 
"remembering on a grand scale".Delusions of Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/11/delusions-gender-sex-cordelia-fine>
, the cognitive neuroscientist Cordelia Fine's study of the science 
underpinning gender stereotypes, is the third work of non-fiction to make the 
shortlist.

The fiction contenders are Etgar Keret's short story collection Suddenly, a 
Knock on the Door, which reflects the "chaos and randomness of everyday 
existence", according to Sansom'sGuardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/23/suddenly-knock-door-etgar-keret-review>
; and the novel Sufficient Grace by Amy Espeseth, which is a tale of two young 
women in an isolated religious community in Wisconsin.

Author Macfarlane, who is chair of judges for the 2013 Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/23/booker-prize-longlist-daring-experimental>
 finds himself on the other side of the fence this time around.

The Warwick prize for writing is awarded for a substantial piece of work in 
English in any genre or form, by the University of Warwick and, for the first 
time in 2013, also by Monash University in Melbourne, Australia, following an 
alliance between the two institutions. "Broadening it out to Australia this 
year did bring in a more global perspective," Sansom said. The shortlisted 
authors are British, Iraqi-British, Canadian-British, American-Australian and 
Israeli.

Joining Sansom as judges this year are acclaimed writer and professor Marina 
Warner and Professor Ed Byrne, the vice-chancellor and president of Monash 
University. The shortlist was announced atMelbourne writers' festival 
<http://www.mwf.com.au/2013/?name=Home-content>, Australia, and the prize will 
be awarded on 24 September at theWallace Collection 
<http://www.wallacecollection.org/>, London.

Naomi Klein was the inaugural winner of the prize in 2009 for her book The 
Shock Doctrine <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/politics>, an 
exposé of how a privileged few are making millions from worldwide disasters. 
Peter Forbes triumphed in 2011 forDazzled and Deceived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/31/dazzled-deceived-peter-forbes-review>
, a study of mimicry and camouflage in nature, art and warfare.
 