
The McDonald’s on the corner of Third Avenue and 58th Street in New York City 
doesn’t look all that different from any of the fast-food chain’s other 
locations across the country. Inside, however, hungry patrons are welcomed not 
by a cashier waiting to take their order, but by a “Create Your Taste” kiosk – 
an automated touch-screen system that allows customers to create their own 
burgers without interacting with another human being.

It’s impossible to say exactly how many jobs have been lost by the deployment 
of the automated kiosks – McDonald’s has been predictably reluctant to release 
numbers – but such innovations will be an increasingly familiar sight in 
Trump’s America.

Once confined to the pages of futuristic dystopian fictions, the field of 
robotics promises to be the most profoundly disruptive technological shift 
since the industrial revolution. While robots have been utilized in several 
industries, including the automotive and manufacturing sectors, for decades, 
experts now predict that a tipping point in robotic deployments is imminent – 
and that much of the developed world simply isn’t prepared for such a radical 
transition.

Many of us recognize robotic automation as an inevitably disruptive force. 
However, in a classic example of optimism bias, while approximatelytwo-thirds 
of Americans 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/03/10/public-predictions-for-the-future-of-workforce-automation/>
 believe that robots will inevitably perform most of the work currently done by 
human beings during the next 50 years, about 80%also believe 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/03/10/public-predictions-for-the-future-of-workforce-automation/>
 their current jobs will either “definitely” or “probably” exist in their 
current form within the same timeframe.

Somehow, we believe our livelihoods will be safe. They’re not: every 
commercial sector will be affected by robotic automation in the next several 
years.

For example, Australian company Fastbrick Robotics has developed a robot, the 
Hadrian X <http://fbr.com.au/>, that can lay 1,000 standard bricks in one hour 
– a task that would take two human bricklayers the better part of a day or 
longer to complete.

In 2015, San Francisco-based startup Simbe Robotics unveiled Tally 
<http://www.simberobotics.com/>, a robot the company describes as “the world’s 
first fully autonomous shelf auditing and analytics solution” that roams 
supermarket aisles alongside human shoppers during regular business hours and 
ensures that goods are adequately stocked, placed and priced.


Swedish agricultural equipment manufacturer DeLaval International recently 
announced thatits new cow-milking robots 
<http://modernfarmer.com/2016/12/rise-cow-milking-robots/> will be deployed at 
a small family-owned dairy farm in Westphalia, Michigan, at some point later 
this year. The system allows cows to come and be milked on their own, when they 
please.

Data from the Robotics Industries Association (RIA), one of the largest 
robotic automation advocacy organizations in North America,reveals just how 
prevalent 
<http://www.robotics.org/content-detail.cfm/Industrial-Robotics-News/North-American-Robotics-Market-Sets-New-Record-in-First-Half-of-2016/content_id/6246>
 robots are likely to be in the workplace of tomorrow. During the first half of 
2016 alone, North American robotics technology vendors sold 14,583 robots worth 
$817m to companies around the world. The RIA further estimates that more than 
265,000 robots are currently deployed at factories across the country, placing 
the US third worldwide in terms of robotics deployments behind only China and 
Japan.

In a recent report <https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-future-of-jobs>, the 
World Economic Forum predicted that robotic automation will result in the net 
loss of more than 5m jobs across 15 developed nations by 2020, a conservative 
estimate. Another study 
<http://www.ilo.org/public/english/dialogue/actemp/downloads/publications/2016/asean_in_transf_2016_r1_techn.pdf>
, conducted by the International Labor Organization, states that as many as 
137m workers across Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam 
– approximately 56% of the total workforce of those countries – are at risk of 
displacement by robots, particularly workers in the garment manufacturing 
industry.

A Trump-sized problem
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36b39fa66e13b073d7256184e760d6e3bb1fd2e%2F0_68_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we're%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we%27re%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb36b39fa66e13b073d7256184e760d6e3bb1fd2e%2F0_68_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Young women visit a newly opened robot-staffed store where robots welcome 
customers looking to buy a mobile phone. Photograph: Franck Robichon/EPA 
Advocates for robotic automation routinely point to the fact that, for the 
most part, robots cannot service or program themselves – yet. In theory, this 
will create new, high-skilled jobs for technicians, programmers and other newly 
essential roles.

However, for every job created by robotic automation, several more will be 
eliminated entirely. At scale, this disruption will have a devastating impact 
on our workforce.

Few people understand this tension better than Dr Jing Bing Zhang, one of the 
world’s leading experts on the commercial applications of robotics technology. 
As research director for global marketing intelligence firmIDC 
<http://www.idc.com/>, Zhang studies how commercial robotics is likely to shape 
tomorrow’s workforce.

IDC’s FutureScape: Worldwide Robotics 2017 Predictions 
<https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prAP42000116> report, authored by 
Zhang and his team, reveals the extent of the coming shift that will jeopardize 
the livelihoods of millions of people.

By 2018, the reports says, almost one-third of robotic deployments will be 
smarter, more efficient robots capable of collaborating with other robots and 
working safely alongside humans. By 2019, 30% or more of the world’s leading 
companies will employ a chief robotics officer, and several governments around 
the world will have drafted or implemented specific legislation surrounding 
robots and safety, security and privacy. By 2020, average salaries in the 
robotics sector will increase by at least 60% – yet more than one-third of the 
available jobs in robotics will remain vacant due to shortages of skilled 
workers.

For every job created by automation, several more will be eliminated entirely. 
This disruption will be devastating

“Automation and robotics will definitely impact lower-skilled people, which is 
unfortunate,” Zhang told me via phone from his office in Singapore. “I think 
the only way for them to move up or adapt to this change is not to hope that 
the government will protect their jobs from technology, but look for ways to 
retrain themselves. No one can expect to do the same thing for life. That’s 
just not the case any more.”

Meanwhile, developments in motion control, sensor technologies, and artificial 
intelligence will inevitably give rise to an entirely new class of robots aimed 
primarily at consumer markets – robots the likes of which we have never seen 
before. Upright, bipedal robots that live alongside us in our homes; robots 
that interact with us in increasingly sophisticated ways – in short, robots 
that were once the sole province of the realms of science fiction.

This, according to Zhang, represents an unparalleled opportunity for companies 
positioned to take advantage of this shift, yet it also poses significant 
challenges, such as the necessity of new regulatory frameworks to ensure our 
safety and privacy – precisely the kind of essential regulation that Trump 
spoke out against so vociferously on the campaign trail.

According to Zhang, the field of robotics actually favors what Trump pledged 
to do on the campaign trail – bring manufacturing back to the US. Unfortunately 
for Trump, robots won’t help him keep another of his grandiose promises, namely 
creating new jobs for lower-skilled workers. The only way corporations can 
mitigate against increasing labor costs in the US without compromising on 
profit margins is to automate low-skilled jobs.

In other words, we can bring manufacturing back to the US or create new jobs, 
but not both.

Time for a career change, then? 

With millions of jobs at risk and a worldwide employment crisis looming, it is 
only logical that we should turn to education as a way to understand and 
prepare for the robotic workforce of tomorrow. In an increasingly unstable 
employment market, developed nations desperately need more science, technology, 
engineering and math – commonly abbreviated as Stem – graduates to remain 
competitive.
During the past eight years, science and technology took center stage both at 
the White House and in the public forum. Stem education was a cornerstone of 
Barack Obama’s administration, andhe championed Stem education 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/02/11/stem-all> throughout his presidency.

On Obama’s watch, the US was on track to train 100,000 new Stem teachers by 
2021. American universitiesbegan graduating 100,000 engineers 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2014/06/data-check-us-producing-more-stem-graduates-even-without-proposed-initiatives>
 every year for the first time in the nation’s history. High schools in 31 
states introduced computer science classes as required courses.

Unfortunately, this progress is now in jeopardy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff060a17028b43b76f4983368edbd788ca80f29%2F0_221_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we're%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we%27re%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ff060a17028b43b76f4983368edbd788ca80f29%2F0_221_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The coming future? A robot holding a medical syringe. Photograph: Alamy 
Like many of his cabinet choices, President-elect Trump’s appointment of Betsy 
DeVos as secretary of education is darkly portentous. One of the country’s most 
vocal charter school cheerleaders, DeVos has little experience with public 
education beyond demonizing it as the product of governmental overreach.

DeVos and her husband Dick have spent millions of their vast personal fortune 
fighting against regulations to make charter schools more accountable, 
campaigned tirelessly to expand charter school voucher programs, and sought to 
strip teachers’ unions of their collective bargaining rights – including 
teachers’ right to strike. Despite these alarming shortcomings, Trump seems 
confident that a billionaire with little apparent interest in public education 
is the perfect choice for such a crucial role.

There is no doubt that this appointment will affect the opportunities of 
students keen to launch a career in Stem. Private schools such as Carnegie 
Mellon University, for example, may be able to offer state-of-the-art robotics 
laboratories to students, but the same cannot be said for community colleges 
and vocational schools that offer the kind of training programs that workers 
displaced by robots would be forced to rely upon.

In light of staggering student debt and an increasingly precarious job market, 
many young people are reconsidering their options. To most workers in their 40s 
and 50s, the idea of taking on tens of thousands of dollars of debt to attend a 
traditional four-year degree program at a private university is unthinkable.

Enter Silicon Valley: no need for a degree any more? 

Solving inequality in tech has been a particularly challenging PR exercise for 
Silicon Valley.A report <https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/reports/hightech/>
 published by the Equal Opportunities Employment Commission in May 2016 found 
that just 8% of tech sector jobs were held by Hispanics, 7.4% by African 
Americans and 36% by women.

However, those numbers have done little harm to perceptions of Silicon Valley 
in general. Propelled by our enthusiastic consumer adoption of mobile devices, 
startup culture has become the latest embodiment of America’s Calvinistic work 
ethic. Graduates struggling to find jobs aren’t unemployed; they’re daring 
entrepreneurs and future captains of industry, boldly seizing their destinies 
by chasing bottomless venture capital financing.

“Hustle” has become the latest buzzword du jour, and it seems as though 
everybody is working on an app, trying to set up meetings with angel investors, 
or searching for a technical co-founder – including Daniel Hunter.

The son of two engineers, Daniel has been fascinated by robots his entire 
life. He spent much of his formative years building elaborate machines with 
Lego blocks, and later joined a robotics club near Sacramento, California. 
Before long, Daniel and his team-mates were pitting robots of their own design 
against those of other teams, and even won first prize in a regional robotics 
tournament.

Daniel is now preparing to complete his bachelor of science in robotics 
engineering at the University of California, Santa Cruz – one of a small but 
growing number of colleges across the US to offer a generalized undergraduate 
degree in robotics.

In addition to his studies in robotics, Daniel has also been improving his 
coding skills, in part to sate his intellectual curiosity, but also to further 
hone his competitive edge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782ae669158631db12088e02bda530b9c2744967%2F0_0_3346_2009%2F3346.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we're%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robots%20will%20destroy%20our%20jobs%20%E2%80%93%20and%20we%27re%20not%20ready%20for%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frobots-jobs-employees-artificial-intelligence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782ae669158631db12088e02bda530b9c2744967%2F0_0_3346_2009%2F3346.jpg>
 Humanoid robots work side by side with employees in the assembly line at a 
factory in Kazo, Japan. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
Daniel, who works at a startup that is currently developing an iOS app for 
sales professionals, is a firm believer in the new gold rush. He told me of his 
admiration for the work of libertarian journalist Henry Hazlitt, his ambitions 
to become a world-renowned roboticist and technologist (“I’m 21 now, so if by 
the time I’m 45 – Elon Musk’s age – I’ve established myself as a world-class 
mechatronics engineer, I’ll consider myself pretty successful”) and that he 
doesn’t believe everyone should go to college.

I'm a GP: will a robot take my job in 2017?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/29/im-a-gp-will-a-robot-take-my-job-in-2017>
“I ask myself pretty regularly if the degree is actually worth it,” he says. 
“There’s a lot of side projects I could work on that might provide more value 
to my future than some of the classes I take, so it’s hard to justify.”

Daniel also told me that his experiences defy conventional wisdom that earning 
a college degree is the only pathway to success in today’s savagely competitive 
job market.

“I talk to as many employers and startup founders as I can, and I hear the 
same thing over and over: degrees mean less and less, experience is 
everything,” Daniel says. “In the age of Udacity, Udemy, MIT’s OpenCourseWare, 
it’s very possible to do a bunch of small personal projects, display that 
experience to an employer, and get hired.”

This appetite for alternatives to traditional higher education has driven 
intense interest in private programming schools and self-styled coding “boot 
camps” in recent years.

Intensive coding schools may be popular, but they have attracted more than 
their share of criticism – not least for their typically high tuition fees, low 
academic rigor, and vague promises of highly paid, full-time jobs upon 
completion.

On top of this, one of the most common arguments leveled against coding boot 
camps is that they do little to address the chronic underrepresentation of 
minorities and the exclusion of those from economically disadvantaged 
backgrounds.

Most [coding] schools are expensive, which means they tend not to be serving 
populations that need a leg up economically

“I think programming boot camps have been fairly criticized for the fact that 
there’s a lot of tension around the idea of economic mobility,” says Adam 
Enbar, a former venture capitalist and co-founder of Flatiron School, one of 
the most renowned private programming schools in New York City. “The reality is 
that most schools are fairly selective and very expensive, which means they 
tend not to be serving populations that really need a leg up economically; 
they’re really more often people who graduated with a good degree and want to 
change careers.”

Founded by Enbar and self-taught technologist Avi Flombaum in 2012, Flatiron 
School has implemented programs designed to make careers in technology more 
accessible to marginalized groups.

“For three years, we’ve been working with the city of New York on something 
called theNew York City Web Development Fellowship 
<http://www1.nyc.gov/nyc-resources/service/2138/nyc-web-development-fellowship>
, where we run programs exclusively focused on low-income and underrepresented 
students,” Enbar says. “We’ve done courses exclusively for kids from households 
with no degrees. We’ve done courses exclusively for foreign-born immigrants and 
refugees … When we enroll students at Flatiron School, we actually specifically 
look for people from different backgrounds. We don’t want four math majors 
sitting around a table together working on a project – we’d rather have a math 
major and a poet, a military veteran and a lawyer, because it’s more 
interesting.”

We don’t need any more food delivery apps – we need engineers

Developing a new iOS app may be more interesting than navigating the 
comparatively dreary worlds of logistics infrastructure, manufacturing 
protocols, and supply chain efficiencies, but America doesn’t need any more 
messaging or food delivery apps – it needs engineers. The question, according 
to Enbar, is not whether future engineers earn their degrees from traditional 
colleges or not, it’s about what a technology job actually is and how we, as a 
nation, view scientific and technical work.

In much the same way, many also believe we must examine the role of technology 
in primary education if we are to address growing concerns about labor 
shortages. Initiatives such asHour of Code <https://code.org/learn>, a 
nationwide program that aims to highlight the importance of programming in K-12 
education, have proven remarkably popular with educators and students alike.


According to Enbar, such initiatives are just one way America needs to examine 
its attitude toward Stem and traditional education. “I think the question we 
should be asking is ‘Why is this important?’” Enbar says. “We have to ask 
ourselves why we’re not mandating accounting or nursing or plenty of other 
jobs. The answer is that we’re not trying to create a nation of software 
engineers – it’s that this is becoming a fundamental skill that is necessary 
for any job you want to do in the future.”

Despite these grave threats, when I asked Daniel where he sees himself in five 
years, he remained cautiously optimistic.

Who would want to be cared for by a robot?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/07/robot-carers-elderly-people>
“I’ll have my undergraduate degree and be several years into working,” Daniel 
says. “I don’t think I’ll go to grad school. I’m not sure if I’ll be working at 
a company or for myself – that largely depends on the opportunities I find once 
I graduate, and it’s pretty difficult to predict that.”

It is indeed difficult to predict how the gradual automation of the American 
workforce will take shape under Trump’s presidency. One certainty, however, is 
that the interests of those Americans at greatest risk of professional 
obsolescence will continue to be sacrificed in favor of serving, protecting and 
benefiting wealthy, white conservatives – a trend we are likely to see across 
virtually every aspect of life in Trump’s America and yet another betrayal of 
the predominantly working-class voters who believed Trump’s empty promises on 
the campaign trail.

As Enbar observed, the most urgent question we must answer is not one of 
robots’ role in the workforce of 21st-century America, but rather one of 
inclusion – and whether turning our backs on those who need our help the most 
is acceptable to us as a nation.

If history is any precedent, we already know the answer.
 