
RoboCop in modest launch


The sentiment among many insiders is you can't beat the original, but MGM and 
Columbia Pictures gave it a go nonetheless with a rebootedRoboCop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90791/robocop>. Twenty-seven years 
after Paul Verhoeven's dazzling Hollywood debut left a dent in the zeitgeist, 
the gifted Brazilian director José Padilha has had a go, with mixed results. 
The new movie has earned fans and detractors and while it still has a pop at 
corporate greed, there is also a fresh focus on the perils of drone warfare. 
The number three launch on $21.5m (£12.8m) was not the best start in an 
admittedly crowded weekend and RoboCop 2.0 will need to fire its turbo boosters 
if the North American box office is to play a part in recouping the reported 
$100m budget. It's off to a great start internationally though, on a number one 
$35m haul.

About Last Night drives superb result 


Sony's Screen Gems division scored a palpable hit with the number two debut of 
this romcom starring Kevin Hart and Regina Hall, two faces that are well known 
to US audiences generally and among black audiences in particular. Hall is a 
familiar face in movies and comedy star Hart is getting out there now and 
starred in recent number one hit, Ride Along. Screen Gems will not have spent a 
lot onAbout Last Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159142/about-last-night> – estimates 
put the budget at around $12.5m – so this smartly priced piece of entertainment 
is well on its way to profit. Sony executives can anticipate several more weeks 
of solid theatrical performance followed by strong numbers on VOD, digital 
platforms and TV.

Crowded calendar leaves weekly casualties


Each week too many movies jostle for attention in the charts and each week too 
many fail to make an impression. We hear about the big hits and one or two big 
flops, but behind the end-of-year headlines lie hundreds of mid-range titles 
that have faded into oblivion. Two releases that appear destined for such a 
fate opened at the weekend. Universal's romanceEndless Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159139/endless-love> starring Alex 
Pettyfer, the UK model and actor who is yet to break out, arrived at number 
five on $13.4m. Warner Bros' fantasyWinter's Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159143/winter-s-tale>, starring Colin 
Farrell and Jessica Brown Findlay, debuted in seventh place on $7.8m. US 
critics pilloried both movies and without A-list stars with proven box office 
cachet, it would seem this is the only time we will hear about their theatrical 
careers.

The Monuments Men needs to step up


George Clooney's WWII adventure about a ragtag band of heroes who rescue 
artefacts from the Nazis receivedits international premiere at the Berlin 
International Film Festival a little while ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/08/monuments-men-review-george-clooney-berlin>
. Advance word in the early days of the festival, which wound up at the 
weekend, was that the movie was not that good. The coming weeks will judge its 
merits in the eyes of the great US public, but so far the North American run 
has not impressed. A so-so $43.7m after two sessions is hardly the best start 
to recoup costs, given that the movie is understood to have cost around $70m to 
make and a fair amount on top of that to promote. The international run is in 
its infancy but an early $9m suggests rewards lie in wait.

China Lion waits to spring

Beijing Love Story did not score the kind of result that sets the charts 
alight, but is interesting nonetheless. The romance opened well outside the top 
20 on $128,000 from nine venues, but distributor China Lion Films will take 
heart from what amounts to a small incursion into North America. The movie 
opened day-and-date in China, where a relatively modest $25m placed it in the 
top five at the international weekend charts and would have seen it rank third 
in North America. With the growing ascendancy of Chinese movies worldwide, how 
many years are left before a Chinese-made movie dominates the US charts?

North American top 10, 14-16 February 2014


1 The Lego Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159138/lego-movie> 
$48.8m. Total: $129.1m

2 About Last Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159142/about-last-night> $27m

3 RoboCop <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90791/robocop> $21.5m. 
Total: $26.4m

4 The Monuments Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156633/monuments-men> $15m. Total: 
$43.7m

5 Endless Love <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159139/endless-love> 
$13.4m

6 Ride Along <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159117/ride-along> $8.8m. 
Total: $116.1m

7 Winter's Tale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159143/winter-s-tale> 
$7.8m

8 Frozen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155770/frozen> $5.9m. Total: 
$375m

9 Lone Survivor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159112/lone-survivor> 
$4.1m. Total: $118.4m

10 That Awkward Moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159123/that-awkward-moment> $3.3m. 
Total: $21.4m
 