
Rod Culleton has refused to attend a high court hearing in the case about his 
eligibility to sit in the Senate. Since the One Nation senator is representing 
himself, his refusal raises the prospect the case will proceed without any 
representation on his behalf.

Culleton has claimed the high court didn’t give him notice about the case, 
which the court denies.

In a Facebook post on Tuesday, Culleton said he had “no idea what is going on” 
in the case, which will begin with a directions hearing on Monday to set the 
next steps including dates for submissions and a full hearing.

Hanson brushes off complaints her staffer threw phone at Rod Culleton aide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/hanson-brushes-off-complaints-her-staffer-threw-phone-at-rod-culleton-aide>
He gave three reasons for not attending on 21 November. He said it was a 
parliamentary sitting day, that he had not received “any official documentation 
or referral” from the court, and that the high court had not addressed “errors 
in their rules”.

In November the government referred Culleton to the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/02/challenge-election-one-nation-senator-rod-culleton>
 over a conviction for larceny at the time of the election, since annulled, 
which may make him ineligible to be a senator.

The One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson, agreed with the referral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/07/pauline-hanson-agrees-rod-culleton-case-eligibility-high-court>
, a decision Culletoncriticised as being made without the full facts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/hanson-brushes-off-complaints-her-staffer-threw-phone-at-rod-culleton-aide>
.

On Wednesday Culleton told Guardian Australia he did not intend to appear, nor 
to send a legal representative, but he would represent himself “in spirit” at 
the directions hearing.

Culleton said he only found out about the hearing in the Senate and through 
media reports. The president of the Senate, Stephen Parry,told the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/10/george-christensen-we-needed-some-trump-in-our-political-leadership-politics-live?page=with:block-5823fa51e4b0822c310eca11#block-5823fa51e4b0822c310eca11>
 about the hearing on 10 November.

Culleton said he hadn’t received any notice from the court although he had 
since spoken with the registry, which he claimed appeared to be confused about 
the case.

“I’ve filed a conditional appearance because of the confusion … We’re prepared 
to participate but we need more information, I’m not going to go fight in the 
dark.”

He said he wanted to know “the nature and spirit” of the action against him.
 One Nation senator Rodney Culleton’s Facebook post on Tuesday about his 
decision not to attend the high court for a directions hearing on 21 November 
in the case about his eligibility to sit in the Senate. 
“I’m not required to attend because it’s a sitting day,” Culleton claimed.

Asked why he didn’t send a legal representative or be absent from the Senate 
chamber, he replied: “It’s not up to them to decide.

“The Coalition want to send someone by parachute and want a safe landing. Is 
that why they’ve thrown me in court – is it to get me out of my seat? I don’t 
need a seat warmer.”

Among the objections to appearing before the high court listed in his Facebook 
post, Culleton says the court has “not yet addressed their errors in their 
rules which was admitted by Brandis in the Senate. They must first fix this so 
that it abides by the High Court of Australia Act 1979.”

In comments to Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/14/hanson-brushes-off-complaints-her-staffer-threw-phone-at-rod-culleton-aide>
, Culleton claimed the error – which deals with a section of the law dealing 
with issue of writs, which must be in the name of the Queen – needed a massive 
“constitutional correction”.

Will it be such a loss if Bob Day and Rod Culleton disappear from parliament? 
| Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/will-it-be-such-a-loss-if-bob-day-and-rod-culleton-disappear-from-parliament>
On Thursday the attorney general, George Brandis, told the Senate the matter 
was a technical discrepancy between the rules and high court forms, which did 
not amount to a breach of the constitution. Brandis counselled Culleton not to 
accuse judges of misbehaviour.

A spokesman for the high court told Guardian Australia that Culleton had 
received notice from the court about the directions hearing.

“It is a matter for him if he wishes to attend the directions hearing. His 
absence would not prevent directions being made.”
 