
Seeds Andy Roddick, Ivan Ljubicic and Gaston Gaudio all cruised through the 
round of 32.

American No2 seed Roddick, the 2003 US Open champion, did not have it all his 
own way against Wesley Moodie but moved through with a straight sets, 7-5, 6-3, 
6-2 triumph. "I knew Wesley was just going to come out and really take it to 
me, be aggressive and try to get in as much as possible," Roddick said.

"Luckily for me I played three matches, including Kooyong, before this where I 
got to hit some balls. So I wasn't expecting a lot of rhythm out there today."

Croatian Davis Cup hero Ljubicic, the seventh seed, had no trouble dispatching 
Philipp Kohlschreiber 7-5, 6-2, 6-1, and eighth-seeded Gaudio breezed through 
with a ruthless 6-3, 6-2, 6-3 victory over Lars Burgsmuller.

Spanish 11th seed David Ferrer overcame a brief comeback by Daniele Bracciali 
to prevail 6-4, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, while 13th seed Robby Ginepri led by two 
sets and 3-0 only to fall apart, with Germany's Denis Gremelmayr coming to win 
2-6, 5-7, 6-4, 6-3, 6-3.

Another seed to make an early exit was Radek Stepanek, the No17 seed beaten 
6-4, 6-3, 3-6, 0-6, 7-5 by Marcos Baghdatis, while another Croatian favourite, 
Mario Ancic, ended the tournament for Jan Hernych 6-1, 6-4, 6-4.

Finnish No26 seed Jarkko Nieminen saw off Yeu-Tzuoo Wang 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), 6-2, 
while Fabrice Santoro found the second round easy going as he trounced 
Romania's Andrei Pavel 6-4, 6-1, 6-4. Julien Benneteau booked his spot in the 
third round with a relatively easy 6-4, 7-6 (7-3), 6-1 victory over Guillermo 
Garcia-Lopez of Spain.

Other results

Gilles Simon (Fra) bt Tomas Berdych (Cze) 6-3, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2; James Blake 
(USA) bt Jean-Christophe Faurel (Fra) 2-6, 6-1, 6-4, 6-3; Feliciano Lopez (Spa) 
bt Gilles Muller (Lux) 6-2, 6-4, 6-7 (6-8), 6-4; Tommy Robredo (Spa) bt Dmitry 
Tursunov (Rus) 7-6 (7-4), 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3; David Nalbandian (Arg) bt 
Stanislas Wawrinka (Swi) 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, 6-2.
 