
An Australian diver has just escaped from the jaws of a great white shark by 
poking it in the eye and such a thought may occur to Andy Roddick before he 
plays the world No1, Roger Federer, tomorrow for a place in Sunday's final of 
theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. The two 
have met 13 times, with the Swiss having won 12, including two Wimbledon finals 
and the final of last year's US Open.

Yet Roddick, under the tutelage of Jimmy Connors, is currently playing some 
exceptional tennis. The hang-dog slope from baseline to chair has gone and the 
old Roddick strut has returned. In the first of the quarter-finals here he 
demolished his fellow American Mardy Fish 6-2, 6-2, 6-2 and might as well have 
been shooting fish in a barrel.

Connors, who won the Australian Open 33 years ago, one of his eight grand slam 
titles, has managed a makeover on Roddick and, if the ugly duckling is not yet 
a sleek and gliding swan, it is a vast improvement. The power is undiminished 
but the rallies have become more cerebral and the backhand no longer simply 
gets the ball back. Roddick is volleying with something resembling competence 
and occasionally brilliance.

All this means that Federer will have more of a challenge on his hands as he 
strives for his third title here and his 10th major title in total. Roddick had 
a match point against him during last year's end-of-seasonTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Masters Cup in Shanghai and beat him 
just before the Australian Open, albeit in an exhibition match at Kooyong.

Federer, in windy conditions, was not entirely at his best in his 
quarter-final against the world No6, Tommy Robredo of Spain, though the time he 
spent at the net, much more than usual, suggests that this may be his tactic 
against the American. Who but Federer of the current top players could use a 
grand slam quarter-final for practice?

"I've said for the past probably five or six months the gap has either been 
closing a little bit or Roger hasn't been extending it," said Roddick. "I don't 
feel like you can sit back and let him create. I think that's when you get in 
trouble. I'm going to have to go with what I do well and try to attack him, at 
least make him come up with shots from uncomfortable positions."

It might be said of this year's Australian Open that the women's tournament 
will not be over until the fat lady loses and Serena Williams duly defied all 
tenets of sporting logic when she reached the semi-finals with a three-set 
victory over Israel's Shahar Peer. Williams, playing in only her sixth 
tournament in 13 months, should not be able to play tennis of such a high 
standard given her overall size and fitness.

Several times during the first set, which Williams lost 6-3, her mother and 
coach, Oracene, shook her head in despair at her daughter's lumbering efforts 
to reach the ball. Yet Williams, the winner of seven grand slam titles, is such 
a formidable competitor that she is still able to defy the rules that apply to 
lesser mortals and took the next two sets 6-2, 8-6.

Next up in her formidable hitting zone is the 17-year-old Czech, Nicole 
Vaidisova, already a top-10 player, and capable of halting Serena's run should 
she not be constricted by her reputation. An out-of-condition Williams won here 
two years ago, her last title, and it is increasingly possible she may do it 
again.
 