
World No1 Andy Roddick survived a tricky-looking first-round clash at the 
Australian Open - but for last year's finalist Rainer Schuettler it was another 
day to forget.

Roddick beat Chile's Fernando Gonzalez in straight sets but Schuettler, who 
has not won a match in 2004, surrendered a two-set lead to Swedish teenager 
Robin Soderling, going down 4-6, 4-6, 7-5, 6-3, 6-4 in the Rod Laver Arena. 
Schuettler was the surprise finalist last year, beating Roddick in the 
semi-finals before losing to Andre Agassi, but has been in poor form so far 
this season.

"I've had a pretty tough three weeks now. I started in Doha, Sydney and now 
here. I didn't win a match," said the sixth seed.

"Today I was two sets up and had break point at 5-5. I played the wrong shot. 
It's very disappointing of course.

"I had great memories from last year and there was a bit of pressure, but that 
is not the reason why I didn't win."

Soderling will play Nicolas Escude in the second round after the Frenchman 
beat Hyung Taik-Lee 6-3, 7-6 (7/5), 6-2. Roddick had been wary of Gonzalez, one 
of the best unseeded players in the draw, and in the past there has been little 
to choose between them.

After two previous meetings their record stood at one win apiece, both in 
three tie-breaks.

Today, though, Roddick forced the upper hand in a tight encounter as Gonzalez 
became increasingly frustrated with some crucial line-calls before going down 
6-2, 7-5, 7-6 (7/4).

"I don't think it was a good draw for either one of us," said Roddick. "I knew 
I had to play well. I got lucky there in the third set."

Three-time French Open champion Gustavo Kuerten was pushed the distance, but 
the Brazilian held on for a dramatic 5-7, 6-0, 6-1, 2-6, 8-6 victory over a 
resilient John van Lottum.

Kuerten, who has never been further than the second round at Melbourne Park, 
will play Croatian Ivan Ljubicic.

Frenchman Arnaud Clement, seeded 30, also lost a two-set lead, going down to 
Nikolay Davydenko of Russia 7-6 (8/6), 6-4, 4-6, 1-6, 2-6. Of the other seeds, 
Vince Spadea (29) lost in four sets to Thomas Enqvist, Spain's Tommy Robredo 
(20) was beaten by Argentine Gaston Gaudio 6-3, 6-2, 7-6 (8/6) and crowd 
favourite Younes El Aynaoui (18) was forced to retire.

His participation was always in doubt after he withdrew from the Commonwealth 
Bank International last week with a foot injury that has caused him concern for 
some time.

The Moroccan was trailing Gala Blanco of Spain 4-1 when he retired.

American Taylor Dent (27) also benefited from a withdrawal when Fernando 
Verdasco pulled up when trailing 6-2, 6-1, 2-1. Dent will meet Juan Ignacio 
Chela in the second round after the Argentinian overcame Irakli Labadze 6-4, 
3-6, 6-3, 6-3. Carlos Moya, as was widely expected, pulled out of his first 
round match against James Blake with the ankle injury suffered in the adidas 
International final against Lleyton Hewitt on Saturday.

"I tried to hit this morning. It was hurting a little bit. Then I came here, I 
got some treatment, tried again and then I realised that it was not possible 
for me to play," he said.

"It has improved so much. Yesterday I couldn't even walk. Today I was running. 
I was still in pain and maybe one more day it would have been perfect." 
Elsewhere, Paradorn Srichaphan (13) eased into the second round with a 7-5, 
6-4, 6-0 thumping of Jose Acasuso of Argentina in 94 minutes while Sjeng 
Schalken (16) beat Kenneth Carlsen of Denmark 7-5, 6-3, 6-1. American Robby 
Ginepri, the 32nd seed, beat Peruvian Luis Horner 7-5, 6-3, 6-3 and will play 
Australian 18-year-old Chris Guccione, while American Mardy Fish (21) lost in 
three tie-breaks to Ivo Karlovic.

The Croatian will face veteran Todd Martin who came from two sets down to beat 
Frenchman Anthony Dupuis in a marathon encounter 4-6, 4-6, 7-6 (7/5), 7-6 
(7/4), 6-3. Defending champion Agassi was to open his 2004 campaign against 
Australian Todd Larkham and Marat Safin was to take on Brian Vahaly in the 
other men's evening match.
 