
To the waiting room of history that is the Dictionary of National Biography, 
216 people who died in 2007 are being added today. It is an eclectic mix:Anita 
Roddick <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anita-roddick>, the founder of 
Body Shop, rubbing shoulders with the northern comedian Bernard Manning; and 
the former Daily Telegraph editor Bill Deedes mingling with the England World 
Cup hero Alan Ball.

The new entrants take the total number in the DNB – spread over 60 volumes and 
2,000 years of British history – to 57,665 notable lives lived. The dictionary 
is available online in libraries, although a complete set in hard copy, with 
supplements listing deaths since 2000, will set you back more than £1,500.

There are nuggets in the current mix: who knew that the actor Ian Richardson – 
best known as Francis Urquhart, the rascally chief whip in television's 1990 
political thriller House of Cards – claimed that his father, a manager at the 
McVitie biscuit factory in Edinburgh, was the man who invented the Jaffa Cake?

The most poignant new entry is probably that for Jane Tomlinson, whose 
terminal cancer did not prevent her running charity fundraising marathons, 
culminating in a cycle ride across the US in the year before her death at the 
age of 43.

While authors of some entries might be thought to have an axe to grind in 
their subject's skull, most are generous if occasionally feline in their 
judgments, in keeping with the modern taste in obituaries. Sir Peregrine 
Worsthorne, who was sacked as editor of the Sunday Telegraph, notes that 
Deedes, his opposite number on the daily and a former Tory minister, "rarely 
put his head above the parapet" in his dealings with the paper's management.

"A dyed-in-the-wool Keynesian in marked contrast to the leader writers who 
were Thatcherite fundamentalists … Deedes's characteristically civilised way of 
making up for this was by playing a lot of golf and drinking a lot of gin and 
tonic with Denis Thatcher." Deedes, of course, was the "Dear Bill", supposed 
recipient of Thatcher's letters in Private Eye.

Similarly, Tim Walker, diarist on the Daily Telegraph, plants an elegant 
stiletto in the back of veteran Daily Mail diarist Nigel Dempster, another 
casualty of 2007, noting that he was an excellent conduit for celebrity gossip 
but not a natural writer, whose copy regularly had to be rewritten by the 
paper's then editor, David English, who was also apparently hard at work honing 
the prose of another star columnist, Lynda Lee-Potter.

More generous is the Telegraph columnist Simon Heffer in memorialising Tory 
politicians – not only John Biffen, an admirer of Heffer's hero Enoch Powell, 
but also Ian Gilmour, the Tory wet and excoriator of Thatcherism.

Lawrence Goldman, the DNB's editor, said: "We have always encouraged 
contributors to make judgments. It is not Who's Who or an obituary but a 
considered essay, though we would never allow an enemy, or a close friend for 
that matter, to go overboard. We do tone things down."

Among others joining the DNB is Alan Coren, the former editor of Punch, 
remembered by his friend and protege Libby Purves for his "abundant freedom 
with impromptu jokes ... he never saved them up for best, or for profit", the 
satirist and broadcaster Ned Sherrin, and the writer and jazz singer George 
Melly, recorded as saying that when he had decided he preferred sex with women 
to men, "it was just a matter of taste ... not a moral decision".
 