
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> and Rafael 
Nadal both voiced their displeasure at Andre Agassi after the former world No1 
revealed he took the recreational drug crystal meth in 1997 and lied about the 
reasons for a positive test.

"To me it seems terrible," the world No2 Nadal said yesterday. "Why is he 
saying this now that he has retired? It's a way of damaging the sport that 
makes no sense. I believe our sport is clean and I am the first one that wants 
that. Cheaters must be punished and if Agassi was a cheater during his career 
he should have been punished."

The world No1 Roger Federer, who beat Agassi in the final of the 2005 US Open, 
also spoke of his sadness at the eight times major winner'sadmission in his new 
autobiography, Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/28/agassi-took-crystal-meth>. "It 
was a shock when I heard the news," Federer said. "I am disappointed and I hope 
there are no more such cases in futureâ€¦ our sport must stay clean."

However, Agassi found support at home with fellow American and Wimbledon 
finalist Andy Roddick saying the 39-year-old remained his hero despite the 
revelations. Roddick, the leading US men's player who lost to Federer in this 
year's Wimbledon final, was one of many compatriots who remained unfazed by 
Agassi's admissions. "Andre is and always will be my idol. I will judge him on 
how he has treated me and how he has changed the world for [the] better," 
Roddickwrote on his Twitter page <http://twitter.com/AndyRoddick>.

Roddick said Agassi's letter to the ATP, in which he told the governing body 
he had failed a drugs test because his drink had been spiked, came at a time 
when the player was far from his peak. "To be fair, when Andre wrote the 
reported letter, he was well outside the top 100 and widely viewed as on the 
way out," said Roddick.
 