Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH8fSyBwdiFA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH8fSyBwdiFA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FH8fSyBwdiFA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Television viewers in Bismarck, North Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota>, were treated to a class act 
this weekend when the great Ron Burgundy read them the news.

Actor and comedian Will Ferrell reprised his Anchorman role for KXMB's 
Saturday night news broadcast. The former Saturday Night Live star is promoting
Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/30/anchorman-2-newsflash-sequels>, a 
sequel to the 2004 film about a fictional news team's sexist reaction to the 
arrival of an ambitious female reporter.

Dressed in his signature rust-colored, three-piece suit and a striped tie, 
Ferrell read stories off the teleprompter, punctuated his delivery with 
exaggerated eye blinks and engaged in witty banter with weekend anchor Amber 
Schatz and the rest of the Bismarck news team.

Schatz said she has watched the original Anchorman about 30 times, and the 
hardest part of co-anchoring with Ferrell was holding back laughter every time 
he spoke in character. "The second he said, 'Good evening, I'm Ron Burgundy,' I 
lost it," Schatz said Sunday. "It was really hard not to laugh."

Ferrell also clowned around, popping into Schatz's screen while she read a 
story and telling her after a commercial break, "Amber, you look lovely 
tonight" before asking her whether she was married. When Schatz told him she 
wasn't married, Ferrell replied, "Well I am, so don't get any ideas."

The online video of the 30-minute newscast, which is making the rounds online, 
is part of a widespread marketing campaign for the movie sequel that has 
included Dodge Durango commercials,a new Ben & Jerry's ice cream flavor named 
"Scotchy Scotch Scotch" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/23/anchorman-2-ron-burgundy-ice-cream-scotchy-scotch>
, and Burgundy'sown school at Emerson College 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/20/boston-college-renamed-ron-burgundy-anchorman>
. Even sea otters have engaged in the press tour,penning a protest letter to 
the fictional anchor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/26/ron-burgundy-anchorman-boring-otters>
.

On Sunday, Ferrell headed to Winnipeg, where he was slated to help cover 
Canada's Olympic curling trials for broadcaster TSN. The Bismarck station 
shares programing with Minot's KXMC, but the two stations produce separate 
newscasts.

Schatz, 31, said station managers and salespeople had been planning the 
appearance for months, but she didn't know anything about it until Wednesday. 
It was a complete surprise to viewers.

During Saturday evening's newscast, Ferrell occasionally strayed from the 
script. While extolling the tale of firefighters extinguishing a trash fire in 
a Sam's Club parking lot, Ferrell seemed impressed that crews used 500 gallons 
of water and foam to put out the blaze: "I repeat: 500 gallons."

He also drew laughs from Schatz when he mispronounced s'mores as "sah-mores", 
overdramatized his tease of the "Dakota Storm Center", and noted after the 
sports segment, "I've never seen fighting in a hockey match before. That was 
fascinating."

Schatz, who has worked in small markets in the Dakotas for eight years, said 
the whole experience was surreal. If she could choose how to spend her 15 
minutes of fame, "I would choose this exact thing."

The news team expected Ferrell to end with his "Stay classy" catchphrase, but 
he missed the cue, saying: "What? Am I supposed to read that?" The crew got to 
hear him say "Stay classy, Bismarck," during the credits, but his microphone 
had already been cut off. Schatz said, "He did say it, it just didn't air."
 