
Midway through American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
, the film pulls in to the kerb, the action pauses for breath, and the heroine 
discusses her dreams with a passing trucker. The trucker tells her his dream is 
to visit the ocean. She tells him that hers is a home and a bundle of children. 
The sun sinks in the west, Bruce Springsteen plays on the stereo and this 
pivotal scene is almost too perfect. Make a film about gritty American life 
and, sooner or later, the dream will crawl in through the cracks.

I’m not even sure it has to be as gritty, restless and hungry a movie as 
American Honey. More likely it’s just any US-set picture that sends its 
characters on a journey, that has them want something and set out to achieve 
it. The American dream, after all, is the ur-text of Hollywood and the founding 
principle of a nation that was always as much an idea as a physical place to be 
cultivated and plundered. Small wonder that film-makers are drawn back to it 
again and again, likeGatsby <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-great-gatsby> 
contemplating the green light at the end of Daisy’s dock. Some come to 
celebrate it (Rocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/rocky-in-numbers--creed-sylvester-stallone>
, Mr Smith Goes to Washington). Some come to damn it (Chinatown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/03/chinatown-review>, Scarface). 
American Honey, unusually, manages to do both.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd9c104bc8eace949ba14a3ee15388e500fb6b1%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcd9c104bc8eace949ba14a3ee15388e500fb6b1%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Selling themselves … American Honey’s itinerant sales team. Photograph: 
Allstar/Film4 
American Honey's Sasha Lane: 'I’m exhausted by people – I want to be alone so 
bad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honeys-sasha-lane-im-exhausted-by-people-i-want-to-be-alone-so-bad>
The film follows the fortunes of teenage Star, played by Sasha Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honeys-sasha-lane-im-exhausted-by-people-i-want-to-be-alone-so-bad>
, who lights out to “explore America” as part of an itinerant crew of magazine 
vendors. Her route loops back and forth across the midwest, from strip malls 
and oil derricks to sterile McMansions perched on irrigated lawns. Inside the 
bus, the crew members thrill to songs of freedom and empowerment. Outside, they 
angle for subscriptions, spinning a different story at every door. They speak in
Horatio Alger <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horatio_Alger_myth>, 
working-hard-to-escape-poverty cliches. Theirs is the rags-to-riches life, yet 
it’s clear from the start these kids are going nowhere fast.


Director Andrea Arnold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold> 
acknowledges her film is about the American Dream. “I was aware of that when I 
was making it, but it’s been fed back a lot to me since. It probably has to do 
with the idea of selling. These kids are supposedly selling magazines, but 
really they are selling themselves. That feels very American. So the 
environment in the bus is like a potted version of a bigger picture.”


Road movies take the dream concept back to its frontier origins … that life 
was better and richer on the move

It could be that the road movie is the best way to navigate the dream. It’s 
the genre that seems to take the concept back to its frontier origins, to 
manifest destiny and the pursuit of happiness, the sense that life was somehow 
better and richer when it was lived on the move. “There is no truth but in 
transit,” said the essayistRalph Waldo Emerson 
<http://www.biography.com/people/ralph-waldo-emerson-9287153> in the mid-19th 
century, whileAlexis de Tocqueville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/03/classics.history> marvelled at 
the “feverish ardour” of the rootless American. At a time when the New World 
was still freshly minted, the crown governor to Virginia was already 
identifying an impulse that suggested settlers would be forever unsettled, 
“forever imagining that the lands farther off are still better than that upon 
which they are already settled. If they attained Paradise,” he added tartly, 
“they would move on if they heard of a better place farther west.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658e662b43e17a23674c4ae82a03adb7915edc49%2F0_0_1764_1170%2F1764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F658e662b43e17a23674c4ae82a03adb7915edc49%2F0_0_1764_1170%2F1764.jpg>
 Feminist pioneers … Susan Sarandon, left, and Geena Davis in Thelma and 
Louise, 1991. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer 
Such restless striving is at the heart of every ambulatory picture about the 
American dream. It’s there in 1939’s Stagecoach, typically cited as the first 
great Hollywood western, which frames the coach as a microcosm of new American 
society, clattering through increasingly hostile terrain. And it’s there in 
such road movies as Easy Rider, with its countercultural cowboys, or Thelma and 
Louise, with its feminist pioneers, or the existential Two-Lane Blacktop where 
the finish line’s an illusion, the engine overheats and the very celluloid 
seems to catch and combust in the projector.

When I went to America, I felt liberated, accepted for who I was. I started to 
think I could be all I wanted to be

Arnold was raised on a Kent housing estate. American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-honey>, backed by the BFI and Film4, 
is her first US-set feature. But she points out that, back in the late 1990s, 
she studied film-making in LA. It was America, then, that helped jump-start her 
career. “Growing up,” she says, “I was always very conscious of my class. I 
basically come from a working-class background. But when I went to America, I 
felt liberated, accepted for who I was as opposed to where I came from. I 
started to think I could be all I wanted to be, live the idealised life. So I 
understand the mindset. It’s very seductive. But how does it work if you’re a 
kid from a small town with no industry and no work except what you can get at 
the fast-food restaurant? How do you rise above all that and find some 
self-belief?” For many – for most – the American dream is just that.

If Arnold’s film has an ancestor, it may be The Grapes of Wrath 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRjpqJozOcI>, John Ford’s searing 1940 odyssey 
adapted from the Steinbeck bestseller and charting the voyage of a family of 
dustbowl migrants. Like Star, the Joads hail from Oklahoma. Like her, they are 
chasing the promise of a better life. And like American Honey, Ford’s drama 
aims for an unvarnished, social-realist intensity, documenting the desperate 
lives of a marginalised underclass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd448e4c3fc62f3be6fb1ffdf8862fe81894feba0%2F0_0_2351_1754%2F2351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roof%20down%2C%20music%20up%3A%20American%20Honey%20and%20the%20neverending%20search%20for%20the%20American%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Famerican-honey-american-dream-andrea-arnold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd448e4c3fc62f3be6fb1ffdf8862fe81894feba0%2F0_0_2351_1754%2F2351.jpg>
 For a better life … The Grapes of Wrath, 1940. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext 
But there are major differences. In American Honey, for instance, there is no 
particular place to go. There’s no fieryTom Joad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/dec/29/families-in-literature-the-joads-in-the-grapes-of-wrath-by-john-steinbeck>
 at the centre, clamouring for social change. Nor are there many obvious 
villains intent on bringing these 21st-century hobos to heel. Instead, they are 
sent bobbing through an apolitical, atomised, zero-hours environment where 
everybody else appears to be in pretty much the same boat. The magazine vendors 
aren’t targeted – they’re ignored, and this affords them a weightless euphoria.


It is this quality, I suspect, that makes the film so special. On my first 
viewing, I filed it as a bizarrely joyous and exuberant picture, despite its 
harsh subject matter. After watching it a second time, I think it might be more 
complex. More likely the joy and the subject matter are indivisible, each 
dependent on the other. Some films come to prop up the faltering, debased 
notion ofAmerican exceptionalism 
<https://iantyrrell.wordpress.com/papers-and-comments/>; others to expose it as 
a bright and shining lie. But American Honey sees the dream for what it is – a 
fantasy born out of hardship – and appreciates it on its own terms. Intuitively 
Arnold’s film understands that the trip is usually more exciting than the 
destination, that the pursuit is invariably more authentic than the happiness 
at the end. Or, to put it another way, in chasing after the dream we are, in 
fact, already living it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1SpWZm1PLc&media=>
Video: watch the trailer for American Honey <https://youtu.be/y1SpWZm1PLc> 
If American Honey is fuelled by a sense of hope and possibility, Arnold 
believes that this is largely thanks to the cast. The majority are 
non-professional actors, plucked from skate-parks and Wal-Mart lots. They all 
came from difficult circumstances but, she insists, they all brought their own 
spirit, a spark of undimmed potential. “Some of their lives have changed as a 
result of the film. Some got jobs or moved away from abusive partners. The film 
gave them a small sense of control of their lives.”


It would be nice to credit American Honey with providing the cast with the 
dream – or at least a convenient leg-up towards it. But that’s too much the 
Hollywood happy ending. It doesn’t account for the other pitfalls on the road, 
the fact that people can backslide and circumstances can change. It may even 
run counter to the abiding spirit of the film – which exults in the 
freewheeling abandon that comes from having nothing much left to lose, the 
thrill of whipping through the fringes of an unfamiliar city with the music up 
loud and the sunroof thrown back to show off the stars. All around is a humdrum 
nightmare of dead-end jobs and foreclosed homes, vacant lots on the endless 
road. But in the middle, in the moment, there’s the American dream.


 * American Honey is out now.
 