
Those of us who harbour scepticism about golf’s inclusion in the Olympics have 
been provided with decent arguments to the contrary.

If Olympic involvement tightens up drugs-testing procedures within golf, for 
example, that would be an undeniable positive. Evidence from tennis – when 
there were early doubts – suggests golf can become more global in terms of 
participation when on the Games stage. It also seems reasonable to link the 
altered approach to membership policy by Augusta National and the Royal & 
Ancient to a realisation of fresh standards of acceptability. Golf can no 
longer behave in blissful isolation, as pressed home by the R&A last week when 
it made a firm and instant stance onMuirfield at the Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/muirfield-golf-club-votes-to-continue-excluding-women>
.

Rory McIlroy says he could withdraw from Rio Olympics over Zika threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/rory-mcilroy-rio-olympics-zika-threat>
And yet, golf and the Olympics have existed in an almost constant alliance of 
disharmony. The venue in Brazil was subject to legal wrangling and delays which 
had the renowned course designer Gil Hanse visibly exasperated. The choice of 
format, a simple four-day stroke-play competition as per every other standard 
week on the Tour, was castigated. That element was slightly unfair; Peter 
Dawson, the InternationalGolf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> 
Federation president and a key proponent of this Olympic return, always stated 
that earning Games status was pivotal, with scope to alter the format for 
future years. Providing an immediately different, or contrived, competition 
style could have been troublesome.

Mumbles of discontent from players were apparent from the moment in 2009 when 
a decision was made over inclusion. Adam Scott took that a step further and has
refused to participate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/20/australian-golfer-adam-scott-says-no-to-rio-olympics-selection>
.Louis Oosthuizen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/21/louis-oosthuizen-rio-south-africa-olympics>
, Charl Schwartzel and Vijay Singh have followed suit. The stated reasons? A 
mix between schedule and the Zika virus.

This week, matters threatened to take an even more negative turn when Rory 
McIlroy admitted to concern over the Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/23/rory-mcilroy-rio-olympics-zika-threat>
 threat to Rio. McIlroy’s demeanour seemed more telling than his words; this 
looks a genuine dilemma for the four-times major winner. Alarm bells should be 
blaring at the International Olympic Committee; McIlroy is the individual who 
ideally links golf and athleticism, who endorses this as a sport and not a game.

Any notion that McIlroy is seeking a soft option here would be flawed; not 
only did he face a nationality debate head-on by declaring for Ireland’s team 
at an early juncture but very recently spoke about his fear that the Olympic 
narrative could be damaged by scenarios such as Scott’s. Far from being seen as 
a summer nuisance, the Olympics had evidently grown on McIlroy to the point 
where he was a keen advocate. McIlroy is one of a clutch of players for whom 
the commercial crossover between Olympic demands and his own, lucrative 
contracts would be another legitimate cause for annoyance.

Zika virus makes Rio Olympics a threat in Brazil and abroad, health expert says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/rio-olympics-zika-amir-attaran-public-health-threat>
By Tuesday the Masters champion, Danny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett>, conceded that he also has a 
decision to make on the grounds of health alone. Pieced together, there is no 
chance McIlroy and Willett are the only ones harbouring such thoughts. And 
pieced together, should they believe non-participation the safest option, 
Olympic men’s golf will quickly regress into the realms of farce.

It is at best unfortunate and at worst scandalous that sportsmen find 
themselves in this position, where the health of themselves and their families 
is a serious concern before an Olympic trip. They will also be perfectly aware 
of the burden of expectation, where the pressure to play and thereby offer golf 
its best Olympic return weighs heavily. As things stand, golf is scheduled to 
be in the Olympics only in 2016 and 2020. The vote on whether to extend this is 
to be held next year.

The recurring, glaring factor in the comments from McIlroy and Willett was 
that they appeared genuinely unsure about the scale of the Zika problem and 
dangers therein. Somewhere, somehow, the communication process between Games 
organisers and athletes has broken down. With that in mind, it is little wonder 
attention is drawn towards Amir Attaran’sreport 
<http://harvardpublichealthreview.org/off-the-podium-why-rios-2016-olympic-games-must-not-proceed/>
 insisting the Olympics should simply not proceed because of the spread of the 
Zika virus. Within that article, one sentence leaps out: that which asks “but 
for the Games, would anyone recommend sending an extra half a million visitors 
to Brazil right now?” The answer barely needs stating.

The level of tournament-ready courses elsewhere, even within close reach of 
Brazil, means the Olympics could move this sport with minimal disruption. Other 
than to reputation, that is, not least among others competitors who could 
rightly bemoan preferential treatment.

The very debate as to whether golf should be in the Olympic equation also 
applies. Athletes who have pushed for four years – or more – for a shot at gold 
don’t compare to those featuring in major championships or Ryder Cups with far 
more regularity. Which group would take the greater risk? Which would feel less 
inclined to flirt with illness?

The IGF’s stated position is thus: “The IGF recently issued a constituent 
letter regarding theZika virus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus> 
and continues to monitor the situation through regular communication with the 
IOC and Rio 2016, who in turn are keeping advised by the World Health 
Organisation, on the steps and measures being planned.

“We are also working with the National Olympic Committees of the countries 
where our athletes are from to assist in the education and ongoing information 
about the virus that is being developed.”

Admirable words, but the testimonies of McIlroy and Willett highlight a flawed 
process. Confusion and concern can only be allowed to reign for so long.
 