Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon13/giv-125156V1cuAEwsivB/>
Lee Westwood (England)

It’s a driver down there, left-hand side, hopefully hit the fairway and 
depending on the wind, it can be anything from a three wood to a seven iron. 
It’s a tricky green, with quite a big drop-off on the left so you would just 
take four every day and run.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon14/giv-125159ABig3ir9RWM/>
James Heath (England)

It’s pretty straightforward really. If it’s a westerly wind, it’s playing 
into-off the left, which makes it a little bit harder. I believe on Friday it’s 
going to play down off the left. There’s two bunkers on the front left that 
regardless of pin position, even if it’s at the front, you’re going to play to 
the middle of the green. It’s not dead in the sand but it’s a tricky 
up-and-down from either bunker. You’ll be playing to the middle for all four of 
those pins. If the wind is 15mph or less you’re looking at it as a birdie hole.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon15/giv-12515BdxZC4hm513D/>
Mark Calcavecchia (USA), 1989 Open champion at Troon

It’s a driver, three wood and a chip. It’s longer than it used to be and a 
slightly different angle of approach. It’s an easier driving hole than it was 
in the other years because they have moved the fairway to the left, so out of 
bounds doesn’t come into play. It’s important to hit the fairway then there’s a 
hill short right of the green, so you kind of bounce it down that or you’re 
trying to fly it on to the front of the green and roll into the middle. It’s 
long, even for the long guys. Four’s a good score. I’d love to take four fours 
there this week.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon16/giv-12515HfeuF0TXqnpg/>
Adam Scott (Australia)

It’s wind dependent but most likely you just get it up 280 yards off the tee 
short of the burn and if it’s not too severe into the wind you’ll be able to 
reach the green at about 250. If it is into the wind it’s probably a five iron 
lay-up and then just 90 yards, so it’s pretty straightforward. If it’s downwind 
the option is there for some guys to fly it over the burn but it’s questionable 
if it’s worth the risk, there’s some pretty long rough either side of that 
fairway at driver length. I’ve been laying it up and getting up to the green in 
two and relying on the short game.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon17/giv-125158zORIau1p9h6/>
Rod Pampling (Australia)

Hit it low and hard, you’re trying to land it somewhere around that front 
edge. Last time I played the wind was straight at it and it was a flat-out 
three iron and I don’t know if that was enough, but I wouldn’t take any more 
than that; you just have to hit the three and flight the ball correctly. If the 
wind changes it’s still the same and you’re still trying to land it in that 
little area at the front. I don’t think it’s a birdie hole, there will be a few 
but not many, but it’s one of those holes you could easily have a bogey if not 
more, so get to the front edge, take your par and go.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/troon18/giv-12515jI1GXZ7Si2yh/>
Henrik Stenson (Sweden)

If it comes down to the last hole, then that can be a tough one. When I played 
last Tuesday it was all of a drive and then a four iron to the middle of the 
green. So in a way I think it almost made it easier because you couldn’t reach 
some of the fairway bunkers. It was not much of a question about laying up. A 
lot of holes in general on links it’s always either take a bunker out of it, 
and if you do, another one is in play and so on. When it’s pumping into your 
face there, you can just hit it as hard as you want up on that right-hand side. 
It probably made it easier in a way with the tee shot.
 