
Royal Mail has proved the old adage about it better to travel than arrive 
(although hopefully not where the Christmas post is concerned.)

Following this year's controversial flotation - with critics arguing the 
government underpriced the issue at 330p a share - the company has joined the 
FTSE 100, and has now made its debut in the leading index.

But the move has prompted a spate of profit taking, and its shares are 
currently 7.5p lower at 582.5p. However they are still not that far off their 
all time high of 607p, and of course are well ahead of the flotation price.

Ashtead, the industrial group, was the other entrant into the leading index, 
and it too has slipped back, down 7.5p at 766p.

Vedanta Resources, up 9p at 857.5p, and Croda International, 16p better at 
£24.16, were the two companies to lose their places.

Overall the FTSE 100 is 25.99 points higher at 6632.57, with optimism about US 
economic growth after upbeat comments from the IMF outweighing worries about a 
possible credit crunch in China.

Carnival continues to cruise higher, up another 56p at £24.45 following its 
better than expected figures last week.

Arm has added 24p to £10.92, boosted by news one of its key customers, Apple, 
has signed a long awaited deal with China Mobile, giving it access to one of 
the world's fastest growing markets. Marc Kimsey, senior trader at Accendo 
Markets, said:
 Traders are snapping up shares in Arm today after Apple agreed a tie-up with 
China Mobile. The state-owned network boasts more than 750m subscribers, put in 
to context the entire US population consists of 318m. With Arm technology in 
every Apple handset, the potential is obvious. Expect to see Apple's 5% share 
of the $80bn Chinese smartphone market increase significantly in 2014.

Elsewhere Centamin has climbed 1.81p to 41.95p, responding to a recent upgrade 
from Canaccord Genuity, which has moved from hold to speculative buy, with a 
price target increased from 38p to 60p. The broker said:
 We raise Centamin from hold following the robust operating results amid the 
challenging political environment. In 2014 we expect a shift to positive free 
cash flow and the final court ruling on the license appeal, which we expect to 
be positive for Centamin.  