
Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> will this week 
face a stormy shareholder protest when the company holds its first annual 
meeting since its controversial privatisation.

The 500-year-old company is likely to face questions about the £1.35m pay 
package awarded to the chief executive, Moya Greene, and its warning that the 
universal service obligation – the pledge to deliver to every address in the 
country for the same price six days a week – is under threat.

The company, which the government privatised in October 2013 at a £1bn loss to 
the taxpayer according to a committee of MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/11/royal-mail-sale-lost-1bn-says-select-committee>
, will hold its first annual meeting as a FTSE 100 firm in Birmingham on 
Thursday. It will also update the City on its latest financial performance, 
which has been worrying some analysts, in an interim management statement on 
Tuesday.

Royal Mail's chairman, Donald Brydon, also chairs the FTSE 100 software firm 
Sage Group. Pirc, the investor advisory group, is concerned about multiple 
chairmanships and Brydon's ability to do both jobs, and is urging shareholders 
to vote against his appointment. Serial boardroom director Sir John Peace, who 
chaired three FTSE 100 firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/sir-john-peace-hat-trick-shareholder-revolts>
 – fashion house Burberry, Standard Chartered bank and credit-checking company 
Experian – faced a hat-trick of rebellions in recent meetings.

Greene's pay is likely to be among the biggest issues for Royal Mail's private 
shareholders at Thursday's meeting in the National Exhibition Centre.The 
Canadian chief executive collected total pay, bonuses and pension contributions 
of £1.35m in the last financial year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/06/royal-mail-boss-pay-dropped-610k-2013>
. Her pay would have been higher if it were not for the intervention of the 
business secretary, Vince Cable, who queried a £250,000 housing allowance, 
which she handed back.

Despite the reduction, her total pay was still 50 times the average £27,036 
collected by her 150,000 staff. The average bonus handed to postal workers was 
£514 – compared with Greene's long- and short-term bonuses of £873,000.

She was also handed 65,880 bonus shares in the company worth an additional 
£328,000 at Friday's share price. However, the share award is subject to 
conditions and will not pay out for three years.

Although she voluntarily repaid her housing allowance, Greene said she was 
"deeply offended" by the criticism over her pay and benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/aug/26/royal-mail-chief-moya-greene-executive-pay>
.

Brydon has previously described Greene as the worst-paid chief executive in 
the FTSE 100 and that Royal Mail must improve her remuneration package or risk 
losing her. "I think it's only fair to pay Moya the right market rate for her 
job," he has said.

Research by the High Pay Centre put the average total pay of FTSE 100 bosses 
in 2013 at £4.2m.

Shareholders are also likely to express anger at the company's warning that 
postal deliveries to rural areas are under threat because rivals are being 
allowed to cherrypick easy and profitable deliveries in towns and cities 
without having to run services to homes in isolated areas, such as the isles 
off Scotland.

Greene issued the warning over the universal service obligation (USO) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/22/royal-mail-universal-service-threat-rivals>
 as the company reported a 12% rise in full-year operating profits to £671m in 
May.

She said rival TNT Post UK's ability to pick off profitable routes in big 
cities was "striking at the economics of the universal service obligation".

TNT Post UK has launched "final mile" delivery services in London, Manchester 
and Liverpool, and plans to deliver to up to 42% of addresses by 2017.

Ofcom, the regulator, said it does not believe the universal service is at 
risk. It is due to review the service next year, but Labour has called for the 
regulator to begin the review early and said it will commit to safeguarding the 
USO if it wins the next election.

Royal Mail will also face a tough time over revelations last week that it 
could be fined up to £160m over an investigation into "breaches of antitrust 
laws" by its parcels division GLS in France.

While Royal Mail's big institutional shareholders made substantial profits 
buying up and immediately selling the company's shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/30/lazard-bank-royal-mail-shares-profit-flotation-margaret-hodge>
, which soared by 38% on the first day of trading, most of the thousands of 
private investors have held on to their holdings. The shares, which were 
floated at 330p and rose to a peak of 615p in January, closed at 471.7p on 
Friday.

Analysis of trades by stockbroker Peel Hunt suggests that 76% of individual 
investors still own the 227 shares they bought.
 