
Aidan O’Brien, whose 12-strong team for the Breeders’ Cup meeting this weekend 
is the biggest of his career, said on Tuesday that the decision to switch 
Found, thePrix de l’Arc de Triomphe winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/found-prix-de-larc-de-triomphe-aidan-obrien-first-three-horse-racing>
, from the Classic to the Turf had been taken because it would have been unfair 
to ask her to make her dirt debut in one of the strongest fields the Classic 
has seen.

The late change of heart on Found’s target here was confirmed only on Monday 
morning, when she was declared for the Turf rather than the Classic, which had 
been listed as her “first preference” engagement. The switch means that O’Brien 
will be double-handed in the Turf, in which his colt Highland Reel,the King 
George winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/ryan-moore-highland-reel-ascot-king-george-frankel-fair-eva-horse-racing>
, is also a leading contender, but the trainer said that John Magnier, the 
prime mover in the Coolmore Stud syndicate which owns Found, had been “more 
comfortable” sending the Arc winner back to the Turf, a contest which she won 
at Keeneland 12 months ago.

Racing shows its true colours at Kempton in aftermath of pile-up trauma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/kempton-racing-day-after-pileup-left-two-jockeys-injured>
“The lads were more comfortable doing that,” O’Brien said. “There were an 
awful lot of unknowns on the dirt. What was pushing us to the dirt was that 
she’s tactically fast, she stays very well and she’s a quick breaker, that’s 
what was leaning us that way, and we had Highland Reel for the Turf. He missed 
[Champions Day at] Ascot and came straight here and we always thought that a 
mile and a half on fast ground around here was going to suit him, that was the 
thinking.

“If anything happened to Found … you’re pitching her in, it would have been 
unfair to her, she would never have experienced anything like that, and she’ll 
be in her own comfort zone on the turf.

“JM didn’t want to risk her, he knew that she’s irreplaceable. She’s probably 
the most genuine mare I’ve ever seen in my life, if you saw her in the Arc, she 
put every sinew of her body into going forward when she was asked to. If you 
watch it in slow motion, it’s the most incredible thing you ever saw, she gives 
it all and gives it freely.”

The turf track at Santa Anita was relaid in the summer and is expected to ride 
even faster than usual this weekend, which will be a sharp contrast to the 
easier ground on which Found beat Golden Horn, the Derby winner, in last year’s 
Turf.

“She’s run on fast ground a lot,” O’Brien said “I think when she was just 
beaten in the Coronation [Stakes at Royal Ascot] last year, that was fast 
ground. They say it’s very quick here, but she has very good form on it, and it 
wasn’t really soft at Chantilly [for the Arc]. You don’t come here and expect 
it to be anything else.

“She’s a hardy lady and she’s in good form since Ascot [where Found was second 
to Almanzor in the Champion Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/almanzor-beats-found-champion-stakes-ascot-horse-racing>
]. Having the two of them in the race gives us a better chance, but obviously 
it’s a very good race.”

O’Brien has saddled 21 Group One winners this season and has runners in six of 
the 13 Breeders’ Cup races this weekend, when four wins would see him equal 
Bobby Frankel’s all-time record of 25 top-flight victories in a calendar year. 
Monday’s draw for post positions dealt his team a few tricky stalls, however, 
prompting Ryan Moore, his principal jockey, to text the trainer before leaving 
Australia after riding in Tuesday’s Melbourne Cup.

Melbourne Cup sketch: even winning can be a half-full experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/melbourne-cup-sketch-even-winning-can-be-a-half-empty-experience>
“He was just getting on the plane, and ‘there’s a lot to think about’ was what 
he said,” O’Brien said. “Draws are what they are, but we have to go through 
them and see what the story is.

“I’m looking forward to running Washington DC [in Saturday’s Turf Sprint], 
there’s no pressure with him and he’s very fast and getting better. He’ll be 
coming from the back, but he’s hard and progressing. It’s six furlongs but he 
has to have five-furlong pace to survive round there, and he should get it.

“We’ve always felt that Highland Reel would be suited by the turf here, and 
also Alice [Springs] in the Mile. Seventh Heaven [in the Filly & Mare Turf] 
will be suited by the track and the ground, and we’re interested to see what 
Roly Poly and Hydrangea do on the fast ground [in the Juvenile Fillies’ Turf].”

Other leading contenders for the weekend’s 13 Grade One events to exercise on 
Tuesday morning included Tepin, the Queen Anne Stakes winner at Royal Ascot in 
June, and Henry Candy’s Limato, her main market rival in betting for the Mile. 
“She’s great and she’s happy,” said Mark Casse, Tepin’s trainer. “She likes 
going to different places, she travels much better than the rest of us.

“She’s got a great post in eight, and it looks like there’s a fair amount of 
speed in there, which is good for us. Tepin is very versatile, and once we won 
at Royal Ascot, this was our main objective.”
 