
I feel I will disappoint regular readers if I don't mention that I spent this 
morning having an endoscopy and biopsy. This is good news. This is very good 
news. It means that my health has recovered to such an extent that my doctor 
and I can now explore my interior with vigour and the assistance of the most 
vile topical anaesthetic I have ever tasted. He said it was meant to taste of 
bananas but wouldn't, and he did not lie. It would only have tasted of bananas 
if bananas tasted of arse. Sorry, but there it is. Or was. In my mouth. Had 
been more media savvy I would have asked for the whole Journey to the Centre of 
my Duodenum to be burned on to a DVD and you could be viewing it now on this 
site or downloading it as a screensaver, but I decided simply to be happy that 
nothing untoward was found.

I declined the option of a sedative, because chemicals and I do not mix well. 
I also couldn't have spent the rest of today being smashed because I have a 
huge pile of work to get through: partly to pay for the Unbanana Experience and 
partly because work is arriving for assessment from the latest crop of Warwick 
creative writing students. Is it that time again?

As usual, I wonder where the new writers at Warwick get the courage to give 
work-in-progress to anyone, never mind someone who will comment upon it. I have 
also been moved to ponder just how any of us ever reaches the point at which it 
is possible to view our own work as clearly and dispassionately – we might even 
say diagnostically – as we could the work of some other writer.

It is hugely necessary, of course, that any writer should be able to examine 
what they produce in a creative, but critical manner. (When I write "critical" 
I am remembering that it comes from the Greek word meaning "to look at 
closely".) We can't rewrite to any purpose without being able to find our 
faults and strengths, uncover passages and themes that could be expanded, to 
dissect and then reconstruct our characters, tones, plots. But there are times 
– especially during our early days – when our attempts at exploration can seem 
as nasty and unhelpful as trying to shove a tiny camera down one's own throat. 
It's awkward. It's alarming. It hurts.

But we have to know what's there. We have to be able to look at our papery 
offspring as if they were not ours, to see them as horrified strangers might. 
And this is a clue to a way forward. If you've ever presented your real live 
children, or relatives, or loved ones to people whose opinion you respect, 
you'll be familiar with the personal unease this can provoke. Oh, my God, I've 
produced the antichrist – she's so rude. And loud. I am a bad parent. She is 
the bad seed. Or else perhaps – Oh, my God, he needs a haircut. I think his 
dishevelment is cute, but she doesn't. She doesn't understand. I must kill her. 
Or at least never speak to her again. You need not present your work to others 
who are physically present – although it can provide a healthy pressure to 
improve – but you can always imagine doing so. This is often more convenient 
than announcing a flashreading on Twitter at 3am and expecting anyone to turn 
up in order to help you with page 16.

Sometimes a change of medium will help. We all know that when we print out a 
piece which seemed acceptable on screen we will usually find that it is somehow 
converted to inexcusable dross as soon as it hits the paper. But would reading 
the piece aloud help you, too? Would playing a tape of it back to yourself be 
informative? I have either internalised this process, or always heard my 
writing in my head and I've found it invaluable to switch from one form of 
voice to another. Would walking the piece through and changing direction at 
each piece of punctuation tell you something? What about running that otherwise 
pointless bit of software that tells you the key words of your piece, or 
picking out each verb, each noun, each adverb and adjective – is there 
something your piece is trying to tell you? Is it possible to let its true 
nature be announced?

Perhaps you have been advised to leave your work in a desk drawer for a week, 
six weeks, three years … That can work well, but what if you don't have the 
time? What if you're aiming for a deadline? In my opinion, as writers, we can 
and should be continually learning how our minds work and helping them to help 
us more. What do you respond to better: sight, sound, smell, touch? If you try 
picturing your work as a movie, does that help you? Can you summon up a 
detailed portrait photo of your protagonist, or an action shot, or a strip of 
snaps from a booth, maybe posing with their lover? Can you draw them? (If you 
can draw.) Does your text smell of anything – beyond a bitter lifetime of 
soured hope? If you trace your finger over your words, or write them out 
longhand, rather than using your computer, does anything new fire?

I have sometimes played out scenes or sections of dialogue as comedy, then SF, 
then tragedy, then sitcom. I don't change the words, I just see what happens if 
the tone is altered. Or is the tone indelibly there? Do I have enough 
information already on the page to make that kind of assault impossible?

And then, of course,ß we can ask ourselves whose opinion we most respect and 
if they would like what we have done so far. (It will be informative if you 
discover that your own opinion is all that matters…) We may actually hand 
unfinished work to an editor, or a group, but I think it's important to be able 
to take this power into ourselves, too. It's perfectly possible to sit and 
imagine a wise chum, or a dear pal, or Antonin Artaud, or Captain Ahab, or 
Captain Scarlet, or Captain Haddock – whoever works for you – and to ask 
ourselves how satisfactory they would find our efforts.

If nothing has done the trick for you yet, don't despair – it simply means 
that you have more investigations to pursue and a very real opportunity to 
discover what kind of author you are, with what kind of mind. Best of luck. 
Onwards.
 