
Ann Patchett's State of Wonder is "a triumph", according to the Guardian, and 
her "best book yet". Joanna Trollope "loved it" and Emma Donoghue called it 
"the best book I have read all year". Adulation indeed, and perhaps why her 
publisherBloomsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bloomsbury> 
emblazoned its latest reprint with "winner of the Orange prize 2012".

Except it wasn't. Although Patchett won the Orange in 2002 for Bel Canto, and 
although the American author's latest novel was shortlisted for this year's 
Â£30,000 award, that honour actually went toMadeline Miller's debut The Song of 
Achilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/30/orange-prize-2012-madeline-miller>
. The error was spotted by booksellers at the independent Bookseller Crow in 
Crystal Palace, andhighlighted on their blog 
<http://booksellercrow.typepad.com/the_bedside_crow/2012/11/publishers-heres-a-tip-from-bloomsbury.html>
. "Publishers, here's a tip from Bloomsbury," they wrote. "If your shortlisted 
book fails to win a major book award, just SAY that it did anyway."

Not, added Bookseller Crow, "that the wonderful Ann Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> shouldn't have won it (and did 
in fact for Bel Canto in 2002) but it's a tad wonky of her publisher, 
particularly when they also publish the real winner of the Orange prize 2012, 
Song of Achilles by Madeline Miller."

State of Wonder is the story of a pharmacologist who spends time with the 
Lakashi tribe in the heart of the Amazonian rain forest. Bloomsbury blamed the 
error on moving to a new printer, saying that "in the course of that move we 
made a mistake reprinting State of Wonder". The "incorrect stock" has been 
pulped, they continued, with a corrected reprint "due in tomorrow".

The mistake is just the latest in a long line of editorial howlers. Earlier 
this year,Zagat was forced to recall its restaurant guide to San Francsico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/05/zagat-san-francisco-restaurant-guide-typo>
 after misspelling the city on the spine, while in 2010 theUK edition of 
Jonathan Franzen's novel Freedom was pulped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/01/jonathan-franzen-book-pulped>, 
and a Penguin recipe book was destroyed after calling forcooks to add "freshly 
ground black people" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/19/penguin-cook-book>.
 