
“I am drawn to theatre as an art form of surprise and of provocation,” says 
the Almeida’s artistic director Rupert Goold, while backstage at rehearsals for
American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>, the stage 
adaptation of Bret Easton Ellis’s novel about late 80s excess and violence in 
New York. “Every show we’ve done at the Almeida is trying to challenge 
aesthetic and sometimes social assumptions.”

Goold’s been challenging assumptions his entire career. He’s set King Lear in 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/11/king-lear-theatre-postlethwaite-liverpool-review>
 andMerchant of Venice in Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/20/merchant-of-venice-review-rsc>, 
while the first of his two ventures on to Broadway this season, King Charles 
III – which opens in Sydney, Australia in April – stripped away the nobility of 
royalty with its minimalistic set.

Bret Easton Ellis: today's American Psycho would be an online troll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/11/bret-easton-ellis-broadway-american-psycho-online-troll>
You’d forgive Goold for succumbing to delusions of grandeur himself after his 
rapid rise. He became artistic director of Headlong Theatre at 33 and four 
years later he was also serving as associate director at the Royal Shakespeare 
Company, until he took over theAlmeida Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/almeida-theatre> two years ago. He won two 
Olivier awards for best director before he turned 40.

 Goold, who is now 44, initially staged both King Charles III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/01/king-charles-iii-review-stage-theater-british-royal-family>
 (for which he earned another Olivier nomination) andAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review> 
at the Almeida. On the surface they are starkly different, yet Goold sees what 
unites them: they each speak to their country’s sensibility.

“In America, the relationship between the individual and the state has an 
uneasiness about it and in Europe we tend to accept institutions a bit more,” 
he says.

 More significantly, while King Charles III “required something spare and 
Shakespearean, as close to nothing but the performances and text” and American 
Pscyho “is incredibly visual and flamboyant”, what drew him to both plays is 
the risks they take. Both play with form and style in unique ways while telling 
a compelling story that makes an argument to support the writer’s vision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcce29081ce85a1ed111b8c0552e954c61bd88644%2F5_525_2745_1646%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rupert%20Goold%3A%20American%20Psycho%20'is%20absolutely%20as%20pertinent%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rupert%20Goold%3A%20American%20Psycho%20%27is%20absolutely%20as%20pertinent%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcce29081ce85a1ed111b8c0552e954c61bd88644%2F5_525_2745_1646%2F2745.jpg>
 Tim Pigott-Smith in King Charles lll at the Almeida Theatre Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 King Charles III used blank verse and iambic pentameter to tell a thoroughly 
modern story in a classical style, while one of Broadway’s go-to composers
Duncan Sheik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/01/sting-broadway-debut-the-last-ship-rockstars-and-musicals>
, who wrote the music and lyrics for American Psycho, is giving Broadway its 
first EDM, or electronica, musical. “This music has been pretty dominant in the 
culture but has not found its way much on to theater stages,” Goold says. 
(Sheik acknowledges the 80s pop musical obsessions of the book, with covers of 
songs by Phil Collins and Tears for Fears; additionally some Huey Lewis is 
heard onstage.)

Additionally, he points to Patrick Bateman, the American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> protagonist who is both 
Wall Street banker and serial killer, as an example of what intrigues him about 
“non-normative dramatic art”. Bateman is an execrable human being, “a rightwing 
materialist and an exceptionally violent figure”, he says. Yet Goold sees him 
as symbolizing “a certain kind of social loneliness we all feel and the show 
asks you to think about this character and your own sense of self but in a 
slightly provocative way”.

On one level this is an existential satire about materialism and on another 
it’s sort of a horror-comedy
Rupert Goold 
 Goold believes American Psycho should fare even better here than it did in 
London where it debuted in late 2013 with Doctor Who starMatt Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/matt-smith> in the lead role. For 
starters, he worked with Robert Aguirre-Sacasa and Sheik on some tweaks “to fix 
some holes we felt we had from the last production”.

 Then there’s the subject matter and location. “On one level this is an 
existential satire about materialism and on another it’s sort of a 
horror-comedy,” he says. “That marriage of genre, character and wit is 
something the Americans embrace more than the British.”

 Finally, there’s a bit of fortuitous timing. Patrick Bateman idolizes a man 
who symbolized the greed is good ethos of the 80s. No, not Gordon Gekko. A real 
life figure, one who is frighteningly even more relevant today: Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc433d071004b8cdb650775f95684ce0127667f7f%2F32_777_2476_3093%2F2476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rupert%20Goold%3A%20American%20Psycho%20'is%20absolutely%20as%20pertinent%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rupert%20Goold%3A%20American%20Psycho%20%27is%20absolutely%20as%20pertinent%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Famerican-psycho-broadway-musical-rupert-goold-bret-easton-ellis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc433d071004b8cdb650775f95684ce0127667f7f%2F32_777_2476_3093%2F2476.jpg>
 Matt Smith as Patrick Bateman at the Almeida Theatre Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
 “Trump was a major figure in the novel of American Psycho, which is looking 
at a period and people, not just Trump, who dictate power in this country and 
set a cultural agenda for better or worse,” Goold says, adding that the book 
and the musical look at the legacy of the United States at its peak in terms of 
power but also a timewhen people were defining their self by the brands they 
consumed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/mar/25/yuppie-revenge-thriller-obsessed>
. “What Bret was satirizing back then is absolutely as pertinent now. Many 
things he wrote about have come true.”

 Bateman and King Charles III also share a trait with many other protagonists 
in shows Goold has directed – from Doctor Faustus to Macbeth – and even in his 
first feature film,True Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/true-story-review-rupert-goold-jonah-hill-james-franco-felicity-jones>
, which was released last year: all have vaulting ambition but when they reach 
for their dreams they find they have lost sight of themselves or reality or 
pitfalls and consequences. All are undone, and often doomed by their efforts.

 “I am drawn to these figures, these paradigm shifters,” Goold says. “Perhaps 
it is because I am so unlike that, I am interested in the other.”

 Indeed, Goold is known for being relatively unflappable and for being a team 
player even as the boss. “He is a true collaborator and no idea is a bad idea 
... until you try it and find out it really is bad,” saysBenjamin Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/28/benjamin-walker-abraham-lincoln-vampire-hunter>
, who will play Bateman on Broadway and who says the opportunity to work with 
Goold was one of his reasons for signing on. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen him 
lose his cool. It’s a dark work but he runs a very peaceful and efficient and 
enjoyable rehearsal room.”

Irvine Welsh – American Psycho is a modern classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
 But Goold is more than just a nice guy, Walker adds: “A lot of directors 
flounder in the darkness to find what works but Rupert has a visually creative 
mind so intricate and beautiful that when you step into the play you step into 
the visual vocabulary of Rupert’s imagination.”

 Robert Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/28/robert-powell-my-family-values>
, who is playing King Charles III in the touring company, adds that he didn’t 
get to work directly with Goold before their first leg and requested some time 
with him during a rare week off. “He completely revitalized the show and lifted 
the cast in a very brief period,” Powell says, explaining that Goold zeroed on 
the emotional and theatrical side of the show instead of the intellectual side.

 Goold has no complaint about juggling his myriad responsibilities: producing 
and directing at the Almeida and elsewhere while developing a movie career and 
planning to write books in whatever downtime he has. (He also has two children 
with wife Kate Fleetwood, whom he met while directing her in Romeo and Juliet 
in 1998 on a UK tour.)

 “You have to stave off complacency and keep yourself challenged,” he says, 
adding that he is “viciously self-critical.” He acknowledges that being a late 
bloomer – his ascent was sharp but started late – motivates him but he keeps 
working so much because he, “feels fortunate to be doing this. I like doing 
other things, but I really like directing and producing”.

 * American Psycho <http://americanpsychothemusical.com/#introduction>, now in 
previews, opens on 21 April at the Schoenfeld theatreon Broadway. Rupert 
Goold’s production ofKing Charles III 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2016/king-charles> opens 
at Sydney Theatre Company on 31 March
 