
Where two or three were gathered together in the corridors and corners of the 
MelbourneTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre over the 
weekend the word was, inevitably, "Rusedski". Much as everyone has been trying 
to concentrate on the tennis, Greg Rusedski's positive drugs test dominates 
conversation.

"It's sad because this is the best cast of young big-name players I've ever 
seen bar none and here we are talking about Rusedski, who's 30 years old," said 
Brad Gilbert, the world No1 Andy Roddick's coach.

Drugs dominated the ATP players' 90-minute meeting on Saturday, with Mark 
Miles, the chief executive, amplifying the need for players to be vigilant over 
supplements. "This is the third year I've stressed this point," said Miles, 
leaving some to wonder why he had not banged it home to the ATP trainers, who 
last year were implicated in the handing out of contaminated electrolytes that 
led to a rash of cases involv- ing the steroid nandrolone.

"In-house doping" was a new concept in tennis and one that led to none of the 
cases being prosecuted, with Bohdan Ulihrach of the Czech Republic having his 
ban and fine rescinded after it emerged that the ATP could not rule out the 
possibility that its own trainers had been responsible for seven failed tests 
and another 36 narrow misses. It was a decision that troubled the World 
Anti-Doping Agency and it is one that it is still investigating.

Rusedski continues to assert his innocence and that he has the backing of many 
of the players, although there is a growing feeling here that, if next month's 
independent tribunal finds him guilty, then he should be given the full 
two-year ban. "If the decision was seen to be fair, it would be an outcome we 
would be comfortable with," said Todd Martin, the players' president.

Rusedski begins his ninth Australian Open challenge tomorrow against Albert 
Costa, the 2002 French Open champion and 26th seed, while Tim Henman, who 
dropped to No12 in the world rankings this week after being overtaken by 
Lleyton Hewitt, is up against Jean-Ren√© Lisnard, ranked No112, also scheduled 
for tomorrow.

Last year's talk from the ATP of boycotting the grand slam events if their 
prize money was not substantially increased has faded away. It was mostly bluff 
and the players were easily pacified by a little extra money into their pension 
schemes, which has the added advantage of being "tax effective".

As well as there being no boycott, it appears unlikely that the Australian 
Open will be moved in the calendar much more than a week. There had been 
suggestions that the event would be switched to March in 2007, when the current 
contracts run out. The ITF, the game's governing body, is keen to have a longer 
run-in to Melbourne but has met with strong resistance from the Australians.

Tennis has a free run in the media here at this time of year, with the rugby 
and AFL seasons not having started. The organisers fear that, if they made a 
substantial move in the calendar, they would have the same problems as in the 
United States, where their Open is overshadowed by baseball and the start of 
the NFL season.

To the great relief of Paul McNamee, the Open's chief executive here, Kim 
Clijsters, the world No2, who turned her ankle in the Hopman Cup, said 
yesterday she would be playing. McNamee had already lost two of the world's top 
six - the reigning champion Serena Williams and Jennifer Capriati - to injury.
 