
It was scheduled to start over a week ago. Then last Wednesday. Now tomorrow . 
When round three of the Geneva peace talks onSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> begins, it could be Groundhog Day for 
Syrians. If the actors read from the script they used at the previous 
UN-sponsored negotiations – Geneva I in 2012 and Geneva II in 2014 – the last 
act will be the same: a failure.

The conference, like the current ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/syria-ceasefire-to-begin-us-expecting-violations>
, which began on 27 February, is taking place because the United States and 
Russia want it to. At last they seem to agree that the stumbling block to the 
last two sessions – the fate of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad – is not 
important enough to prolong the war.

Both sides know that this US v Russia proxy war is out of control: Europe has 
been hit with a tide of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/02/refugee-crisis-europe-eu-countries-greece-receive-700m-extra-aid-funds>
 that threatens the EU’s fragile unity; and the conflict has spread to Iraq, 
and threatens to erupt in Lebanon and Jordan.

If the war is to end, the powers that fuelled it must impose a solution in 
Geneva

Early in the war, the Syrian combatants ceded decision-making to their 
financiers and armourers inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, 
Iran, the US, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Qatar. If the war is to end, the powers 
that fuelled it must impose a solution in Geneva.

The war in Syria can be seen as an imperial card game that the US can leave 
while it has a few chips left. Once the conflict is over, someone will have to 
pay billions of dollars to rebuild the nation. Most probably it will be the 
winners, Russia and Iran – if they don’t cough up, they will lose in peace what 
they gained in war. Why would any sensible Washington policymaker object?

Russia, with its collaborators, is winning this phase of the war, so renewed 
negotiations will solidify its gains and allow the Syrian government to restore 
sovereignty over the entire country. Then, a combined onslaught by the 
Russians, Americans, Syrian army, Hezbollah, Kurds, non-jihadist Syrian rebels, 
Iran and Iraq will be able to remove Islamic State from Syria and Iraq.

Russia has stuck to its position from the beginning of the conflict in 2011: 
that Assad must remain in office. The US demanded that he went as a 
precondition to a settlement, but Russian credibility was at stake. Before the 
Arab League suspended Syria, in 2011, it had 22 member states, 21 of which were 
US clients. Russia had one Arab ally, which was not about to be abandoned.

So unless the US was willing to up its game by sending more planes, drones and 
troops – which would invite the Russians to raise theirs and risk a world war – 
it had to change tack. Secretary of StateJohn Kerry did just that in December 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/ed88e4c5d57341eba365a966300f67e3/kerry-moscow-talks-syria-ukraine 
[4] http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-24628442>, when he said: “The US 
and our partners are not seeking so-called regime change.”

Before the second Geneva conference in 2014, Assad’s minister for national 
reconciliation, Ali Haider, declared: “Neither Geneva II, nor Geneva III nor 
Geneva X will solve the Syrian crisis. The solution has begun and will continue 
through the military triumph of the state.” Haider was wrong: the regime may be 
winning militarily now, but it cannot wage war for ever. Just as America’s 
proxy rebels failed to defeat the regime, the regime failed to defeat them. The 
only way out is compromise.

Vladimir Putin takes personal charge of Syria ceasefire effort
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/vladimir-putin-takes-charge-of-syria-ceasefire-effort-russia>
So the outside world should impose a settlement but not dictate the future of 
Syria. Proposals to divide it into sectarian cantons in a federal system are 
doomed. The French tried that in the 1920s, when they cut their Syrian Mandate 
territory into six separate statelets that its people rejected. Nor can 
outsiders decide who will lead the nation: such matters are for the Syrian 
people.

This does not mean the Kurds cannot enjoy some degree of autonomy, despite the 
objections of many Syrian Arabs and Turkey. Geneva III can impose a 
transitional arrangement in which the Syrians decide for themselves how they 
shall be governed and by whom, albeit with close international monitoring of 
elections. The regime refuses to share power during a transitional period with 
“terrorists”; the opposition demands that Assad goes before the transition 
begins. But if both sides cling to these positions, the US and Russia can 
compel them to change their minds. The Syrian people demand it.

The ceasefire of the past fortnight has allowed many of them to resume their 
lives. If Geneva III brings peace, they will not take long to rebuild a country 
they love and of which, despite the cruelty and crimes of this war, they are 
proud. © Charles Glass 2016

Charles Glass is the author of Syria Burning: A Short History of a Catastrophe 
<http://www.versobooks.com/books/2172-syria-burning> (Verso) published on 22 
March
 