
The greatest jockeys can sense and seize an opportunity a fraction of a second 
before their opponents, andRyan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ryan-moore> did so to decisive effect here 
on Saturday to steer Highland Reel to a one-and-a-quarter length victory in the 
King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes.

It took 149 seconds to complete the one-and-half miles and Moore had the race 
in his grasp from the first stride, as he sent Highland Reel straight into the 
lead. Had Postponed, last year’s winner, not been ruled out earlier in the 
week, he would have had a pacemaker in the race but, in his absence,Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/ryan-moore-air-force-blue-2000-guineas>
 grabbed the initiative and squeezed a little tighter with every furlong that 
passed.

With more than a mile to run, Moore’s rivals allowed him to build a 
five-length lead, and while the gap closed as Highland Reel’s rider gave him 
time to catch his breath, he was guaranteed the first run in the straight and 
only Wings Of Desire, the sole three-year-old in the race, offered any hint of 
a threat in the final quarter-mile. Dartmouth, attempting to give the Queen her 
second winner of the race named after her parents, was third, ahead of Sir 
Isaac Newton and Erupt.

“It was just an option [to make the running] but I didn’t know how it was 
going to play out,” Moore said. “There were a couple that could be ridden 
forward. He hit the gates well, landed in front and everyone wanted to get a 
lead.

“The ground was against him last time [when second to Dartmouth in the 
Hardwicke Stakes] and it was his first run off the back ofHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/ryan-moore-highland-reel-hong-kong-vase-aidan-obrien>
 [in April]. He was entitled to come on for it and quick ground is very 
important to him.”

Aidan O’Brien, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/16/aidan-obrien-irish-oaks-seventh-heaven-even-song-ryan-moore>
 who has now won the King George four times, expects Highland Reel to be aimed 
towards the Breeders’ Cup Turf at Santa Anita in November, on what seems sure 
to be fast ground.

“He has pace, he loves it fast and he can go anywhere over a mile and a 
quarter or a mile and a half,” O’Brien said. “He could go to the Breeders’ Cup, 
or Australia or Hong Kong, he has a lot of options. We knew he wouldn’t mind 
making the running, he killed them in the Secretariat [Stakes at Arlington Park 
last August] making the running.

“It was some run last time on soft ground, he goes on it but he’s not a soft 
ground horse. At a mile and a half, he’s very strong tactically.”

Highland Reel was cut to around 6-1 for the Breeders’ Cup Turf and can also be 
backed at 16-1 for the International Stakes at York next month but US Army 
Ranger, the runner-up behind Harzand in the Derby, seems more likely to 
represent O’Brien’s stable in that race.

Frankel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frankel> recorded five of his 14 
career victories at this track, and the greatest racehorse in living memory 
secured the first Group winner of his new career as a stallion when Fair Eva 
routed her field in the Group Three Princess Margaret Stakes.

In all, eight foals from Frankel’s first crop have now made it to the 
racecourse, and seven of those have recorded at least one success. Fair Eva’s 
performance, though, was another significant step forward and was stamped with 
Group One quality throughout.

Cunco wins at Newbury as first son of Frankel to see a racecourse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/cunco-wins-newbury-first-son-frankel-racecourse>
Roger Charlton’s filly, in the same pink and green colours of Khalid Abdullah 
that were carried by her sire, cruised through the first three furlongs and 
pulled her way to the front two out before powering four lengths clear at the 
line. It was no surprise to see Fair Eva soon promoted to the head of the 
market for next year’s 1,000 Guineas, and she is now top-priced at 5-1 to give
the Frankel line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/frankel-royal-ascot-offspring-cunco-queen-kindly>
 a swift Classic success.

“Secretly, yes,” Charlton said, when asked if he had expected such a 
convincing success. “Realistically, no, because you can’t let yourself think 
like that.

“But she’s done everything really professionally, she looks very good and I 
thought her performance at Haydock [in June] was really exciting. We didn’t 
know what she was beating that day, and as it turned out, she beat some good 
fillies.

“She’s got a wonderful action and like most Frankels, they take a bit of 
pulling up after the winning post, which is a great sign. She could clearly go 
another furlong and let’s hope that next year she might go a mile.”

The seven-furlong Moyglare Stud Stakes at The Curragh in September, a Group 
One event, is a possible target for Fair Eva, although the Group Two Lowther 
Stakes at York in August could offer a more gradual advance through the ranks.

“Roger said that seven is probably what she wants now,” Frankie Dettori, Fair 
Eva’s jockey, said. “It was only her second run and she idled a bit [in front], 
but when I gave her a tap she went on and found another gear.”

Charlton completed a double on the day when Time Test, a leading candidate for 
the International Stakes, ground out victory at short odds in the Group Two Sky 
Bet York Stakes. Time Test had to dig in to get past Mondialiste in the closing 
stages, but remains third-favourite for the International behind Postponed and 
Hawkbill at around 4-1.
 