
Phil Mickelson appeared on television to issue a grovelling apology to Hal 
Sutton. On Tuesday,Mickelson criticised what he regarded as bad preparation by 
Sutton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/28/phil-mickelson-ryder-cup> 
when he was the US captain in 2004. “I feel awful,” Mickelson said. “It was 
never meant to be like that, I was trying to use an example of how a captain 
can have a strong effect.

Ryder Cup 2016: player-by-player guide to Europe and USA teams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/ryder-cup-2016-player-guide-europe-usa>
“Unfortunately it came across the way it did. I was totally in the wrong. I 
never should have brought that up. I used an extreme example of the way 
decisions can affect play and I never should have done that because it affected 
Hal.” Mickelson is old enough and wise enough to know what he was doing in the 
first place. The backtracking is bizarre.

Rose pays up for punter’s putt

Justin Rose was unbeaten in the 2014 Ryder Cup at Gleneagles, but the Olympic 
champion has already tasted defeat at Hazeltine – to an American spectator. 
After Andy Sullivan andRory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy> had failed to make a putt on 
the eighth green during the practice round on Thursday, David Johnson from 
North Dakota shouted that he could make it from around 12 feet.

Rose and Henrik Stenson, the other two European players in the group, decided 
to call the man’s bluff and brought him out of the crowd, with Rose even 
betting him $100 that he would miss. However, after Rose placed the $100 bill 
on the green, Johnson promptly holed the putt to spark wild celebrations and 
earn himself high-fives and hugs from the European quartet.
Rory McIlroy (@McIlroyRory) 
Has the @rydercup <https://twitter.com/rydercup> started already??🇪🇺🇺🇸 
pic.twitter.com/s6EImcbnZv <https://t.co/s6EImcbnZv>
 <https://twitter.com/McIlroyRory/status/781535441233162241> September 29, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/McIlroyRory/status/781535441233162241> 
McIlroy in for Turkish payday

Rory McIlroy used Ryder Cup eve to confirm he will join Tiger Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> in the Turkish Airlines Open in 
November. McIlroy and Woods are expected to receive huge appearance fees to 
participate at the Regnum Carya resort, where a $7m prize fund is also 
available. “This is the start of an important run to the climax of the season,” 
McIlroy said. “The Turkish Airlines Open has already established itself as a 
key week in the golfing calendar and one I know all the guys really look 
forward to.”

Europe cut a dash

Tony Jacklin is credited with the raising of standards of dress and 
accessories when he was European captain in 1983. Jacklin would approve, then, 
of this European team donning clothing from the Italian manufacturer Loro 
Piana. A glance at the company website shows knitwear, similar to that worn by 
the European players at Hazeltine this week, retailing for more than $4,000 a 
piece.

Tiger keeps low profile 

Patrick Reed revealed the USA players have been trying to persuade Tiger Woods 
to illustrate his current playing abilities, but to no avail. Woods is a 
vice-captain to Davis Love III and has kept a generally low-key presence at 
Hazeltine, including the polite refusal of a request to give a media-centre 
interview. “He has not swung a golf club, unfortunately,” Reed said. “We are 
all pushing him to, but he’s not going to do it.”

Tiger Woods tucks into his new role as the USA team’s resident tactician
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/tiger-woods-usa-tactician-ryder-cup-2016-hazeltine>
Hats off to hats-off plan

The decision of Europe’s players not to wear hats during Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> practice days has been a positive 
one. Golf’s great characters, Seve Ballesteros amongst them, did not play in 
headwear. The acceptance of hats as a standard part of the professional outfit 
has led to all players looking the same and arguably shut-off to the watching 
world. Not that Martin Kaymer was accepting of a wider meaning. “I have a small 
head; the hats that were in the locker room don’t fit my head well,” the German 
said.

Hazeltine pays tribute to Palmer

The flags at Hazeltine flew at half mast on Thursday in memory of Arnold Palmer
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>, who passed away on Sunday 
aged 87 and whose towering presence will loom large over the proceedings all 
weekend. The PGA vice-president, Paul Levy, said the players and executives 
will wear the umbrella pins that Palmer made famous, while organisers plan to 
hand out 50,000 Arnie’s Army buttons to spectators upon entry for Friday’s 
play. The opening ceremony will include a video tribute and a moment of 
silence, while Palmer’s Ryder Cup bag will stand by the first tee for the 
duration of the competition. Palmer, in addition to winning 62 tour titles 
including seven majors, played on six Ryder Cup teams from 1961 through 1973 
and won 22 matches, more than any American in history. “He’s been such an icon 
for everybody,” Dustin Johnson said on Thursday. “The things he’s done for the 
game will never be forgotten.”

Reed thrills in Woods walk

Reed made headlines as a Ryder Cup rookie when he raised his index finger to 
his lips to shush the rowdy Scottish crowd at Gleneagles two years ago, but the 
26-year-old American’s sophomore appearance may prove even more personally 
memorable. The Texan is playing in the pod headed by Woods, offering him an 
up-close audience with his childhood hero that included a one‑on-one tour of 
Hazeltine’s back nine. “He walked it with me, helping me figure out the golf 
course. You don’t get that very often. And to have somebody do that for you, 
especially a guy like Tiger Woods, it meant a lot to me,” Reed said. “I learned 
so much just from that nine holes walking around that I felt like just that 
alone could save me so many shots throughout my career, because of – just by 
thinking about just the little minor details. And it’s not rocket science. It’s 
really stuff that you’re like, well, I should have been thinking about that.”
 