
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, the mayor of 
London, has called for Labour politicians to raise their game to win the EU 
referendum for remain, saying Tory divisions meant it was down to Labour to get 
the vote out.

“Every day we see another example of why David Cameron and the Tories simply 
cannot win this referendum as they lose credibility with the public,” Khan 
said. “They are simply too riven by division. It now falls to us, and it’s time 
for us to step up.”
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash>
Khan is to take on Boris Johnson, his predecessor as London mayor, in the 
biggest EU referendum debate at Wembley arenain a fortnight’s time. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/sadiq-khan-boris-johnson-eu-referendum-debate-wembley-arena>

Between then and now, Labour had to be more visible, the mayor said. “Jeremy, 
Harriet, Alan, Yvette, the whole shadow cabinet, and everyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP, councillor, member and 
supporter in Britain – the responsibility is ours. We don’t want to look back 
in two weeks’ time and think – did we do enough?”

After his speech at London’s shard, and flanked by Alan Johnson, Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> and Harriet Harman, he 
told supporters: “I think it’s up to to us now to persuade Labour supporters to 
come out and vote.” He denied that the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who did 
not attend, was doing too little to make the case for the EU.


“Jeremy’s got a very busy diary and we’re working our socks off,” said Khan, 
who was named by a YouGov survey of Londoners on Wednesday as the “most trusted 
figure” to tell the truth on the EU.

“Our call today is to Labour MPs, councillors, members, trade union members to 
do your bit, to persuade your friends and family that we’re better of as 
members of the EU. From my experience, in the recent past, the best way to get 
people to turn out is to enthuse and excite people.”

Dr Sarah Wollaston defects from Vote Leave to remain campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
Alan Johnson, who heads the Labour In For Britain campaign, hinted that the 
party’s campaign had been slow to attract attention. Almost half of Labour 
voterswrongly believed the party was either split or backing Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/labour-voters-in-the-dark-about-partys-stance-on-brexit-research-says>
, or said they did not know the party’s stance, according to a poll in the 
Times this week. “The problem is, when people saw blue-on-blue stuff 
constantly, maybe we then needed to do more big rallies to get the media 
interested, I think we’ve done that now,” he said, adding that Corbyn was 
committed to the cause.

Corbyn “does a lot of events which are below the media radar”, Johnson said. 
“He says the EU is the best framework for the future success of this country, 
it’s not perfect. He is not the only one who has changed his mind since 1975. 
Labour was split in ‘75 and it’s united now.

“Disunity is news, not unity, so we’ve had to fight to get the airtime. I 
guarantee by the time we get to polling day, there will not be many who don’t 
know where Labour stands.” Johnson said Labour volunteers were concentrated now 
in safe Labour seats to ensure turnout. “This is every vote counts, it’s a 
different challenge for us,” he said.

A handful of Eurosceptics in the party “always had their own quaint view”, 
Johnson said, but Corbyn’s mind was genuinely changed on the issue. “They are 
longstanding Eurosceptics, [Corbyn is] longstanding but now switched. Jeremy is 
an interesting character who has been on this journey.”

Yvette Cooper, Labour’s former shadow home secretary, who spoke at the event 
to encourage more young voters to register before the new extended deadline, 
said Corbyn would not privately vote leave. “He has never been reluctant to 
tell people his views, whatever they may be. He is not known for keeping them 
private, so I think this is mischief-making.” she said.

In contrast, Cooper said, the leave campaign were setting out to deliberately 
mislead, directly accusing Boris Johnson of lying about the EU in order to 
advance his own career. Johnson and the justice secretary, Michael Gove, were 
“deliberately telling lies” about Turkey’s accession to the EU, Cooper said.

UK trade union leaders call on 6 million members to vote remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/uk-trade-union-leaders-call-on-6m-members-to-vote-against-brexit>
“They know Cyprus would veto, they know Greece would veto it, they know they 
don’t fulfil the criteria, they are not stupid, but they are deliberately 
misleading and manipulating the facts, deliberately telling lies. I don’t know 
how they live with themselves,” she said.

Johnson, also cited by polls as one of the most trusted figures by the public 
on the EU, would lose his reputation eventually, Cooper said.

“Watch what happens over time to Boris Johnson’s reputation... the way he 
ignores the truth, and think he can have any kind of authority,” she said.

“How could you have someone like that as a prime minister? Someone who is 
happy to rip up the facts and talk up complete fiction for his own personal 
interests. In the end, people will see through that.”

 