
Call him the new Jimbo jet. Those who regularly despaired of Andy Roddick ever 
being able to change his game are now having to admit that since Jimmy Connors 
became his coach last year, after Roddick had sunk to his lowest ebb, the 
former US Open champion is beginning to fly again.

There will be turbulence, that is for sure, but the belief is seeping back. 
When Roddick looked at the draw for theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, and figured that he might 
meet Russia's Marat Safin, the 2005 champion here, as early as the third round, 
his heart sank. In the event it was a tumultuous encounter and the progress the 
American has made under the tutelage of Connors was there for all to see in the 
Rod Laver arena yesterday as Roddick won 7-6, 2-6, 6-4, 7-6.

He is now standing closer to the baseline to receive serve, thus giving 
himself more chance to attack, while his rushes to the net no longer end in 
hopeless entanglement. Roddick is starting to volley with something like 
assuredness, and his double-fisted backhand is gradually transforming into a 
weapon of some deftness. OK, he will never be Roger Federer, but Roddick Mark 2 
may pose a real threat to the Swiss, and everybody else. Ugly Andy, like Betty, 
may yet capture hearts and, more importantly for him, more majors.

There were signs in the US Open final last year that Roddick was changing for 
the better. Federer held firm then, but if they were to meet in the semi-final 
next week it might be altogether closer. And now Roddick has Connors at his 
side again, his illustrious coach being absent last week to attend the funeral 
of his mother. He watched Roddick through slightly jet-lagged eyes last night, 
and would have been immensely pleased at what he saw.

Safin, currently outside the top 20 after knee surgery in 2005, played 
wonderfully and served 22 aces, but Roddick was just a touch steadier, and had 
a little more variety. Safin being Safin, there was drama. He cut his little 
finger diving for a volley, and then chastised both the tournament director and 
the umpire when the roof was closed after the third set, and he deemed the 
court wet, which it was not. He was warned for swearing, continued to chunter, 
and was cheered when he queried an over-rule on his serve and was proved right 
by Hawkeye.

Roddick, not immune to on-court outbursts himself, refused to become embroiled 
and went about his business in a way that spoke volumes for the influence of 
Connors. No other coach, not even Brad Gilbert, had been capable of changing 
his game to such a degree.

Much has been talked about Andy Murray, the two Frenchmen GaÃ«l Monfils and 
Richard Gasquet - Gasquet winning their third-round encounter yesterday - and, 
obviously, Rafael Nadal. Yet of this bustling, barnstorming new generation 
Novak Djokovic is the youngest, and the highest ranked, at No15. Should he beat 
Federer tomorrow, albeit virtually unthinkable in a grand slam these days, then 
the 19-year-old Serb, one week younger than Murray, would find his face 
prominent on every television station and every sports page throughout the 
world.

"It's a huge challenge for me," said Djokovic, who has lost both his previous 
matches against the world No1 but is currently on a run of eight successive 
victories, including winning the title in Adelaide and yesterday's 6-3, 6-4, 
5-7, 6-1 third-round win over the Thai Danai Udomchoke. "But I won't be going 
on to the court waving a white flag."

Gauging the current form of Federer during the first week of a grand slam has 
become a pretty pointless exercise because, the French Open apart, he has gone 
on to win the title in five of the last six. In his third-round match he 
defeated Russia's Mikhail Youzhny 6-3, 6-3, 7-6, and then turned his mind to 
Djokovic.

"It's a dangerous match for me, that's for sure. This is maybe his big moment 
where he can make a name for himself. But he already missed that opportunity 
twice. Usually when I beat a guy twice, I know how to play him. I hope I can 
take advantage of that." He rarely fails.
 