
Whatever happens between now and Sunday, and this tournament has provided a 
series of shocks and surprises, theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> will have a new champion. 
In all probability it will be Russia's Marat Safin, who reached the last eight 
yesterday by defeating Pete Sampras, the winner here in 1994 and 1997.

Safin's win was nothing like as brutal as that in the 2000 United States Open 
final, when Sampras managed only 10 games during a straight-sets defeat from 
which he has not entirely recovered. For two sets yesterday the Russian, 22 on 
the day of the final, had Sampras by the throat but the American staged a 
spirited recovery before Safin slammed the door in a second tie-break. He won 
6-2, 6-4, 6-7, 7-6 in just over 3 hours of enthralling and frequently brilliant 
tennis.

Asked who he thought might win the title now, Sampras replied: "I really don't 
care." Then, as a pertinent after-thought, he added: "Whoever doesn't choke." 
The comment will not have been aimed at his friend Tim Henman but it was a 
further reminder of the opportunity the Briton missed, not that anybody would 
have fancied his chances against Safin if they had met in the final. The 
Russian is a tennis heavyweight, Henman a tricksy lightweight by comparison.

Sampras, without a title since his Wimbledon win two years ago, the last of 
his 13 grand-slam successes, arrived in Australia brimming with vigour and duly 
lifted his confidence by beating Andre Agassi in the final of the pre-Open 
exhibition event here. But he then experienced a tough opening week, including 
a five-set third-round match against France's Nicolas Escud√© which went on into 
the small hours of Sunday morning.

Since losing that final to Safin the two have met three times, with Sampras 
winning twice, including last year's US Open semi-final. But 2001 was a 
difficult year for Safin, a back injury robbing him of form and confidence. 
Having finished the previous year as the world No2, he drifted out of the top 
10 and used the winter months to prepare more assiduously than ever.

He has also surrounded himself with friends, for both comfort and inspiration. 
Many of his entourage are blondes. "I have an unbelievably beautiful bench," he 
said beaming after defeating Sampras - Marat's Angels. He has also moved from 
Spain, where he had spent seven happy and formative years, to Geneva, "where I 
am a little nearer Russia".

Sweden's Mats Wilander, himself a three-times Australian Open champion, is 
still coaching Safin but he is not here - hence the need, presumably, for the 
entourage.

Sampras has acquired a new coach Tom Gullikson, twin brother of his earlier 
coach Tim who died, together with a new-found zest for tennis life, or so he 
would have everybody believe. The reality is that Sampras, who turned 30 last 
year, is not what he was.

The serve has lost much of its bite and his reflexes at the net have slowed 
enough for him to be beaten for pace during the first two sets, when he could 
scarcely hit a volley of note.

Sampras's mid-match recovery will give his many admirers hope that he may yet 
win an eighth Wimbledon title this year, having lost in the fourth round to 
Switzerland's Roger Federer last time, but his days continue to look numbered. 
"There has never been any doubt in my mind about carrying on," said Sampras 
defensively but this may have been his last Australian Open.

In his own fourth-round match Federer, who had a match point, lost in five 
sets to Germany's Tommy Haas who, at No7, is the top seed left standing. He 
next plays Chile's Marcelo Rios, a beaten finalist here in 1998, for a place in 
the semi-finals, while Safin is up against South Africa's Wayne Ferreira, who 
defeated Spain's Albert Costa in his second successive five-set victory.

Safin holds a 2-0 career advantage over Ferreira, who reached the semi-finals 
of the Australian Open in 1992 as a 20-year-old but had not reached the last 
eight again. "I'm getting slower but I can last longer," said Ferreira. The 
same cannot be said of Sampras.
 