
The Screen Actors Guild awards provided a counterbalance to the much-protested 
lack of ethnic diversity the Oscar nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/oscars-awards-diversity-crisis-african-american>
 on Saturday as the actors union honoured four black actors: Idris Elba, who 
won two awards, Viola Davis, Uzo Aduba and Queen Latifah.

“Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to diverse TV,” said Elba, presenting an award 
after Davis’s win. The British actor won outstanding performance by a male 
actor in a supporting role forBeasts of No Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/beasts-of-no-nation-review-brutal-epic-opens-awards-season-in-style>
, and outstanding performance by a male actor in a TV movie or miniseries for 
Luther. Controversially, he has been overlooked entirely for the Oscars.

The top award went to Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/spotlight-review-catholic-church-called-to-account-over-child-abuse>
 for outstanding performance by a cast in a motion picture, about the Boston 
Globe’s expose of a network of paedophile priests. Michael Keaton dedicated the 
award to “the disenfranchised everywhere, for every Flint, Michigan in the 
world, for the disadvantaged and the powerless”. He added: “There’s fair and 
there’s unfair and I’m always going to vote for the good guys.”

However, the film’s rival for the best picture Oscar, The Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/the-big-short-review-steve-carell-ryan-gosling-2008-financial-crisis>
, is still the hot favourite, as itwon the Producers Guild award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/the-big-short-oscars-frontrunner-producers-guild-of-america-zanuck-award>
 – a reliable bellwether for the top prize at the Academy awards.

It was also a good night for British actors, with Downton Abbey winning 
outstanding performance by an ensemble in a drama series. Meanwhile Australians 
Ruby Rose and Yael Stone won as part of theOrange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black> ensemble, 
and Mad Max: Fury Road took home best performance by a stunt ensemble.

Leonardo DiCaprio’s trajectory to his first Oscar looks unassailable as the 
actor picked up the outstanding performance by a male actor in a leading role 
forThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/the-revenant-review-gut-churningly-brutal-beautiful-storytelling>
, to add to the Golden Globe he won earlier this month. On the red carpet, 
DiCaprio described the film as “epic arthouse” and said that it was the kind of 
film he’d like to make more of – despite a gruelling shoot that saw the actor 
eating raw bison liver, an incident mocked by Amy Poehler and Tina Fey when 
presenting the lifetime achievement award to Carol Burnett.

“So you slept in a horse, and you ate bison liver, big whoop,” said Poehler. 
“Carol would have slept in that horse, worn it, done a song and a dance and 
made a much funnier face after eating something very disgusting.”

The TV awards saw streaming sites dominate, with Netflix’s Orange is the New 
Black taking two awards and Jeffrey Tambor taking outstanding performance by a 
male actor in a comedy series for his lead role as a transgender woman in 
Amazon’sTransparent <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent>. 
Tambor dedicated his award to the transgender people who don’t have the wealth 
and privileges of his character, “for their operations, for their medicines, 
for their freedom”.

Winning outstanding performance by a female actor in a drama series, Davis 
gave arguably the most stirring speech of the night, saying: “People are always 
saying, ‘Wow, Annalise is an antihero. Don’t you worry she’s not likable? Don’t 
you worry that she’s not a mentor?’ And I always think: ‘Why do I have to be a 
hero? Why do you have to like me? Why do I have to be a mentor?’ My job as an 
actor is to create a human being to the best of my ability. Flawed, messy, 
maybe not always likable. Maybe not cute. But it is my job and I do it to the 
best of my ability and I get so much joy out of being an actor.”

Meanwhile, Alicia Vikander, who won outstanding performance by a female actor 
in a supporting role forThe Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-danish-girl>, thanked the trans community 
in her tearful acceptance speech, another indication of the respect for 
diversity that set this ceremony apart from the Oscars.
 