
Major literary names including Salman Rushdie, Art Spiegelman and Mario Vargas 
Llosa <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mario-vargas-llosa> are protesting the 
planned $300m restructuring of the iconic Fifth Avenue branch of the New York 
Public Library, saying it is "a misplaced use of funds in a time of great 
scarcity".

A letter signed by more than 700 writers 
<http://www.nypl.org/yourlibrary/42-street>, academics and others was sent to 
the library yesterday, criticising plans to add a collection of books for 
lending to the reference library currently housed on Fifth Avenue and 42nd 
Street. The proposal includes moving the collections from two other branches to 
Fifth Avenue, adding more computers, more space and potentially a cafe.Up to 
three million books <http://www.nypl.org/yourlibrary/faq> could also be removed 
from the library to a storage facility.

"NYPL will lose its standing as a premier research institution (second only to 
the Library of Congress in the US) – a destination for international as well as 
American scholars – and become a busy social centre where focused research is 
no longer the primary goal," say thesignatories 
<http://permalink.gmane.org/gmane.education.libraries.autocat/45626>, who also 
includeJonathan Lethem 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/05/09/cultural-heavyweights-let-public-library-know-they-dont-like-planned-revamp/>
. "One of the claims made about the [plan] is that it will 'democratise' the 
NYPL, but that seems to be a misunderstanding of what that word means. The NYPL 
is already among the most democratic institutions of its kind. Anyone can use 
it; no credentials are needed to gain entry. More space, more computers, a 
cafe, and a lending library will not improve an already democratic institution."

Others disagree: an editorial in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/09/opinion/a-library-for-the-future.html?_r=2&ref=opinion>
 called the plans "both necessary and forward-thinking in this digital era", 
and said that "though some library lovers want nothing to change, this plan 
could revitalise the library and make it as much a resource for the public as 
it is a research haven for writers and scholars".

Designed by the architect Norman Foster, the renovation of the building on 
42nd Street is scheduled to begin in 2013, with thereopening estimated to take 
place in 2017-8 <http://www.nypl.org/yourlibrary/timeline>. Officials say the 
new library, which would be open until 11pm, will be visited by "millions more 
users", and that this "enlivened, democratic hub of learning and creativity 
would be a symbol of rebirth".

New York Public Library President Anthony Marx said his "absolute priority" 
was "to preserve the integrity of the library and its collections, as well as 
the unparalleled quality of the services we offer" in a piece for the 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/the-new-york-public-library/nypl-embraces-the-future_b_1415156.html>
.

"For the first time in more than three decades, the 42nd Street library will 
house a major browsable circulating collection in addition to its superb 
research collections. The formula is simple: more readers, plus all the books, 
materials, and services they need, will infuse the building with even more 
intellectual and creative vitality," he wrote. "Some have shared concerns that 
this will compromise our commitment to research. We believe instead that the 
circulating library will complement and reinforce research, bringing even more 
readers into the building who will be able to more easily explore the unique 
research-level collections. Researchers, in turn, will be able to take 
advantage of the circulating collection."
 