
Sam Allardyce is poised to formalise his return to football at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> over the next 24 hours 
after his ill-fated 67-day stint as England manager, as the struggling Premier 
League club seek to make a swift appointment following the sacking of Alan 
Pardew.

Palace dismissed Pardew on Thursday after almost two years in charge with the 
team having lost eight of their past 10 league games, and 22 over the calendar 
year, to slump to within a point of the relegation zone.Allardyce departed his 
position with the Football Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 in September after one match having been filmed discussing FA rules on 
third-party ownership by undercover reporters. The 62-year-old’s representative 
was holding talks with Palace’s chairman, Steve Parish, on Thursday evening.

Some Crystal Palace fans will be alarmed by impending arrival of Sam Allardyce 
| Ed Aarons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/22/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-survival-fan-alarm>
It is understood agreement has been reached in principle on a contract set to 
run to 2019, with a break clause inserted after 18 months. The 62-year-old had 
made clear his desire to return to club management. Although Pardew had 
anticipated overseeing Palace’s game at Watford on Boxing Day, the hierarchy 
appear to have sacked him for fear that they might miss out on Allardyce, who 
had fielded tentative interest from clubs in China and agents claiming to work 
on behalf of Swansea City over the past few weeks. “I think [I will return] 
probably in the new year, if not before, depending on who approaches me,” he 
had told beIN Sports last week. “I don’t think I can leave it where it ended.”

The possibility of losing out on a manager who has never been relegated from 
the top flight appears to have prompted Palace, whose players had been granted 
a day off on Thursday, to act before the Christmas programme in the hope they 
can confirm the hiring of Allardyce as a replacement. The American major 
shareholders, David Blitzer and Josh Harris, whoeach purchased an 18% stake in 
the club a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/18/crystal-palace-us-investment-josh-harris>
, had grown increasingly alarmed at the team’s slump in form, which was 
threatening their considerable investment, and had been made aware of 
Allardyce’s credentials some time ago.

The Knowledge archive Christmas Special: given the sack on 25 December?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/the-knowledge-archive-christmas-special-given-the-sack-on-25-december>
Indeed, it is understood they had been sent a dossier offering detailed 
analysis of the club’s squad, with assessments of each player, towards the end 
of last month, while Palace were embroiled in a six-match losing streak that 
culminated ina calamitous 5-4 defeat at Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 on 26 November. Allardyce had questioned the team’s fitness and also indicated 
what he feels would need to be done in the January transfer window, when Palace 
had hoped to sign the Leeds left-back Charlie Taylor, to instigate a revival. 
He would seek to bring in his own backroom staff, including Sammy Lee as an 
assistant and new fitness coaches and analysts, and the American co-owners were 
increasingly swayed.

Pardew, however, had retained the support of Parish until very recently and 
appeared to have bought himself some time by picking up four points from games 
with Southampton and Hull City, for all that the revival was choked by losses 
to Manchester United and Chelsea last week. His in-game decision-making had 
been called into question in the first of those defeats, but he had attended 
the club’s Christmas party at London’s Quaglinos restaurant on Tuesday, and was 
due to face the media before continuing preparations for the Watford game on 
Friday.

England furore will follow Sam Allardyce around but he is too good to be 
jobless | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/22/sam-allardyce-relegation-firefighter-crystal-palace-manager>
Instead he was summoned to a meeting at Palace’s office in Soho on Thursday 
morning and informed his time was up. “Relegation is so costly and I feel, with 
no blame attached, we got ourselves in a rut and need a change,” Parish told 
the BBC. “We hope a change will change things. We all bought into the decision 
to play a more expansive style of football. We all believed in it. That hasn’t 
worked. It’s no one’s fault. The players have been running their socks off for 
Alan, the spirit is good. But now we’re going to wind the dial back the other 
way.”

There had been support within the Palace hierarchy for Chris Coleman – no 
formal approach has been made to the Football Association of Wales – and Roy 
Hodgson and Roberto Mancini had also been mentioned. Yet Allardyce’s track 
record appears to have been key, particularly in convincing Harris and Blitzer, 
given his achievements in steering Bolton Wanderers and, more recently, West 
Ham United and Sunderland to Premier League survival.

Alan Pardew: ‘People ask about England but why would I leave Crystal Palace?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/alan-pardew-england-crystal-palace>
Although the FA is still waiting to conduct its own investigation into its 
former manager’s conduct during his brief tenure with the national side – the 
relevant evidence has yet to be passed over by the City of London Police, who 
have confirmed Allardyce is not the subject of a criminal investigation – there 
is nothing to prevent him taking up the reins of a club side again immediately. 
Allardyce would inherit arguably the strongest squad in Palace’s history, with 
money to add to his options next month, and a trip to Arsenal on New Year’s Day 
to follow that to Vicarage Road.

Pardew’s payoff is believed to be an initial £2.5m, but he will effectively be 
paid his basic salary up to a cap until he takes up another position. “I would 
just like to take the opportunity to thank everybody at Crystal Palace for 
their fantastic support,” he said in a statement. “In particular a big thanks 
to the players who gave me absolutely everything and Steve Parish and his 
board. Personally I have a lot of good feelings for this football club and am 
sad that my time there has ended. I feel that I have a special bond with the 
club and hope that hasn’t been affected.”

His assistant, Keith Millen, is expected to take training on Friday and may 
yet be placed in caretaker charge for a fourth time at the club for next week’s 
fixture at Vicarage Road.
 