
Sam Allardyce says he has enough to worry about with his own injury-hit West 
Ham United side rather than wonder what Tottenham Hotspur might doafter the 
sacking of André Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/tottenham-sack-andre-villas-boas>
, before Wednesday's Capital One Cup quarter-final.

Tim Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/andre-villas-boas-tottenham-sack-tim-sherwood>
 has been placed in interim charge at White Hart Lane after the north London 
club sacked the Portuguese coach on Monday.

The former Spurs player and manager Glenn Hoddle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/17/glenn-hoddle-return-tottenham-manager-andre-villas-boas>
, the Russia coach,Fabio Capello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/football-transfer-rumours>, 
and Southampton'sMauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/nov/22/mauricio-pochettino-southampton-espanyol>
 have emerged as contenders for the job.

However, with his own squad hit by injuries – including to the England forward 
Andy Carroll – the captain, Kevin Nolan, suspended and the team struggling for 
goals to pull them clear of trouble in the Premier League, Allardyce is not 
about to lose any sleep over goings-on off the pitch for his team's next 
opponents.

"I have enough of my own problems with injuries and suspensions with games 
coming up rapidly to have too much concern about Tottenham other than what team 
I am going to play, how we are going to play and what we can do to combat them 
and get through to the semi-finals," Allardyce said.

"They had a very, very poor result against Liverpool and that ultimately 
resulted in them removingAndré Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas>, which was a surprise 
to me.

"But whatever the situation is at Spurs, from our point of view they have got 
an excellent squad. So whatever team they turn out against us on Wednesday 
night is always going to be an exceptionally difficult game for us."

Allardyce added: "This is a less pressured game than has fallen upon us 
recently in the Premier League, so we have got to go out and give it all we 
have got. It is a one-off tie, so could be the end of your cup competition or 
you go to the exciting semi-finals in the new year. Hopefully our players will 
come out and give their all."

Villas-Boas follows Paolo Di Canio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/22/paolo-di-canio-sunderland-sacked>
,Ian Holloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/oct/23/ian-holloway-crystal-palace-resigned>
,Martin Jol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/01/fulham-part-company-with-martin-jol-manager>
 andSteve Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/15/steve-clarke-west-bromwich-sacked-cardiff>
 in getting the sack this season.

Given the huge financial rewards for success in the Premier League after the 
new broadcast deals, Allardyce is not shocked any more.

"The money is so big that the fear of losing that status of being in the 
Premier League and losing that revenue is so big now that it causes lots of 
thinking by owners of football clubs to try and make sure they continue with 
that type of revenue," he said.

"For Tottenham, it is probably more about budgeting for Champions League 
football and what that brings on top of what they have spent.

"The removal of managers at this level is probably the highest it has been in 
the entirety of the Premier League.

"You have to be well aware of that when you step through the door and sit 
behind the desk, it is all about winning and making sure your team lives up to 
the reality of where it should be with what is spent and the quality of players 
you have."

The club's co-owner David Sullivan admits there is "deep concern" over their 
position in the league table, just a point above the relegation zone, but has 
faith Allardyce remains "the man for the job".

The Hammers' manager, 59, remains ever pragmatic. "My particular situation 
will ease and will get better as long as we get our injured players fit, and 
our communication between the board of directors and myself with everyone at 
the club is clear and precise," he said.

"I am not saying that it wouldn't happen, but we are supportive in terms of 
trying to do something in January to help the players and try to bring back the 
injured players to get the squad back to where it was at the start of the 
season, which even if it didn't include Andy Carroll was a very good squad."
 