
"My books Soldier Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781447220053/soldier-dog>
 and A Horse Called Hero are about animals in war and were inspired by true 
accounts of animal endeavour during the first and second world wars. I am not a 
historian but I do love researching; the diaries and manuscripts and private 
letters are for me the things that make the subject come alive. Stories with an 
element of truth in them are particularly wonderful to write and seem to engage 
children more than others. The story of Solider Dog, for example, is drawn from 
the lives of two first world war messenger dogs."

Here are some of my favourite war-time stories:

1. The Silver Sword by Ian Seraillier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780099439493/the-silver-sword>

This book has never gone out of print and was certainly one of the most 
memorable reading experiences of my childhood. Ian Serailier depicts the 
delinquency of war frankly and openly in this story of a family torn apart, of 
children fending for themselves amidst the desolate rubble of a bombed out 
Warsaw, of how they care for one another and together discover the clue that 
will lead to them finding their parents.

2. The Dolphin Crossing by Jill Paton Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780140366242/the-dolphin-crossing>

One of my favourite books ever, Jjll Paton Walsh depicts life at home during 
the Second World War and the events of Dunkirk. Two boys learn that the British 
Army is stranded on the beach at Dunkirk and set out in a little boat and with 
which they valiantly ferry men from the beach to the big naval vessels as 
German machine guns strafe their brow. Great adventure, Concise and tough, this 
is a book that is as enjoyable for adults as it is for children.

3. The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas by John Boyne  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781849920438/the-boy-in-the-striped-pyjamas>

A terrific story from the other side, about the son of an Auschwitz prison 
commandant. Vivid, shocking and disturbing, this powerful, unsettling book is a 
sparse and elegant fable written from the point of view of the nine year old 
Bruno. Isolated and bored in his new home, he is told by his Father that the 
people he can see on the other side of a wire fence are not really people. 
Through Bruno's eyes we come to understand both man's capacity for inhumanity 
and for friendship.

4. I am David by Ann Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780435123710/i-am-david>

Short, intense, poetic and heart-stirring, the story is told as simply as a 
fable. It is an atmospheric, thought-provoking read, which has a strong impact 
on everyone who reads it.

5. The Mozart Question by Michael Morpugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781406306484/the-mozart-question>

Part metaphor, part memoir, this is a novella with a lot of depth to it that 
works as well for adult readers as it does for children. It has illustrations, 
yet has the feel of an adult book, opening as it does with a journalist 
interviewing a violinist, but turning then to the boyhood of the violinist and 
the terrible things he has endured. This is a quiet, focused and beautiful 
story of secrets, music and hope, of the next generation's struggle to discover 
and understand what happened in the past. It has a wonderful, upbeat ending. I 
have enjoyed this more almost than any other Morpugo book.

6. Carrie's War by Nina Bawden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141333304/carries-war?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>

Superb account of an evacuee child during the second world war. Nina Bawden's 
best-known book is a great read, and a modern classic, a compelling coming of 
age adventure that is both literary and historical. A book to return to again 
and again.

7. I am the Great Horse by Katherine Roberts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781905294275/i-am-the-great-horse>

An honest and unsparing account of the battles of Alexander the Great. You 
cannot help but love this book â€“ which is narrated through the eyes of 
Alexander's horse, Bucephalus. Stunning, well-researched and moving.

8. The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780241952436/the-diary-of-a-young-girl>

A remarkable book and a moving testament to the strength of the human spirit. 
Anne's innocence, honesty and courage are luminous and heart-breaking. This 
book is an example to every child, everywhere, of the power of simple, honest 
writing.

9. Biggles Learns to Fly by WE Johns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781849419703/biggles-learns-to-fly>

WE Johns is clear that war is a dreadful business in this pacy adventure story 
of the courage and camaraderie of fighter pilots in the first world war.

10. The Machine Gunners by Robert Westall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780330397858/the-machine-gunners>

Another book set on the home front and one that I remember vividly from 
childhood. Full of wonderful characterisation and fine storytelling, this was 
Westall's first published book and it won him the Carnegie medal. With no 
thought of publication, he wrote in exercise books, long hand, for his son 
Christopher, who was then 12, and read it aloud to him, to show him how things 
had been for himself when he was 12, in the second world war.
 