
The makers of the Sandy Hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newtown-shooting> shooting documentary 
Newtown have joined a boycott of the cinema chain Cinemark over the latter’s 
treatment of the victims of the2012 Aurora shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aurora-shooting>.

According to Deadline, 
<http://deadline.com/2016/10/newtown-documentary-filmmakers-pull-film-from-cinemark-stand-with-aurora-theater-shooting-families-1201843747/>
 Newtown was due to screen in over 100 Cinemark theatres – including sites in 
Los Angeles, Detroit and Ann Arbor – as part of a one-night multi-cinema event 
on 2 November. (About 400 other cinemas were also booked.) However, Newtown’s 
directors, Kim Snyder and Maria Cuomo Cole, have withdrawn the film from 
Cinemark, saying in a statement: “Out of respect for the families of the Aurora 
victims and with solidarity for the community as a whole, our decision to 
remove the film from playing in all Cinemark theaters is unequivocal.”


Newtown review: film places focus on town stories over gun violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/30/newtown-review-sandy-hook-mass-shooting-sundance>
Cinemark, whose cinema in Aurora, Colorado, was the location of the mass 
shooting by James Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-murder-trial-verdict>
 during a screening of The Dark Knight Rises that resulted in the death of 12 
people, has suffered a backlash after it emerged that it was demanding legal 
fees of more than $700,000 (£575,000) from plaintiffs who had sued the company 
for not keeping its customers safe.Calls for a boycott arose, with the hashtag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/01/cinemark-requests-legal-fees-victims-2012-shooting-aurora-colorado-the-dark-knight-rises>
#BoycottCinemark <https://twitter.com/hashtag/BoycottCinemark?src=hash>, after 
the legal action failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/01/cinemark-requests-legal-fees-victims-2012-shooting-aurora-colorado-the-dark-knight-rises>
 and the company was permitted by Colorado law to recover fees from the 
plaintiffs.

Sandy Phillips, whose daughter Jessica Ghawi was killed in Aurora, said she 
appreciated the Newton film-makers’ actions. “Cinemark really doesn’t get what 
they are up against. Gun violence victims stand united from coast to coast. We 
are a force, and we do not waiver. We thank the Newtown filmmakers and love our 
Sandy Hook family.”

Newtown, which was described by the Guardian’s Lanre Bakare as “a shocking and 
compelling piece of work”, is a documentary aboutthe mass shooting in 2012 at 
Sandy Hook elementary school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newtown-shooting> in Connecticut in which 
20 children aged between 6 and 7 were shot dead as well as six staff members.
 