
Newtown, a documentary about the Sandy Hook school shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/16/sandy-hook-classroom-massacre> 
in Connecticut, hsa been shown at Cinemark movie theatres despite its makers 
attempting to withdraw it.

Kim Snyder and Maria Cuomo Cole had attempted to block the chain from showing 
the film in solidarity with the victims of the Aurora cinema shooting in 2012, 
whereJames Holmes killed 12 people during a screening of The Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/16/aurora-shooting-james-holmes-murder-trial-verdict>
.

Newtown review: film places focus on town stories over gun violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/30/newtown-review-sandy-hook-mass-shooting-sundance>
Cinemark attracted criticism for demanding more than $700,000 (£575,000) in 
legal fees from victims and their families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/28/sandy-hook-film-makers-join-cinemark-boycott-over-aurora-shooting>
, who had unsuccessfully sued it for not keeping its patrons safe. Colorado law 
allows the winning side in a court case to claim legal fees from the loser.

Cinemark argued that it could not have foreseen the attack and that no 
reasonable security measures would have stopped Holmes, whowas sentenced to 
life in prison without parole in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/26/colorado-theater-shooter-james-holmes-12-life-sentences>
.

Cinemark’s attempt to reclaim court costs led to calls for a boycott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/01/cinemark-requests-legal-fees-victims-2012-shooting-aurora-colorado-the-dark-knight-rises>
, and led Snyder and Cole to attempt to withdraw their film from their 
theatres. They released a statement that said: “Out of respect for the families 
of the Aurora victims and with solidarity for the community as a whole, our 
decision to remove the film from playing in all Cinemark theatres is 
unequivocal.”

However, according to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/11/newtown-documentary-cinemark-battle-1201847312/>, 
the film-makers tried to negotiate with Cinemark but are beholden to their 
contract, meaning the screenings went ahead on 2 November. Tickets had been 
sold in advance and the film had been advertised for weeks.

Deadline reports that Snyder and Cole requested that Cinemark donate profits 
from the screenings to anti-gun violence charities and victims’ groups, but it 
had not been set up as a non-profit event.

The makers of Newtown declined to comment, while Cinemark did not respond to 
the Guardian’s request.
 