
Two controversial comedians will be joining forces as Sarah Silverman joins 
Seth MacFarlane's upcoming western comedy,A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2557490/>, according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/sarah-silverman-talks-play-prostitute-429330>
.

Silverman will play a prostitute who refuses to sleep with her husband 
(Giovanni Ribisi) for religious reasons, despite performing a variety of lewd 
acts for her clients. MacFarlane, who co-wrote the script, will also be 
directing and starring in the film, which is set for production this spring. He 
will play a yellow-bellied chicken farmer who is forced to corral his courage 
when an outlaw terrorises his town.

Macfarlane <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/seth-macfarlane>, whose 
directorial debutTed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148370/ted> 
grossed $545.8m (Â£361.3m) worldwide, recently received criticism for his 
material at this year's Oscars ceremony. He used his stint as host to make 
jokes on female nudity, domestic violence and Jews in Hollywood. His musical 
segment, entitled We Saw Your Boobs, sparked outrage. Oscars producers defended 
the host,describing his style as "irreverent" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/18/oscars-producers-defend-seth-macfarlane>
.

Silverman is widely known for her standup work, which saw her perform last 
month at London's Bloomsbury theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/11/sarah-silverman-review>. The 
comedian recently voiced a leading role in Walt Disney Animation's Wreck-It 
Ralph.

A Million Ways to Die already boasts a cast including Charlize Theron, Liam 
Neeson and Amanda Seyfried.
 