
In Enter the Void, Gaspar Noé shows us things we've never seen before, 
beginning with opening credits of a rare intensity: big throbbing letters in 
English and Japanese, pulsating so rapidly they're almost reduced to a stream 
of subliminal imagery. It's dazzlingly modern and in-your-face, even though 
it's essentially just a bunch of different typefaces. Noé has taken an 
intrinsically old-fashioned approach to credits and given it the ultimate 
makeover.

A lot of today's movies (particularly the more self-important "event" 
releases) dispense with opening credits altogether, which is a shame, because 
there's nothing like an exhilarating launchpad to give a film lift-off. Until 
the 1950s, the usual method was to present names and titles on cards, or 
against an unmoving backdrop, though prestige productions sometimes tinkered 
with the format: the titles of Gone With the Wind, for example, play out over 
tranquil vistas of fields, flowers and cotton-picking slaves. More common were 
credits like the ones in Casablanca, rolling out against a static map of Africa.

It was Otto Preminger who changed things by hiring Saul Bass to pep up the 
credits of Carmen Jones in 1954 with an animated flaming rose. The following 
year, Bass's credit sequence for The Man With the Golden Arm played with a 
strong graphic image – white lines rearranging themselves into a junkie's 
twisted arm – which was carried over into the film's publicity, prefiguring the 
corporate identity approach of modern film advertising, in which everything 
from Twilight to The A-Team has its own special logo.

Bass, who approached his commissions in the spirit of a problem-solving 
graphic designer, continued to take his lines for a walk forAlfred Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> at the starts of North by 
Northwest and Psycho, with the lines morphing into a vortex of whirling spirals 
in the sublime opening credits of Vertigo. Bass's ascetic strategy fell out of 
favour in the 60s, when animated sequences went a bit bananas. The witty 
animation of The Pink Panther and Maurice Binder's writhing Bond girls were in 
the vanguard of a riot of brashly exciting opening sequences, often virtually 
mini-films in their own right.

My favourite credits of the 1960s include the eight-minute music-free sequence 
at the start of Once Upon a Time in the West, which riffs on exaggerated sound 
effects and fun with typography at a railroad stakeout, and Richard Williams's 
animated Punch cartoons, fusing historical exposition and political satire with 
breathtaking economy, for Tony Richardson's underrated The Charge of the Light 
Brigade. And Binder fans should check out his less familiar but terrific 
opening credits for Billion Dollar Brain. Jean-Luc Godard, meanwhile, had the 
opening credits to Le Mépris read out loud, a ploy repeated by François 
Truffaut in Fahrenheit 451, but one that never caught on in the mainstream, 
making it still seem pretty avant garde today.

Bass, like another Hitchcock collaborator Bernard Herrmann, made a comeback 
courtesy of the movie brats in the 1970s, and went out with a bang – his last 
completed credits sequence (with his wife, Elaine) was Robert De Niro blasted 
by a car bomb through a raging inferno of Las Vegas neon in Casino. "When his 
work comes on the screen," said Scorsese, "the movie itself truly begins." Or 
ends, since the sequence is so stunning it casts the rest of the film into the 
shade. The same goes for Watchmen's history of modern America with added 
superheroes, and Zombieland's super-slo-mo list of rules.

Kyle Cooper's innovatory titles for Seven sparked a trend for 
scritchy-scratchy credits that look as though they were cobbled together by 
maniacs with OCD (my favourite rip-off of this technique is the House on 
Haunted Hill remake). Cooper's also at the forefront of titles trends such as 
the story-so-far credits of the franchise sequel (Spider-Man III, lated copied 
by Final Destination). Also notable is Brian de Palma nearly spoiling half the 
plot of Mission: Impossible in the opening credits (and in the trailer for 
Femme Fatale, but hailed as radical only when Godard recycled it for his Film 
Socialisme).

So what's next for opening credits? Will Enter the Void trigger a trend for 
flashing typography? Will Woody Allen continue to use his trademark plain 
Windsor font? And is the Pope Catholic?
 