
Being called Pizza Face and having your complexion likened to a dot-to-dot 
puzzle is traumatising for teenagers, and wishing for the day they grow out of 
it has become an adolescent pastime. So having to endure the agony of acne in 
adulthood is a particularly heavy cross to bear.

But it's a growing problem. Adult acne - which now affects 20% of adults in 
the UK - is especially on the rise among high-flying women. According to theAcne
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> Support Group, 5% of them get their 
first serious attack in their 30s or 40s. The spotty skin of Cameron Diaz, 
Britney Spears and Victoria Beckham, among others, is testament to the findings.

And it's not just a superficial problem. The psychological effects of adult 
acne can include a severe lack of self-esteem, social isolation, increased 
unemployment and even, in the most vulnerable sufferers, thoughts of suicide.

But why are more and more grown-ups being brought down by the problem? "We 
don't know, to be absolutely honest with you," confesses Professor Keith 
Holland of the department of microbiology at Leeds University. "It hasn't been 
resolved, but a large group of scientists are absolutely fascinated by it. If 
we could solve that, we could solve a lot of unanswered questions about acne. 
There's no rational explanation that everyone agrees with."

Acne at any age is triggered by hormones rather than by eating fried food, 
chocolate, smoking or a lack of hygiene as folklore would have it. It is caused 
by an abnormal response of the skin to normal levels of androgens, male 
hormones found in men and women, which control how much oil, or sebum, is 
produced from the sebaceous glands. These glands occur mainly on the face, back 
and chest, which are therefore the main sites where acne appears.

One of the possible reasons that adults experience the onset of acne - even if 
they were clear-skinned throughout their teens - is stress.

"My personal view is that stress is an important factor in acne," says 
Professor Holland. "We always see people's grades of acne worsen in May, which 
seems to be to do with exam time."

Stress exacerbates the problem by triggering the body's adrenal glands to 
become overactive. This in turn boosts sebum production.

Hormones are also the culprits when it comes to the onset of acne during 
pregnancy, because of polycystic ovary syndrome and in women who have recently 
stopped taking the contraceptive pill.

Other causes include alcohol and drug consumption, which can reduce the 
capability of the immune system and make adults vulnerable to spots, while 
cosmetics have also been shown to clog pores. Adult acne sufferers often get 
depressed, wondering if teenage angst has come back to taunt them. But two new 
treatments have excited dermatologists and brought a chink of hope.

The first comes from Dr Tony Chu, consultant dermatologist at the Hammersmith 
hospital and president of the Acne Support Group. He used single five-minute 
doses of laser treatment on 31 men and women with mild to moderate acne who had 
failed to respond to conventional drugs, and compared the results with a 
control group of 10 people given a sham treatment. After 12 weeks, 18 patients 
had lost at least half their spots and 10 had lost them altogether.

Dr Chu explains the findings by suggesting that the wavelength of light kills 
the bacteria, having a collagen-producing effect. In other words, the energy of 
the light targets blood vessels in the skin and fools them into thinking there 
has been a wound. The collagen then produces a wound-healing response.

Why this turns off the acne "switch" is still unclear, but Chu believes that 
the laser treatment effects a biological change in the reactivity of the skin.

It's a significant breakthrough. But Chu acknowledges that more work and 
larger studies are needed to confirm the findings. "It isn't a cure," he says. 
"What it does is manage and control acne."

At Leeds University, frustration at the ineffectiveness of antibiotics in the 
treatment of acne has led to another new approach. Professor Holland explains: 
"The reason people like us are looking for other treatments is the failure of 
antibiotic treatments.

"Treatment times for antibiotics are very, very long - between 12 weeks to two 
years - and that promotes resistance. Think about it - treatment for an 
infection is usually only seven days.

"We're working on something at the moment which we believe will come as a 
breakthrough. We have identified a virus that attracts the organisms associated 
with the inflammatory side of acne. A virus has been found on human skin which 
kills the organism, so instead of antibiotics we may be able to use viruses to 
help get rid of the disease. However, I have to say that it's early days yet."

These treatments may help in the future. But that won't help if you're 
desperately trying to get rid of the sore, scarlet volcanoes that are 
threatening to erupt just in time for Saturday night's big party.

Many beauticians offer "extraction", which is salon-speak for easing out 
blackheads in a haze of steam and expensive lotions.

But even if nothing else works, pick spots at your peril. Trying to gouge out 
your blackheads will force the contents deep into the skin rather than on to 
the surface and can lead to scarring or cysts. By adulthood, most acne 
sufferers have learned that squeezing a pore plugged by a blackhead only leaves 
the way open for another.

If you feel that you absolutely must extract your blackheads, invest in a 
comedone spoon or a blackhead expressor - a tiny device with a needle-eye end 
that inflicts fewer traumas on skin than eager fingers and is available from 
most chemists and the Body Shop.

Still, few of us can resist the urge to pop, and that little flash of 
satisfaction on the successful expulsion of an intruder is perhaps one of 
acne's few pleasures. So if you are going to do it, at least make sure you do 
it properly. According to the Acne Support Group, the best way to proceed is 
this: first wash your hands, then puncture the surface of the pustule with a 
sterilized needle, before gently squeezing out the pus. But know when to stop - 
if you see blood, you may be left with a scar.

Â· Acne Support Group: Alison Dudley, PO Box 9, Newquay, TR9 6WG. Tel (0870) 
870 2263. Website:www.stopspots.org <http://www.stopspots.org>
 