
Finally: the Android-running G1 phone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2008/sep/22/google.mobilephones> is let 
loose. It's set to be the first commercial application of Google's Android 
phone operating system - the one built by Andy Rubin and friends (makers of the 
Danger Sidekick, popular in the US and anonymous in Britain).

Richard Wray, our telecoms editor, is in New York for the launch - where Larry 
Page and Sergey Brin turned upon rollerskates (no joke) - and he should have 
some more information from on the ground soon. In the meantime, however, the 
rest of us are poring over the coverage from thegadget <http://www.gizmodo.com> 
blogs <http://www.engadget.com> and commentators to try and get a feel for 
things.

What to say? The pictures suggest it looks pretty much like any HTC smartphone 
of recent years, with a large screen, smattering of buttons on the front and a 
slide-out Qwerty keypad. For American consumers, at least, it's being heavily 
subsidised - and still costs $179. Plenty of people have told me to dampen down 
expectations since, after all, it's only the first version (I hope that doesn't 
mean it'llstill be in beta in four years 
<http://www.siliconvalleywatcher.com/mt/archives/2008/09/four_years_late.php>).

Charles Arthur adds: if you want a quick comparison chart of the two, then 
have a look atTechnologier's page 
<http://technologizer.com/2008/09/23/tmobile-g1-vs-iphone/>, which is as good a 
first-pass weighing up as you'll see until we do it. The quick reaction: G1 has 
better phone, choice of keyboard (touch/key), is cheaper, weighs more, comes 
optionally in brown (yuk), and has perhaps a significantly shorter standby 
(though these things are always fibs to some extent.)

But here may be the killer difference: the G1 has cut and paste. Oh noes!

Update: Joe Wilcox, in God phone meets the devil 
<http://blogs.eweek.com/applewatch/content/iphone/god_phone_meets_the_devil.html>
, says that "The phone offers single sign-on to Google's plethora of online 
services, including Calendar, Contacts, Gmail, Google Talk, Maps Street View 
and YouTube. Suddenly, the hodgepodge plethora of Google applications and 
services have a single point of connection and synchronization. If this 
mechanism works, and well, the G1 and other Android-based phones will be 
powerful data and telephony devices out of the box."

And he adds: "As I've blogged before, sync is the killer application for the 
connected world. Last year I warned: "IfGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> gets synchronization right 
before Microsoft, it's game over." Ditto to Apple. Google's sync magic requires 
no PC." Apple, feel warned.
 