
She may have been the victim of casual sexism from her fellow castmembers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/29/black-widow-scarlett-johansson-sexism-avengers-jeremy-renner-chris-evans>
, andgood luck trying to find examples of Black Widow merchandise in Toys ‘R’ Us
 <http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/04/black-widow-avengers-sexist>. But 
Scarlett Johansson was at least paid an equivalent wage to her male 
counterparts in The Avengers movies, it has emerged.

Hollywood bible Variety, which this week published an edition 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/hollywood-gender-pay-gap-inequality-1201636553/>
 dedicated to exploring the issue of film industry sexism,said it had confirmed 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/scarlett-johansson-avengers-salary-chris-evans-chris-hemsworth-1201637789/>
 that studio Disney paid Johansson the same level of fee received by Chris 
Evans, who plays Captain America, and Chris Hemsworth (Thor) in both 2012’s The 
Avengers and this year’s Avengers: Age of Ultron.


The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
It is not clear how much the three made from the films, but Forbes magazine 
estimated Johansson’s earnings at $35m annually earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/21/jennifer-lawrence-best-paid-female-star-forbes>
. What is known is that Robert Downey Jr, who plays Iron Man, is the highest 
paid star of the blockbuster superhero saga after negotiating a better deal 
than his fellow cast members following the success of the Iron Man movies.
Downey made $80m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/04/robert-downey-jr-best-paid-actor-forbes-jackie-chan-amitabh-bachchan>
 from June 2014 to June 2015, making him the world’s best-paid film star.

Variety praised Disney for standing alone among Hollywood studios in its 
determination to tackle the equal pay issue. The studio has also been at the 
forefront of creating female-driven movies, including the $1.2bn animated 
musical fantasy Frozen, Angelina Jolie vehicle Maleficent and the upcoming 
Beauty and the Beast, starring Emma Watson.

Elsewhere in its equal pay edition, the magazine discussed film industry 
sexism with Oscar-winner Sandra Bullock,who revealed her disgust at the 
different treatment received by male and female stars 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/sandra-bullock-sexism-pay-gap-1201637694/> 
at high-profile events.

“I always make a joke: ‘Watch, we’re going to walk down the red carpet, I’m 
going to be asked about my dress and my hair while the man standing next to me 
will be asked about his performance and political issues,’” said Bullock. “Once 
we start shifting how we perceive women and stop thinking about them as ‘less 
than,’ the pay disparity will take care of itself. There’s a much bigger issue 
at hand. I’m glad Hollywood got caught.”

Meanwhile another Oscar-winner, Reese Witherspoon, told an audience at 
Glamour’s Women of the Year Awards in New York 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/reese-witherspoon-at-glamour-women-838691>
 that female-driven movies should no longer be considered loss leaders.

Sharon Stone: 'After Basic Instinct, no one wanted to pay me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/09/sharon-stone-after-basic-instinct-no-one-wanted-to-pay-me>
“Female-driven films work,” she said, pointing out that movies her production 
company Pacific Standard helped create, such as Gone Girl and Wild, have taken 
more than $420m. “Films with women at the centre are not a public service 
project, they are a big-time, bottom line-enhancing, money-making commodity.”

Witherspoon said her pet hate when reading prospective scripts was coming 
across the line: “In the time of crisis, the woman turns to the man and asks 
him, ‘What are we gonna do now?!’” She suggested the problem could be fixed by 
employing more female screenwriters, which is part of Pacific Standard’s remit.

“Have you ever met a woman in crisis who doesn’t know what to do?” she asked. 
“Why do people have prejudiced opinions against women who want to accomplish 
things? Why is that perceived as a negative? … Like [Legally Blonde’s] Elle 
Woods, I did not like to be underestimated.”

Sharon Stone became the latest actor to publicly attack the gender pay gap in 
Hollywood earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/09/sharon-stone-after-basic-instinct-no-one-wanted-to-pay-me>
, revealing that she struggled to receive decent remuneration after erotic 
thriller Basic Instinct catapulted her to fame in 1992. Last month, Jennifer 
Lawrence added her voice to the chorus lobbying for action, lamenting her 
failure to lobby for equal pay on the film American Hustle and expressing 
dismay over the language commonly used to describe female actors who are seen 
as forthright. Stars including Meryl Streep, Cate Blanchett,Emma Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/21/emma-thompson-sexism-in-acting-industry-is-worse-than-ever>
 and Charlize Theron have also spoken out this year to voice their disgust at 
film industry sexism. The issue was put firmly on the map in February after
Patricia Arquette called for “wage equality once and for all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
” in her Oscar acceptance speech.
 