
Scarlett Johansson has confirmed she will take the lead role in the live 
action American remake of classic Japanese anime Ghost in the Shell,according 
to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/scarlett-johansson-star-dreamworks-ghost-761118>
.

Johansson is likely to play a character based on the cyborg detective, Major 
Motoko Kusanagi, who plays a key part in the 1995 film and the comic book 
series it is based on. Kusanagi is team leader of a Japanese counter-terrorism 
organisation focused on cybercrime in a futuristic world, where a vast 
electronic network connects and permeates every aspect of life. However, it 
appears likely the US version will transfer the action to north America.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F02%2Funder-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-jonathan-glazer-clip&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F9%2F2%2F1378126442716%2FScarlett-Johansson-in-a-s-025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Under%20the%20Skin%3A%20world%20exclusive%20first%20look%20at%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20in%20Jonathan%20Glazer's%20new%20film&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F02%2Funder-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-jonathan-glazer-clip>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Under%20the%20Skin%3A%20world%20exclusive%20first%20look%20at%20Scarlett%20Johansson%20in%20Jonathan%20Glazer%27s%20new%20film&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fsep%2F02%2Funder-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-jonathan-glazer-clip&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F9%2F2%2F1378126442716%2FScarlett-Johansson-in-a-s-025.jpg>
 Under the Skin: watch Scarlett Johansson in Jonathan Glazer’s film 
Three anime films (one made-for-TV), an animated Japanese TV series and three 
video games have been based on the originalGhost in the Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghost-in-the-shell> comics. However, the new 
version will be the first English language, Hollywood-produced take.

Johansson was reportedly offered $10m to star in the long-gestating film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/17/casting-conch-scarlett-johansson-set-for-ghost-in-the-shell-remake>
, which will be directed by Snow White and the Huntsman’s Rupert Sanders from a 
script by The Reluctant Fundamentalist’s Bill Wheeler, in October. The 
impressive pay cheque recognises the US actor’s newfound status as an A-list 
action star following standout turns in Lucy and Marvel Studios’ Avengers 
series of superhero films.

With its vision of a vast electronic network to which every human can connect, 
Ghost in the Shell has been credited with influencing Hollywood movies such as 
The Matrix. The original manga’s depiction of a part-human, part-machine 
detective who questions her identity also echoes the themes of Ridley Scott’s 
earlier Blade Runner.
 