
Two men arrested in Amsterdam may have been conducting a dry run for a 
potential terrorist attack, US officials said today after a mobile phone taped 
to a bottle of medicine and a knife and boxcutters were found in one of the 
men's luggage.

US investigators are pursuing leads in three American cities, according to 
officials speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss the investigation.

The arrests come at a time of heightened alert just days before the ninth 
anniversary of the September 11, 2001 terror attacks in the US.

On Sunday, authorities found the suspicious items: a mobile phone taped to a 
medicine bottle, multiple mobile phones and watches taped together, and a knife 
and boxcutter in one of the men's checked luggage. The man and his luggage were 
headed to separate international destinations, which also raised concerns.

None of the items found on the men or in their luggage violated US security 
rules. But the items and the men's changing travel itinerary may have been a 
deliberate test of the US aviation security system to determine what would 
raise red flags.

Neither man was on any US terror watch lists, White House spokesman Robert 
Gibbs told CNN today.

A US law enforcement official identified the men as Ahmed Mohamed Nasser 
al-Soofi and Hezam al-Murisi. Soofi is of Yemeni descent, an official said.

The pair were arrested yesterday at Amsterdam's Schiphol airport after getting 
off a United Airlines flight from Chicago.

RTL television news broadcast video footage filmed on a passenger's mobile 
phone of armed law enforcement officers escorting two men off the plane, their 
hands bound behind their backs. The officers' weapons were holstered and there 
appeared to be no resistance.

They were being held on suspicion of conspiracy to commit acts of terror, but 
neither has been charged with any offence in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, the national prosecutor's 
office said. Under Dutch law, the men can be held without charges for up to six 
days. No charges have been filed against the men in the US, a law enforcement 
official said.

Soofi was questioned as he went through security in Birmingham, Alabama, on 
his way to Chicago, one of the officials said. He told the Transportation 
Security Administration authorities he was carrying a lot of cash. Screeners 
found $7,000 (Â£4,500) on him, but he was not breaking any law by carrying that 
much money.

Soofi was supposed to fly from Chicago to Washington Dulles airport in 
Virginia and then on to Dubai, one of the officials said. But when he got to 
Chicago, he changed his travel plans to take a direct flight to Amsterdam, 
while his luggage went on to Virginia.

On international flights, passengers and their luggage must be headed toward 
the same destination, according to US policy.

Murisi also changed his travel plans in Chicago to take a direct flight to 
Amsterdam, raising suspicion among US officials. Federal air marshals were on 
the flight from Chicago to Amsterdam, a law enforcement official said.

Homeland security spokeswoman Amy Kudwa said once officials found suspicious 
items in luggage associated with two passengers on Sunday night's flight, they 
notified the Dutch authorities.
 