
Holy looming planets, Batman! It has already been observed that Mike Cahill's 
Another Earth and Lars Von Trier's Melancholia share the evocative image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/16/poster-notes-another-earth>
 of another heavenly body in close proximity to Earth. For me, though, the most 
significant thing about this coincidence is that neither film would normally be 
classified as science fiction. And it's not as if either director is distancing 
himself from the term, the way Margaret Atwood seems to be. She's made 
increasingly baroque contortions to explain that what she writes is 
"speculative fiction" and not SF. (Though surely the term "speculative fiction" 
is tautological. Isn't all fiction speculative?)

There has long been a tendency for SF themes to bleed into the mainstream and 
non-SF genres. What isIt's a Wonderful Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36171/it-s-a-wonderful-life> if not a 
story set in a parallel universe? And we've come to expect a touch of SF in our 
action films; as far back as the 1960s, James Bond and other spy movies flirted 
with technology so farfetched it tipped over into futuristic, and it's rare for 
a Hollywood thriller now to pay much heed to the laws of physics. But more and 
more high-concept, big-budget action flicks – Limitless, The Adjustment Bureau, 
In Time are just three recent examples – are coming out of the closet as 
unabashedly SF, even though not one of them features what Atwood refers to as 
"talking squids in outer space".

These films are aimed at audiences who probably wouldn't object to talking 
squids, butI've written before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/15/memento-narrative-time-sci-fi> 
about the way chronological jiggling, time warps and parallel universes have 
infiltrated mainstream drama, romcoms and sitcoms. And "SF creep" into the 
mainstream and arthouse is on the rise, even if the term "science fiction" is 
only mentioned by critics disparagingly, as if the fact that the film under 
question refuses to classify itself as that makes it superior to the usual 
genre nonsense.

Take three other 2011 high-profile releases. Never Let Me Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137791/never-let-me-go> was sold as 
Brit-lit (tagline: "Based on the best selling novel"), whereas it was really 
The Island for People Who Don't Like Explosions, with Keira Knightley instead 
of Scarlett Johansson.Hanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141512/hanna> was sold as a junior 
Bourne Identity ("Adapt or die"), whereas it was essentially a junior Universal 
Soldier ("Robots run amok").Midnight in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141834/midnight-in-paris> was basically 
a time travel yarn, but was sold as a Woody Allen film, which is permissible 
since he's a genre unto himself and has already flirted with SF in Sleeper, 
Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex … and – in the most memorable 
bit of Stardust Memories – aliens. ("We enjoy your movies. Particularly the 
early, funny ones.")

It's tempting to dismiss such films as SF for People Who Don't Like Science 
Fiction, since mainstream pontifications on the genre still yield blinkered 
pronouncements from folk who wouldn't be caught dead at a Star Trek movie. 
Conversely, a lot of people who might have enjoyedMonsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/136970/monsters> were probably put off 
by it being marketed as a variation onDistrict 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131234/district-9> ("After six years, 
they're no longer aliens. They're residents") when it was really the sort of 
thing that plays better at Sundance than at a fantasy festival – a low-budget 
relationship movie that happened to have tentacled aliens as walk-on extras.

But it's more likely a symptom of the way boundaries between traditional 
genres are dissolving. So maybe it's time to redefine genres, or even nominate 
new ones. Since barely a week goes by without another set of actors doing 
give-me-my-Oscar-now acting in overwrought drama triggered by a traffic 
accident (Another Earth, Margaret, Rabbit Hole etc) I propose "roadkill" as a 
new genre. Remakes, sequels and prequels can be lumped together under 
"recycling". Then there's the "girls in fetishwear" genre typified bySucker 
Punch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/31/action-heroine-outfits-sucker-punch>
 andColombiana <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/01/hitwomen-movies>. 
This Year's Leslie Mann Movie would take care of all those bromances involving 
her husband, Judd Apatow. And we mustn't forget The Tom Cruise Running Very 
Fast film.
 