
Scientists have written an open letter to Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> politicians and the 
farmers’ lobby to highlight “the overwhelming scientific consensus” on the need 
for proposed tree-clearing laws likely to be voted on by state parliament this 
week.

The letter, written by the environmental science academics Martine Maron and 
Carla Catterall, suggests that opposition to the laws in the face of detailed 
cases of support by hundreds of scientific experts amounts to ignoring the 
science.

It was prompted by calls for evidence of “science-based support” for the 
Palaszczuk government’s proposed controls by AgForce, which has strongly 
campaigned against the changes.

Queensland land-clearing reforms could hinge on speaker's vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/queensland-land-clearing-reforms-could-hinge-on-speakers-vote>
The letter suggests AgForce has overlooked a consensus first shown in April by 
“26 independent senior Queensland scientists” in aparliamentary submission 
<http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/committees/AEC/2016/11-VegetationMangt/submissions/504.pdf>
 “clearly explaining the scientific basis for retaining native vegetation”.

“This group of scientists includes world leaders in diverse fields of 
environmental expertise – to ignore their carefully written expert opinion is 
to ignore the science,” the letter says.

The weight of scientific consensus in support of stronger controls across 
eastern Australia more broadly was further shown by a statement on clearing
endorsed by almost 500 experts 
<http://scboceania.org/policystatements/landclearing/> in July, it says.

“Many of these scientists collaborate closely with farmers who not only are 
keen to protect native vegetation but who sometimes also need to expend great 
effort to reverse problems caused by previous land clearing,” it says.

“The beneficial effects of this hard work (including tree planting) is 
reversed many times over by the recent native vegetation clearing in 
Queensland.”

The scientists’ letter says that “recent rates of clearing remnant native 
vegetation have been alarmingly high”.

“An increasing proportion of this is old-growth vegetation, including clearing 
of threatened ecosystems, and in the catchments that drain to the Great Barrier 
Reef,” it says.

“The resulting carbon emissions are a significant part of Australia’s 
emissions from all sectors.”

Queensland’s former tree-clearing controls from 2004 saw clearing rates drop 
from more than 500,000 hectares a year to just over 150,000 hectares in 2011.

The controls were instrumental in Australia meeting its Kyoto pledge on 
cutting carbon emissions.

Since the former Liberal National government relaxed clearing controls for 
“high-value agriculture” in 2012,the annual clearing rate has almost doubled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/08/queensland-tree-clearing-figures-spur-call-for-tighter-laws>
 to just under 300,000 hectares.

More than half this in 2014-15 occurred in Great Barrier Reef catchments, 
suggesting a challenge to Australia’s efforts to cut runoff to reef waters, a 
key part of Australia’s long-term conservation plan that persuaded Unesco not 
to list the natural wonder as “in danger”.

The state government puts emissions from clearing at 34m tonnes a year. The 
commonwealth put total national emissions in 2014 at around 550m tonnes.

Coalition split over intervention in Queensland land clearing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/coalition-split-over-intervention-in-queensland-land-clearing>
Excluding emissions from tree clearing, Queensland’s carbon pollution rose 
27.3% from 2000. But emissions overall dropped 4.8% in that time because 
tree-clearing rates fell between 2005 and 2011.

 The scientists’ letter accuses AgForce of “selectively misusing” data from an 
annual tree cover survey by the state science department to argue Queensland’s 
vegetation cover had recently increased.

Representatives of the same group of scientists gave further evidence in June 
that the survey reliably indicated “actual clearing but should not be used in 
attempts to estimate regrowth”, which could be grass, weeds or leaves on trees.

The letter noted that “early regrowth that does occur lacks the habitat values 
and carbon content possessed by remnant vegetation”.

The letter has been sent to MPs including independent parliamentary speaker 
Peter Wellington, who could cast the deciding vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/queensland-land-clearing-reforms-could-hinge-on-speakers-vote>
 on Labor’s bill.

“We hope that Agforce will consider the strong scientific case for limiting 
further land clearing and the consequences for future generations of not doing 
so,” it says.
 