
In an unprecedented politicisation of the most prestigious prize for popular 
science books, the winning author pledged to donate his Â£10,000 prize to the 
family of the late government scientistDavid Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-kelly>.

David Bodanis, who was awarded the Aventis science book prize last night, said 
he hoped his gesture would, "tell some people in England something about the 
importance of truth."

"Science is all about truth. There's one realm where a lot of people feel that 
truth hasn't come out and truth is known but it hasn't been acknowledged," he 
told the Guardian. Alluding to Dr Kelly's death following comments he made to a 
journalist about Iraq war intelligence Dr Bodanis said, "[Dr Kelly] was aware 
of what was really going on and the government lied and tried to feel they 
could suppress the truth. Events have clearly shown that they were wrong and he 
was right."

Dr Bodanis' book, "Electric Universe - How Electricity Switched on the Modern 
World" beat off competition from Collapse, a rare scientific take on the 
history of fallen societies, by Jared Diamond, a Pulitzer prize winner and 
evolutionary biologist, as well as Vivienne Parry's book The Truth About 
Hormones, and Parallel Worlds, by Michio Kaku, a theoretical physicist. 
Electric Universe had been rated second favourite by the bookies.

The story opens with the birth of the universe and takes the reader on a 
journey from the waters of the Atlantic to the streets of Hamburg during a 
second world war firestorm via the construction of electromagnets powerful 
enough to raise an ironmonger's anvil. Alongside Thomas Edison and Michael 
Faraday, who struggled against the British class system, there is a depiction 
of Samuel Morse, who, before inventing the telegraph, ran for mayor of New York 
on a platform of persecuting Catholics.

"It reads like a novel, with twists and turns that would make a fiction writer 
happy to be so inventive," said the broadcaster Nick Ross, who chaired the 
judging panel. "It's simply a very good read and if you have little or no 
interest in electricity, after reading this you will have."

Dr Bodanis said he was, "pleased and very pleasantly surprised" to have won. 
"I wanted to make electricity sort of come alive. I was struck by this eternal 
power, this force that was created over 13 billion years ago when the universe 
was young."

"Any science book must be good literature and good science," said geneticist 
Steve Jones at University College London, one of the judges. He said Dr Bodanis 
had tackled a daunting subject. "It seems like an enormous task but in a very 
short book David Bodanis succeeds triumphantly. It makes a very difficult 
subject simple."

Lord Martin Rees, president of the Royal Society, presented the prize to Dr 
Bodanis at the Royal Society last night. Previous winners have included Stephen 
Hawking, Stephen J Gould and Robert Kunzig. Notably absent from the list are 
Richard Dawkins and Richard Fortey.
 