
David Beckham and Vivienne Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vivienne-westwood> have become the latest 
in a growing list of celebrities to share their opinion on the independence 
debate with Scottish voters.

On Sunday, Westwood urged Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
to vote for independence, saying a yes vote would be "absolutely great".

"The future could be just amazing and Scotland would be very important and an 
influence on the world," the fashion designer said. "We just hope that Scotland 
can be a model for future hope and development where we have a people's 
democracy instead of only everything for profit and for business and for 
destruction."

Meanwhile, Beckham has added his voice to the campaign to keep the union, 
telling Scots: "We want to let you know how very much we value our relationship 
and friendship."

The ex-England captain said: "I took as much satisfaction in seeing Sir Chris 
Hoy or Andy Murray win gold as I did watching Jess Ennis and Mo Farah do the 
same in the Olympic Stadium.

"What unites us is much greater than what divides us. Let's stay together."

The Scottish singer Susan Boyle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/susan-boyle>
 also came out against independence on Sunday, saying you shouldn't break what 
is "basically working".

"I don't feel reassured that the change will in any way make our already great 
country better," she said. "We should not be wasting money on this change – we 
should be putting it into areas that need it the most."

The yes camp has been backed by celebrities including James Bond star Sir Sean 
Connery, who said the campaign "is rooted in inclusiveness, equality and that 
core democratic value that the people of Scotland are the best guardians of 
their own future." ActorAlan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming> also encouraged Scots to 
vote to break with the rest of the UK, saying: "The world is waiting for us and 
I know Scotland is ready."

Last month a list of more than 200 celebrities signed a letter urging Scotland 
to stay in the union, including Sir Paul McCartney, Sir David Attenborough, Sir 
Bruce Forsyth, Dame Judi Dench Simon Cowell and Professor Stephen Hawking.

But celebrities espousing their deeply-held views on the independence has not 
gone down well with many Scottish voters. Twitter user Rob Stewart said: "This 
isn't about some kind of celebrity parade – it's about your country's future." 
Andy Arthur tweeted: "Can't think of one celebrity whose opinion matters so 
much to me it would outweigh the informed decision I arrived at all by myself."

Another Twitter user said: "Has there been a celebrity yet whose opinion on 
#indyref wasn't rightly met with a 'mate, fuck off. Nobody cares what you 
think' response?"

The small handful of celebrities who have kept out of the debate include Billy 
Connolly <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/billyconnolly>, who said: "I 
don't want to influence anybody so I shut up."

Annie Lennox <https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox>, who was born in 
Aberdeen, also refused to support either campaign, saying: "Personally, I'm 
neither a gambler nor soothsayer and my view doesn't count in any case."
 