
The first time Australian Sean Armstrong played rugby in the gloomy depths of 
a German winter, his fingers turned blue. With the temperature falling well 
below freezing, the field was covered in white powder. Most players would be 
forgiven for packing it in after such a baptism of ice, yet eight years on and 
Armstrong is captaining the German national team.

“The club president told me to put my hands in the snow to warm-up,” Armstrong 
laughs incredulously. “There was about six inches of snow on the ground, easily 
the worst conditions I’ve played in. I came into the sheds at half-time and my 
hands were like stumps, I couldn’t hold the ball. I spent the next 30 minutes 
under the shower trying to get warm and once I came out again the game had 
finished.”

It was the start of a journey that Armstrong could never have imagined 
possible, one that has taken him all around the world, from getting pummelled 
by Moldovan behemoths to meeting the Queen. And, of course, captaining Germany 
into the second tier of European rugby and taking them to within three games of 
a trip to the 2015 World Cup.

In a football mad country, you would not expect to stumble across the town of 
Heidelberg, home to just 150,000 people, and find that it is a hotbed of rugby 
talent. Nestled between the Königsstuhl and Gaisberg mountains, sprawled across 
the River Neckar, Heidelberg’s preserved old town has become a must-see 
destination for travellers.

And despite the close proximity to traditional football strongholds such as 
Freiburg and Karlsruhe, walk into one of the many 17th century pubs and you can 
see rugby paraphernalia adorning the wooden framework and stone walls. Here, in 
Germany’s south, lies the heart of rugby. It has been Armstrong’s permanent 
home since 2008, after being lured from Sunnybank in Brisbane to Heidelberg 
Ruderklub.

“I knew there was a chance to develop rugby here, but it was sold as a chance 
to come over for a new experience,” Armstrong explains. “After an initial 
three-month trial period [in 2007] I returned home, and then I was offered the 
chance to come on a full-time basis. It’s pretty random when you think about 
it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1c9527e92567b30fbaebedaa0a423d778666cf0%2F0_0_3000_2027%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sean%20Armstrong%2C%20the%20Australian%20hoping%20to%20take%20Germany%20to%20a%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sean%20Armstrong%2C%20the%20Australian%20hoping%20to%20take%20Germany%20to%20a%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1c9527e92567b30fbaebedaa0a423d778666cf0%2F0_0_3000_2027%2F3000.jpg>
 Sean Armstrong in action for Sunnybank in an Australian Club Championship 
match against Sydney University at Suncorp Stadium in 2008. Photograph: Cameron 
Spencer/Getty Images 
 Now 28, Armstrong has led Heidelberg RK to six consecutive Bundesliga titles, 
though more importantly he has been developing young talent through the Wild 
Rugby Academy. With the German national team still relying heavily on 
foreigners from Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, the academy’s goal is 
to inject more local flavour into the rugby landscape.

Since Armstrong’s arrival the institute has significantly grown interest in 
rugby among younger crowds, and Heidelberg RK now boasts youth teams from 
Under-6s through to Under-18s. “From our club side the number of youth 
participants have doubled, and as an academy we regularly go to about 12 or 15 
schools for a week at a time,” Armstrong says. “The aim is to get them 
interested early, before they have a chance to join football clubs.”

Rugby was once a powerhouse sport in Germany, a natural progression for a 
nation that widely embraced gymnastics and wrestling in the 19th century. Yet 
it was banned during World War II and rapidly fell behind its main competitor, 
football, after a semi-professional West Germany shocked the world and won the 
1954 football World Cup.

 Rugby was left behind, and is only starting to make a resurgence; though 
there are still only about 12,000 members in 125 clubs. “The German people are 
crazy about football, but we’re not looking to put them down. We’re just 
looking for guys and girls who are interested in trying something different,” 
Armstrong says. “One of the selling points is that, despite the low participant 
numbers, Germany is still competing at the top level. Rather than playing fifth 
division for a club in football, in rugby you can realistically work yourself 
up to the national team.”

 It’s uncannily hot in Heidelberg when the new Bundesliga season opens. 
Spectators trickling in to watch Heidelberg RK versus TSV Handschuhsheim have 
beers in hand, ice packs on necks and sweat-dripping foreheads. The conditions 
on the field are more akin to a rugby match in Dubbo than a southern German 
town.

 Heidelberg RK win the match with ease, 71-14, with Armstrong dictating the 
play from scrum-half. The Australian playmaker’s girlfriend Tilla Dier, who 
also plays rugby, explains from the sidelines that the off-field vision is 
starting to translate on-field. “They are starting to see more German players 
coming into the first team,” she says. “The one on the wing who came on [as a 
substitute] has been at the club his whole life. In the women’s team we have 15 
players who have developed through the club.”

 The club scene is still a work in progress – Heidelberg RK is one of the few 
professional outfits in German rugby. However the main focus is improving the 
national team; without international success, funding will dry out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda07e461e7897cf58710dca3151ca6f70f8c2843%2F1061_236_1371_1545%2F1371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sean%20Armstrong%2C%20the%20Australian%20hoping%20to%20take%20Germany%20to%20a%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sean%20Armstrong%2C%20the%20Australian%20hoping%20to%20take%20Germany%20to%20a%20Rugby%20World%20Cup%20%7C%20Janek%20Speight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsean-armstrong-the-australian-hoping-to-guide-germany-to-a-rugby-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda07e461e7897cf58710dca3151ca6f70f8c2843%2F1061_236_1371_1545%2F1371.jpg>
 Armstrong poses with the World Cup trophy during a promotional tour of Germany 
in April this year. Photograph: Alex Grimm/Getty Images 
 After the match, over a few drinks at The Dubliner, one of many old pubs 
lining Heidelberg’s cobble-stoned Hauptstrasse, Armstrong details how rugby’s 
promising future in Germany is down largely to one rugby fanatic: Hans-Peter 
Wild. An entrepreneur and philanthropist, Wild not only sponsors the German 
national team, he also helped build the Wild Rugby Academy and one of his 
companies provide sponsorship for Heidelberg RK.

 “Without him I definitely wouldn’t be here, none of us would be,” Armstrong 
says. “He doesn’t ask for publicity or anything and he doesn’t get anything out 
of it, he just does it for the love of rugby. But we need to find more 
sponsors, we can’t keep relying on the one guy. German companies sponsor rugby 
outside Germany, but we need them to look closer to home.”

International success is the way to coax further investment. Under the 
captaincy of Armstrong, whose leadership skills South African-born coach Kobus 
Potgieter says have been vital, Germany were promoted to the European Nations 
Cup Division A for the 2014-16 campaign. They lost their opening five games 
earlier this year but there is optimism that the team can flip results after 
narrow defeats to Portugal and Romania.

 “It was a massive jump in quality, so it wasn’t easy for the players to 
adapt,” Potgieter admits. “We prepared but we were not sure what to expect. 
Last year showed us that we have the ability; we had chances but we didn’t take 
them. Now it’s about getting more experience.” Retaining Division A status 
would be a significant achievement for what is essentially an amateur national 
team. Most players have full-time jobs, study commitments and families, and use 
up all their holidays to travel with the national team.

 The next round of games starts in February, and a successful relegation fight 
would make an assault for the ultimate holy grail – the World Cup – much more 
plausible. “We have to be realistic if we look at our squad size and young 
playing group,” Potgieter says. “But we’re hoping by the [2019 World Cup] we’re 
very close to the final stages of qualifying and then for the next one [2023] 
we can have a decent chance to go there.”

 On the road to this year’s World Cup, Germany went agonisingly close to the 
repechage qualification. Leading Russia 20-17 with three minutes left on the 
clock, the Germans conceded two late tries and saw a monumental victory turn 
into a devastating 20-31 defeat. “It was obviously disappointing, but there 
were positives,” Armstrong says. “Consistency is what is lacking, and that’s 
what we’ve tried to develop over the last year.”

 More matches against quality opposition, Heidelberg RK entering the third 
tier of the European Challenge Cup and a new artificial pitch in Heidelberg to 
allow training in winter are all projects that Armstrong feels can be game 
changers for the sport.

 “There has always been a lot of talk, but never much action,” Armstrong says. 
“That’s actually starting to change now and you can see things happening. It’s 
a step in the right direction and a step that needed to be taken. All the other 
countries we’re competing against have specific facilities for rugby so [the 
artificial field] will be the project that ties everything together and pushes 
us forward.”

 Excitement is also building through rugby sevens, which has received federal 
funding since its inclusion as an Olympic sport. While Armstrong is ineligible 
to play for the sevens, the team will compete in final qualifications next year 
for the Rio Olympics. An appearance in the Olympics would put rugby firmly in 
the German public’s eyesight, with obliviousness not an option – unlike when 
Armstrong last made an appearance on national television.

 In June this year Armstrong and Dier were invited to meet the Queen during 
her visit to Berlin. Only 138 guests attended the state dinner at Schloss 
Bellevue, most of them politicians, journalists and dignitaries. “We thought 
[the invitation] was a joke, I still can’t really believe it,” Armstrong 
laughs. “Tilla’s mum was watching on television and when my name was announced 
the commentator just said ‘Armstrong, that doesn’t sound familiar… Oh, he’s 
just a rugby player!’.”

 A good story, but also a missed opportunity for some invaluable publicity. 
Qualification for the Olympics or, better, the World Cup, could change the 
scene. In a promising sign, the 2015 edition is being televised for the first 
time in Germany.

 Competing for the Webb Ellis Cup is just a dream at the moment, but as 
Armstrong says there is no point aiming low. “I have no plans to go [back to 
Australia]. Rugby has opened so many doors and I’ve got a few years left in 
me,” Armstrong says.

 “The rugby spirit is worldwide and we’re trying to develop that here, but 
also create our own culture too. German rugby union is in a stronger position 
now … but the rugby World Cup, that’s where we want to be.”

 Come Japan 2019, the Wallabies could well be facing one of their own.
 