
Ask the Cambridge bioengineer, Michelle Oyen, how the cities of the future 
might look, and she’ll reference termite mounds, along with the swirling 
architecture of Antoni Gaudí, whose buildings look like they’ve grown from 
organic matter rather than been built by human hands. Oyen and her 
contemporaries are currently striving to harness nature’s smart building 
techniques, investigating bone, eggshell, seashells and spider silk, as 
alternatives to unsustainable steel and concrete.

“As engineers,” she says, “we throw energy at problems to make things 
technologically better, but we don’t necessarily think about the consequences 
of what all of that energy input is doing.” The concrete industry, for example, 
produces 5% of global CO2 emissions. The beauty of the materials that Oyen and 
colleagues are developing is that they can be produced in gentle, low-energy 
conditions.

Eggshell is her favourite example. “If you look at a chicken, they go from 
zero to eggshell in 18 hours. It’s almost a millimetre thick, 95% ceramic, and 
it has this organic component that makes it very tough. The whole thing has 
been put down in an extremely short period of time, at an ambient pressure and 
at body temperature, barely above ambient temperatures.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4396fe3323fac5eb57c0b78a08203d2ad4eea380%2F0_0_925_1157%2F925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seashells%20or%20spider%20silk%3A%20how%20nature%20could%20transform%20the%20structure%20of%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seashells%20or%20spider%20silk%3A%20how%20nature%20could%20transform%20the%20structure%20of%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4396fe3323fac5eb57c0b78a08203d2ad4eea380%2F0_0_925_1157%2F925.jpg>
 Spidey City – Ordinary Vis’s visualisation of a city built from genetically 
engineered spider silk 
Manmade ceramics, on the other hand, are formed at thousands of degrees 
Celsius. The ceramic deposits on the protein in the eggshell membrane, and the 
protein’s presence makes it more durable than manmade ceramic. “So you have 
this paradigm,” says Oyen, “where nature does these things cleverly, using 
information, whereas engineers just throw energy at them.”

Organic materials, from bone to shell to spider silk, are composites of 
different components with complementary properties. “So you get combinations 
that don’t exist in a single monolithic material,” says Oyen, which is why we 
have to reinforce concrete with steel beams. “The steel is really good at 
taking tension and the concrete is really good at taking compression.” Nature 
makes its own similarly resilient combinations. Eggshell is much more resistant 
to fracture than manmade ceramic because of its collagen membrane.Spider silk 
is stronger than steel <http://www.wired.com/2012/02/spider-web-strength/> (if 
you had a strip of steel as thin as spider web, the web would be stronger), yet 
flexible, because it is a perfectly designed composite of proteins, which allow 
it to change consistency according to the resistance it faces.


Spider silk is, says Oyen, “extremely tunable,” in that its properties change 
according to its water content. The spokes of spider webs are stiff, whereas 
the spiral of silk running around the spokes is droopy because it has more 
water in it. So the less water, the stiffer it is, and vice versa.

It’s still a stretch of the imagination, though, to picture spider silk 
holding up a garden shed, let alone big-city builds (although this has been 
nicely visualised by London-based architectural imagineers, Ordinary Vis, in 
the form ofSpidey City <http://cargocollective.com/ordinaryltd/Spidey-City>, 
suspended by genetically engineered spider silk). “There’s no question,” says 
Oyen, “that spider silk is optimised to be a fibre, so it’s not that we can 
replicate it to be a three-dimensional structure, but it may be that a 
three-dimensional assemblage of fibres, with a matrix added in a composite 
material could be good.”

Spider silk is also biodegradable, hypoallergenic and antimicrobial. 
Meanwhile, scientists have createda surface made from synthetic sharkskin 
<http://sharklet.com/>, which inhibits bacterial growth. Could it erase 
superbugs from hospitals? Might our kitchens, bathrooms and workstations, too, 
end up being finished in faux sharkskin?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3a0fc32be9662fdd0178308c2008e382d00cd1%2F117_37_843_304%2F843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seashells%20or%20spider%20silk%3A%20how%20nature%20could%20transform%20the%20structure%20of%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seashells%20or%20spider%20silk%3A%20how%20nature%20could%20transform%20the%20structure%20of%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fseashells-or-spider-silk-how-nature-could-transform-the-structure-of-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3a0fc32be9662fdd0178308c2008e382d00cd1%2F117_37_843_304%2F843.jpg>
 On the left is an image of natural shark skin – on the right is the Sharklet 
micropattern 
You could be forgiven for thinking that the organic part of Oyen’s materials 
might cause buildings to biodegrade, with disastrous consequences, but she 
isn’t worried. The organic element of eggshell remains so stable in the ceramic 
that, she says, “they’ve been able to isolate organic components from eggshells 
that are millions of years old.” And, regarding bone, she adds that “rock can 
form in the bone structure that’s giving you dinosaur bones that are 30 million 
years old.” It’s not, she says, that we want to make cities made of bone the 
way it’s in our body right now. “We can be inspired by natural materials rather 
than literally mimicking them.”

Cities aren’t about to start resembling termite metropolises any time soon. 
“From a timeline perspective,” says Oyen, “for the last 10 years we’ve been 
trying to figure these things out. We’ve probably still a few more years to go 
and then maybe the following decade will be taking all the things we’ve learned 
and being able to apply them to making new materials.” However, the race to 
replace concrete continues apace. British architect Jack Munro, for example, 
has been experimenting withbricks made from sand and blood 
<http://www.fastcodesign.com/1670981/bricks-and-maybe-buildings-made-from-a-wasted-resource-blood>
. “Animal blood was for a long time the main source of natural glue before we 
had synthetic glues,” he writes, so why not make bricks as a way of using this 
byproduct of the meat industry?

Wooden skyscrapers could be the future of flat-pack cities around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/03/-sp-wooden-skyscrapers-future-world-plyscrapers>
Cambridge’s architecture department is working on genetically modifying plants 
to make super-wood for building. “We’re looking at what’s in plants that give 
rise to properties that are beneficial for building bigger buildings: strength, 
resistance to rot, durability,” says senior lecturer, Michal Ramage. “Starting 
with a small plant called Arabidopsis, which has a short, six-week growth 
cycle, his team will graduate to a willow or poplar before tackling oak, 
eucalyptus or spruce.

Meanwhile, Ramage has just returned from Chicago where he has been working on 
a wooden-skyscraper project. “The tallest wooden building at the moment,” he 
says, “is 14 stories, in Norway. In our research, we’ve been looking at 
buildings 80, 90, 100 stories tall.” He is teaming up with leading 
architectural and engineering firms, and out of these designs will come 
specific elements that he and colleagues can test structurally in their labs at 
Cambridge. Ramage suspects it’ll be a few more years before they can 
definitively say that the ideas will work at scale, but developers are already 
chomping at the bit to erect one of the first wooden skyscrapers. Imagine their 
excitement when it’s time for the first shell, bone or spider-silk tower.

Dr Michelle Oyen is giving a public lecture at Cambridge Science Festival on 
Biomimetic materials: re-thinking how we build stuff 
<http://www.sciencefestival.cam.ac.uk/events/biomimetic-materials-re-thinking-how-we-build-stuff#sthash.thUT5Eqk.dpuf>
 on Wednesday 9 March.Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 