
“I’m really a witch,” rapper Azealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks> quipped last January, shortly 
before all hell broke loose on her Twitter account.

Banks is known for her online rants. She tends to share fairly dense ideas, 
spontaneously spun out in punchy lines liberally interspersed with curse words. 
I don’t know a person on this earth who can agree with every one of them, but 
her opinions are smarter than she usually gets credit for.

Still, even by Banks’s standards, the witch thing was weird. It came out in 
the middle of a run about black Americans and their relationship to 
Christianity:

I wonder if most of the black American Christians in the US know WHY they are 
Christian. I wonder if they even consider for a SECOND that before their 
ancestors came to the Americas that they may have believed in something ELSE.

Not uncontroversial, but not wrong. Banks then suddenly took a hard left into 
what seemed like either a joke, or an unexpected embrace of Harry Potter fan 
fiction. She went on:

But really, it’s all about magic. The most magical people are the ones who 
have to deal with oppression, because the non-magical are jealous. That’s why 
Jews and Blacks have been persecuted over and over again throughout history. 
because they have the most magic ... all I’m trying to say is that black people 
are naturally born SEERS, DIVINERS, WITCHES AND WIZARDS. we have REAL 
supernatural powers, and the sooner we ALL learn to cultivate them and access 
them, the sooner we can REALLY fix shit.

Then she joked that racism might end a lot sooner if black people could make 
their enemies sicken and die with a thought, and of course the rightwing 
publications started sounding the klaxons.

It was the strangest thing: simply by calling herself a witch in public, Banks 
had managed to evoke real fear. Rightwingers treated her as if she were 
actually planning to blight crops and hex her enemies, all the while claiming 
that they didn’t believe in witchcraft.

Given the strength of the reaction, you would think that Banks was the first 
woman to cross over to the dark side. You would be wrong. Witchcraft – and the 
embrace of “magical” practices, like reading tarot cards – has recently 
experienced a resurgence of sorts among young, creative, politically engaged 
women.

This is largely reflected in niche corners of US pop culture: 2013’s American 
Horror Story: Coven <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Horror_Story:_Coven>,
 in which witchcraft stood in for girl power, was the most popular American 
Horror Story season ever. A popular Tumblr blog,Charmcore 
<http://charmcore.tumblr.com/>, purports to be run by three witch sisters; it 
gives sarcastic “magical” advice and praise of the female celebrities it deems 
to be “obvious witches”. On the more serious side, teen sensation Rookie 
magazine has publishedtarot tutorials 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2012/12/sunday-video-tarot-101/> along with more 
standard-issue feminist and fashion advice, andAutostraddle 
<http://www.autostraddle.com/tag/tarot/>, a popular left-leaning blog for young 
queer women, has an in-house tarot columnist. Speaking of which, those tarot 
cards are available in trendy Brooklyn knickknack shops and Urban Outfitters, 
as well as new age stores. And these days, no one thinks there’s anything weird 
about herbal medicine and other potions.

The task of reclaiming the witch is a fundamentally poetic one.

•••

 In vogue or not, Banks was continuing a heritage of women’s activism that 
stretches back decades by expressing her politics and invoking the fearsome 
power of a “witch”.

“To reclaim the word witch is to reclaim our right, as women, to be powerful,” 
wrote Starhawk, in her seminal 1979 bookThe Spiral Dance 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Spiral_Dance>. “To be a witch is to identify 
with 9 million victims of bigotry and hatred and to take responsibility for 
shaping a world in which prejudice claims no more victims.”

Today, The Spiral Dance is in its third edition, and has sold over 300,000 
copies. It is many people’s first introduction toWicca 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wicca>, the earth-based spiritual movement that 
was created in the 1950s and has come to be a recognized religion around the 
world. It is also one of the most well known and comprehensive texts from a 
very particular moment in feminist history which until recently was largely 
unfashionable: the “women’s spirituality” movement, in which women radically 
rewrote existing religions, or simply made their own to be in line with the 
goals of women’s liberation.

“I’ve been involved with this resurgence of interest in spirituality since the 
1960s,” Starhawk told me during a phone conversation. “It’s like suddenly the 
world opened up and people realized there wasn’t just Judaism, Christianity, 
Islam. There was a whole world of eastern religions and traditions. In the 
1970s, with the resurgence of the feminist movement, a lot of us began to 
investigate a feminist spirituality and the goddess traditions of Europe and 
the Middle East.”

Wicca, with its focus on a goddess (rather than a male god – though it has 
those too) and its relatively open approach to creating canon, was a natural 
fit for many feminist women interested in writing their own spiritual script. 
But women who weren’t explicitly Wiccan were also drawn to “witchy” ways of 
processing the world: not only did women make feminist tarot cards in the 
1970s, author Alice Walker personally endorsed one set –the Motherpeace deck 
<http://www.motherpeace.com/>. Feminist psychologists such as Jean Shinoda 
Bolen and Clarissa Pinkola Estés wrote books on using goddess imagery and myths 
as means of understanding female subjectivity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424796223058%2F5990d86b-132a-4a89-871c-70b527007a90-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Season%20of%20the%20witch%3A%20why%20young%20women%20are%20flocking%20to%20the%20ancient%20craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Season%20of%20the%20witch%3A%20why%20young%20women%20are%20flocking%20to%20the%20ancient%20craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424796223058%2F5990d86b-132a-4a89-871c-70b527007a90-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Veronica Lake in I Married a Witch. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex 
It’s tempting to write all this off as fluffy woo-woo stuff (a trivialization 
of which Starhawk is well aware: “We’re no more nutty than most religions,” she 
says, “and probably a lot less nutty than some”). But the politics are there, 
and they hold up; mixed in with the spells and rituals of The Spiral Dance, you 
will find meditations on sexual violence, ecology and anarchist group building, 
and thoughts on how men can overcome patriarchal conditioning in order to 
participate effectively in leftwing activism.

What’s more, in the moment that Starhawk and others like her were practicing 
witchcraft as a religion, non-religious women were also claiming the witch as a 
symbol of their feminist ambitions. The 1970s socialist-feminist collective 
Witch – the letters stood for anything the leaders felt like from moment to 
moment, but Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell was a popular 
choice – held theatrical protests, starting by “hexing” the New York stock 
exchange and going on to attend a “bridal fair” where they unleashed white mice 
into the crowd.

Their protest chants were particularly catchy: “Double, bubble, war and 
rubble/ When you mess with women, you’ll be in trouble”.

There’s something deeply appealing in the notion of being put in touch with an 
inner source of power.

It was a gimmick, but it resonated: “Because Witch actions could be done with 
a small group and were both fun and political, they quickly spread around the 
country,” writes Jo Freeman. “Boston women hexed bars. DC women hexed the 
presidential inauguration. Chicago women zapped everything.”

I asked Starhawk why she thought the iconography of the witch had such 
persistence in activist circles. After all, feminists could be going around 
calling themselves harpies, or sirens. Of all the mythological images we could 
pick, why does this one stick?

“I think that part of the power of the word is that it refers to a kind of 
power that is not legitimized by the authorities,” Starhawk says. “Even though 
not all witches are women, and a lot of men are witches, it seems to connote 
women’s power in particular. And that’s very scary in a patriarchal world – the 
kind of power that’s not just coming from the hierarchical structure, but some 
kind of inner power. And to use it to serve the ends that women have always 
stood for, like nurturing and caring for the next generation – that, I think, 
is a wonderfully dangerous prospect.”

“In each wave of feminism there’s this renewed respect for the women that came 
before us,” says Beth Maiden, Autostraddle’s tarot columnist who also runs the 
website littleredtarot.com. “I think we like to identify with the stories of 
women who were persecuted in the past – wise women, witches, women who 
practiced that kind of ‘kitchen table’ healing that wasn’t part of the 
patriarchal progression of medicine.”

This means identifying, as women of the 1960s and 1970s did, with ancient 
myths and iconography of goddesses, or with the mythological figure of the 
witch. But it may also mean a renewed respect for those women: the legacy of 
their spirituality movement seems to have been quietly re-incorporated back 
into the mainstream of feminism.

This is part of a larger phenomenon – the tendency for Gen X-ers and those who 
came after them to be “spiritual but not religious”. Rather than converting to 
one set mythology, younger people tend to pull spiritual ideas and practices 
from any source that works.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424795383569%2F0a5a58d3-4238-480f-b273-4de63f09d4f3-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Season%20of%20the%20witch%3A%20why%20young%20women%20are%20flocking%20to%20the%20ancient%20craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Season%20of%20the%20witch%3A%20why%20young%20women%20are%20flocking%20to%20the%20ancient%20craft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fwitch-symbol-feminist-power-azealia-banks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424795383569%2F0a5a58d3-4238-480f-b273-4de63f09d4f3-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Tarot cards can be found in hip stores as well as new age shops. Tarot cards 
by The Wild Unknown. 
There’s something deeply appealing in the notion of being put in touch with an 
inner source of power that can’t be taken away. Not that this power needs to be 
something nebulous and mystical: as Suzy X, one of Rookie’s tarot teachers and 
frontwoman of “witchcore” punk band Shady Hawkins, says, it can be pretty damn 
pragmatic.

“I think one of the biggest conspiracies of a male-dominated society is the 
suppression of feminine intuition, in that women have been conditioned to 
second-guess our own hunches, or second-guess our own abilities, all the time,” 
she told me. “You know when you can just tell someone is creepy, right off the 
bat? That’s your intuition speaking.”

Embracing the witchiness – deciding you can know something about your life by 
looking at tarot cards and listening to your hunches, or trying to affect a 
situation by focusing your will on it – might be just a process by which women 
can come to trust themselves.

There’s also the pull of the taboo, of being a woman who does what she’s not 
supposed to: “It feels incredible to use all the aspects of being a woman which 
the dominant culture considers to be signs of weakness, like emotional 
sensitivity or a menstrual cycle, as tools when you are giving a reading or 
doing a spell,” says Marty Windahl, proprietor of Tarotscopes. “This is really 
the heart of being a witch for me, turning everything on its head. That, and 
making treasure of trash.”

***

Since she got in trouble for it the first time, Banks has doubled down on the 
witch thing, tweeting about full moon parties, card readings and her herbal 
cabinet.

Tell the white media that you’re a voodoo king and you like to drink rooster 
blood and chew glass. Stop trying to get them to relate. LOL.

She may be joking, but her objectives – to identify with persecuted ancestors, 
to reclaim lost ways of seeing the world, to claim the ability to be powerful 
and scary – are part of a long tradition. Images of witchcraft call to so many 
women – straight and not, white and of color, religious and devoutly atheist – 
because the task of reclaiming the witch is a fundamentally poetic one.

The witch, that strange woman at the edge of town – crazy, scary, ugly, 
disliked, but maybe,just maybe, smarter than anyone else in town – well, that’s 
all of us.
 