
It may not be me. It may be one of my friends, or a co-worker, or one of the 
other aid workers who live on my street. But it’s going to happen: we will be 
attacked.


Best-case scenario: we get robbed. They take our things and they leave. We’ve 
backed up our hard drives, saved our favourite photos online, we’re ready for 
this. Worst-case scenario: we get raped. Or killed. It’s a 50/50 split on which 
people think is worse.

Over the past four months, security for aid workers in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> has sharply deteriorated. For a 
few weeks, it was estimated that there was one attempted NGO compound break-in 
per day. Thankfully, for the time being, many of those attempts have been 
unsuccessful. But far more worrying is the growing incidence of violence 
against humanitarian staff, particularly a new trend of sexual violence.

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
It starts out like any other night: you have dinner with friends, have a few 
drinks, and catch a ride home before your 10pm curfew. If you’ve had a 
particularly long week, maybe you stay out a little past curfew to blow off 
steam. On your way home, you’re stopped at a checkpoint. Men with AK47s stand 
in the road, and they’re wearing uniforms, so your driver stops. They approach 
the car, and tell your male friends to get out. Then the armed men get in the 
car, and everything goes horribly, irreversibly wrong.

This is the scenario that keeps every female aid worker in South Sudan awake 
at night. Sometimes, the women have been able to escape. Other times, they have 
not.

Even with the best security procedures in place, it is difficult to know how 
to prevent these situations. Our curfews have been lowered. Aid workers have 
been banned from going to one of the most popular restaurants in Juba after two 
such incidents occurred just outside their doors. But with these attacks 
happening more and more frequently, eventually it begins to feel like it’s just 
a matter of time. We’re sitting ducks.

Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>
There are no easy answers on how to manage this. We’re doing everything we can 
to be prepared in case of the worst: we’re updating our guidelines on managing 
sexual assault, ensuring we have staff who are trained to administerHIV 
post-exposure prophylaxis 
<https://www.aids.gov/hiv-aids-basics/prevention/reduce-your-risk/post-exposure-prophylaxis/>
, and doing everything we can to help our staff be prepared. But it’s not 
enough. We should never be in this situation in the first place.

Nevertheless, aid workers continue to get up and work six or seven days a week 
to address the overwhelming humanitarian needs in South Sudan. Famine is 
looming, massacres are regular in parts of the country, and more than 180,000 
people still seek protection in UN bases. There is simply no time to slow down.

In the same way that we need the humanitarian leadership and international 
community to engage on issues of violence against civilians, we also need those 
same leaders to engage on issues of violence against humanitarian staff. The 
current environment is untenable. Humanitarians cannot be effective at their 
jobs when the risk of violence against them or their friends is not just a 
possibility, but a probability. We have done everything we can. But now, we 
need help.

We are reporting stories of sexual violence against aid workers; you can 
contact us confidentially at globaldevpros@theguardian.com with Secret aid 
worker in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 

 