
If I had to describe the western expat aid workers I’ve worked with in one 
word, it would have to be ‘hyper’. Most of the time they’re running around the 
office – hardly ever on the ground in the communities they’re meant to work in 
– checking, controlling, advising, shouting, trying to help, working late into 
the night. I’ve seen locals stare at them like they are a TV show on fast 
forward.

Secret aid worker: How can we fight inequality if we live as privileged expats?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/29/secret-aid-worker-how-can-we-fight-inequality-if-we-live-as-privileged-expats>
My first real field experience was in Nepal, in a village in the middle of 
nowhere, where I shared a flat with Nepalese colleagues. We had a rule that 
there would be no work talk after 6pm – and we all stuck to it. The village was 
tiny and there was nothing else to do other than having dinner and a couple of 
beers once a week in the only local restaurant. I was always careful not to 
drink too much and shock my Nepalese colleagues.

Kathmandu, on the other hand, was a different world. I’d travel there every 
couple of months to dive into the real expat world – the hyper one, as I would 
call it. Almost all the expats I met there were Europeans or Americans, always 
on a sort of high from their field experience. Even after 9pm, they couldn’t 
stop talking about work, issues they encountered, failed aid, and how things 
could be improved. I hardly heard of their families and friends there or back 
home.

Don’t get me wrong – sitting in a pub and talking to people who shared 
cultural references with me was great. But I couldn’t help think that the high 
concentration of expats was rather weird. All of them were full of energy until 
their last drink – alcohol seemed the only way to get them to turn off. They 
would find any possible way to invent a crazy adventure – such as hiring a 
rickshaw at 3am for the equivalent of the average Nepalese weekly wage, driving 
it drunk and risking their lives in doing so. They were teenagers on a trip to 
Nepal by night, slightly cocky aid workers by day.

 After Nepal, I travelled to a number of other countries, mainly staying in 
capital cities, and while I encountered some expats who had really tried to 
integrate into their host communities, most of the rest lived completely 
detached lives from the country they were working in. You know thestereotype 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/29/secret-aid-worker-how-can-we-fight-inequality-if-we-live-as-privileged-expats>
; they have a fancy house with a cook and guards, earn twice as much as the 
yearly local GDP in a single month, and sneak off to parties at the UN compound 
during curfew hours.

Secret aid worker: sometimes I go to supermarkets to escape the loneliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/01/secret-aid-worker-humanitarian-loneliness>
 I sound judgmental here because this is not how I’d like a foreigner to live 
in my country when they come to help or support. I understand they need to 
decompress, particularly when working in an emergency setting, but how you do 
that is something I have always questioned.

 What I also found weird is that most of these men and women seemed unhappy. 
Whining is a favourite sport of the usual expat: everything in the management 
is wrong, the office is not right, things do not work in the organisation, in 
the system, in the country, in the world.


They all seemed to be trying to escape something but not quite succeeding. 
Everything needed to be fixed constantly, no matter if it was work, the home, 
the friendship or the relationship. No matter where you were or what was 
improving, the grass was always greener on the other side – hence the constant 
need to hop to another disaster, another country.

 Of those I became closer to, I often learned of incredibly painful family 
histories, and saw little recognition that they might be escaping one desperate 
situation to solve another distant one – one with people they could never 
really get attached to.

For many aid workers, returning home too is difficult. Whenever an aid worker 
friend of mine returns home from Somalia to southern France he feels like 
fleeing: family reunions and shopping malls give him panic attacks.

Secret aid worker: It's unrealistic to expect us to live like monks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/05/secret-aid-worker-its-unrealistic-to-expect-us-to-live-like-monks>
This is not unusual. When I returned home, I also wondered if I had actually 
been one of the hyper aid workers I’ve just described, looking for an escape. 
It took me two years to finally stop dreaming about Afghanistan or Congo, to 
withdraw from the adrenaline, the high you get, and the constant feeling of 
having to fix anything I could see. It also took me the same amount of time in 
therapy to realise I could live back home, face some of my issues and even 
enjoy a gentler pace of life without trying to prove myself all the time.

 Of course, there are many aid workers who might not always have been like the 
expats who frustrated me. But more recently I’ve started wondering whether for 
some, choosing a career as an aid worker might be the hidden symptom of earlier 
trauma in life and not solely the beginning of an adventure. They can’t deal 
with their own issues, so they make it their mission to desperately try to put 
a stop to everyone else’s pain.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here’sinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 