
Following yesterday's departure of the Daily Telegraph editor Tony Gallagher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/21/tony-gallagher-exits-daily-telegraph-editor>
, the man now in charge of the paper is planning to address the staff on his 
vision for its future.

Jason Seiken <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jason-seiken>, chief content 
officer and editor-in-chief of the Telegraph titles, will hold two meetings 
today and two more on Friday.

He will outline, though not in specific terms, how he sees the newspapers 
progressing to the next phase of its digital transformation.

My understanding is that Seiken, who is well known for his dislike of top-down 
management, will speak generally about the need to institute a process of 
organic, ground-up change.

But there will certainly be a change. In his statement yesterday, the 
Telegraph Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/telegraphmediagroup> 
(TMG) chief executive, Murdoch MacLennan, indicated that a restructuring of the 
titles will occur.

There appears to be a need to present TMG to the outside world as a digital, 
rather than a newspaper, business. This is certainly the ambition ofAidan 
Barclay <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>, son of Sir David 
Barclay, who owns the company in partnership with his twin brother, Sir 
Frederick.

Aidan Barclay chairs TMG and manages the brothers' other UK businesses, 
including the Shop Direct Group, the former Littlewoods home shopping business 
that has thrived as an online company. Hence his belief in the value of a 
digital business.

So Seiken, despite a lack of British journalistic experience, has been given 
his chance to show what he can do. Though Chris Evans will be acting print 
editor of the Telegraph's weekday issues and Ian MacGregor is assuming the 
title of acting weekend print editor to oversee the Saturday and Sunday issues, 
both will report to Seiken. (And, incidentally, Ben Brogan has been stripped of 
his deputy editorship role. He will, however, keep his column).

As I argue in my London Evening Standard column today, 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/media/telegraph-must-adapt-but-still-make-journalism-count-9076903.html>
 Gallagher appears to have been sacrificed on the altar of the digital 
revolution despite his own commitment to online development (only recently he 
abandoned the daily newspaper conference because of its inappropriateness to a 
digital newsroom).

But TMG - meaning Aidan Barclay and MacLenan - clearly feel the group has 
fallen back from the days when it claimed to be in the vanguard of online 
journalism.

That, of course, was during the period when the Telegraph was edited by Will 
Lewis and, in an ironic coincidence, yesterday also marked yet another rise in 
Lewis's fortunes whenhe was named as interim chief executive of Dow Jones. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/21/will-lewis-appointed-interim-ceo-of-dow-jones>

And his appointment is also related to the belief of the owners, Rupert 
Murdoch's News Corp, that the company requires an overhaul of its digital 
strategy.

It would appear that Lex Fenwick failed to shine in that department. A source 
quoted by the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/media/10588582/Dow-Jones-chief-executive-Lex-Fenwick-to-leave-News-Corp.html>
 said: "We weren't happy with the direction of travel... we have got to have a 
rapid rethink."

So Lewis gets the rethink job at Dow Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones> while Seiken gets the same role 
at TMG. That's the modern media for you.
 