
The liberties taken by films purporting to retell real-life stories vary 
enormously, a new study has found. The data-based siteInformation is Beautiful 
<http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/based-on-a-true-true-story/>
 looked at 14 key fact-based Oscar contenders since the turn of the decade, 
examining the veracity of each scene.

Is Selma historically accurate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/12/reel-history-selma-film-historically-accurate-martin-luther-king-lyndon-johnson>
They found that while every single incident in Selma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma>, Ava DuVernay’s “painstaking” biopic 
of civil rights leader Martin Luther King, seemed sound, other similar films 
fell short. However, the study does not allow for omitted information, simply 
examining those scenes which the film chooses to include.

Only 41.4% of the scenes in Alan Turing movie The Imitation Game were deemed 
“real”. “To be fair,” said the analysts of the first film, “shoe-horning the 
incredible complexity of the Enigma machine and cryptography in general was 
never going to be easy. But this film just rips the historical record to 
shreds.” Graham Moore’s screenplaypicked up the film’s sole Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/oscars-2015-list-of-winners> in 
2015.

Both scores concur with the grades issued by Alex von Tunzelmann, the 
historian whowrote a weekly series for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/reelhistory> rating the historical 
accuracy of films. She praised Selma as “well-researched, accomplished and 
fair-minded”, while her verdict on The Imitation Game was that it was “as much 
of a garbled mess as a heap of unbroken code. For its appalling suggestion that 
Alan Turing might have covered up for a Soviet spy, it must be sent straight to 
the bottom of the class.”

The Imitation Game: inventing a new slander to insult Alan Turing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/the-imitation-game-invents-new-slander-to-insult-alan-turing-reel-history>
Said von Tunzelmann of the report: “The results are mostly in the right 
ballpark, but I’d be reluctant to issue such precise percentage-point scores on 
historical accuracy. It’s a nice touch that you can alter the pedantry level on 
the site. Even so, historical truth isn’t a binary: you need fuzzy logic.

“Furthermore, some lies are bigger than others. Most films have to alter 
details of character and timeline to fit their stories into a 90 or 120 minute 
runtime. That is much less historically offensive than, say, whatThe Imitation 
Game <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game> does, which is to 
falsely allege that Alan Turing, one of Britain’s greatest war heroes, was 
mixed up with the Cambridge Spies, some of Britain’s most notorious traitors.”


There was also scant praise from Information is Beautiful for American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, Clint Eastwood’s film about 
Navy Seal Chris Kyle, which was judged 56.9% accurate. “A lot of the events in 
the movie did happen,” it said, “but Kyle’s involvement in them was repeatedly 
exaggerated. His tragic hero status was a Hollywood flourish – by all accounts 
(including his own) he thrived off his job and it didn’t bother him much.”

Overall, scores were high, with last year’s best picture winner, Spotlight, 
taking 81.6%, financial crisis drama The Big Short 91.4%, Bridge of Spies 
89.9%, 12 Years a Slave 88.1%, and Rush 81.9%,Captain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-phillips> 81.4% and The Wolf of Wall 
Street 74.6%.

Slightly less impressive were the percentages for The Social Network (76.1%), 
The King’s Speech (73.4%), Philomena (69.8%) andDallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dallas-buyers-club> (61.4%).

The strictness of this accuracy – and the extent to which it matters – has 
been a subject for keen debate over the past few years, as the number of 
fact-based awards contenders has risen dramatically.

Hollywood, sometimes the truth is better than fiction | Catherine Shoard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/hollywood-truth-better-fiction-birth-of-nation-nat-turner>
Those movies vying for awards this year which flout a basis in fact include 
biopics of Jackie Kennedy (Jackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
), the man behind McDonald’s (The Founder) and slave revolt leader Nat Turner (
The Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
). Also in the mix areLoving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/loving-review-civil-rights-tale-marries-heartfelt-drama-with-too-much-restraint>
, about a couple who fought a ban on interracial marriage;Hidden Figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/hidden-figures-trailer-octavia-spencer-janelle-monae>
, about three black female Nasa mathematicians;Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/lion-review-dev-patel-and-nicole-kidman-hunt-oscars-in-moving-adoption-drama>
, with Dev Patel as a man who used Google Maps to track down his long-lost 
family andHacksaw Ridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/hacksaw-ridge-review-mel-gibson-finds-a-conscience-in-gruesome-war-story>
, Mel Gibson’s second world war epic about a pacifist medic.

 