
Ava DuVernay, the director of acclaimed civil-rights drama Selma, is being 
courted by Marvel to take charge of a high-profile superhero movie.The Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/marvel-courting-ava-duvernay-to-direct-diverse-superhero-movie-exclusive/>
 reports DuVernay is being lined up for either Black Panther, the company’s 
first attempt at a film headlined by an African American comic-book titan, or 
Captain Marvel, expected to be the studio’s first female-fronted superhero epic.

Black Panther, which will debut in July 2018, is the most likely project, 
according to the respected Hollywood trade site’s sources. The print version, 
the first black superhero in mainstream comics, is the superpowered ruler of 
the fictional African nation of Wakanda. He is considered a genius – one of the 
eight cleverest people on Earth – and has access to vast financial resources, 
thanks to his nation’s huge reserves of the fictional substance Vibranium.

Marvel vs DC: dawn of the superhero blockbuster movie war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/marvel-vs-dc-dawn-of-the-superhero-blockbuster-movie-war>
Chadwick Boseman will play a younger Black Panther who takes on the mantle 
following the death of his father in the forthcoming big-screen version. 
DuVernay would become Marvel’s first African American director, and first 
female director, though the company had initially hired Monster’s Patty Jenkins 
to direct Thor: The Dark World before later dispensing with her services.

The film-maker’s absence from the list of 2015 Oscar nominees for best 
director was one of the biggest controversies of the awards season. Selma did 
pick up a best picture nomination, and was rewarded with the best song prize, 
but critics lamented the Martin Luther King biopic’s absence from a number of 
other high-profile categories.

Captain Marvel, the other option for DuVernay, is one of the studio’s 
best-known female superheroes. A sometime US air force pilot named Carol 
Danvers who develops cosmic superpowers including flight, super-strength and 
“energy projection” after gaining extraterrestrial DNA during an accident on a 
restricted military base, the character was named MsMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> in 1977 before gaining her current 
moniker some 35 years later.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
She was chosen by Marvel as a surprise choice for its first female-centred 
superhero movie, despite Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow being better known to 
cinema audiences through her appearances in the Iron Man, Captain America and 
Avengers films. Angelina Jolie has also been under consideration to direct the 
film, which will debut in 2018,according to reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/angelina-jolie-tipped-to-direct-captain-marvel-movie>
.

The two films are part of Marvel’s ambitious slate of nine superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/superhero-comic-book-movies-cinemas>
 set to debut between 2016 and 2019, which will also include Captain America: 
Civil War, Benedict Cumberbatch’s debut as sorcerer supreme Doctor Strange, a 
second Guardians of the Galaxy film and two new Avengers movies, Infinity War 
parts one and two.
 