
Write for Rights 2012 <http://vimeo.com/48147746> from Amnesty International 
<http://vimeo.com/amnestyuk1> on Vimeo <http://vimeo.com>.

There is something particularly powerful in writing to another person letting 
them know you are interested in their plight.

Chekib El-Khiari knows that all too well. 

Former prisoner of conscience, Chekib was arrested and held in prison for two 
years after he spoke out against corruption and human rights abuses in Morocco. 
While in prison, thousands of strangers sent him messages of support after 
Amnesty International informed them of his case. This is what he saidwhen he 
was released 
<http://blog.amnestyusa.org/middle-east/great-news-prisoner-of-conscience-chekib-el-khiari-released-in-morocco/>
:

"Every week I was waiting for these letters. I was reading them again and 
again, thinking of those people who took five minutes to write or to draw. Five 
minutes of their time gave me the energy to survive two years of unlawful 
imprisonment."

Messages of support and solidarity can inspire, motivate and encourage others. 
They also send a clear warning signal to the authorities that their actions are 
being observed. And that simple act of writing a letter can contribute to the 
release of those who have been unfairly imprisoned or can help stop the illegal 
demolition of people's homes.

Perhaps it is for its success that so many contribute to Amnesty 
International's popular annualWrite for Rights Campaign 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/content.asp?CategoryID=10673>. Perhaps it is for its 
simplicity. Or maybe it is both.

In sending a message of support through a letter, card or Facebook message, 
Write for Rights successfully connects men and women, young and old with people 
elsewhere who have been wrongly imprisoned, at risk of harassment and 
intimidation or whose rights have been violated in other ways. It is also an 
effective way to encourage family members to persist in their pursuit for 
justice on behalf of their loved ones, and it offers a chance for us to urge 
the authorities to uphold and respect basic human rights.

So far this year, Jeremy Irons, Ana Matronic and Dame Vivienne Westwood are 
among the thousands to have taken five minutes to stand in solidarity with 
individuals featured in this year's Write for Rights. They would be delighted 
if you stand in solidarity with them. As would I.

This year people from China, Syria, Kenya and Afghanistan to name a few are 
featured within Amnesty's Write for Rights Campaign. You can send a message of 
solidarity to the family of Gao Zhisheng, one of China's most respected human 
rights lawyers, who is in prison and at real risk of torture. Or to the scores 
of families in Kenya's Deep Sea Settlement at risk of being evicted from their 
homes at a moment's notice.

Or perhaps you can take action for the two members of the Russian punk band 
Pussy Riot still imprisoned.

A few minutes is all that it takes to have a significant impact on a person's 
life.

To find out more about Write for Rights visit www.amnesty.org.uk/write 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/content.asp?CategoryID=10673>.
 