
When I was given the opportunity to direct Senna 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1424432/>, I decided the film had to work for 
audiences who disliked sport, or had never seen a Formula One race in their 
lives. It had to thrill and emotionally engage people who had never heard of
Ayrton Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/17/adrian-newey-red-bull-ayrton-senna>
.

I was a sports fan long before I had any interest in film-making. I used to 
watch everything – football, boxing, cricket – and on Sunday afternoons Formula 
One was always on in the background. Before this film, I'd only ever been to 
one race. I worked withMichelle Yeoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/01/bond-girl-michelle-yeoh> on my 
last film,Far North <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/121136/far.north>, 
and her partner isJean Todt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/23/jean-todt-elected-fia-president>
; at the time, he ran Ferrari. So I went as a VIP to the British grand prix. I 
was in the pit with the team during the qualifying and was so nervous someone 
was going to trip over my foot. It was unbearably loud, and there were two real 
VIPs with me,Gianluca Vialli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/may/03/newsstory.sport> and Frankie 
Dettori <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frankie-dettori>; I could sense they 
could tell I didn't belong there.

I had always wanted to combine my two passions: sport and cinema. Boxing is 
made for film – there is corruption, violence, tragedy and the chance that the 
underdog can catch the champion with one lucky punch.Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is like boxing. It's a circus 
that travels the world, it's political, and "team-mates" are the greatest of 
rivals. The rules change all the time, the points system is complicated, and 
the person who crosses the line first doesn't always win.

I came to the film not knowing much about Senna off the track. Now he's up 
there with other sporting heroes. Like Muhammad Ali, he was intelligent and 
eloquent,explaining what was going on in his head 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fuJL8fKtTj8&feature=related>, even in his 
second language.Alain Prost 
<http://www.formula1.com/teams_and_drivers/hall_of_fame/36/>, his great rival, 
was all about the points, but Senna existed to win. It didn't come naturally 
for him to slow down and preserve the tyres. He went all out.

I had a rule with the film: if we can't show it, we can't put it in. 
Fortunately, Senna was constantly followed by a camera at the height of his 
fame: whether it was Globo TV from Brazil, Fuji from Japan, his brother's VHS 
camera or the Formula One crews. Rather than shooting it, we scripted it and 
then sent word to our researchers in London, Japan and Rio to find the shots to 
fit. While they looked for that footage, something else would pop up. There was 
so much available that it enabled us to make a "true fiction" film that works 
like a three-act drama. There are no talking-head interviews, but I didn't 
shoot a frame of the film. There is no voiceover filling in the gaps.Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/senna> narrates his own life story.

He died in 1994, at Imola in Italy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FnGk19zVVRY&feature=related>. When the sport's 
biggest star, a man who doesn't make mistakes, dies on the track, everything 
changes: the cars, circuits, helmets. Nobody will ever know exactly what 
happened, but we can be sure he didn't make a mistake. It was a freak set of 
circumstances: something was wrong with the car, it hit the wall at a certain 
angle, the wheel came off, hit him on the head and killed him.

We made the big decision not to use live TV racing footage in the movie: 
instead we reconstructed the races from other bits of filmthat essentially put 
you in the car with Senna <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uMQgoOaqPnw>, giving 
you a sense of how fast he is going. My favourite part of the film ishis win at 
Interlagos in 1991 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6HLgJ96t9w>. It sums up 
everything about Senna. He was so far ahead; there are no other cars visible – 
then the gears go on the car and he brings it home, the last seven laps, in 
sixth gear. At the time, it wasn't thought possible to drive a Formula One car 
in one gear. But we have the footage: his hand never leaves the steering wheel. 
He gave everything to win.

There's a lot of love for Senna all over the world. He inspired people. And in 
Brazil it was special. The country was coming out of dictatorship, it was 
considered part of the developing world, and he was out there competing with 
the best driver, Prost, and the best team, McLaren. He made Brazilians proud 
again. It was a huge responsibility for me not to mess this film up.
 