
A fractious Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams>
 was made to look like a gatecrasher at the Australian Open this morning as she 
scraped into the second round on the centre court.

A sigh of relief replaced her normally confident smile when she finally 
overcame France's Emilie Loit, a woman without a singles title to her name, 
3-6, 7-6, 7-5.

Donning diamond earrings and a rhinestone-decorated outfit, Williams' outfit 
looked increasingly inappropriate as the contest turned into a desperate fight 
for survival for the women's favourite.

"It was me getting a little nervous and getting a little tight out there," she 
said afterwards. "I definitely regret the way I played today."

Williams was made to fight all the way for her very survival and was at one 
stage in the second set just three points from an inglorious exit.

As the pressure mounted, she grew increasingly frustrated and received an 
official warning for an 'audible obscenity' when she screamed abuse after 
missing a return.

After the two-hour ordeal, however, she insisted she was at no point worried.

"I never thought I was going to lose that match, not at one point," she said 
before preferring to talk about her natty new outfit

"That extra design, I made that one up. I've got rhinestones that I attached 
with a heatgun. It's my design and I am really proud of it," she smiled, the 
on-court agonising conveniently forgotten.

Judging by this encounter, Williams may regret talk of going through 2003 
unbeaten and of winning a 'Serena slam' - the term she has modestly dreamed up 
for winning a non-calendar year grand slam

 The holder of the French, Wimbledon and US Open crowns, Williams needs the 
Australian crown to become only the fifth woman in the history of the sport to 
hold all four major titles at the same time.

Fourth seed Kim Clijsters, however, is likely to take comfort from the chinks 
in Williams' armour.

The Belgian was in fine form in her opening match, crushing American Samantha 
Reeves 6-2, 6-1.

Clijsters beat Serena in last year's season-ending WTA Championships and has 
now won 20 of her last 21 matches against all opposition.

The 19-year-old has also won four of the past five tournaments she has 
entered, including last weekend's Sydney International, and has been working 
out with beau Lleyton Hewitt to boost her hopes of breaking the Williams 
sisters' domination.

"I've beaten Serena and Venus once before but every time I play against them 
it's a different match," she said.

"I don't know how close I am to beating them again, it's hard to answer that. 
I'm just trying to get as fit as I can to be able to compete with the top 
girls."

Australian Open Women's singles first round results

25-Meghann Shaughnessy (US) beat Nuria Llagostera Vives (Spain) 4-6, 6-3, 6-3
 Klara Koukalova (Czech Republic) beat Maria Sharapova (Russia) 6-4, 7-6 (8-6) 
 Ludmila Cervanova (Slovakia) beat Mariana Diaz-Olivia (Argentina) 7-6 (7-2), 
6-2
 Barbara Schwartz (Austria) beat 17-Elena Dementieva (Russia) 5-7, 6-4, 6-2
 19-Amanda Coetzer (South Africa) beat Barbara Schett (Austria) 6-4, 6-3
 28-Clarisa Fernandez (Argentina) beat Adriana Szili (Australia) 6-1, 7-5
 Magui Serna (Spain) beat Asa Svensson (Sweden) 6-4, 3-6, 7-5
 8-Anastasia Myskina (Russia) beat Eva Fislova (Slovakia) 7-5, 6-3
 14-Anna Pistolesi (Israel) beat Meilen Tu (US) 6-4, 4-6, 6-2
 Cristina Torrens Valero (Spain) beat 29-Iva Majoli (Croatia) 6-3, 6-4
 Antonella Serra Zanetti (Italy) beat Martina Muller (Germany) 7-6 (7-5), 6-0
 Emmanuelle Gagliardi (Switzerland) beat Marie-Gaianeh Mikaelian (Switzerland) 
6-1, 2-0 (retired)
 1-Serena Williams (US) beat Emilie Loit (France) 3-6, 7-6 (7-5), 7-5
 Alina Jidkova (Russia) beat Laura Granville (US) 2-6, 6-4, 6-0
 26-Tamarine Tanasugarn (Thailand) beat Maureen Drake (Canada) 6-0, 6-2
 Yoon Jeong-cho (South Korea) beat Eva Dyrberg (Denmark) 6-3, 6-3
 Maja Matevzic (Slovenia) beat Casey Dellacqua (Australia) 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, 6-2
 16-Nathalie Dechy (France) beat Sarah Taylor (US) 6-2, 6-3
 18-Eleni Daniilidou (Greece) beat Marissa Irvin (US) 7-6 (8-6), 6-3
 20-Elena Bovina (Russia) beat Vera Zvonareva (Russia) 6-2, 6-1
 4-Kim Clijsters (Belgium) beat Samantha Reeves (US) 6-2, 6-1
 10-Chanda Rubin (US) beat Melinda Czink (Hungary) 6-4, 7-5
 Mary Pierce (France) beat Patricia Wartusch (Austria) 6-1, 6-4
 Tatiana Poutchek (Belarus) beat Tina Pisnik (Slovenia) 6-3, 6-0
 Jelena Jankovic (Yugoslavia) beat Rossana Neffa-De Los Rios (Paraguay) 6-3, 
6-3
 Rita Grande (Italy) beat Aniko Kapros (Hungary) 6-0, 6-1
 Amy Frazier (US) beat Conchita Martinez Granados (Spain) 6-0, 6-1
 Els Callens (Belgium) beat Martina Sucha (Slovakia) 6-0, 6-2
 Petra Mandula (Hungary) beat Silvija Talaja (Croatia) 7-5, 6-1
 11-Magdalena Maleeva (Bulgaria) beat Marion Bartoli (France) 6-4, 6-1
 Daja Bedanova (Czech Republic) beat Iveta Benesova (Czech Republic) 6-3, 5-7, 
6-4

 