
Larry Gopnik is making us coffee on his hotel-room Nespresso machine – albeit 
in the less fictional form of actor Michael Stuhlbarg. The plaintive, sing-song 
voice, the anxious soliticiousness – “Milk? Sugar? No sugar?” – takes me right 
back toA Serious Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/nov/19/a-serious-man-coen-brothers>, the 
Coen brothers-directed masterpiece in which Stuhlbarg appeared, apparently out 
of thin air.

These days, what with high-end TV, as well as a conveyor belt of young-adult 
book adaptations, it’s easy enough to see people coming from a long way off, 
but Stuhlbarg, who was entering his fifth decade when he was cast in A Serious 
Man, had flown almost completely under the radar. Even now, he feels he has to 
make excuses, as he puts it, “to feel like I justified getting cast in the 
role. My life was about making small steps – and then thathuge leap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mDKHWRbK2_Q>. So I took some steps back, to 
fill in the blanks. It’s been that kind of life: building my sea legs to make 
that leap.”

On the face of it, Stuhlbarg’s film career breaks into pre- and post-Serious 
Man. Before it, his biggest deal was a one-line scene in the Ridley Scott 
thriller Body of Lies; afterwards, he got the nod from Scorsese (Hugo), Barry 
Sonnenfeld (Men in Black 3), Spielberg (Lincoln), Woody Allen (Blue Jasmine) 
and Danny Boyle (Steve Jobs).

He is fully conscious that the rocket the Coens lit under his career has led 
to colourful character roles: an obsessive film critic in Hugo, a sex-pest 
dentist in Blue Jasmine, a timid computer nerd in Jobs. A return to the centre 
ground would appear to be some way off. “Maybe it’s my insecurity,” he says, 
“but I would love another opportunity like that. I would love it if someone 
would take a chance in hiring me to play the lead again.”

But what an opportunity it was. Gopnik was the role of a lifetime and the 
attention to detail the Coens lavished on it is evident in every frame. Even 
now, there’s a wondering tone in his voice as he recalls landing the role – 
“nothing like that ever happened to me before” – and explains that he 
originally went to audition for theYiddish-language prologue that opens the film
 <https://vimeo.com/62620013>. “They decided to go with folks who spoke the 
language fluently. But several months later I got a call saying they wanted to 
see me again both for Larry and Uncle Arthur. After a long period of 
deliberation it came my way.”


He says he doesn’t know exactly what it was the Coens saw in him but, “it all 
seemed to work out all right”. Perhaps there’s a genuine contiguity between the 
self-effacing, put-upon Gopnik and the undeniably modest Stulhbarg, whose 
cautious, diffident method of expressing himself appears a cigarette-paper away 
from the Coens’ creation. “I’ll never be able to thank them enough,” he says, 
with heartfelt earnestness.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444825001411%2F4ef50640-c0ae-468d-bcc1-ede959bfae39-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seriously%20big%20break%3A%20how%20a%20call%20from%20the%20Coens%20changed%20Michael%20Stuhlbarg's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seriously%20big%20break%3A%20how%20a%20call%20from%20the%20Coens%20changed%20Michael%20Stuhlbarg%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444825001411%2F4ef50640-c0ae-468d-bcc1-ede959bfae39-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Michael Stuhlbarg as computer scientist Andy Hertzfeld, with Michael 
Fassbender and Kate Winslet in the biopic Steve Jobs. Photograph: Francois 
Duhamel 
Except, of course, Stuhlbarg has been around all along – doing a quaint thing 
called theatre. He theorises that Joel Coen may have seen him in a reading, 
with Frances McDormand (the director’s wife) or, more plausibly, on stage in 
the Broadway production of Martin McDonagh’saward-winning play The Pillowman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/11/theater/reviews/a-storytelling-instinct-revels-in-horrors-fun.html?_r=0>
 in 2005 (“a lot of folks came out to see it”). It certainly helped him snag 
another of his post-Serious Man roles, inSeven Psychopaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/07/seven-psychopaths-review>, 
McDonagh’s follow-up to In Bruges.


In fact, Stuhlbarg’s career demonstrates the hidden links between New York’s 
theatre world – a hothouse community of highminded souls – and its brasher 
movie land cousin. After a spell in theJuilliard <http://www.juilliard.edu/> 
drama department (inspired, he says, by former graduates such as William Hurt, 
Kevin Kline and Kevin Spacey – “they had great elan and facility with 
language”), he decided to give professional acting a shot. After a couple of 
years of working steadily, he made his first lead,playing Richard II for – of 
all people – Steven Berkoff 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/04/10/theater/sunday-view-berkoff-directs-a-quirky-stylish-richard-ii.html>
.


He says that, at the time, he had no great ambition to move into cinema – 
“other actors in my generation were breaking into the film industry, but I felt 
completely unprepared for acting on camera” – and still sounds relieved that, 
in between shooting A Serious Man andits being released to sobbing acclaim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/28/a-serious-man-film-review>, he 
managed to land a regular, punch-clock type of acting job, as racketeer Abe 
Rothstein on the Martin Scorsese-produced TV seriesBoardwalk Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/21/boardwalk-empire-box-set-review>
.

With the fervency of someone who hasn’t fully put their hardscrabble audition 
days behind them, Stuhlbarg identifies “the two Ellens” –Chenoweth 
<http://www.playbill.com/features/article/the-other-chenoweth-casting-director-gives-stage-actors-their-film-careers-164225>
 andLewis 
<http://www.backstage.com/interview/artios-awards-2015-ellen-lewis-her-legendary-career/>
, casting directors for the Coens and Scorsese respectively – as key figures in 
his success. “Without them, nobody would know who I am.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444827133871%2Fb7524e48-f7c8-4103-80e4-68a28679dcb9-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seriously%20big%20break%3A%20how%20a%20call%20from%20the%20Coens%20changed%20Michael%20Stuhlbarg's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seriously%20big%20break%3A%20how%20a%20call%20from%20the%20Coens%20changed%20Michael%20Stuhlbarg%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fmichael-stuhlbarg-coen-brothers-serious-man-steve-jobs-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444827133871%2Fb7524e48-f7c8-4103-80e4-68a28679dcb9-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Michael Stuhlbarg as Edward G Robinson in Trumbo. Photograph: PR 
They certainly do now. Stuhlbarg has Steve Jobs in the can, and another film, 
Trumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/trumbo-review-bryan-cranston-toronto-tiff>
 (in which he plays Edward G Robinson) working the festival circuit. He may or 
may not ever get to play a lead role again – but even if it never happens, he 
sounds content. “You never know what is going to happen in your life. I had 
been acting since I was a kid, I had done 35 plays in New York before Serious 
Man, but you never know what putting one foot in front of the other is going to 
do. I put my best foot forward to make the best impression I could have, and 
it’s been serving me well ever since.”


 * Steve Jobs is out in the US, and released in the UK on 13 November; Trumbo 
is out on 6 November in the US, 5 February in the UK  