
A cloud appears to have dropped out of the sky and landed among the trees in 
Kensington Gardens, in west London. This hazy lattice of spindly white rods, 
which hovers above the ground like a digital apparition, is the 13th annual 
Serpentine Gallery pavilion, designed by the Japanese architectSou Fujimoto 
<http://www.sou-fujimoto.net/>. At 41, Fujimoto is the youngest architect to be 
selected for the commission, and he brings a fresh, experimental energy to the 
project.

"I wanted to create a structure that was somewhere between architecture and 
nature," he says, "something like the primitive beginnings of a building."

His pavilion is not composed of walls or roofs, but rather is seemingly grown 
from a steel matrix that extends upwards and outwards in all directions, like a 
garden trellis on steroids. It forms a shape-shifting mass with no discernible 
edges. Here and there, it rises into pert peaks and swells outwards in dramatic 
overhangs; from other angles, it appears to slump like a deflated meringue.

As you walk around, over and through the structure, the layered grids play 
games with your eyes, creating ever-changing patterns in a three-dimensional 
tartan weave. In some places it seems solid, forming dense, rocky crags; in 
others, it is barely there at all.

Stepping inside, surrounded by this all-pervasive grid, feels like entering a 
computer mainframe, as imagined in the 1980s. It is a dazzling, Tron-like 
landscape of infinite white lines, the modular, cubic units of which form 
terraces of seating and steps, side tables and a coffee bar, as if Fujimoto has 
revealed an invisible geometric order of which the whole world is made. The 
cubes are not closed, but rather extend in projecting rods, like the frayed 
edges of fabric, suggesting the network might continue to grow. On an overcast 
day, it's hard to tell quite where it ends.

Relating his design to a distinctly Japanese conception of nature, Fujimoto 
describes how the process of crafting the form was "like clipping a bonsai 
tree". Working from hand drawings and large-scale models, he "pruned" sections 
of the grid to provide nooks and crannies, creating a multi-levelled terrain of 
places to perch and explore.

"Architecture," he says, "should provide a background structure that allows 
people to behave in a different way. I want visitors to find cosy spaces here." 
It is an idea that runs through all of his buildings, which he compares to 
caves and nests, trees and forests: natural landscapes to be inhabited.

His transparent House NA 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2012/05/08/house-na-by-sou-fujimoto-architects/>, in 
Tokyo, is as close as you could get to a treehouse of steel and glass, with 
clusters of rooms suspended within an impossibly slender frame. It is, like the 
pavilion, a beguiling nest of what he calls in-between spaces that elegantly 
dissolve the boundaries between the private interior and the busy street on a 
cramped urban site.

But Kensington is a long way from the dense plots of inner-city Tokyo. Here, 
his utopian frame looks like it could do with something to rub up against. It 
is a shame that, where it meets the realities of safety and access, his 
continuous landscape is fettered with balustrades and safety rails to stop you 
hitting your head â€“ as well as layers of acrylic discs to keep out the rain.

Like the dreamy megastructure projects of the 1960s before it, the relentless 
aerial grids ofYona Friedman <http://www.yonafriedman.nl/> and the tree-like 
towers of the JapaneseMetabolists 
<http://architecturalmoleskine.blogspot.co.uk/2011/10/metabolist-movement.html>
, with their plug-in living pods, Fujimoto's cloud is somewhat deflated when it 
meets the real world. But as a powerful distillation of a young architect's 
ideas and one of the most radical pavilions to date, it sets a promising 
direction for the Serpentine programme.
 