
Seth MacFarlane, creator of Family Guy, American Dad and the hit comedy film 
Ted, has written his first novel, an adaptation of his forthcoming filmA 
Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/mar/19/sarah-silverman-seth-macfarlane-western>
.

The film was co-written, produced and directed by MacFarlane, who also stars 
in the lead role. He plays a sheep herder in the wild west intent on avoiding 
the multifarious sticky ends that characterise frontier life – but has to man 
up when his girlfriend leaves him for another man, and when a beautiful 
gunslinger and her outlaw husband arrive in town.

The film stars Charlize Theron, Liam Neeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson> and Amanda Seyfried, and is 
released in the US on 30 May. But spoiler-loving MacFarlane fans can find out 
the ending before that, as the novelisation is published on 4 March.

Novelist is another quiver to MacFarlane's bow, who is a kind of Renaissance 
Bro, bringing his knockabout humour to bear on a wide variety of projects. He 
is most famous for creatingFamily Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/family-guy>, the animated series 
about a dysfunctional family which is currently in its 12th season, and which 
he provides multiple voices for as well as producing. It span off The Cleveland 
Show, and American Dad! was another animated success.

He moved into film directing with Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148370/ted> in 2012, which starred Mark 
Wahlberg, Mila Kunis and a talking bear voiced by MacFarlane – it earned $550m 
worldwide and was voted the Guardian'ssecond favourite film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/dec/13/best-films-ted-seth-macfarlane>
 of that year, and a sequel is currently slated for a release next year. He is 
also known for his musical talents, performing musical theatre numbers at the 
Proms in 2012 and of course hosting the Oscars in 2013,attracting controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/18/oscars-producers-defend-seth-macfarlane>
 for such ditties as We Saw Your Boobs.

Next up is Cosmos, a documentary series from US pop-astrophysicist Neil 
DeGrasse Tyson that MacFarlane is producing, and that will bepremiered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/10/sxsw-film-festival-chef-jon-favreau-veronica-mars>
 at this year's SXSW festival. His next animation series, Bordertown, will 
appear on Fox later this year – it is the story of a border patrol agent in a 
Texan town near Mexico, and his Mexican immigrant neighbour. The friction 
between the pair will no doubt invite hilarious consequences.
 