
Seth MacFarlane is known for his musical numbers in his animated comedies 
Family Guy and American Dad!, as well as his semi-disastrous stab at hosting 
the Oscars. Now he will parlay that enthusiasm into the most wonderful time of 
the year: the 40-year-old hasrecorded a Christmas album 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop-shop/6091812/seth-macfarlane-collaborates-with-norah-jones-sara-bareilles-on>
, featuring guest spots from Norah Jones and Sara Bareilles, which will be 
released this year.

Macfarlane assembled a crack team of swingtime greats, including former Frank 
Sinatra bassist Chuck Berghoffer and a 52-piece orchestra, to record the album 
in Abbey Road studios. Jones joins him for Little Jack Frost Get Lost, while 
Bareilles duets on Baby It's Cold Outside. Other songs include Let It Snow and 
swooning Sinatra obscurityChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Dreaming, all of which are 
arranged by longtime MacFarlane collaborator Joel McNeely.

It's far from the first airing of MacFarlane's love for swing and vocal jazz. 
His debut album, Music is Better Than Words, was released in 2011 and earned 
two Grammy nominations, and he's been a frequent Proms guest singing songs from 
the movies and stage. During his hosting of the 2013 Academy Awards, he sang a
widely criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/26/seth-macfarlane-onion-oscars-misogyny>
 song called We Saw Your Boobs, making reference to actors' nude scenes amid a 
high-stepping Broadway-style number; the blend of classy orchestration with 
bawdy humour has long been a feature of his long-running animated series Family 
Guy, which features a barbershop song about Aids and a big band number about 
Down's Syndrome.

MacFarlane's first film Ted, in which he voiced a foul-mouthed teddy bear 
alongside Mark Wahlberg and Mila Kunis, made nearly $550m worldwide – it also 
featured Norah Jones in a cameo role. His new movie and his first in a 
non-voice role,A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west>, opens on 
June 6 and co-stars Charlize Theron and Liam Neeson in a comedy set during the 
Wild West. As well as starring, MacFarlane directed, produced and wrote the 
script, which he has also turned intohis first novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/million-ways-die-west-review-seth-macfarlane-first-novel>
.
 