
Despite it being that rarest of films, a critical and commercial success, with 
seven Oscars and three-quarters of a billion dollars in worldwide theatrical 
grosses to its name, a tiny band of naysayers have got it in forGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity>.

 Last year, for example, Neil deGrasse Tyson took great delight in trashing 
the film’s perceived scientific flaws on Twitter 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/adambvary/neil-degrasse-tyson-trolled-gravity-on-twitter>
. Astronaut Chris Hadfield appeared on talk shows,besmirching Sandra Bullock’s 
choice of underwear 
<http://arts.nationalpost.com/2013/11/12/chris-hadfield-says-sandra-bullocks-underwear-in-gravity-were-all-wrong-video/>
. Alan Evans, in this space on Tuesday,named Gravity as the most overrated film 
of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/11/gravity-my-most-overrated-film>
. This despite the existence of The Dark Knight Rises. Surely that can’t be 
right.

 Perhaps sensing that consensus is starting to slip against it a little, the 
producers of Gravity have decided to release a new version designed to show the 
film in the most realistic way possible. The new diamond luxe version of 
Gravity comes with the option to turn off Steven Price’s Oscar-winning score 
entirely, allowing viewers to experience the ostensibly realistic thundering 
silence of space. Whether or not that’s something that anyone would actually 
want to do is another matter, since the score – especially theethereal Sigur R 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8>ó 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8>s thrum of Aningaaq 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0zcYkuIzzy8>, playing during a scene so vital 
that it received its own spin-off short – is one of the film’s best assets.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQUb1k2vbXqU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQUb1k2vbXqU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQUb1k2vbXqU&media=>
Either way, it’s becoming quite fashionable to muck around with a film’s 
soundtrack. Back in 2005, the Australian band the New Pollutants premiered a 
new score for Fritz Lang’sMetropolis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/metropolis>, to moderately successful effect. 
And just last month, Radio 1’s Zane Lowe rescored Drive for a BBC3 broadcast; a 
move that only really succeeded in turning Nicolas Winding Refn’s studious 
passivity into a slightly more emotionally on-the-nose extended advert for 
bomber jackets.

But perhaps there’s something in both replacing a film’s score and removing it 
entirely. If anyone with the talent and the inclination happens to be reading, 
here are the rescores I’d most like to see.


Titanic

If any film deserves the Gravity Diamond Luxe treatment, it’s this. Imagine 
how much better it’d be with no score at all. All the early scenes – from the 
dinner, to the love scene, to “King of the world” – would be so much better if 
they were accompanied only by the plaintive slap of water on metal. And then, 
obviously, the last third of the film would contain nothing but creaking metal 
and screaming, something much more in tune with my ambient internal commentary 
than anything James Horner could compose.No Celine Dion either 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8tuvz_9D7Ok>, which frankly is a massive bonus.

Jurassic Park

I’d love to see if the iconic scene where the humans first clap eyes on the 
dinosaurs would be as majestic without John Williams’ soaring theme. Based on 
theinfamous melodica cover version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ynlk9K1psFg>
, I doubt it. Also, without all that music, we’d probably get to hear a 
dinosaur fart. That’d be fun.


Mission: Impossible II

It goes without saying that Limp Bizkit’s whiny poor-me rap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NdpP6ynPbiY> contributes hugely to the dismal 
quality of this film. Let’s replace all trace of them with something less 
offensive, like the sound of crying children or dentist drills or distant 
screaming. Anything, really.

Justin Bieber: Never Say Never

See above <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=COJCN3Mhr14>.


Vanishing Point

Yaketty Sax <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZnHmskwqCCQ>. All the way 
through. All the way through.


 What do you think? Are film scores untouchable pieces of art, or would you 
welcome a tinker? Any films that you’d like to see rescored? Leave your ideas 
below.

• New version of Gravity minus score  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/12/gravity-space-sandra-bullock-alfonso-cuaron-score>
• Gravity: my most overrated film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/11/gravity-my-most-overrated-film>

 * This article was amended on 12 November 2014, to correct the name of the 
composer of the score for Titanic and the takings of Gravity.  