
The debut trailer for Captain America: Civil War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-civil-war> has hit the web, 
ushering in a new era which sees the world’s superheroes at each other’s 
throats. So who’s on whose side, what happened to set them at odds, and why 
does everyone look so miserable?


Sky-high expectations for Marvel's super-slate of comic book movies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/superhero-comic-book-movies-cinemas>
This almighty superhero smackdown has multiple sparks

In Mark Millar’s Civil War <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/civil-war-9.html>
, the 2006 comic book from which the plot of the Russo Brother’s new film is 
loosely drawn, Captain America and Iron Man find themselves on opposite ends of 
the argument when authorities attempt to introduce a Superhero Registration Act 
to keep costumed crime fighters under control. In the movie, the act goes by 
the name of the Sokovia Accords, an international agreement to limit superhero 
activities sparked by the destruction of the fictional Eastern European nation 
during the events of Avengers: Age of Ultron.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbdc930cd2ed50bff6b1a875a7796ae77f3a86d0%2F384_179_737_442%2F737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbdc930cd2ed50bff6b1a875a7796ae77f3a86d0%2F384_179_737_442%2F737.jpg>
 Stark’s sparks … Cap and Iron Man duke it out in the Captain America: Civil 
War trailer. Photograph: YouTube 
But there’s more. Cap and Tony Stark also find themselves duking it out 
following the actions of Sebastian Stan’s Bucky Barnes during the events of
Captain America: The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-first-look-review>
. While Chris Evans’ Steve Rogers seems willing to forgive his old pal for 
crimes committed while the latter was under the spell of Hydra, Stark takes the 
opposite view. Marvel has cleverly tied this new central conflict to the 
natural fallout from previous episodes, in the process creating a much more 
satisfying reason for superhero fisticuffs than we ever got in print.

Mark Ruffalo: Hulk has been cut from Captain America: Civil War
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/04/hulk-cut-from-captain-america-civil-war-marvel-mark-ruffalo>
William Hurt’s General Ross is back, and he still hates superheroes

Bringing back a character from the less-than-well-received Incredible Hulk, 
from 2008, seems like risky business. But who better to put a stop to all that 
unchecked superhero fun and games than Bruce Banner’s old nemesis? Ross has 
been given the unenviable task of telling Captain America to accept official 
oversight or face been taken out of the equation. A conversation that was never 
going to go down well with a guy whose last boss turned out to be a stooge for 
a bunch of Nazi crazies, still fighting the bad fight 70 years after the second 
world war.

Tony Stark’s new superpower is a palpable ‘sad face’

The tension between Captain America and Tony Stark, the two unofficial leaders 
of The Avengers, began during the events of Ultron when the latter accidentally 
created an artificially intelligent tech demon hell-bent on destroying all 
sentient life on Earth. But things have clearly taken a distinct downward turn 
in the meantime, and Downey Jr’s face is sadder than that of a small boy who’s 
just been told Christmas is cancelled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f36d7254f3efbeb295c3c3ad47706ee1c029d6f%2F121_0_880_528%2F880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seven%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seven%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Captain%20America%3A%20Civil%20War%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fseven-things-trailer-captain-america-civil-war-marvel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f36d7254f3efbeb295c3c3ad47706ee1c029d6f%2F121_0_880_528%2F880.jpg>
 Sadface … Robert Downey Jr in the Captain America: Civil War trailer. 
The two opposing teams have begun to form

At the end of Ultron, Captain America had recruited a new team comprising War 
Machine, Vision, Scarlet Witch, Falcon and Black Widow. But it looks like he’s 
lost a few of those, namely Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow and Don Cheadle’s 
War Machine, to Iron Man, and picked up Hawkeye and Bucky along the way. 
Vision’s allegiance is more mysterious, but it’s a fair bet that the god-like 
being formerly known as Jarvis sees such mortal spats as being a bit beneath 
him.

Are superhero movies really set to go the way of the western?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/sep/04/are-superhero-movies-really-set-to-go-the-way-of-the-western>
Black Panther has arrived in the Marvel cinematic universe

Chadwick Boseman’s African warrior seems to be going up against Team Cap, but 
it’s not clear if he’s on Iron Man’s side. T’Challa’s introduction is a rare 
instance of a superhero being introduced in an Avengers-style ensemble flick 
(which Civil War clearly is) before getting his own spin-off in 2018.Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> is adopting the same dynamic, 
apparently borrowed from rival studio Warner Bros’ DC Comics-based universe, 
for another notable trailer absentee – Tom Holland’s Spider-Man.

War Machine is in trouble

If Bucky is Steve Roger’s best pal, we can be assured that Team Iron Man isn’t 
going to be at all happy at the state of James Rhodes, aka War Machine, in the 
trailer. Is Rhodes dead, or just injured? In any case, we might just be about 
to see Tony Stark’s angry face.

It’s already looking better than the comic book

Millar’s graphic novel dragged just about every Marvel superhero under the sun 
into the fight, but Captain America: Civil War looks likely to benefit from 
keeping the superpowered antagonists to a round dozen or so. We can also expect 
to see Paul Rudd’s Ant-Man in his debut non-solo outing, and Martin Freeman as 
some sort of US government stooge.

At first glance, there’s little here that’s not to like, though you do wonder 
why producers didn’t simply title the movie Civil War. Perhaps Marvel is keen 
to build Evans’ Captain America up to the point where his solo movies feel like 
the kind of event that Downey Jr’s Iron Man films have become, especially with 
the latter now past 50 and expected to set the suit aside for good after the 
events of back to back Avengers: Infinity War movies in 2018 and 2019.
 