
Halfway through the morning, with fog rising from the fen, a fox was caught 
out at the end of its night shift. It had opted to cross an open field of 
winter wheat, whose short, narrow blades offered no cover at all. Plenty saw 
the fox coming. A pair of Egyptian geese that had been grazing at the fringe 
made a precautionary lift off. A clamour of crows well and truly outed the 
predator by swirling in an umbrella of flaps and raucous jeers.

The fox paused to sit out the overhead commotion, then traipsed a little 
further before squatting down to swivel its eyes, ears and snout, and stare 
intently in the direction of my glinting binocular lenses. It was not the only 
animal that had been found out.

The day before I had watched another fox stalk a mouse at dawn, paws flattened 
on the ground, shoulders hunched, every muscle marshalled by complete 
concentration. And when it leapt up and pounced I thought it an object of 
balletic perfection.

This one was more of a dozy lion. There is a looseness, a jauntiness in an 
off-duty fox, an actor out of costume, performance over. Yet even allowing for 
its dilatory offguardedness, there was something not quite right about this 
creature, and I could feel my brow crinkling against my binoculars in 
puzzlement. Why was it stopping so often in such an exposed spot?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fshambling-fox-is-caught-out-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6203735b783b355a6e648b41d5243407b282ab5%2F2082_1129_1802_1081%2F1802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shambling%20fox%20is%20caught%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fshambling-fox-is-caught-out-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shambling%20fox%20is%20caught%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fshambling-fox-is-caught-out-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6203735b783b355a6e648b41d5243407b282ab5%2F2082_1129_1802_1081%2F1802.jpg>
 Intense concentration for a fox as it leaps to catch prey in a meadow. 
Photograph: FLPA/Alamy 
The fox shambled on, moving closer until it was standing directly side-on, the 
point when a beam of sunlight suddenly flamed its raggedy flanks. It held its 
brush so low that it seemed to form a fur extension, a trailing elongation of 
its rump.

At this angle, its irregular movement made sense. As it brought one hind leg 
forward, the other dangled uselessly, bent stiffly at the knee. With every 
step, the afflicted limb swung forward, but did not touch the ground, and so 
the hobbled animal limped on. It passed behind some trees out of sight and I 
reflected sadly that a fox may kill a mouse but an injury will kill a fox.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 