
A £23m pay deal for the chief executive of Reckitt Benckiser will come into 
focus this week when the Dettol-to-Durex maker puts its remuneration plans to 
the vote at its annual general meeting. Rakesh Kapoor’s package –twice what he 
received the year before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/reckitt-benckise-paid-chief-executive-23m-last-year-rakesh-kapoor-share>
 – has been described by one shareholder as a misjudgment of the mood of 
investors, who have marked 2016 as the year they are prepared to say no to 
exorbitant pay deals.

Boardroom bosses will be trying to gauge whether the revolts, which got this 
year’s season off to a blistering start, can be maintained. With BP and Smith & 
Nephewstill reeling from No votes at the start of April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
, Shire Pharmaceuticals and fellow FTSE 100 member CRH were last week rebuked 
by investors, while in the FTSE 250, engineering firm Weir had to abandon plans 
to issue shares to its directors after a resounding protest.

“This AGM season is shaping up to be the most raucous on record,” said Simon 
Walker, director general of the Institute of Directors. “I welcome the fact 
that shareholders are finding their voice.”

The mood appears to be hardening even compared with the so-called shareholder 
spring of 2012, which delivered boardrooms their first jolt since May 2003 – 
whenGlaxoSmith-Kline’s £22m deal for then chief Jean-Pierre Garnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/may/20/executivesalaries.executivepay2>
 was rejected.

That was the first time shareholders had had a direct vote on pay. In 2013 the 
system changed, with the advisory vote on remuneration reports covering that 
year’s pay now supplemented by a second vote on remuneration policy for the 
upcoming three years. Crucially, that vote is binding.

Walker said: “Investors are still getting used to their new binding vote, and 
have seemed cautious about using it so far, perhaps waiting to see whether 
boards pre-emptively addressed concerns on executive pay. It is vital that 
boards do this. The binding vote has not yet had the desired effect and 
shareholders are making their displeasure clear.”

The annual meeting season continues this week. On Thursday, Reckitt will ask 
investors to vote on its pay report and new remuneration policy, which reduces 
the maximum number of shares that can be awarded to Kapoor but still means he 
can get multiples of his salary in shares. The company hopes to head off a 
revolt by emphasising its performance – its stock market value is up £21bn in 
three years.

Other companies holding AGMs include Standard Chartered, Royal Bank of 
Scotland, Glaxo and Aviva, whose chief executive, Andrew Moss, was forced out 
in the 2012 revolt.

Investors are also focusing on companies outside the FTSE 100, including Man 
Group, the hedge fund firm that awarded chief executive Manny Roman a 10% 
salary rise for 2016. Its AGM is on Friday and in its annual report points out 
that Roman has not had a salary rise for five years, while performance has 
improved.

In the coming weeks there will also be meetings of Shell and WPP, which 
announced last Friday thatchief executive Sir Martin Sorrell had received 
£70.4m for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/sir-martin-sorrell-70m-in-2015-pay-deal-wpp>
.

WPP responded to a revolt by changing its bonus schemes: investors are 
scrutinising the small print of this year’s deal before deciding how to vote in 
June. Sorrell has set out his case that he is being paid for performance. Pay 
revolts are often sparked when this link breaks down. They can also happen when 
shareholders are caught unawares – as happened last week withShire’s 25% salary 
rise for chief executive Flemming Ørnskov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/shareholder-rebellions-shire-pay-agm-ceo-investor-anger>
.

There also signs that investors are focusing on absolute pay. Stefan Stern of 
the High Pay Centre is calling for the disclosure of pay ratios – comparing the 
boss’s reward with average pay in the company – as a way to keep boardrooms in 
check. The idea was also raised last week by major investor Legal & General 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/pay-ratio-between-bosses-and-employees-will-be-2016s-hot-topic>
. “If public disapproval and shame is what it takes, that sort of disclosure 
could be helpful,” he said. He pointed out that shareholder action tends to 
come in waves, and hopes this year’s will have a lasting impact.

Peter Montagnon, a key figure at the Association of British Insurers at the 
time of the Glaxo revolt who is now at the Institute of Business Ethics, 
agreed: “It’s possible that this time will be different because of public 
awareness of inequality, and recognition that the system is pretty well broken.”

A report produced under the auspices of the Investment Association, which has 
taken on the governance monitoring previously done by the ABI, concluded last 
month that the current approach to executive pay is “not fit for purpose”.

Montagnon said: “There is a case for root-and-branch reform but all sides 
would have to agree it needs to change. Some companies like the present system 
because they feel they can game it. Some shareholders like it because they make 
a living out of it and prefer to stay in their comfort zone.”
 