
We always knew there was something extraordinarily privileged about camping, 
the exact way we wanted, on our land on the New South Wales south coast, with 
its wild forest, native grass paddocks and big sky views.

We loved gathering around a fire, with friends coming and going, having enough 
space not to worry about neighbours if someone pulled out a guitar and belted 
out a bad song or if the kids ran through the forest screaming while playing 
murder in the dark.

We liked having our dog with us and we preferred that there were no jumping 
pillows, swimming pools, big amenity blocks or an on-site office selling 
ice-creams. Our infrastructure was a tent, some basic camping gear and a ring 
of rocks for our fire. We cooked on a hot plate over coals, with jaffle irons, 
or baked in a camp oven.
 Camping at Old Bara, 20kms from Mudgee, NSW. One of the sites available on 
the website YouCamp. Photograph: YouCamp 
The “shower” was a bucket of warm water – magnificently cleansing after a day 
spent in the sea.

We figured if we treasured those days and nights so much then a lot of other 
people would too.

A campervan trip in outback New South Wales, where dirt is red and stars blaze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/09/a-campervan-trip-in-outback-new-south-wales-where-dirt-is-red-and-stars-blaze>
At the time we hadn’t heard of the phrase “share economy” – all we knew was 
that a lot of outdoor leisure in Australia had become what we called McCamping 
– increasingly monopolised by homogenous, big business-operated van and cabin 
parks or government agencies, such as state-run national parks.

Our plan was to open up thousands of under-utilised farms and other properties 
across Australia to visitors who didn’t want to stay in van parks or compete 
for spots in crowded public campgrounds. We also wanted to cater for those who 
felt forced to camp illegally in rest areas or picnic grounds because they 
didn’t want to pay the surprisingly high costs of many tourist parks.

Somehow we wanted to create a 21st-century way for people to metaphorically 
knock on a farmer’s door and ask if they could pitch a tent for a few days on a 
back paddock or beside a river.

We figured if we treasured those days and nights so much then a lot of other 
people would too

All around us were beautiful properties, perfect for camping, mountain biking, 
walking or even birdwatching. What was missing was a mechanism for those who 
camp and those who have space for campers to come together.

In the summer of 2012, as we were preparing to start to build our website we 
called a meeting with our web designer.

Because it was during the Christmas break we met around the fireplace of the 
campsite on our property.

As I struggled to articulate our vision to the man whose job it was to build 
the website, Michael Honey, he cut straight to the chase: “What you are doing 
is creating a dating agency for campers and farmers”.

It was a nice line and it immediately resonated but it took a while for me to 
realise how spot on his assessment was. For me, that sentence has come to 
encapsulate what the share economy is all about.

The business model of many traditional service industries has been more like 
an arranged marriage than a relationship built on love.

When I caught my first ride-share, I was seriously taken aback at how the 
traditional taxi experience suddenly seemed like a 30-year-old, stale marriage 
where both sides take each other for granted.

I am a recent convert to Uber and I have been staggered at how superior it is 
to using a cab. Every ride I have had so far has been flawless – the 
technology, the fares, the cleanliness of the vehicles. But just as important 
is the impression that has been made on me by the drivers I have met. I have 
relished the hospitality and good manners, the interesting, exchanged stories 
and mutual respect. The share economy is not just about a new way of doing 
business, it is a return to an old and better, less anonymous way of being a 
human.

Top 10 hotels, hostels and campsites in and around Brisbane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/13/top-10-hotels-hostels-campsites-brisbane>
And if there is one thing to be learned from running a share economy website 
it is that the exchange of money for the product or service supplied is just 
part of the transaction.

What our landholders tell us is the extra income is often secondary to the 
pleasure of meeting people and seeing their land being appreciated and enjoyed 
by new eyes.

Whether you are climbing into a stranger’s car, organising a weekend in 
someone else’s home by the sea or, in our case, facilitating camping and 
outdoor experiences on private property, what is actually happening is that 
people are coming together and discovering again that sharing is good.

A huge part of what makes the share economy such a pleasure is the fact that 
everyone has to play nice or else risk getting a bad review.

The biggest flaw of the first incarnation of our website is that we 
underestimated how important reviews are to the share economy. We will address 
this when we relaunch next year.

Through reviews, the anonymity of big enterprise has been replaced with the 
watchful eyes of the “village” – or the “sharing” community that people choose 
to join when they benefit from someone else’s private property via a website.

And with many sharing economy businesses, as with dating, you get to choose 
the partner you want. We have people who want to camp nude and landholders who 
are happy to allow that. We have properties that welcome dogs and others that 
don’t. Some travellers want to avoid the high fees that come with good 
amenities and so travel in self-contained campers and caravans that even have a 
toilet, water and shower onboard. These “freedom” travellers, want to be 
charged accordingly.

Many landowners don’t want to have to jump through all the hoops of installing 
amenity blocks and so refuse all but this new wave of self-contained traveller.

Some families want to stay on properties that have all the bells and whistles. 
Others want to rough it. Some campers want the entire property to themselves. 
Some want to be able to make noise and others want quiet. Some want good 
telephone coverage and others want their kids to unplug completely.

But the biggest revelation from the share economy’s emergence has been that 
even when a new economy product is clearly superior and desirable to consumers, 
like renting a lovely home instead of a sterile motel room, or a good private 
campground, the political and legal system is often built to favour the poorer, 
established product.

A huge part of what makes the share economy a pleasure is everyone has to play 
nice or else risk getting a bad review

Private land camping is nowhere near as disruptive to existing van parks as 
ride sharing has been, but is just as challenging to governments. Every state, 
territory and shire takes a different approach to whether or not landholders 
can easily set up boutique tourism businesses on their land. In many places if 
a landholder wants to allow even just a single party of campers onto their 
land, they are forced through all the same hoops as if they were setting up a 
big commercial campground.

The insurance industry is also scrabbling to work out what to do with the 
share economy.

We have been meeting with planning, environment and tourism officials from 
around the country to try to negotiate ways for farmers (many of whom are 
desperate for new sources of income or for novel economic incentives to protect 
high conservation value assets on their land) to host visitors legally.

But until the tidal wave of demand overwhelms governments and they are forced 
to streamline land-sharing approvals, campers will be denied the experiences 
they crave, change will be slow and antiquated planning regimes will continue 
to apply.

But as Uber has shown, public support for the best service and experience will 
prevail. Our web designer was right – the share economy is as much a matter of 
the heart as of the mind, people coming together and cooperating, not just 
opening their wallets.

What Michael said has proven true – share economy businesses are, in essence, 
niche dating agencies.

And what governments will learn is that there is no standing between a person 
and their perfect first date.

• James Woodford is the cofounder of Youcamp.com <https://www.youcamp.com/>. 
Here are some suggestions from him of great places to camp:

Northern Territory

Lorella Springs Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/9 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/9>

Victoria

Wild Valley Gippsland Camping and Retro Caravans: 
https://www.youcamp.com/properties/195 <https://www.youcamp.com/properties/195>
Point Best: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/243 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/243>
Little Desert Nature Lodge: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/380 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/380>
Whinbury Hill Equestrian Centre: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/285 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/285>

Western Australia

Wooleen Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/68 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/68>
Lynton Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/72 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/72>
Ringwould: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/164 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/164>
Cambinata Yabbies: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/111 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/111>

Tasmania

Kimberley Cottage Camping: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/354 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/354>

Queensland

Camp Adventures at Point Glorious: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/492 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/492>
Greg and Deb’s Natural Bush Camping Retreat: 
https://www.youcamp.com/properties/428 <https://www.youcamp.com/properties/428>
Gleneden Organic Farm and Working Bullock Team: 
https://www.youcamp.com/properties/200 <https://www.youcamp.com/properties/200>
The Tin Pannikin: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/290 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/290>
Leichhardt Creek Organic Farm: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/204 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/204>
Mount Barney Lodge: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/108 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/108>
Mount Barney Wilderness Retreat: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/174 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/174>
Satinwood: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/103 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/103>

NSW

Cundle Flat Farm: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/54 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/54>
Newnes Hotel Cabins and Camping https://www.youcamp.com/properties/218 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/218>
Bed and Bush in Bungonia: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/272 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/272>
Mount Terrace Eco: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/459 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/459>
Belowra Camping Area: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/184 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/184>

South Australia

Mikkira Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/342 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/342>
Rawnsley Park Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/75 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/75>
Mount Ive Station: https://www.youcamp.com/properties/50 
<https://www.youcamp.com/properties/50>
 