
Top seed Maria Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> 
battled through to the semi-finals of the Australian Open and a match-up with 
Kim Clijsters after overcoming Russian Anna Chakvetadze at Melbourne Park.

Sharapova was expected to down the 12th seed with clinical ease in the early 
quarter-final on the Rod Laver Arena but was made to fight all the way for a 
7-6 (7-5), 7-5 win.

Chakvetadze, who despatched Patty Schnyder and Jelena Kostanic Tosic on her 
way to the quarters, proved to be a worthy adversary. In a first set that 
dragged on for 59 minutes, both players struggled to hold their own service as 
unforced errors hampered their efforts.

Following two breaks each the set eventually came down to a deciding 
tiebreaker and again errors were prevalent from both players. Finally Sharapova 
was able to edge ahead and claim the tiebreaker on the back of two mistakes 
from Chakvetadze.

In much the same fashion as the first set, both players again succumbed to 
early breaks in the second. Sharapova then broke Chakvetadze in the ninth game 
but faltered serving for the match, and then missed her match point chance on 
her compatriot's next serve.

Chakvetadze eventually relented, crashing the ball into the net in her next 
service game, and on Sharapova's third match point. Heading into her third 
semi-final appearance in a row at Melbourne Park, Sharapova said she was 
satisfied with her performance.

"I was just very competitive. Against a girl like that, that gets a lot of 
balls back, it's just a matter of who can be a little bit smarter, who can get 
an extra ball back, who is a little tougher," she said. "I thought I did the 
job really well today. Overall I thought it was a bit scratchy. First set I was 
down a break, [but] I get back in the groove."

Clijsters had to claw her way back from a set down to overcome three-time 
former champion Martina Hingis 3-6, 6-4, 6-3.

Despite a mixed performance, which was in stark contrast to her previous four 
romps on route to the quarters, Clijsters eventually muscled her way back into 
the contest before taking the match. Hitting 23 unforced errors to Hingis's 
seven, Clijsters crashed in the first set to the Swiss after having her service 
broken three times in just 35 minutes.

Casting aside her early setback, the tournament's fourth seed made a big 
improvement early in the second as she began to find the form that had 
previously eluded her.

Cantering to a 5-2 lead on the back of some strong winners and as Hingis began 
to falter, the Belgian looked set to seal the win in no time. However, the 
costly errors that had subsided began to crop up again as Hingis pegged the 
score back to 5-4.

This resistance proved to be short-lived, however, as Clijsters upped the 
tempo, held off a break point on her own serve and then took the set. Clearly 
frustrated at relinquishing her grip on the match, Hingis started the final set 
in emphatic fashion with a break of her opponent's opening service game.

But it was not to be her day as Clijsters bounced back with three service 
breaks to put an abrupt end to the comeback queen's title aspirations. Despite 
falling in the quarter-finals at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> for the second consecutive 
year, Hingis said after the match that she was pleased with how she played.

"I had the best chances today to beat her from all the matches we've played in 
the past," she said. "Confidence-wise she definitely had the edge. But this 
time I definitely stepped it up. In the beginning we both were very nervous. 
But I came out stronger and I had my chances today. It was definitely 
disappointing. I felt like I was winning the match and I had all the things in 
my hands. But she's a great fighter. It was a great match."

Clijsters admitted she was still trying to work out how she won the match. "I 
think the only two things that I did well today was that I fought and I tried," 
she said. "I think those are the two things that made me play a little bit 
better when I had to, when it was most important. That's the only thing you can 
do when you're not hitting the ball well and you feel like whatever you're 
trying is not really going your way.

"That's the only thing you can do. Hopefully [it] turns it around. Luckily for 
me, it did."

Serena Williams and and Nicole Vaidisova will contest the other semi-final.

Women's quarter-finals

(4) Kim Clijsters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kim-clijsters> (Bel) bt 
(6) Martina Hingis (Swi) 3-6, 6-4, 6-3
 (1) Maria Sharapova (Rus) bt (12) Anna Chakvetadze (Rus) 7-6 (7-5) 7-5
 