
So the Australian Open has the glam slam final it desired. Russia's Maria 
Sharapova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/maria-sharapova> and Serbia's Ana 
Ivanovic have had more pictures taken of them than any other players over the 
last 12 days and they have raised their games to a level that has singled them 
out as the two outstanding women of the tournament.

Sharapova will look to win here for the first time for her third grand slam 
title while Ivanovic is chasing her first major title. Both are 20, though in 
terms of relative experience Ivanovic is an ing√©nue.

From the moment Sharapova won the Wimbledon singles title as a 17-year-old in 
2004 she appeared destined to dominate the sport. In one respect she already 
has, earning the sort of money from her off-court endorsements that even Roger 
Federer cannot match. But whereas he has 12 grand slam titles to his name, the 
US-based Russian has only two and that might be regarded as a poor return for a 
player who struck the headlines so early.

A heavy defeat by Serena Williams in the final here last year, coupled with a 
debilitating shoulder injury, raised further questions about Sharapova's 
future, ones she had appeared to answer after winning the US Open title in 2006 
by beating Justin Henin 6-4, 6-4 in the final.

At Flushing Meadows she discovered a new-found maturity that seemed likely to 
lift her to a higher plane. Then came the shoulder problem that badly affected 
her serve and it was not until the end-of-season WTA Tour Championship final 
against Henin in Madrid that she displayed clear signs of a complete 
rehabilitation.

She lost to the Belgian, principally because she ran out of gas, having played 
so little tennis, but nevertheless the performance in Spain buoyed her 
confidence and she entered the off season with new found vigour. "A week before 
Madrid I was feeling pretty good but I didn't expect so much from myself. I 
really played great tennis," Sharapova said. Having slipped to No 5 in the 
rankings, she knew the really big match here was always going to be the 
quarter-final against Henin, who had beaten Sharapova in six of their previous 
eight matches. Prior to that meeting this week the Russian had not dropped a 
set, though the quality and dominance of her victory over the world No1, whom 
she defeated 6-4, 6-0, was an eye-opener for everybody.

This was Sharapova as nobody had seen her before. She served beautifully, 
while touching on elements to her game that had previously been suspected but 
not really evident. Everybody knew she could strike the forte chords; the 
delicate touches of pianissimo were altogether more of a surprise.

Whereas Sharapova's semi-final victory over Ivanovic's Serbian compatriot, 
Jelena Jankovic, was straightforward - the Russian has won all her matches in 
straight sets - Ivanovic had to recover from being 6-0, 2-0 down against 
Slovakia's Daniela Hantuchova, a match blighted by ill-feeling after the victor 
was accused of using squeaky shoes to gain an unfair advantage.

"It's a distraction to the server. We played before and she never did it," 
Hantuchova said. A complaint was made to the umpire but no action was taken.

Ivanovic, who has dismissed her opponent's gripe by insisting any 
shoe-squeaking on her part was 'unintentional', admitted feeling emotionally 
flat after her quarter-final win over Venus Williams and will today keep a low 
profile in order to conserve as much mental and emotional energy as possible.

In Ivanovic's first major final at Roland Garros last year nerves shredded her 
game and she went down 6-1, 6-2 to Henin. She will be desperate for that not to 
happen again, although Sharapova, the overwhelming favourite, is bound to put 
her under huge pressure. "It's been a good ride so far but it's not over yet," 
said Sharapova ominously.
 