
The sharing economy makes headlines daily: from anti-Uber protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/11/cab-drivers-europe-protest-taxi-app-uber-london-madrid>
 across Europe toAirbnb's recent £5.9bn valuation 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304626304579509800267341652>
, new start-ups entering the private sector are offering more things to share 
(or rent, swap, borrow or barter) and more ways to do so.

Quietly and gradually, however, a parallel evolution is taking place in the 
public sector. While it doesn't end up on the front page – and might not even 
rely on a smartphone app – it may ultimately prove to be more transformative 
than any single platform or venture capitalist investment.

I'm talking about the emergence of Shareable Cities: mayors, civic innovators, 
sustainability leaders, economists and other champions working inside 
government to bridge the sharing economy with the public sector, harness its 
potential to better meet public needs, and enhance sustainable growth. 
(Coincidentally, this week also marks the one-year anniversary of theShareable 
Cities Resolution 
<http://www.usmayors.org/resolutions/81st_Conference/metro18.asp> signed by 15 
US mayors.)

To date, policy debates have occupied most of the airspace around cities and 
the sharing economy. We bemoan that zoning, insurance and taxation structures 
are by and large outdated for today's business – while too often forgetting 
that such circumstances are not unique to the sharing economy. Rather, policy 
reform for innovation is a hallmark of modern history. As vice president of the 
European CommissionNeelie Kroes recently said 
<http://ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/kroes/en/blog/my-view-todays-taxi-protests-and-what-it-means-sharing-economy>
, "We cannot address these challenges by ignoring them, by going on strike, or 
by trying to ban these innovations out of existence … We need to work with them 
not against them."

Greece as a case study

A recent trip to Greece brought home the challenges we face to make the 
sharing economy more inclusive. The 2008 economic crisis hit the Greek economy 
especially hard, and the country is still struggling to regain its health. 
Everyone is looking for ways to generate income, and tourism is an economic 
mainstay. At the same time,a very high percentage (82%) of Greeks 
<http://blogs.crikey.com.au/theurbanist/2012/06/17/are-high-home-ownership-countries-wealthier/>
 own their homes.

Ideally, Greeks would be able to share their homes with visitors and generate 
income via platforms such as Airbnb andOneFineStay <http://www.onefinestay.com/>
. This would be a win-win: individuals earn income from assets they already 
own, helping the government achieve its recovery goals as well.

Many Greeks participate in these services, and tourism regulators are eager to 
find new ways to innovate. However, they are stuck in a regulatory system that 
includes penalties of up to €50,000 – more than twice the average income of a 
Greek family today – for engaging in this kind of activity without a "special 
operation" licence. In many cases, private homes cannot realistically meet the 
licence requirements for factors beyond their control. As a result, value – 
financial, community and even fiscal – is left on the table.

Policy is key to inclusion

If we focus strictly on policy and the private sector, we miss some bigger, 
more important questions and conversations. First, we overlook how cities 
themselves can be participants and beneficiaries of the sharing economy.Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/cities> own all kinds of 
assets – from buildings to car fleets – that could yield additional revenues or 
cost savings (or both) if shared. Moreover, by partnering with sharing economy 
companies or sponsoring hyper-local initiatives, the city is able to learn, 
experiment and develop its strategy through direct experience.

In the United States, Airbnb's Shared City partnership with Portland 
<http://fortune.com/2014/03/26/airbnb-cozies-up-to-cities/>, Oregon and Etsy's 
Craft Entrepreneurship <http://craftentrepreneurship.com/> programs in New York 
City, Chicago, Dallas, Newark and Santa Cruz give new life to public-private 
collaboration and allow first-hand exposure to new business models. In Europe, 
several of theBloomberg Mayor's Challenge city semi-finalists 
<http://mayorschallenge.bloomberg.org/index.cfm?objectid=2EF12D10-CA57-11E3-A4230050569A3ED0>
 propose to apply sharing economy principles in different ways. In Asia,Seoul's 
Sharing City <http://sharehub.kr/english> initiative has supported dozens of 
resident-led sharing initiatives with public funding and other resources, with 
the primary goal of boosting community connectedness and trust. From Boston to 
Johannesburg, cities are testing the waters in thoughtful ways, while companies 
are developing unprecedented city engagements and opportunities for 
collaboration.

Second, all too often we forget the principal roles of policy makers: to 
ensure inclusive, balanced systems correct market distortions and give voice to 
marginalised communities. The sharing economy is often applauded for enhancing 
local economic investment, sustainable consumption and community connectedness. 
It brings people closer together. However, only recently have we begun to 
recognise the role – and importance – of inclusion in doing this.

To be sure, there are many ways this can happen. The ridesharing platform Lyft 
enables livelihood creation to anyone with a car; it also operates itsLyft For 
Good <http://blog.lyft.com/lyftforgood/> program, which seeks to promote public 
service and expand access to transport within its community. In India, Sakha 
applies a similar concept with itsWomen On Wheels 
<http://sakhaconsultingwings.com/hire-a-cab.php> programme, enabling 
livelihoods for marginalised women (and safe women-only rides as well). Yet, 
such examples barely scratch the surface of what is possible – and what is 
needed – in today's cities.

The sharing economy is not a panacea or a silver bullet. It will not 
single-handedly rebuild local economies or solve the jobs crisis. However, it 
does have the potential to transform both business and cities in unprecedented 
ways, and to boost urban resilience and sustainability in the process.

All members of the sharing economy – participants, entrepreneurs, 
policy-makers and other leaders – have an essential role to play in making this 
happen.

April Rinne is chief strategy officer at Collaborative Lab 
<http://www.collaborativeconsumption.com/lab/>

The circular economy hub is funded by Philips. All content is editorially 
independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 