
The most troubling aspect of Avi Shlaim's one-dimensional piece on former PM 
Ariel Sharon (Comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/13/ariel-sharon-no-man-of-peace-israel>
. 13 January) is his claim that the goal of the Gaza disengagement was 
"preventing the establishment of a Palestinian state". In an Orwellian turn of 
events, we are expected to believe that the relinquishing of Israel's control 
over Gaza was in fact carried out with the aim of harming the Palestinian 
national cause. A reality check is in order here: Israel did not install the 
Hamas terror group in Gaza, nor did it bring over thousands of rockets from 
Iran and proceed to fire them at its towns and cities. Gaza represents a tragic 
missed opportunity for the Palestinians to have presented their ability to live 
side by side with Israel in peace, one that still resonates as an alarming 
reminder of the challenges faced by Israel in the current peace negotiations.
Yiftah Curiel
Embassy of Israel

• Your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/12/ariel-sharon-legacy-of-division>
 (13 January) claims Ariel Sharon believed terror could only be defeated with 
bullets and bombs. But his policy of disengagement, not only withdrawing from 
Gaza, but also by building the barrier that has successfully prevented 
terrorist attacks, gives the lie to this simplistic conclusion and shows his 
creativity in devising pragmatic nonviolent solutions to Palestinian 
intransigence and murder. He was no saint, but he was the only politician in 
the Middle East who successfully managed to reduce conflict by two separate 
practical initiatives. If only Netanyahu and Abbas were so creative.
Arnold Zermansky
Leeds

• Your pieces on Ariel Sharon would not be out of place in an Arab newspaper. 
Ariel Sharon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon> was a soldier and 
his military achievements were legendary. The large battles against regular 
armies that he commanded in the 1956 Suez campaign, the 1967 Six Day War, and 
the 1973 Yom Kippur War are still taught in military academies around the world 
for their tactical brilliance. Countries under threat need good soldiers. The 
problem for many critics of Sharon is that he was a better, more daring and 
more successful military leader than his enemies.
Diane Saunders
Leeds 
 