
The annual meetings of Britain's leading companies have prompted a number of 
shareholder revolts this summer, includinga hat-trick of rebellions against the 
serial boardroom director Sir John Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/sir-john-peace-hat-trick-shareholder-revolts>
, who chairs three FTSE 100 firms – Standard Chartered, fashion retailer 
Burberry and credit-checking company Experian.

Heads have not rolled this year, unlike the "shareholder spring of 2012" when 
several chief executives were ousted, including the bosses of the 
pharmaceutical firm AstraZeneca and the insurer Aviva. There is, however, 
deeper scrutiny of executive pay after the business secretary, Vince Cable, 
allowed shareholders a new binding vote on future remuneration for executives 
last October.

Next Thursday, Royal Mail will hold its first annual meeting in Birmingham 
following itscontroversial float last autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/11/royal-mail-sale-lost-1bn-says-select-committee>
. The Commons business, innovation and skills committee said in ascathing 
report last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/11/royal-mail-sale-lost-1bn-says-select-committee>
 that taxpayers lost out on £1bn because the government and its City advisers 
underpriced the postal service's privatisation. Shareholders may also ask 
questions about a potentially hefty fine fromFrench competition authorities  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/16/royal-mail-anti-competition-inquiry-france>
investigating possible anti-trust violations at Royal Mail's parcel delivery 
subsidiary.

The brewer SABMiller, telecoms firm TalkTalk and Carphone Warehouse also have 
shareholder meetings next week. Carphone Warehouse is holding an extraordinary 
meeting, during which investors are expected to back its merger with Dixons.

The shareholder advisory group Pirc has advised investors to oppose 
SABmiller's remuneration policy, arguing that chief executive Alan Clark's 
maximum potential payout was "highly excessive" as it was far above the 
acceptable limit of 200% of his salary.

Pirc has also called on TalkTalk shareholders to vote against both the 
remuneration report and policy, noting that the company's boss, Dido Harding, 
received variable pay equal to 1,255% of her base salary last year, including a 
bonus and long-term incentive award granted in 2010, 40% of which vested the 
same year.

Vodafone, which has had stormy meetings in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2011/jul/26/vodafone-meeting-uk-uncut-protest>
, holds its annual general meeting the following week, on 29 July. Rounding off 
the AGM season, Sports Direct faces the wrath of shareholders on 10 September.
Leading investors have threatened to vote against the re-election of the 
chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/03/sports-direct-investor-revolt-bonus-scheme-mike-ashley-shareholders>
 and other board members who they think are weak and haven't acted in the best 
interests of all shareholders. Theboard came under fire for pushing through a 
multimillion-pound bonus scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/02/sports-direct-meeting-mike-ashley>
 for Sports Direct's founder,Mike Ashley, which he pulled out of this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/sports-direct-tycoon-mike-ashley-leaves-bonus-scheme>
.

AstraZeneca – 24 April


The drugmaker, which has since successfully fended off an unwelcome takeover 
approach from its US rival Pfizer, suffered a major shareholder revolt at its 
AGM.Around 40% of investors failed to back its remuneration report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/24/astrazeneca-defends-strategy-pfizer>
 and 31% refused to support its proposed pay policy for the next three years. 
Two years ago, the then chief David Brennan was forced to quit after a row over 
his £9m pay deal and a long period of worsening performance at Britain's 
second-biggest pharmaceuticals firm.

Barclays – 24 April


One in three Barclays investors refused to back its pay plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/24/barclays-agm-protests-shareholders-pay-bonuses>
, in a bloody nose for the bank over its decision to raise bankers' bonuses by 
10% despite a 32% fall in profits. Barclays faced a barrage of criticism at an 
acrimonious AGM and was accused of greed after handing out £2.4bn in bonuses 
last year. The anger was not restricted to small shareholders. One major City 
investor, Standard Life Investments, which owns almost 2% of Barclays, spoke 
out to explain why it had voted against.

Kentz – 16 May


The biggest shareholder revolt of the year happened at the AGM of the 
engineering firm Kentz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/16/kentz-shareholders-first-vote-down-pay-policy-remuneration-report-revolt>
, which was forced to tear up its pay plans after investors rejected them. It 
was the first time shareholders voted down a company's pay plans. About 51% of 
shareholders voted against the remuneration policy, 57% including abstentions.

Standard Chartered – 18 May


The emerging markets bank suffered a humiliating rebellion when 41% of 
investors voted against pay deals for its management team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/standard-chartered-pressure-executive-pay-investor-revolt>
. Investors said the bank failed to consult them properly about new bonuses for 
its chief executive, Peter Sands, and other top executives.

Morrisons – 5 June


The former chairman of the supermarket chain tore into its boss, Dalton Philips
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/morrisons-former-chairman-accuses-management-ruining-supermarket-philips-gibson>
, at Morrisons' AGM. In an extraordinary public tirade, which drew loud 
applause from hundreds of private shareholders, Sir Ken Morrison described 
Philips's strategy as bullshit and warned that the business founded by his 
father had been ruined.

Shareholders also registered a significant protest vote against the management 
team that presided over a 27% fall in the FTSE 100 company's share price in the 
year leading up to the AGM.The results showed 15.4% voted against Philips's 
re-election 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/morrison-w-sprmkts--mrw-/rns/result-of-agm/201406060700099931I/>
, 12.3% opposed the re-election to the board of the chairman, Sir Ian Gibson, 
and 26.5% voted against the pay policy.

Tesco – 27 June


At a bad tempered shareholder meeting, small investors turned out in force to 
accuse the management of arrogance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/27/tesco-chairman-pledgres-turnaround>
 and having lost shoppers' trust. They pointed to the retailer's worsening 
financial performance and slumping share price. All the resolutions were passed 
with little dissent, however. Only 1.14% of votes cast opposed the re-election 
to the board of Tesco's chief executive, Philip Clarke.

Burberry – 11 July


The fashion house faced a huge revolt over pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>
 with almost 53% of investors voting against its pay report, after it handed 
its new chief executive, Christopher Bailey, a one-off award of shares worth 
nearly £15m last year. While the vote was non-binding, Peace, the Burberry 
chairman, acknowledged that the board would have to "reflect on that and talk 
to shareholders". Before the AGM, a chorus of investor groups including Pirc 
and the Investment Management Association expressed concerns about Burberry's 
pay policies.

Icap – 16 July


At the interdealer broker run by former Conservative party treasurer Michael 
Spencer,one in three investor votes were cast against the remuneration report 
<http://www.icap.com/~/media/Files/I/Icap-Corp/pdfs/2014-07-16-Proxy-Results-.pdf>
. Investor bodies were concerned about bonuses at the money broker, whichwas 
fined £55m in September for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/25/icap-fined-55m-pounds-libor-rigging-charges-former-staff>
. The company's chairman, Charles Gregson, responded to concerns by promising 
to consult them on a new design of the policy in 2016.

First Group – 16 July


The annual meeting of the Aberdeen-based transport company witnessed more than 
a quarter of shareholders vote against executive pay 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/firstgroup-plc--fgp-/prn/result-of-agm/20140716135612PE118/>
, including deals for its boss, Tim O'Toole. The rebellion was smaller than the 
30% vote against pay last year. The company said it would "engage with 
investors to seek their views".

Experian – 16 July


At Experian's last AGM chaired by Peace, who founded the company more than 30 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/profile-sir-john-peace-experian-controversy>
,30% of investor votes (including abstentions)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/sir-john-peace-hat-trick-shareholder-revolts>
failed to support the election to the board of his successor, Don Robert. The 
revolt came after the Institute of Directors warned that Robert's appointment 
breached City codes stipulating that chief executives should not jeopardise the 
independent oversight of the board by stepping up to the crucial role of 
chairman. Investors said they were frustrated with Peace. One said: "He has a 
reputation of being difficult and is not helping to foster good relationships 
between the companies' management and major shareholders."
 