
Josh Frydenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg> 
overrode federal law to give the go-ahead to lethal shark nets in northern New 
South Wales to save the local tourist industry and nipper clubs.

The environment minister has argued that there was a “national interest” in 
installing the controversial nets because, with the tourism season about to 
start, surf shops were experiencing decreased sales and nipper clubs had fewer 
registrations.

On Wednesday the Tasmanian Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peter-whish-wilson> instigated a Senate 
inquiry to examine the netting program, as well as the minister’s reasons for 
making the exemption.

The netting program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/shark-nets-to-be-trialled-at-five-beaches-after-surge-in-northern-nsw-attacks>
 began after threeshark-related deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/09/man-dies-shark-attack-ballina-nsw-north-coast>
 in NSW waters. The nets aim to entangle sharks and are expected to catch other 
animals too, including dolphins, turtles and bony fish.

The program is not allowed under the federal Environment Protection and 
Biodiversity Conservation Act, but Frydenberg granted an exemption for the 
program, deciding it was a matter of “national interest”.

Guardian Australia can now reveal the reasons the environment minister gave 
<http://epbcnotices.environment.gov.au/_entity/annotation/b16072da-8bb6-e611-b33d-005056ba00a7/a71d58ad-4cba-48b6-8dab-f3091fc31cd5?t=1480553796642>
 for granting the exemption.

Among the reasons is a secret report that surf shops in the region have 
experienced a drop in sales, as well as a drop in registrations for the local 
nipper clubs.

Frydenberg argued tourism to the area contributed billions of dollars to the 
economy each year and that it was under threat by the media attention being 
drawn by the shark interactions.

Shark nets don't enclose swimmers – they catch and kill sharks | Leah Gibbs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/14/shark-nets-dont-enclose-swimmers-they-catch-and-kill-sharks>
“I considered that the public safety of water activities in the north coast of 
NSW is a matter of national interest,” Frydenberg said in his official 
statement of reasons for granting the exemption.

He argued that there was likely to be an impact on threatened species, as well 
as the critically endangered grey nurse shark, but that these impacts were 
“difficult to quantify at this time.”

The official statement of reasons follow Frydenberg earlier incorrect 
indication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/federal-government-open-to-shark-cull-on-nsw-north-coast>
 that any action other than culling was permitted without ministerial approval, 
adding he would consider allowing a cull of protected species.

“I absolutely put human safety first and foremost in my mind,” he told ABC TV.

“State governments … can take whatever mitigation measures they like within 
reason, other than the culling, without needing the federal approval. Now if 
they were to put a proposal to the federal government I would consider it, but 
we have to put human safety first.”

Whish-Wilson, an avid surfer, was scathing of Frydenberg’s new official 
reasons.

“Media attention over shark interactions is not sufficient justification for 
putting aside an environmental assessment and neither is confidential claims of 
reduced wetsuit sales,” he said.

“Sharks have been present in the ocean for 450m years. People were swimming in 
the ocean with sharks 100 years ago and people continued to be swimming in the 
ocean with sharks whenMike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird> became [NSW] premier 
two years ago.”

“This new Senate inquiry will look into the details of shark interactions 
without the hysteria. We will examine all the claims of the NSW government and 
the reasons given for the ... exemption.”
 