
For two decades my colleague Shauna Crockett-Burrows, who has died aged 81, 
pioneered a new approach to journalism by focusing upon the good in the world 
and the solutions to humanity's challenges. Shauna launchedPositive News 
<http://positivenews.org.uk/#> in 1993, and remained editor-in-chief until she 
died.

Born in Brighton, East Sussex, she attended Worthing high school for girls and 
then went to London where she worked as an actor and model. She met her first 
husband in the 1950s and the couple moved to West Sussex where they raised two 
daughters and Shauna promoted local artists. She then worked for the Arts 
Council and in 1970 established Shoreham Youth Workshop, a charity that ran 
arts and drama projects for young people.

Leading a successful campaign to protect the Adur estuary 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/reserves/guide/a/adurestuary/index.aspx> from a 
proposed road, Shauna also spent time as an independent local councillor. Her 
next enterprise involved growing and drying herbs for products sold at the 
first incarnation ofAnita Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/sep/12/guardianobituaries.business>'s 
Body Shop, in Hove.

Remarrying in the late 1970s, a pivotal moment then arrived when Shauna 
visited theFindhorn Foundation <http://www.findhorn.org/>, a spiritual and 
sustainable community in Scotland. There she "woke up," as she described it, to 
a greater sense of life purpose. In the early 1980s, she established Link Up, a 
local newsletter to connect people interested in ideas outside mainstream 
debate. It grew into a national magazine before being replaced by Positive News 
in 1993, at which time Shauna moved to Bishop's Castle in Shropshire.

Positive News soon grew to a circulation of 50,000 copies, providing a 
snapshot of positive change across diverse fields of interest and leading the 
way in coverage of issues such as new economics, organic agriculture and 
renewable energy. The paper spread internationally, with sister editions set up 
by Shauna in Spain, Hong Kong, the US and Argentina.

Shortly after establishing Positive News, she also founded Global News 
Education Trust (later renamed Positive News Trust), a charity promoting 
awareness of the achievements and ideas of young people.

Shauna was renowned for her strong will, fiery independence and seemingly 
endless energy. In 1998 she received theSchumacher award 
<http://www.schumacher.org.uk/>, which honours people and organisations in the 
UK who are transforming society, and in 2007 was recognised as one of the 
World's Inspirational Women in a project created by the human rights campaigner 
Zerbanoo Gifford.

She is survived by her daughters, Siobhan and Jo, six grandchildren and nine 
great-grandchildren.
 