
Joe Arpaio, the controversial sheriff of Maricopa County, Arizona, who has been
charged with criminal contempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/joe-arpaio-arizona-sheriff-contempt-court-racial-profiling>
 in a racial discrimination case, is preparing to deploy his deputies at 
polling stations on election day in a move that voting rights activists warn 
amounts to intimidation.


Poll workers assigned to the county’s 640 polling places have been instructed 
by the election recorder, Helen Purcell, to contact Arpaio’s office for all 
non-life threatening police needs on election day. Principals whose schools 
have polling places have also been told that Arpaio’s deputies will be 
“stationed around the valley for easy dispatch should there be any need for an 
officer”.

But voting rights activists warn that deploying Arpaio’s officers will itself 
serve as intimidation, given the sheriff’s track record of ethnic profiling, 
harassment and organized raids directed against undocumented Hispanic people. 
Arpaio is locked in a tense re-election fight on 8 November, as a growing 
number of Latino citizens and allied progressives seek to oust him as sheriff 
after 23 years in the post.

Arizona asks 'the unprecedented': could Democrats sweep the west?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/arizona-swing-state-west-democrats-clinton>
“The presence of Arpaio’s deputies would be intimidation,” said Samantha 
Pstross, president of theArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> 
Commission for Election Accountability, a coalition of non-partisan voting 
rights groups. “They consistently treat voters differently based on the color 
of their skin, so why would they do any differently on election day, especially 
given that their boss is running for re-election?

“This is a recipe for disaster,” she added.

Arizona is one of several states where activists fear potential intimidation 
and vigilantism at polling stations, whipped up by the rhetoric of Donald 
Trump, who hasfalsely claimed widespread voter fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-fact-check-rigged-election-voter>
 and a “rigged” election. The activists fear that the Republican presidential 
candidate ispromoting hostility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/election-day-violence-donald-trump-poll-watchers>
 by repeatedly exhorting his followers to act as poll watchers, particularly in 
areas withlarge African American 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-racial-politics-20161102-story.html>
 or other minority populations.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-mexico-visit-discuss-border-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Isn't%20it%20sad%3F'%3A%20Joe%20Arpaio%20says%20Mexico%20won't%20let%20him%20in%20to%20discuss%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-mexico-visit-discuss-border-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Isn%27t%20it%20sad%3F%27%3A%20Joe%20Arpaio%20says%20Mexico%20won%27t%20let%20him%20in%20to%20discuss%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-mexico-visit-discuss-border-video&media=>
‘Isn’t it sad?’: Joe Arpaio says Mexico won’t let him in to discuss border 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/22/sheriff-joe-arpaio-mexico-visit-discuss-border-video>
Arizona is one of nine states where federal election monitors will be present 
in significantly depleted numbers on Tuesday, as a result of a 2013 supreme 
court ruling,Shelby County v Holder <https://www.oyez.org/cases/2012/12-96>, 
whichgutted a key provision of the Voting Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jun/25/supreme-court-voting-rights-act-obama>
. The judgment freed the states, most of which are in the deep south, from 
federal controls designed to prevent disenfranchisement of minority voters 
stretching back to Jim Crow era of racial segregation.

As a result of Shelby, election monitors from the Department of Justice will 
be spread much thinner on the ground in Arizona on Tuesday, and their powers to 
enter and monitor polling places sharply curtailed. Voting rights campaigners 
fear that will leave voters vulnerable to potential intimidation.

Arpaio is now acting as a lightning rod for many of those fears. A passionate 
supporter of Trump’s insurgent bid for the US presidency, the 84-year-old 
styles himself as “America’s toughest sheriff” and has a long history of 
run-ins with the federal courts to prove it.

Last week, federal prosecutors charged Arpaio 
<http://www.12news.com/news/federal-prosecutors-file-proposed-charges-against-sheriff-joe-arpaio/337022713>
 with criminal contempt of court, for allegedly violating an order by 
continuing to arrest immigrants with no evidence they had broken any state law. 
That came on top of a 2007 civil lawsuit that found against him in a claim that 
he racially profiled Latinos.

'Born and raised' Texans forced to prove identities under new voter ID law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/27/texas-vote-id-proof-certificate-minority-law>
One of his most contentious techniques over the years has been to conduct mass 
raids of factories 
<http://archive.azcentral.com/news/articles/2011/07/14/20110714mesa-sheriff-arpaio-raid-bread-abrk.html>
 where undocumented Latinos are suspected to be working, rounding them up and 
then detaining anyone lacking appropriate immigration paperwork.

“He is hated and feared by the Latino community here,” Pstross said. 
“Especially hated, which is why the very presence of a sheriff’s deputy in a 
high-Latino population neighbourhood will cause problems on election day.”

Arizona has voted Republican in every presidential election since Bill 
Clinton’s re-election bid in 1996. But this year, the race gaveDemocrats enough 
hope 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/az/arizona_trump_vs_clinton_vs_johnson_vs_stein-6087.html>
 that they sent in a stream of high-profile figures to campaign in the state, 
from Hillary Clinton herself to her vice-presidential pick, Tim Kaine, and 
Michelle Obama. Arpaio has insisted he isstill investigating 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/arizona/2016/09/21/arizona-joe-arpaio-still-investigating-obamas-birth-certificate/90743412/>
 Barack Obama’s birthplace, although even Trumpgave up his five years of 
conspiracy claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/trump-obama-birth-certificate-clinton>
 about the president in September.

Pollsters attribute the race’s tightening to a surge in Latino voter 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/11/03/arizona-leads-nation-early-voting-surge-latinos/93129112/>
 registration and interest. In early voting, Hispanics now form 13% of the 
early ballots cast, compared with 11% in 2012.

Outside money has also poured into Arpaio’s race for re-election, as his 
detractors have sensed a chance to finally unseat him. The progressive 
philanthropist and financierGeorge Soros invested $2m 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/george-soros-joe-arpaio-arizona-230724> 
into the Super Pac Maricopa Strong to pay for a series of TV attack ads on the 
sheriff.

In the light of the revelation that Arpaio’s office will have a leading role 
in controlling poling stations on Tuesday, one of the supervisors of county 
affairs in Maricopa, Steve Gallardo, has written to Purcell, the election 
recorder, asking her to reconsider her decision to call on sheriff’s deputies.

“Neither the sheriff nor his office has a good relationship with segments of 
our communities and voters,” the letter says. “It is unfortunate, but the 
reality of using Maricopa County deputies when the sheriff himself is in a very 
contentious re-election race and given his proven actions against citizens’ 
rights may be perceived as voter intimidation.”

 * Update, 7 November 2016: Sheriff Arpaio’s spokesman, Detective Doug 
Matteson, contacted the Guardian to clarify how the election-day plan will work.
 * Six deputies from the Maricopa County sheriff’s office will be roaming the 
area, he said, available should there be any need for law enforcement. A 75ft 
perimeter will be maintained around each polling place, Matteson said, within 
which there will be no permitted protesting or campaigning. 
 * Should any trouble arise, officials organizing each polling place will be 
able to call on the six deputies to come to their assistance. There will not, 
however, be deputies positioned at every location.  