
Sheriff Joe Arpaio on Donald Trump: 'My mission is to get him elected'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/22/sheriff-joe-arpaio-interview-arizona-primary-donald-trump>
Prosecutors said Tuesday that they would charge Sheriff Joe Arpaio with 
criminal contempt of court for defying a judge’s orders to end his signature 
immigration patrols inArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>, 
exposing the 84-year-old lawman to the possibility of jail time.


The announcement in federal court sets in motion criminal proceedings against 
the sheriff less than a month before Election Day as he seeks a seventh term as 
Maricopa County sheriff. The 2016 election cycle has also seen Arpaio take a 
prominent role on the national stage, appearing alongside Republican 
presidential nominee Donald Trump on several occasions.

A judge previously recommended criminal contempt charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/sheriff-joe-arpaio-contempt-charges-immigration-patrols>
 against Arpaio but left it up to federal prosecutors to actually bring the 
case. Prosecutor John Keller said in court that the government would bring 
charges, with the next step being a court filing possibly in the next day 
that’s akin to a criminal complaint.
interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=5a66255a-cc79-416b-9f19-99ad578f5f5a>
Arpaio could face up to six months in jail if convicted of misdemeanor 
contempt.

Arpaio lawyer Mel McDonald said the sheriff would not be arrested and no 
mugshot would be taken. He will plead not guilty by court filing and hopes to 
prevail before a jury.

“We believe the sheriff, being an elected official, should be judged by his 
peers,” McDonald said.

The hearing came the day before early voting starts in Arizona, and the 
sheriff, in a statement, accused the Obama administration of trying to 
influence his re-election race. He also said he was confident he would be 
exonerated.

The U.S. Justice Department didn’t immediately respond to calls seeking 
comment.
Prosecutors are expected to file a misdemeanor contempt charge against Arpaio 
on Wednesday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-endorsing-donald-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I'm%20endorsing%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20Sheriff%20Joe%20Arpaio%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-endorsing-donald-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%27m%20endorsing%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20Sheriff%20Joe%20Arpaio%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fsheriff-joe-arpaio-endorsing-donald-trump-president-video&media=>
Why I’m endorsing Trump – Sheriff Joe Arpaio video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/22/sheriff-joe-arpaio-endorsing-donald-trump-president-video>
The move is yet another key defeat for the sheriff who became a national 
political figure over the past decade by aggressively carrying out immigration 
patrols and attention-getting endeavors such as making prisoners wear pink 
underwear.

Following complaints by Latino drivers about racial profiling, a judge 
demanded that Arpaio stop the enforcement efforts. He was later found to have 
violated the order, causing it to morph into a contempt of court case.

Arpaio has acknowledged violating the order to stop the immigration patrols 
but insists his disobedience wasn’t intentional.

County taxpayers have shelled out $48m so far in the profiling case, and the 
costs are expected to reach $72m by next summer.
 