
A ship laden with nuclear waste is heading to Australia from France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, despite concerns raised over its 
safety record.


The BBC Shanghai, flagged to Antigua and Barbuda, is on its way to Port Kembla 
<http://www.marinetraffic.com/ais/details/ships/shipid:360931/mmsi:304322000/imo:9224623/vessel:BBC_SHANGHAI>
 in New South Wales from the French port of Cherbourg with a cargo of 
reprocessed nuclear waste.

It’s outrageous the BBC Shanghai is heading towards Australia and is not 
outfitted to safely carry nuclear waste.
Emma Gibson, Greenpeace Australia Pacific 
The 25 tonnes of waste was originally generated by the Australian Nuclear 
Science and Technology Organisation and sent to France in 2001 for reprocessing.

Environmental groups have raised concerns over the safety of the BBC Shanghai, 
pointing out it has been blacklisted by the US due to its record.

Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> and French 
environmental campaigners called for the shipment, sent by French nuclear 
company Areva, to be halted. But following an inspection, the vessel was sent 
on its way and is set to arrive in Australia on 27 November.

An Areva spokesman said some small flaws had been found in the inspection that 
had been corrected.

Once in Australia, the waste is set to be held at the Lucas Heights facility 
in Sydney.

“It’s outrageous that the BBC Shanghai is heading towards Australia and it is 
not outfitted to safely carry nuclear waste,” said Emma Gibson, head of program 
for Greenpeace Australia Pacific. “What we have is a vessel that will be 
ill-equipped to deal with any sort of accident involving the nuclear waste. 
It’s an environmental disaster waiting to happen.

Bob Hawke: nuclear waste storage could end Indigenous disadvantage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/03/bob-hawke-nuclear-waste-storage-could-end-indigenous-disadvantage>
“The last official inspection in August this year showed problems with 
shipboard operations and emergency preparedness. This is not the sort of ship 
that should be allowed to carry radioactive waste or anything hazardous, for 
that matter.”

Australia has the largest deposits of uranium in the world but does not have a 
domestic nuclear energy program, although the nuclear industry ispushing the 
energy source 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/29/nuclear-industry-to-push-for-australia-to-adopt-clean-affordable-power>
 as a way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Australia does, however, generate nuclear waste from medical technology and 
successive governments have, unsuccessfully, attempted to find a new dumping 
site for this waste.

Dave Sweeney, anti-nuclear campaigner at the Australian Conservation 
Foundation, said the placement of the waste at Lucas Heights is the “least 
worst option”.

“It’s a purpose built facility that is secure and has the highest level of 
nuclear expertise,” he said.

“In the future we need a full, public process that looks at the full range of 
options. Australia has to take responsibility for its own waste but we strongly 
believe that Australia shouldn’t become an out of sight, out of mind dumping 
ground for the world’s nuclear waste.”
 