
Australia’s peak shooting body has amassed a financial war chest totalling 
more than $34m, new research has revealed.

The figure has sparked calls to amend the national firearm laws set up by the 
former prime minister John Howard, which effectively guarantee gun clubs an 
income stream because club membership provides gun owners with a “genuine 
reason” to hold a firearm licence.

A new analysis from gun policy expert and Sydney university adjunct associate 
professor Philip Alpers gives a new insight into the financial might of 
Australia’s gun lobby. It has revealed that the national branch of the Sporting 
Shooters’ Association of Australia (SSAA) alone has accumulated $10m from 
annual membership fees.

States reportedly agree to place Adler shotgun in strictest category
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/adler-shotgun-category-d-gun-control-coag>
Alpers research, which is published today by the University of Sydney and on 
the Croakey website 
<https://croakey.org/how-john-howards-gun-control-laws-have-given-a-multi-million-boost-to-the-shooters-lobby/>
, shows that seven of the top SSAA branches across the country have declared, 
in total, more than $20m income and net assets of $34m.

Alpers writes: “That’s more than double the assets of Swimming Australia and 
nine-tenths the income of Athletics Australia.


“For 2015, SSAA (VIC) reported $4.4m in revenue and assets of $5m. Adjusted 
for inflation, branch assets have increased 559% in value since the 1996 gun 
laws.

“SSAA (NSW) reported income of $2.4m with assets of $7.2m (up 717%), while 
SSAA (QLD) collected income of $5m and holds assets of $15.7m, of which $8.3m 
are in cash. Adjusted for inflation, Queensland branch assets have increased by 
2,675% since compulsory gun club membership was written into legislation.”

When Howard reformed Australia’s gun laws following the Port Arthur massacre 
the states and territories created similar laws in each jurisdiction that 
require a “genuine reason” for a person to hold a firearm licence, such as 
being a primary producer.

 However, in most states and territories being a member of a gun club is 
sufficient justification to hold a firearm licence.

There are no restrictions on what gun clubs can charge for member fees, which 
has effectively provided an enormous source of guaranteed funding for gun clubs 
since 1990.

The figures are likely to be a conservative estimate of the total assets and 
intake of the various SSAA gun clubs around the country. The clubs are subject 
to varying levels of reporting in each state and territory due to their status 
as incorporated associations.

“Politicians who, for example, dismantled compulsory student union membership 
on ideological grounds might be asked how this system is not a 
government-mandated tax on shooters, with no upper limit,” Alpers said.

“They could also consider the future implications of several swelling war 
chests worth many millions of dollars, amassed to overturn gun laws agreed 20 
years ago by all major parties.”

Matt Canavan declines to back Malcolm Turnbull over Adler shotgun ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/22/matt-canavan-declines-to-back-malcolm-turnbull-over-adler-shotgun-ban>
The federal government’s national firearms review is currently underway, amid 
a number of concerns about Australia’s gun laws.

The federal government last year imposed an import ban on lever-action shotguns
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/adler-shotgun-explainer-whats-the-big-deal-about-lever-action-firearms>
 with a firing capacity of more than five rounds following the emergence of the 
Adler A110, drawing the ire of gun groups, as the states and territories 
grappled with whether to reclassify the weapon.

The states have reportedly now agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/adler-shotgun-category-d-gun-control-coag>
 to allow the controversial Adler shotgun to be reclassified to the toughest of 
the four firearms categories, which would open the way for limited importation 
to resume.

There is no limit on the way the SSAA and other gun clubs can use their 
membership fees.

The Greens MP David Shoebridge, who has been a prominent voice speaking out 
against winding back Australia’s gun control laws, said there should be “a 
maximum membership fee by regulation with a requirement that member’s money is 
spent on club facilities”.

“If the government is requiring membership of a gun club to obtain a firearms 
licence then it it is more than reasonable that there be regulation to protect 
gun club members and their membership dues,” he said.

“Unless we fix the flow of money to the gun lobby we are in danger of creating 
a local version of the NRA and that would be a disaster for community safety.”

There have already been concerns raised about the lobbying power of firearms 
groups.Guardian Australia published a series of meeting minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/michael-keenan-criticised-for-holding-one-sided-meetings-with-gun-lobby>
 that showed the gun lobby setting out their wish list to the justice minister, 
Michael Keenan.

A coalition of prominent Australians subsequently called for greater 
consultation with Keenan.

The Sporting Shooters’ Association of Australia was contacted for comment.
 