
For those of you who completely freak out after the World Series and wonder 
what you’re going to do with yourself all winter long, the hot-stove season is 
a warm, comforting blanket. So having said that, let’s throw a couple of logs 
on the fire, shall we?

1) What’s next for the New York Mets?

The Mets’ starting pitching jackpot 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/mets/world-series-loss-lights-fire-syndergaard-degrom-article-1.2425329>
 of Matt Harvey, Noah Syndergaard, Jacob deGrom, Steven Matz and Zack Wheeler 
means that New York may have some $1bn worth of future-free-agent hurlers on 
their roster. Syndergaard and Matz are under control for the long-term. Wheeler 
and deGrom will be a free-agent to 2020, Harvey in 2019, and he’ll get his 
first arbitration bump this season. You’re never, ever, ever going to be able 
to keep all of them, so why not deal Harvey now?

Yankees star CC Sabathia: I realised I was an alcoholic in 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/06/cc-sabathia-new-york-yankees-alcohol-rehab>
Yes, he put together a Game 5 World Series performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/02/harvey-dented-mets-ace-brilliant-till-the-final-reel-as-world-series-slips-away>
 that was an inning away from becoming an iconic New York sporting moment, and 
yes, you may be trading away Tom Seaver. But his value may never be higher, and 
with Daniel Murphy, who received a one-year $15.8m qualifying offer last week, 
and Yoenis Cespedes possibly heading out of town, Harvey represents a chip that 
could bring back a big young bat back, at least. How about a deal for Manny 
Machado, who could serve as a linchpin of the infield for at least three 
seasons playing shortstop while also serving as a backup at third base for the 
ailing David Wright? There’s no guarantee that Harvey would even be enough to 
get Machado, who posted a 7.1 WAR this season, but Baltimore haven’t had an 
anchor ace since Mike Mussina left, and in their yard, finding offense is much 
easier.


If not, and for whatever reason GM Sandy Alderson 
<http://mlb.nbcsports.com/2015/11/04/sandy-alderson-fainted-during-todays-press-conference/>
 said he “can’t see it happening”, the Mets have some serious off-season 
shopping to do to shore up their potentially Cespedes-less offense. If they 
won’t pay for the Cuban outfielder, will they plunk down the dosh for a Justin 
Upton type, especially when they already have $92m committed to next season? 
It’s unlikely, so a blockbuster trade makes much more sense.

2) Can the Kansas City Royals repeat?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64a14b9a7838ee4f91ec7d0833229646e6311297%2F0_287_4356_2615%2F4356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64a14b9a7838ee4f91ec7d0833229646e6311297%2F0_287_4356_2615%2F4356.jpg>
 Will Alex Gordon and family bid adieu to Kansas City? Photograph: John 
Rieger/USA Today Sports 
Even as winners pile onto each other, spray champagne and talk to presidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/02/never-a-doubt-relentless-royals-find-a-way-once-again-in-world-series-clincher>
, there are those who begin to wonder about what the World Series champs are 
going to look like the following season. Isn’t that a bit sick? Can’t they just 
be-here-now and enjoy the moment?

The good news for Kansas City Royals fans is that most of the biggest players 
in their band won’t be breaking away anytime soon.However, the future of Alex 
Gordon is by far the biggest issue 
<http://www.kansascity.com/sports/spt-columns-blogs/sam-mellinger/article43339149.html>
 for KC heading into the offseason: he had a $13.75m player option for 2016, 
but dumped that chump change to look for a longer term deal. Does a 31-year old 
with Gordon’s credentials get a nine-digit, five-year deal from the Royals? He 
should, because if you’re KC, after back-to-back World Series appearances, 
you’re crazy to disrupt any of that mojo.

Starter Johnny Cueto is likely gone 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2586154-why-johnny-cueto-should-be-blue-jays-no-1-target-this-offseason>
, but that shouldn’t matter with their bullpen - we’re talking about a team 
that had just one starter with an ERA below 4.00 who made 20 or more starts and 
KC still won 95 games. Fill out the rotation with replacement player-esque 
types, and throw some more money atmulti-skilled utility man Ben Zobrist 
<http://nesn.com/2015/11/ben-zobrist-wife-give-newborn-daughter-royal-middle-name-photo/>
, who will be even more important if Gordon goes. Add a front-line starter at 
the 2016 trade-deadline and viola, they’ll be back-to-back champs.

3) Will Pete Rose be welcomed back?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10633314607feb6a17e05350b838ffc7402a71e5%2F0_186_3007_1805%2F3007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10633314607feb6a17e05350b838ffc7402a71e5%2F0_186_3007_1805%2F3007.jpg>
 “Please, enough already with this.” Photograph: John Swart/ASSOCIATED PRESS 
So let me get this straight: MLB have advertising on their network promoting a 
fantasy sports organization that the State of Nevada has deemed a gambling 
product,an entity being investigated by the FBI 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/marcedelman/2015/10/19/could-an-fbi-investigation-of-draftkings-implicate-major-league-baseball/>
, and Pete Rose (or Shoeless Joe Jackson) can’t be re-instated after his own 
gambling-induced exile? Rose made huge mistakes, and followed those up with 
more huge mistakes. However, it must be seen as just a touch hypocritical to 
keep baseball’s hit king in the darkness considering their players are now 
being used as fully fledged gambling pawns, rooks, bishops, well, you get the 
point.Rose left Fox’s World Series coverage 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/writer/jon-heyman/25360196/inside-baseball-no-chance-pete-rose-is-reinstated-plus-more-mlb-news>
 for a card show he previously committed to – that was just the latest act of 
bad judgement, But the guy has to make a living, since he’s been banished from 
a sport that served as his main source of income for a good portion of his 
life, so what’s he supposed to do? Commissioner Rob Manfred has kept his cards 
close to his chest regarding the status of Rose’s bid to get back into the 
games good graces, but odds are very much against him.

4) Will Montreal be awarded a franchise?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daytis8RY6bs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daytis8RY6bs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Daytis8RY6bs&media=>
 Will MLB bring baseball back to Montreal? 
Baseball in Canada is booming right now, mostly thanks to the resurgence of the
Toronto Blue Jays <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toronto-blue-jays>. Couple 
that with the extraordinary grass-roots movement to re-establish Major League 
Baseball in Montreal and the largest market sans baseball in the US and Canada 
is ripe to be filled.

Commissioner Rob Manfred recently said “I’d be interested in another team in 
Canada,” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/mlb-commissioner-foreign-expansion-cuba-833160>
 while Montreal’s Mayor Denis Coderre recentlypenned a letter to all 30 MLB 
teams 
<http://www.sportsnet.ca/baseball/mlb/montreal-mayor-coderre-pens-letter-to-all-30-mlb-teams/>
 along with Stephen Bronfman, a former minority owner of the Expos from 1999 to 
2004, whose father Charles owned the team from its founding in 1969 to 1999, to 
“prove we’re serious to all these people.” Alikely location for a new stadium 
has been identified 
<http://www.sportsnet.ca/baseball/mlb/montreal-mayor-coderre-pens-letter-to-all-30-mlb-teams/>
, while the Mayor, a key pro-baseball ally, currently enjoys a 72% approval 
rating. That won’t last forever, and if he ever is jettisoned, efforts to bring 
baseball back to la belle province could be halted.

MLB wants growth and Montreal is a key component: that’s why MLB should award 
the franchise right now, with a caveat: the movement must prove they can have 
owners and a new stadium in place by a deadline decided by its 30 current 
owners. If it happens, MLB can open up a competition for another city (itself a 
challenge: no other city is as ready as Montreal), bringing the circuit up to 
32 teams, eliminating the need for Interleague play every single day. The 
timing is right to do it now...plus the Montreal-bornex-Jays GM Alex 
Anthopoulos suddenly needs a job 
<http://www.thestar.com/sports/bluejays/2015/11/02/new-jays-chief-mark-shapiro-to-face-media-with-anthopoulos-looming-in-background.html>
.

5) When will the FBI finish their investigation of the Cardinals?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4f975f17c3c4bcd63869f596cc8ce187a1e10e2%2F0_148_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4f975f17c3c4bcd63869f596cc8ce187a1e10e2%2F0_148_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The St Louis Cardinals newly designed logo for 2016. Photograph: Mandel 
Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
Remember that whole thing where someone (or two, or five...) from the 
Cardinals front office allegedly broke into Houston’s proprietary database, 
perhaps to see what their old boss, Astros general manager Jeff Luhnow was up 
to? Well, the story that theFBI was investigating the Redbirds broke way back 
in mid-June 
<http://www.vivaelbirdos.com/st-louis-cardinals-fbi-investigation-hack/2015/6/23/8832417/st-louis-cardinals-f-b-i-investigation-law-enforcement-struggling-to-identify-hackers>
and it’s more or less been crickets since. So far only Cards scouting director 
Chris Correa has lost his job, while we’re told that MLB will only take action 
after the FBI concludes it’s investigation. Meanwhile legions of Cardinals 
haters, a group who grew up hearing about an organization has the best “way”, 
fans, stadium, hot dogs, players, socks, logos and history, bathrooms, 
whatever, wait patiently for their ultra-clean, do-gooding mystique to unravel 
before their very eyes.

6) What’s the plan in LA?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78187e67db4ce68a4f2122c3527e5bfd0044f968%2F0_264_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78187e67db4ce68a4f2122c3527e5bfd0044f968%2F0_264_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 “Look, I made the playoffs three years in a row! Not even Walter Alston did 
that, OK?”
-What Don Mattingly didn’t say Photograph: Bryan Smith/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
When you have a payroll of around $300m 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/dodgers-payroll-is-nuts-2015-8>, you’re 
partially owned by Magic Johnson, have a free-agent pitcher such as Zack 
Greinke, and are hiring a manager, well, you get a lot of attention. LA 
dispatched of Don Mattingly “mutually” after he led the team to three 
consecutive post-seasons and now team President Andrew Friedman and GM Farhan 
Zaidi have a line out the door to become the new skipper 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-friedman-managerial-search-20151105-story.html>
. Candidates include: Kirk Gibson, Bud Black, Bob Geren, Ron Roenicke, Dave 
Martinez and Tim Wallach, Darin Erstad, Gabe Kapler and Dave Roberts. That 
enough? Of course, they could always employ a manager-by-committee system like 
the Chicago Cubs did in 1961.

Where will Greinke end up? Well, folks seem to think that he wants to stay in 
the NL thanks to a hitting fetish. That could mean LA plop down the over $100m 
or so it will take to wrap-up the 32-year-old for another five years or so. The 
Cubs could give them a run for their money - the playoffs showed they need to 
make contact and that they’re short a pitcher. TheSan Francisco Giants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-francisco-giants> also need to shore up 
their once vaunted staff, while the Boston Red Sox badly need an ace to boost a 
rotation that showed progress down the stretch in 2015.

This is the start of year two of Friedman’s work in Los Angeles and he’ll have 
some calls to make to help LA win their first World Series since 1988. Yasiel 
Puig is a trade chip: if he can somehow get a decent return while packaging him 
with Carl Crawford and his two years at over $40m, that would be tough to turn 
down. LA need a second baseman, and Daniel Murphy, who just burned their best 
with multiple NLDS home runs is available. The bullpen remains an issue -
Baltimore Orioles <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baltimore-orioles> middle 
reliever Darren O’Day could go a long way in fixing their bridge to Kenley 
Jansen.

7) Who are the top free-agent hurlers and where will they go?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa9c19425fa1d52bd0a2df559f98ddcb3b67bbf%2F0_0_1358_815%2F1358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa9c19425fa1d52bd0a2df559f98ddcb3b67bbf%2F0_0_1358_815%2F1358.jpg>
 David can be yours if the... Photograph: Matt Slocum/AP 
Really, that’s a two-part question, and if I knew the answer to the second 
part I wouldn’t be sitting here writing this. We already mentioned Geinke, and 
that leaves David Price, Jordan Zimmermann, Johnny Cueto and Jeff Samardzjia as 
the other top available arms. Toronto used Price about as oddly as possible in 
the playoffs, but they badly need him back to maintain the momentum building in 
Ontario. It’s more likely that Dave Dombrowski and the Red Sox beat them to it 
and wrap up an AL East veteran who has already proved he can win in Boston. The 
Yanks could take a stab at Samardzjia, a move that’s guaranteed to blow up. 
Zimmermann could be a back up for the Dodgers if they lose Greinke and I can 
see Cueto could go to the Cubs, or serve as a backup for Toronto if Price can’t 
be inked. Then there’s the lower-tiered arms, like Baltimore’s southpaw Wei-Yin 
Chen, Seattle’s Hisashi Iwakuma, D.C.’s Doug Fister, the St Louis’ John Lackey, 
Texas’Yovani Gallardo 
<http://www.fangraphs.com/statss.aspx?playerid=8173&position=P>, Toronto’s R.A. 
Dickey and Marco Estrada, Houston’s lefty Scott Kazmir and Minnesota’s Joakim 
Soria, to name a few. That’s quite a lot of third-ish starters who could have 
serious impacts on teams thirsty for pitching, like the Giants, Tigers, 
Mariners, Orioles and Diamondbacks.

8) Who are the top free-agent hitters and where will they go?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff802b48f87d4dff4ff5a85a9ea4806cdc1b1041%2F0_135_3064_1839%2F3064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff802b48f87d4dff4ff5a85a9ea4806cdc1b1041%2F0_135_3064_1839%2F3064.jpg>
 Orioles fans likely won’t see Chris Davis as much next season. Photograph: 
Nick Wass/AP 
Chris Davis went bananas down the stretch, adding zero upon zero to his future 
deal with his future team: he’s got about seven coming to him in a $100m plus 
deal for about five years. The Orioles, who already made him a qualifying 
offer, really need to have him back, especially after losing Nelson Cruz after 
the 2014 season. Chances are however that he winds up in Houston or in Seattle 
where they have a collection of expensive stars waiting to win. Signing Davis 
will cost a team a draft pick, which could help the O’s as they scramble to 
keep their star. The deep group includes the Mets’ Cespedes, St Louis’ Jayson 
Heyward, San Diegos’ Justin Upton, D.C.s’ Ian Desmond, KC’s Gordon and New 
York’s Daniel Murphy,many of which have already received qualifying offers 
<http://www.foxsports.com/mlb/story/zack-greinke-jason-heyward-daniel-murphy-davis-qualifying-offers-free-agent-hot-stove-110615>
. The Cards should ink Heyward, who they seemed to like in right field. The 
Mets will never shell out for Cespedes, it’s not in their DNA, but he’s a 
perfect fit for the run-starved Angels. New York have a better shot at 
retaining Murphy, whose contact hitting style is Royal-esque, even if his 
defense isn’t. Gordon should stay home, while some pundits pick Ian Desmond to 
be a Met and already have Upton in the Yankee outfield.

9) Dusty Baker? Really?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f075dc733a8aee77a97684ffa0c12e24476a2a4%2F0_9_4500_2703%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f075dc733a8aee77a97684ffa0c12e24476a2a4%2F0_9_4500_2703%2F4500.jpg>
 Dusty Baker is guaranteed to not take any crap from Jayson Werth. Photograph: 
Gene J. Puskar/AP 
By all accounts, the Lerner family who owns the Washington Nationals 
completely botched the hiring of Bud Black to be their manager, 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/sports/wp/2015/11/03/after-bud-black-negotiations-leave-the-nationals-shifting-to-dusty-baker-the-lerner-family-has-a-fiasco-on-its-hands/>
 lowballing him with a one-year deal worth about $1.6m. Blacks’s thanks but no 
thanks rejection means that Dusty Baker, who was a finalist for the position, 
gets the gig, and MLB doesn’t suffer through the embarrassment of not having a 
single black manager in 2016. Just ask the Mets: sometimes it’s the deals that 
don’t get done that are the best, and landing Baker makes sense in D.C. While 
the Nats have shown themselves to be mostly dysfunctional as a unit, Baker will 
calm the dugout, and Jayson Werth will never, ever, step to him and say 
something like the “when exactly do you think you lost this team 
<http://thebiglead.com/2015/09/30/jayson-werth-to-matt-williams-when-exactly-do-you-think-you-lost-this-team/>
” as he did to the departed Matt Williams...although the occasional dugout 
fight is still a possibility 
<http://www.sfgate.com/sports/article/Giants-now-battling-each-other-Bonds-Kent-2826698.php>
. Baker commands respect, even if his shelf-life is about three years, which is 
the window for this team to win anyway.

10) How do the Yankees get interesting again?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07c92ca602cc2762a07293eeceb62ed2f32c9e23%2F0_5_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20the%20Mets%20trade%20Harvey%20and%20other%20MLB%20offseason%20questions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fshould-the-mets-trade-harvey-and-other-mlb-offseason-questions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07c92ca602cc2762a07293eeceb62ed2f32c9e23%2F0_5_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
 Alex Rodriguez: player-manager? Photograph: Frank Franklin II/AP 
It’s pretty clear that without Alex Rodriguez, the New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> would be just about the 
most boring team in the northern hemisphere. Jacoby Ellsbury? Snooze. Brian 
McCann, baseball’s unwritten rules enforcer? Zzzzz. Brent Gardner? Come on. 
Mark Teixeira? A boringly brash bully. Young Luis Severino and Greg Bird arer 
talented but vanilla. Masahiro Tanaka? Eh.

No, there’s only one thing to do, and that’s start grooming A-Rod to become 
baseball’s first player manager since,you guessed it, Pete Rose himself 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/managers/rosepe01.shtml>. It’s a Mets town 
right now, and looks it’s going to stay that way for a while, so the Yanks need 
a gimmick tostay relevant until Bryce Harper comes to the Bronx in 2019 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/dc-sports-bog/wp/2015/06/10/yankees-fans-are-clearly-ready-for-the-bryce-harper-era-in-new-york/>
. Just this week Yankees hitting coach Alan Cockrell saidRodriguez was 
basically a baseball savant 
<http://web.yesnetwork.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20151104&content_id=156471140&oid=36019>
. So give Joe Girardi one more season and if he can’t bring home title 28, let 
Rodriguez run the show, which is just about enough to keep fans flocking to the 
Bronx until the Harper era arrives.
 