
Curtis Ravenel dates his enthusiasm for purpose-driven business to his first 
job as a program associate with the National Recycling Coalition. “I got very 
interested in the idea that being an environmentalist need not hurt your 
economic opportunities,” he recalls.


But it would be some time before the notion defined Ravenel’s career.

Ravenel joined Bloomberg LP in 2002 as a financial analyst for internal 
operations. He eventually rose to a management position in the firm’s capital 
planning group. Still, his interest in reconciling environmental issues with 
business was dormant rather than defeated.

 Recognized as a smart manager on the rise, in 2006 Ravenel was invited to 
participate in a global manager-training program. “One night they said to us, 
‘We want you to come up with an idea for Bloomberg, and we want you to flesh it 
out a little bit. You have exactly 18 hours’”, he recalls.

“I shot out of bed at four o’clock the next morning,” Ravenel says. “It sounds 
corny, but I saw all of it.” By “it” he means what is today called BGreen – 
Bloomberg’s internal sustainability plan.

The culture at Bloomberg is unambiguously commercial. It is a business of 
selling data to make financial markets more efficient – an entity serving 
money-makers of all stripes. So Ravenel, who is today Bloomberg’s 
sustainability manager, envisioned an internal effort to reduce resource use 
that would focus just as heavily on financial savings as environmental 
benefits, with the cost-cutting accrued directly to the operating groups.

Once BGreen was selected for piloting, Ravenel summoned the guts to nominate 
himself as its leader. He soon saw that what he’d originally envisioned as an 
18-month project had to become much more. “You have to have a full-time, 
permanent group that constantly pushes the envelope,” he says, because a 
temporary effort creates only temporary buy-in from business units. “If you’re 
not a permanent part of the work flow, once you walk away they go back to their 
old ways.”

To take the sustainability initiative company-wide, he hand-picked team 
members from key departments in the company, then set the bar high by telling 
them: “We have to be more professional, more business-minded, and have our shit 
more together than any other group, because there’s so much inherent skepticism 
about what we do.”

This emphasis on cutting costs earned Ravenel and his team instant internal 
credibility and helped build the capacity to take on even bigger game. 
“Bloomberg is about helping customers make better decisions with quantitative 
information,” says Ravenel. “Book value only tells a small part of the market 
cap story. So much is based on intangibles. Sustainability is one example of 
that.”

So the team set out to “make sustainability performance more quantitative, 
consumable and actionable.”

As Ravenel made the rounds internally, he brandished his pinstripe suit, his 
banker’s haircut, and his focus on the bottom line. Over time this “looking the 
part” helped him move Bloomberg’s sustainability activity beyond reducing the 
firm’s own footprint to expanding its product line. “Risk bores people,” 
Ravenel says. “Creating revenue opportunities –that’s exciting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F21%2Fsustainability-business-revenue-goals-products-services-b-green-bloomberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408561790094%2F1a9df837-15dd-47a0-937c-fa92e687368b-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Show%20me%20the%20money%3A%20Curtis%20Ravenel%20on%20meshing%20sustainability%20with%20revenue%20at%20Bloomberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F21%2Fsustainability-business-revenue-goals-products-services-b-green-bloomberg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Show%20me%20the%20money%3A%20Curtis%20Ravenel%20on%20meshing%20sustainability%20with%20revenue%20at%20Bloomberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Faug%2F21%2Fsustainability-business-revenue-goals-products-services-b-green-bloomberg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408561790094%2F1a9df837-15dd-47a0-937c-fa92e687368b-680x1020.jpeg>
 Curtis Ravenel, sustainability director at Bloomberg LP 
On Ravenel’s watch, savings from Bloomberg’s internal sustainability successes 
were channeled from internal risk management to enhancing customer services. 
Today the company integrates “ESG” data – environmental, social and governance 
– on sustainability risks and opportunities into its analytical tools for 
investors, right alongside more established financial benchmarks. The company 
offers a clean energy sector market intelligence service and a website that 
serves as a one-stop shop for executives and policy decision makers seeking 
information and insights on the business of sustainability. The firm’s 
editorial arm provides sustainability news.

Together these offerings generate millions of dollars in new revenues for 
Bloomberg, proving that commercial success is not at odds with sustainability. 
Indeed, commercial success is the primary metric of business sustainability – 
and nowhere more than in a culture of purpose.

 Commercial drive is the oxygen of business. The Curtis Ravenel story clearly 
demonstrates that commercial drive can move sustainability beyond internal 
“greening” to becoming a major engine for revenue-generating products and 
services.

The four leaders profiled in this series – Bob Kidder of Chrysler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/jul/31/leaders-chrysler-bankruptcy-automobile-marchionne-ceo-detroit>
,Kees Kruythoff of Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/07/kees-kruythoff-unilever-recall-beverages-ben-jerrys-resilience>
,Alberto Weisser of Bunge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/15/bunge-limited-agribusiness-brazil-environment-soy-farming-food-security>
, and Curtis Ravenel of Bloomberg – show not only what leaders can do to build 
cultures of purpose, but also that the seeds of such cultures can be found in 
any organization that thinks aspirationally about business sustainability.

Now for an open invitation to other business leaders: what more might you be 
doing to build a culture of purpose marked by energy, resilience and openness? 
What opportunities lie at the intersection of commercial drive and 
sustainability?

Christoph Lueneburger, author of A Culture of Purpose: How to Choose the Right 
People and Make the Right People Choose You 
<http://www.amazon.com/Culture-Purpose-Choose-Right-People/dp/1118814568>, 
founded the sustainability practice and currently leads the private equity 
practice atEgon Zehnder <http://www.egonzehnder.com/>, the world’s largest 
privately-held executive search and talent strategy firm.

The values-led business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/values-led-business> hub is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 