With legal battles over control of her body and paternity of her baby, 
resolved, you might assume that the late Anna Nicole Smith, could finally rest 
in peace. Not so. This week she was accused of nothing less than bringing down 
the Bahamian government, as a result of a scandal that affected the recent 
election. This involved claims that the immigration minister, Shane Gibson, had 
become rather too friendly with the former glamour model in her final months, 
fast-tracking her application for residency on the islands. With all the 
opprobrium heaped on Smith since her death - that she was a terrible mother, an 
awful role model, and, as Christopher Hitchens charmingly termed her last week 
"a fat slut" - what will be thrown at the poor, dead woman next? Is she perhaps 
responsible for global warming?
We can't help but feel sorry for Annie Lennox's 16-year-old daughter, Lola. 
Having invited a few friends over for a party at her dad's, she found the place 
besieged by gatecrashers who had read about the shindig on MySpace and 
proceeded to vomit all over the carpets. Coming so soon after the story of 
17-year-old Rachael Bell (whose family home was wrecked after she announced a 
soiree on MySpace) it does at least prove one thing. While young women trounce 
their male peers academically, they lead another field too - the biggest and 
most destructive parties.

Hugely popular among pre-teens, the adult market was given a taste of the 
Disney Princess range this week, with a collection of wedding dresses "inspired 
by" its six most famous princesses. So when it comes to your "big day", you can 
style yourself on Snow White, Cinderella or Sleeping Beauty. That is, of 
course, if you want to be mistaken for someone who thinks being saved by a 
dull-as-dishwater, horse-riding prince represents the pinnacle of happiness.
 