
Simon Cowell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> has vowed to 
prove that Britain really does have talent after the last two series of his ITV 
show were won by a dance troupe from Hungary and a dog called Pudsey.

Cowell, who will be back on ITV with the eighth season of Britain's Got Talent 
on Saturday, the first full seriessince he signed a new deal with the 
broadcaster worth up to £150m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/15/simon-cowell-x-factor-britains-got-talent-deal>
, said: "I think [the winner] will be someone British this year."

But despite the talent show's most famous discovery to date, Susan Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/susan-boyle>, hailing from West Lothian in 
Scotland, Scottish fans of the show had to do without an audition in their home 
country this year.

Asked at the programme's launch on Wednesday why the producers had not 
travelled to Scotland, Cowell said: "It's a very good question. I wanted to but 
David [Walliams] didn't want to – he doesn't like Scottish people.

"We have got to be fair. We get calls from all the cities now; we've got 
Scottish people, we just didn't go to Scotland."

His fellow judge, former Little Britain star Walliams, added: "Because we 
nearly got lynched there last time, that's the answer. And we went to Belfast 
this year, which we didn't do last year."

Cowell will be under pressure to deliver after signing a three-year contract 
with ITV last November committing him to the channel until the end of 2016.

Cowell will alsoreturn as a judge on his other ITV show, The X Factor, for the 
first time since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/07/simon-cowell-x-factor-uk-itv> in 
a bid to reverse the show's falling ratings. Anotherformer judge, Cheryl Cole, 
will also return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/11/cheryl-cole-x-factor-return>
.

Britain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> is one of the 
most popular programmes on TV but it has also seen its ratings decline despite 
the addition of Walliams to its judging panel.

Last year's final had an overnight audience of 11.1 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/10/britains-got-talent-final-tv-ratings>
, nearly a million down on the previous year when it was won by Pudsey the 
dancing dog and its trainer, Ashleigh Butler.

At its Boyle-driven peak in 2009, more than 17 million viewers tuned into the 
final results show to see the Scottish singer beaten to the title by dance act 
Diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jun/01/britains-got-talent-tv-ratings>.

Cowell and Walliams were joined by the show's other judges, Amanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> and former Strictly 
Come Dancing judge Alesha Dixon, for the new series launch.

This year's show features acts from as far afield as France, Greece, Germany, 
the United States and Ukraine.

The talent show, presented by ITV's two other biggest stars, Anthony McPartlin 
and Declan Donnelly, was criticised by some viewers last year after it was won 
by Attraction, a shadow dance group from Hungary. The winning act takes home 
£250,000 and the chance to perform at the Royal Variety Performance.

Cowell said: "We do attract more foreign acts and they are welcome. I think 
its one of the reasons why we get so many people from around the world entering 
the show, because it is a huge deal for them to perform in front of the royal 
family.

"I like it because it makes it a bit more of a competition – the Brits versus 
the world. I am sure a Brit will win this year."

In a twist to the usual format, the new series features a "golden buzzer" 
which the judges can only use once, giving the act on stage an automatic place 
in the live semi-finals.

Cowell, who became a father for the first time this year, said having a baby 
did not make him any more appreciative of the younger acts.

"If someone is useless you are not suddenly going to go, 'you're fantastic!', 
because you've had a baby," said Cowell, whose son Eric was born on Valentine's 
Day. He added: "I had a baby before I had a baby. Working with David."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 