
Well Dave is like omigod babes you will NEVER guess who I met with today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/24/david-cameron-pmqs-amal-clooney-selfies-eu-summit-french-duncan-smith-disability>
, I’m like, I heard, since when do we heart human rights lawyers who want to 
take the Elgin Marbles back to, like, Elgin, what does *Amal* want? He’s like, 
God, IDK, there was this like list, Julia Roberts needs a visa, Stella 
McCartney’s suitcase needs extraditing from Heathrow, can we sort her extension 
in Sonning, plus she is desperate to go to the Northern Powerhouse can we get 
her & George a table by a window next Tuesday, God her eyebrows are awesome. 
I’m like, IKR, do you think they are a barrister thing like wigs, they must be 
appalling in the heat. He’s like, do you have a white suit, babes, I’m like, 
soz, only one that covers my thighs :((( He’s like & Amal LOVED my FFS joke 
#boom. However she thought it meant something rude lol?

Schmoozing, bad gags and selfies – it must be PM's Qs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/24/david-cameron-pmqs-amal-clooney-selfies-eu-summit-french-duncan-smith-disability>
I’m like, careful, I would not like to be in your shoes when Govey hears about 
it, Dave’s like, WTF? I’m like – as in the guidance – no contractions, ditto 
met with & however. Dave’s like Full Fiscal Shambles babes, the rules are not 
for *actual* people, obvs, just civil servants. I’m like, so we do not really 
have to say grace and wear top hats? He’s like, only if you work for Govey lol. 
I’m like, honestly, what a waste, I have not said however all day, Dave’s like, 
OMG wait till I tell Lynton, he always said to watch Govey, remember when I 
literally had to sack him #goodtimes #hilair God I miss Lynton.

I’m like *tactful face* well unfort he is not missing you back #justsaying. 
Dave’s like What The Fiscal do you mean babes, that man loves me like a son. 
I’m like, well he defo loves Eton, as in literally Boris, then you, and now, 
ICYMI, Zac? Dave’s like, trust me, not going to happen, classic Lynton bantz, 
he knows Zac = mortal enemy no way would he do that. I’m like, well perhaps Mr 
Cobber is *lowers voice* an addict, unless – bear with – he is an unprincipled 
mercenary who is just messing with our politics for money???!!! Dave’s like, 
now that is literally Rolling On Fiscal Laughing babes. I’m like, However :(((

As seen by Catherine Bennett
 