
A Singaporean teenager faces up to three years in prison for criticising the 
nation’s late founder, Lee Kuan Yew, and Christianity in an online video.

At a court in Singapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> on 
Tuesday, Yee was charged with three offences – two of insulting Christianity 
and the late statesman, and another of allegedly transmitting online an 
“obscene representation”, according to court documents.

In the eight-minute clip posted on YouTube, entitled Lee Kuan Yew Is Finally 
Dead!, 16-year-old Amos Yee Pang Sang likened Lee, Singapore’s first prime 
minister, to Jesus Christ and said they were both “power-hungry and malicious 
but deceive others into thinking they are both compassionate and kind”.

“Lee Kuan Yew was a horrible person, because everyone is scared,” Yee said in 
the video. “Everyone is afraid if they say something like that, they might get 
into trouble.”

Singapore police arrest 17-year-old over critical Lee Kuan Yew video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/singapore-police-arrest-17-year-old-amos-yee-critical-lee-kuan-yew-video>
More than 20 police reports were lodged between 27 March and 29 March in 
response to the video, which has now been removed from his YouTube channel, 
though copies are still being circulated on social media.


He was arrested on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/singapore-police-arrest-17-year-old-amos-yee-critical-lee-kuan-yew-video>
 under the country’s strict hate-speech laws, the same day as the elaborate 
state funeral for the 91-year-old founder of the nation.

Yee, who has previously made local headlines with his controversial and 
opinionated videos, could face up to three years in prison if found guilty. He 
was bailed but has been ordered to stop posting any content online pending the 
outcome of his case.

A Christian Singaporean launched a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/the-government-of-singapore-release-amos-yee> calling 
for the release of the teenager. In an appeal to the government of Singapore, 
it states: “Please release Amos Yee.


“We forgive him and desire he have a full life of contribution to his 
community ahead of him.” The petition has received more than 2,000 signatures 
in 24 hours.

Bob Dietz, Asia programme director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, 
said: “The arrest of a young blogger for comments made in a video highlights 
the restrictive environment in which Singaporean journalists are forced to work.

“We call on authorities to release Amos Yee immediately and to undertake 
reform of Singapore’s outdated laws restricting the media.”

The Singaporean media is tightly controlled by the state-owned Media 
Development Agency. In 2015, the campaign group Reporters Without Borders’ 
world press freedomindex ranked Singapore 153rd out of a total of 180 countries 
and territories. <https://index.rsf.org/#!/>

Tan Chye Hee, Singapore police deputy commissioner, said: “Police take a stern 
view of acts that could threaten religious harmony in Singapore. Any person who 
uploads offensive content online with deliberate intention of wounding the 
religious or racial feelings of any person will be firmly dealt with in 
accordance with the law.”

In recent years, many online bloggers and writers have been prosecuted for 
criticising the Singaporean government.


In 2008, a blogger, Gopalan Nair, was sentenced to three months in prison for 
insulting a high court judge. In a posting on hisSingapore Dissident blog 
<http://singaporedissident.blogspot.co.uk/>, Nair accused the judge of 
“prostituting herself ... by being nothing more than an employee of Mr Lee Kuan 
Yew and his son [the current prime minister] and carrying out their orders.”


Two years later, Alan Shadrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-shadrake>, a British-born writer, was 
sentenced to six weeks in prison and paid a large fine after being found guilty 
of contempt of court.

His book Once a Jolly Hangman questioned the independence of Singapore’s legal 
system <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/27/jail-singapore> and its 
use of the death penalty.



 