
A veteran British journalist and author promoting his book on the death 
penalty inSingapore <https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore> was arrested 
in the country today for alleged criminal defamation and other offences.

Alan Shadrake's arrest came two days after Singapore's Media Development 
Authority lodged a police report. The Foreign Office in London said it was 
seeking more information from local authorities.

The 75-year-old's latest book, Once A Jolly Hangman: Singapore Justice In The 
Dock 
<http://www.gerakbudaya.com/products-page/sird-titles/once-a-jolly-hangman-singapore-justice-in-the-dock/>
, contains accounts of high-profile cases in Singapore involving the use of the 
death penalty, and includes interviews with a former executioner, Darshan 
Singh. Published by a Malaysian company, the book was first released in 
Malaysia.

Death penalty opponents who helped to organise the Singapore launch were told 
by police that no bail had yet been set for Shadrake, whose passport has been 
impounded.

Last week one of Singapore's biggest book retailers, Kinokuniya, withdrew the 
book from its shelves after it was contacted by the Media Development 
Authority, which controls censorship in Singapore,according to the Asian 
Correspondent website 
<http://uk.asiancorrespondent.com/the-asia-file/british-author-arrested-in-singapore-over-death-penalty-book>
.

In publicity material for the book, Margaret John, from Amnesty International 
Canada, described it as "a timely contribution to growing criticism of 
Singapore's shameful use of the death penalty".

Shadrake attracted the attention of authorities in Singapore in 2005 when he 
revealed the identity of Singh shortly before he executed an Australian drug 
trafficker, Nguyen Van Tuong. The case, acause célèbre in Australia 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/editorial/how-australia-failed-nguyen-tuong-van/2005/11/30/1133311102197.html>
, led to friction between the Australian and Singaporean governments.

Singapore has a reputation for taking tough legal action against what it sees 
as unfair criticism. In March last year a judge found a Wall Street Journal 
senior editor, Melanie Kirkpatrick, in contempt of court for allegedly 
impugning the independence of Singapore's judiciary.

In October the Far Eastern Economic Review and its editor-in-chief, Hugo 
Restall, lost an appeal in a defamation lawsuit brought by Singapore's founding 
leader, Lee Kuan Yew, and his son, the current prime minister, Hsien Loong Lee, 
over a 2006 article that they said implicitly suggested they may have abused 
the public's trust.

"In the interests of security, public order, morality, national harmony, or 
friendly foreign relations, Singapore law authorises censorship of content and 
distribution of print material and films, severe limits on public processions 
and assemblies, and prolonged detention of suspects without trial," wasHuman 
Rights Watch's verdict <http://www.hrw.org/en/node/87401> on the city state.
 