
Sometimes the Singapore government cannot help itself. The conviction of Alan 
Shadrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/07/alan-shadrake-singapore-death-penalty>
, an outspoken but hitherto unknown British author, is not merely unjust; it 
reminds outsiders of the authoritarian and sinister side of a city state that 
most people associate only with shopping.

Shadrake is the latest in a long line of victims of one of the world's most 
vicious defamation cultures. Pretty much any criticism can be deemed as 
"insult". International media have fallen foul – from theEconomist 
<http://www.economist.com/node/17419873> to the Far Eastern Economic Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/22/far-eastern-economic-review-closes>
 – and most of the tiny group of opposition politicians have over the years 
been bankrupted and then imprisoned for going against the grain.

Shadrake, who divides his time between Malaysia and the UK, knew what he was 
doing, and he knew the consequences. He knew he was inviting trouble – more 
specificallycharges of contempt 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2010/07/singapore-alan-shadrake-ben-bland-free-speech-death-penalty>
 – by calling into question the probity of the judiciary. But that does not 
make the attack on him any less acceptable or sensible. Imagine if Singapore 
had shown a little more foresight and ignored the affair. The book would not 
have matched Jamie or Nigella on the bestsellers.

Sentencing has now been deferred for a week, with prosecutors asking for 
"only" 12 weeks jail. This is more lenient than anticipated, perhaps denoting 
an element of embarrassment at the bad press. But the trial should not have 
happened in the first place.

As a frequent visitor to Singapore (where I was born), I have seen the best 
and the worst of the place. When nearly two years ago I wrote apiece for the 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/jul/01/civilliberties> previewing 
my book,Freedom for Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/06/freedom-for-sale-john-kampfner> 
as the model of the global tendency of people trading their liberty for either 
wealth or security – I was instantly denounced. They did not appreciate my 
description of the consumer culture there as "the anaesthetic for the brain".

In spite of, or perhaps because of, the denunciations, I sought to engage the 
Singaporeans at the top of government. I suggested to them that their kneejerk 
response to all criticism, no matter the tone or subject matter, was doing 
their country enormous harm. They then surprised me by inviting me over to 
launch my book there. My father suggested they might "do a Polanski on me" and 
arrest me at the airport. In the event, I was treated well and the 
government-controlled Straits Times devoted two pages to a measured critique of 
my thesis.

The vacillations in my treatment suggest that the government in Singapore is 
not talking with one voice. Everyone is wondering what will happen once the 
87-year-oldLee Kuan Yew 
<http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/49691/fareed-zakaria/a-conversation-with-lee-kuan-yew>
, the father of the independent nation and father of the present prime 
minister, passes on. Will Singapore begin to loosen its stifling grip and 
tolerate free expression? I examine these questions in a special report later 
this week on BBC Radio 4'sThe World Tonight 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qtl3>.

Singapore's population is well travelled and highly educated. The country is 
stable and completely integrated into the global economy and communications. 
Already it is allowing just a little morecultural freedom 
<http://blog.indexoncensorship.org/2009/12/22/censorship-in-singapore>, but it 
does so nervously. The regime has nothing to fear except fear itself.
 