
Serial boardroom director Sir John Peace is under pressure after facing a 
hat-trick of shareholder rebellions at the three FTSE 100 firms he chairs.

Following his recent embarrassments with revolts over pay at high fashion 
retailer Burberry andStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> bank, investors in 
Experian vented their anger over succession planning at the credit-checking 
company.

After Peace had chaired his last annual meeting of Experian – the company he 
founded more than 30 years ago –it was announced 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/experian-plc--expn-/rns/result-of-agm/201407161049454662M/>
 that 30% of investors had failed to support the election to the board of his 
successor, Don Robert.

The revolt by nearly one in three investors came after the intervention of the 
Institute of Directors, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/15/experian-under-fire-over-corporate-governance>
 which warned that Robert's appointment to chairman breached City codes 
stipulating that chief executives should not jeopardise the independent 
oversight of the board by stepping up to the crucial role of chairman.

It came on a day when other top companies also faced dissent from investors. 
At Icap, the interdealer broker run by former Conservative party treasurer 
Michael Spencer,nearly 33% of investors showed their anger over pay by voting 
against the remuneration report 
<http://www.icap.com/~/media/Files/I/Icap-Corp/pdfs/2014-07-16-Proxy-Results-.pdf>
 while at Aberdeen-based transport company First Group25% of shareholders voted 
against 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/firstgroup-plc--fgp-/prn/result-of-agm/20140716135612PE118/>
 pay deals for its boss, Tim O'Toole.

The revolts come amid heightened scrutiny of pay at leading companies after 
business secretary Vince Cable gave shareholders a new vote on future pay deals 
for bosses.

At Standard Chartered, 41% of investors voted against pay deals for the 
management team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/18/standard-chartered-pressure-executive-pay-investor-revolt>
 while at Burberry, almost 53% of investors cast a non-binding vote last week 
against the pay report. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/11/burberry-shareholders-revolt-christian-bailey-pay-package>

At Experian <https://www.theguardian.com/business/experiangroup> the focus had 
been on succession planning and while just a handful of investors attended the 
annual meeting in Dublin, the drama came in votes that had been cast before the 
meeting by institutional investors.

About 11% of investors voted against Robert's re-election to the board but the 
level of opposition rose to 30% if deliberate abstentions are included. Company 
directors usually expect a much more solid endorsement by their shareholders, 
as was the case for the other directors on the Experian board who were elected 
with about 98% support.

Robert has been chief executive of Experian since it was spun out of GUS in 
2006 and floated on the stock market. He has received £45m over five years and 
there was also a smaller revolt over pay after 15% of investors failed to 
support the remuneration report.

He took up his new post as chairman after the annual meeting where he paid 
tribute to his predecessor's "foresight, leadership and determination".

But shareholders said they were frustrated by Peace's oversight of the 
companies he continued to chair. One said: "He has a reputation of being 
difficult and is not helping to foster good relationships between the 
companies' management and major shareholders".

Experian focused on the 90% of votes cast in favour of Robert's re-election 
rather than the level of dissent. "As chairman, Don brings considerable value 
to Experian and has unrivalled, deep knowledge of the business which he has 
built up over nine highly successful years as chief executive officer. The 
board places enormous value on Don remaining with the business, particularly 
given the retirement of founder Sir John Peace,"the company said 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/experian-plc--expn-/rns/agm-statement/201407161224464993M/>
.

"We endeavour to listen carefully to our shareholders and are always happy to 
engage with any investors on this or any other resolution that was put to 
today's meeting."

Investor advisory bodies such as the Investment Management Association had 
warned about the breaches of corporate governance codes, issuing an "amber top" 
alert before the annual meeting to signal potential concerns. An amber top is 
its second highest warning.

It is thought that investor bodies were also concerned about the bonuses at 
money broker Icap –which was fined £55m in September for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/25/icap-fined-55m-pounds-libor-rigging-charges-former-staff>
 – as there is no upper limit on the amount that can be paid out. At the annual 
meeting in the London headquarters of the broker, chairman Charles Gregson told 
shareholders: "Our remuneration policy is historical, the process is changing 
and during this coming year we will be consulting with shareholders on a new 
design of the policy in 2016."

At First Group, Wednesday's rebellion was less strong than the 30% vote 
against pay policies in 2013. "Imelda Walsh, the newly appointed chair of our 
remuneration committee, will engage with investors to seek their views and 
ensure ongoing support for the group's remuneration policy and practices," a 
First Group spokesman said.
 