
Sir Martin Sorrell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell>, the 
longstanding chief executive of advertising company WPP, received £70.4m in 
cash and shares last year in one of the biggest pay deals in UK corporate 
history.

Estimates of his 2015 pay deal have been made since the disclosure last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/15/wpp-sorrell-pay> that Sorrell 
received nearly £63m in share awards. The advertising company’s annual report 
on Friday showed that a £4.2m annual bonus and other payments had pushed the 
total to £70.4m.


“While the value of Sir Martin Sorrell’s award is very large, it was the 
result of an outstanding set of returns to share owners,” said Sir John Hood, 
chairman of theWPP <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wpp> compensation 
committee.


Sorrell’s pay deal – which means he has received £190m since 2009 – is being 
announced at a time of renewed shareholder focus on executive pay, with two 
FTSE 100 firms – BP and Smith & Nephew – receiving “no” votes for the pay deals.

His figure for 2015 includes a £47,000 allowance for accommodation when he 
stays in his own home in New York.

Sorrell founded WPP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup> in 1985 
when he borrowed £250,000 to buy a stake in shopping basket maker Wire & 
Plastic Products. Through a series of acquisitions it is now the world’s 
biggest marketing and advertising group and an acquisitions machine, combining 
advertising agencies such as JWT and Ogilvy & Mather with PR companies 
including Finsbury and Hill & Knowlton.

Robert Quarta, WPP’s chairman, tackled the issue of when Sorrell, 71, might 
step aside. “At some point we all leave our jobs. The question is when. 
Whether, in Sir Martin’s case, that happens tomorrow, in one, two, three, four 
or five years, or even over a longer period, we have already begun to identify 
internal and external candidates who should be considered.

“Since joining your board, I have seen firsthand a rigorous and comprehensive 
process, where independent members of the board and the chairman regularly meet 
not just those who report directly to Sir Martin, but also the senior tier 
below,” said Quarta, in his first report to shareholders since becoming 
chairman.

“Share owners should have no doubt that we already have a strong pool of 
internal and external candidates to draw from,” said Quarta.

Sorrell’s pay is based on share awards dating back to 2010 when the share 
price was 644p. Since then the shares have risen to more than £15. Sorrell’s 
total pay is 1,444 the average of the 124,930 employed by WPP. His salary is 31 
times the average.

Sorrell payouts derive from a scheme known as the Leap – the leadership equity 
acquisition plan - will has only one more year to runafter a shareholder revolt 
in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/13/wpp-shareholders-vote-against-sorrell-pay>
 replaced it with a new scheme, called the executive performance share plan. At 
current share prices, the shares locked inside the Leap are worth more than 
£20m.
 