
Analysts at Morgan Stanley earlier this year predicted that half of US jobs 
will be replaced by robots 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/likelihood-of-your-job-being-taken-over-by-robots-2016-8>
 in just 20 years.Elon Musk caused a Twitter storm 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/794200368804544512> over his fears about 
how artificial intelligence (AI) could soon assume control of the internet. 
Technology is changing the way we work and it’s only accelerating. If Musk is 
worried, should we be too?


Apparently not if you listen to the technology giants at the forefront of this 
revolution. They seem to believe that we’re hungry, starving in fact, for more 
gadgetry to make our lives easier/more fun/more productive/easier to bear. We 
now trust smart thermostats to reduce our bills, we’re testing cars that drive 
themselves and we can control our speaker systems from anywhere in the house. 
The latest buzz is about personal digital assistants who can help us navigate 
our days both at home and in the office.


Read the marketing spiel around Amazon Echo and Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Home and it appears that 
talking to a shiny box is the new alternative to pressing the touchscreen of a 
shiny box. Now our thumbs can be put to better use. Whatever way you look at 
it, one thing’s for certain – this technology is here to stay.


Amazon Echo: the first 13 things to try
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/13/amazon-echo-alexa-first-things-to-try>
The unassuming speaker-like object is always listening and primed to jump on 
your commands. Need more toilet roll? Tick. Want to play your favourite 1980s 
Spotify playlist? Done. Need the weather report before you walk the dog? Easy. 
It’s fair to say that reviews of this new technology have been reasonably muted 
so far, but it’s the platforms that Echo (or its new competitor, Google Home) 
are creating that are important. What these devices can do today is a pale 
reflection of what they might be capable of doing in the near future. Amazon 
has plans for over 3,000so-called skills 
<http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=176060&p=RssLanding&cat=news&id=2201509>
 for its Echo and having given access to third-party developers, the floodgates 
are about to open.


So, are the likes of Echo, Home and Siri genuinely useful additions to the 
workplace? If we judge them on what they can do now they appear to be a good, 
if not business critical, addition to a small business. They can be useful in 
the management of a calendar, the ability to raise team spirit with some tunes 
on a rainy Thursday or keeping on top of office supplies by ensuring no one 
runs out of Sellotape. They can take on simple functions that either eat up 
time or might require additional headcount that lean and nimble startup 
businesses don’t want on their payroll.


But you may have noticed above that I’ve put this tech in a specific box – a 
small business-sized box. Why? Let’s not forget that Echo is a speaker. Yes, a 
very smart speaker, but speakers are designed to do one thing really well - 
broadcast. Sharing your calendar plans might be ok in your home office, but 
it’s certainly not something you’d see as being de rigueur for a bigger 
enterprise, especially given the modern propensity to open plan office design. 
With no visible screens and no pre-filter capabilities, I’m sure the employment 
tribunals would have little sympathy with Alexa announcing, “Redundancy meeting 
with Jack at 3pm,” to the entire 11th floor.


And while we’re on the topic of privacy, if Alexa wants to spend her day 
listening to the nonsense conversations I have at home then she’s welcome. 
However, these systems work on the basis that they’re always on, always 
listening. Do we want Amazon or Google listening in to our private or 
privileged work conversations? In a corporate context I’m sure there’ll be 
compliance professionals shuddering in their chairs at the thought of the data 
protection issues. Furthermore, do we know if these systems can be hacked? A 
quick search for “laptop camera cover” on Google reveals around4.6m 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=laptop+camera+cover%E2%80%99&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=RI0pWNWmE8H38Ae1_4qIAw#q=%27laptop+camera+cover%E2%80%99>
 listings. That’s a lot of people worried that they’re being spied on.


Google launches new Assistant and puts it at heart of Home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-launch-new-assistant-home>
For now, let’s assume though that no one’s listening. Let’s assume that these 
devices are secure. How could they be harnessed to become an active part of a 
business as opposed to being a passive butler, waiting to drag random 
information from the internet?


A firm called HipChat has already launched a “skill” that harnesses Echo as an 
always-on alert system 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/atlassian-hipchat-amazon-echo-2016-10> that 
“shouts” when one of its sites goes down. By teaching Echo to notice a certain 
set of conditions that will result in a problem, they are now capable of 
reducing service issues more quickly than ever before. In other applications, 
Alexa could instantly alert brand owners to negative social media sentiment, or 
give retailers the ability to take advantage of a fluctuation in the market to 
make truly dynamic pricing strategies possible.


It feels like we’ve not even scratched the surface of the possibilities of 
these devices. As we employ more connected technology in our surroundings, 
having a voice-controlled assistant at the very centre feels intuitively right. 
It’s clear that we should have a pretty broad description of what an 
“assistant” can be in our working and domestic lives if we’re to make the most 
of them. It’s going to be exciting to see whether investment in developing 
these platforms will make them immeasurably more useful.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 