
An inquiry into the assassination of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> in the heart of London 
in 2006 has concluded that he was “probably” murdered on the personal orders of 
Vladimir Putin. This is a troubling accusation.

The report (pdf)  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/493860/The-Litvinenko-Inquiry-H-C-695-web.pdf>
said that Litvinenko, who died from radioactive poisoning, was killed by two 
Russian agents, Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun, who were most likely acting 
on behalf of the Russian FSB secret service.

Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
The head of the inquiry, Sir Robert Owen, also came to the conclusion that 
there was sufficient evidence heard in open court to build a “strong 
circumstantial case” against the Russian state.

His conclusions mirror those of the late Russian oligarch Boris Berezovsky, 
who had been living in London waging a campaign against Putin before hisown 
death in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/27/boris-berezovsky-inquest-open-verdict-death>
. Litvinenko was his chief bomb thrower.

I’ve been analysing this case since Litvinenko’s death, and I’ve followed the 
inquiry closely. I don’t know whether or not his murder was ordered by the 
Russian president or anyone in the Kremlin. What I do know is that Owen’s 
findings are not supported by reliable evidence.

The report relies on hearsay and is marred by inconsistent logic. It offers no 
factual insights into what really happened to Litvinenko, yet has been taken as 
gospel truth by governments and pundits across the west.

Here are some of the problems

1. PR campaign

The inquiry failed to take into account the massive misinformation campaign 
initiated by Berezovsky. It was Berezovsky, an arch-enemy of Putin, who put 
forward the narrative that the Russian president was behind the poisoning of 
Litvinenko and fed this to a gullible western media, with the help of the PR 
firm Bell Pottinger.

A typical headline of the day was something like “Ex-KGB Spy Murdered on 
Orders of Putin”. No facts were presented, just unsupported allegations. 
Berezovsky’s well-funded management of the public discourse set the tone for 
everything that was to come.

If this had been a jury trial, the media coverage would have prejudiced the 
case. In the absence of a jury Berezovsky’s targets included the public, 
journalists, police, and government officials. Yet there was no consideration 
of the impact of this wide-reaching influence in the report.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71a820bdb32183b31c4c338b3e9b64a42e5ebb7a%2F0_40_4000_2403%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20reasons%20you%20can't%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20reasons%20you%20can%27t%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71a820bdb32183b31c4c338b3e9b64a42e5ebb7a%2F0_40_4000_2403%2F4000.jpg>
 Marina Litvinenko holds a copy of the inquiry report with her son Anatoly 
Litvinenko. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
2. Inconsistent

The inquiry appears to use different evidentiary standards for different 
witnesses. On the one hand Owen claims that he considers some of the evidence 
submitted by the two alleged assassins, Lugovoi and Kovtun, to be deficient. As 
a result, he says, he won’t regard as credible any parts of their accounts.

But he applies a different standard to others. For example, a retired physics 
professor named Norman Dombey testified that a polonium sample contains a 
characteristic fingerprint that allows it to be traced back to its source. 
However Owen concludes that this fingerprint theory “is flawed and must be 
rejected”. He does not react to problems with some of Dombey’s testimony by 
dismissing all of it. In fact, he says that he received valuable evidence from 
Dombey.

3. Unreliable

There is also the question of Litvinenko’s dramatic deathbed statement 
implicating Putin that drew so much international attention. Early media 
reports suggest the statement was composed by Litvinenko himself anddictated to 
his associate, <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6180068.stm>Alexander Goldfarb. 
The inquiry report describes Goldfarb as the co-author of the bookDeath of a 
Dissident 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Death-Dissident-Poisoning-Alexander-Litvinenko/dp/1847391079>
 with Marina Litvinenko. It does not mention that he was a close ally of 
Berezovsky’s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4e21bb8c223de8768054a954aca4075eb3c356%2F0_0_1716_1098%2F1716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20reasons%20you%20can't%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20reasons%20you%20can%27t%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4e21bb8c223de8768054a954aca4075eb3c356%2F0_0_1716_1098%2F1716.jpg>
 Boris Berezovsky at his home in Surrey, before his death. Photograph: John 
Downing/Getty Images 
Later media reports quote Goldfarb as saying that he wrote the statement  
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/06/09/AR2007060901354_2.html>
himself and checked it with Litvinenko.Another account suggests the statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
 was drafted by the family lawyer, George Menzies, and discussed with the PR 
firm Bell Pottinger, acting for Berezovsky.

Which is correct? And even more importantly, the statement does not explain 
how Litvinenko could possibly have known of the Russian president’s 
culpability, nor does it offer evidence to back up the allegation.

4. Bias

The report fails to acknowledge that Goldfarb is not an objective observer in 
this case. For instance, he was also involved in promoting theanti-Putin 
protests of the punk rock group Pussy Riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/26/pussy-riot-protest-interview>. 
This is important because it suggests that the accusations against Putin form 
part of a long-running campaign stretching over his entire tenure in the 
Kremlin.

The report recounts many allegations against him as if they were discrete 
events rather than seeing them as part of a continuous process. The point here 
is that the inquiry should have considered Goldfarb’s testimony within a 
context of a systematic anti-Putin agenda.

5. Lacking evidence

 The report admits that there are no hard facts to support the claims against 
Putin, noting that “evidence of Russian state involvement in most of these 
deaths is circumstantial”. But “circumstantial” is used here as a euphemism for 
“factually unsupported”.

The report goes on to suggest that the other allegations against Putin over 
the years, for example that he was implicated in themurder of the journalist 
Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/oct/09/topstories3.russia>, “establish 
a pattern of events, which is of contextual importance to the circumstances of 
Mr Litvinenko’s death”. In other words, Owen admits to being influenced by 
unproven cases in his consideration of culpability in Litvinenko’s death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93b806991687ada04b4cb71b7238cf3899f168c2%2F0_0_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20reasons%20you%20can't%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20reasons%20you%20can%27t%20take%20the%20Litvinenko%20report%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Flitvinenko-report-get-it-wrong-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93b806991687ada04b4cb71b7238cf3899f168c2%2F0_0_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin and David Cameron during the G20 summit in November 2015. 
Photograph: Yuri Kochetkov/EPA 
6. Dubious reasoning

The role of Mario Scaramella, an Italian sometimes described as an academic, 
presented a dilemma for the inquiry. At firstLitvinenko publically accused 
Scaramella 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/the-litvinenko-murder-scaramella-the-italian-connection-426827.html>
 of poisoning him to stop him disclosing information about Russia’s culpability 
in Politkovskaya’s death. But the story seems to have changed after Berezovsky 
visited Litvinenko in hospital, after which his people began saying that 
Litvinenko had blamed Putin.

There is no evidence that Scaramella was responsible, but the inquiry accepted 
a strange reasoning for Litvinenko implicating him in the first place. 
Apparently the former spy was embarrassed to admit that he hadn’t seen Lugovoi 
and Kovtun as threats, so initially concocted the allegations against 
Scaramello to salvage his professional pride.

 While this analysis points to serious flaws in the report, it does not 
present evidence to exonerate Putin. As I said, I don’t know whether or not he 
is to blame. But what happened to the presumption of innocence and the need to 
build a case before declaring someone guilty?

It is clear that those who are behind these claims against the Russian 
president have an agenda, and are using a wealth of means in their attempts to 
convince others.

Key findings: who killed Alexander Litvinenko, how and why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
The public inquiry’s acceptance of so many of their questionable allegations 
casts a pall over Owen’s efforts and renders his report practically useless.


William Dunkerley is a media analyst and author based in the US, who has 
written extensibly about Russia. His recent books includeLitvinenko Murder Case 
Solved 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Litvinenko-Murder-Case-Solved-long-unsolved/dp/0990452913>
 andThe Phony Litvinenko Murder 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Phony-Litvinenko-Murder-Finally-doesnt/dp/0615559018>
 