
The James Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> adventure Skyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144416/skyfall> triumphed at the 
Evening Standard film awards on Monday night, taking both the film of the year 
and blockbuster of the year prizes ahead ofthis weekend's Baftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas-2013>.

Sam Mendes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-mendes>' film, a critical 
hit which has also been the most successful 007 outing at the box office, was 
the first Bond movie to be nominated for the best film prize at the awards. The 
blockbuster accolade follows Skyfall's success as the UK's highest grossing 
movie last year; the film took a staggering £102m, the highest total recorded 
for any film in Britain.

"Thanks in part to the extraordinary success of Skyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/skyfall> – a truly big British movie, 
delivered with a panache Hollywood could envy – 2012 also highlighted the 
creativity, vision and talent of a new generation of British film-makers, 
actors and actresses," said Evening Standard editor Sarah Sands.

Elsewhere, the acting prizes went to Toby Jones for his turn as a sound 
engineer in the period horror homageBerberian Sound Studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148212/berberian-sound-studio> and 
Andrea Riseborough <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-riseborough> for 
her performance as a reluctant IRA informer in the thrillerShadow Dancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145818/shadow-dancer>. The Peter 
Sellers prize for comedy went toBen Wheatley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-wheatley>'s Sightseers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146657/sightseers>, the tale of two 
murderous caravanners, while Bart Layton's filmThe Imposter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145816/imposter>, the real-life tale of 
a French conman who claimed to be a missing American boy, was named best 
documentary.

Picking up her prize, Riseborough said: "It's a huge affirmation and you work 
on something for such a long time and you're so passionate about it, and then 
you're so excited other people are responding to it and it's valuable to them 
in some way."

The prize for most promising newcomer went to director Sally El Hosaini for 
her Sundance and Berlin award winnerMy Brother the Devil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149893/my-brother-the-devil>, which 
centres on two young boys of Egyptian descent who become embroiled in east 
London's gang culture. Best screenplay went to Malcolm Campbell forWhat Richard 
Did <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149525/what-richard-did>, the story 
of a popular Irish teenager whose life is changed forever after a senseless act 
of violence. ComicSacha Baron Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen> won the editor's award, "for 
making an event of every one of his films".

Skyfall, The Imposter and Riseborough are all among the nominees for the 
Baftas, which will take place at the Royal Opera House in London on Sunday.
 