
Inside a converted flower warehouse off a scruffy street in Paris’s 18th 
arrondissement, the world’s largest computer games company is preparing its 
latest assault on the world’s screens.

On Friday, Skylanders Academy, a CGI animation based on a $3bn (£2.5bn) 
combined video game/toy franchise aimed at pre-teens, will hitNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>.

It is the first release from Activision Blizzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/activision-blizzard> Studios, a 
division of the gaming behemoth behind titles including Call of Duty, World of 
Warcraft and Destiny, set up last year to take games to TV and screen.

Activision animation partner TeamTO have 160 people working on the project at 
its headquarters in the French capital and a second site in the south of France.

The TeamTO director general and founder, Guillaume Hellouin, says the 
resources were roughly equivalent to those needed for a CGI film. “It’s 
probably the most ambitious TV series we have had the chance to work on,” he 
said. “It’s close to feature film quality in terms of image sophistication.”

Skylanders has signed up a cast of high-class voice actors. The lead, a purple 
dragon called Spyro, who first appeared as a video game character in 1998, is 
voiced byJustin Long <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0519043/>, best known for 
starring in Dodgeball, and one Spyro’s best friends, a walking pile of rock and 
magmacalled Eruptor <http://skylanders.wikia.com/wiki/Eruptor>, is played by 
Breaking Bad’sJonathan Banks <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0052186/>. 
Oscar-winner Susan Sarandon voices a villain called the Golden Queen.

The crossover between video games and TV and film is nothing new. From 
DuckTales on the NES console in the early 1990s, via Bob Hoskins in the movie 
Super Mario Brothers in 1993, to the forthcoming Assassin’s Creed film starring 
Michael Fassbender, traffic between the mediums has been busy. There are even 
plans to make a series offilms based on Tetris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/28/tetris-films-trilogy>.

But what is new is the way in which Activison is bringing overall control 
inside the business, rather than licensing others to do the work and take most 
of the risk.

Coco Francini, the vice-president of development at Activision’s studio and 
Skylanders producer, says: “I think that a lot of companies licence out their 
intellectual property, and obviously we are not doing that.

“We are accountable to the standards of excellence of the entire company ... 
and we work with the people who make the games, we know the DNA of what makes 
them successful by talking to those people and meeting with those studios.”

Activision has brought in big names to oversee the project. The co-president, 
Stacey Sher, has produced critically acclaimed films including Erin Brockovich 
and Matilda, and worked alongside Francini, whose credits include Django 
Unchained, with Quentin Tarantino. Her co-president Nick van Dyk is a former 
Disney executive who played a key role inacquiring Pixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/jan/24/citynews.business>, Marvel and 
Star Wars for the studio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fskylanders-academy-activision-blizzard-studios-netflix-gaming-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97aa2025f1819bf6369282d4a70e173b5aead38%2F45_0_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skylanders%20Academy%3A%20Activision%20prepares%20for%20Netflix%20assault%20with%20game-TV%20crossover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fskylanders-academy-activision-blizzard-studios-netflix-gaming-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skylanders%20Academy%3A%20Activision%20prepares%20for%20Netflix%20assault%20with%20game-TV%20crossover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fskylanders-academy-activision-blizzard-studios-netflix-gaming-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97aa2025f1819bf6369282d4a70e173b5aead38%2F45_0_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
 Eruptor, right, voiced by Jonathan Banks, is one of the characters in 
Skylanders Academy. Photograph: TeamTO/Activision Blizzard Studios 
The approach suggests a desire to avoid the mistakes of the past, which Sher 
acknowledges. “People are always looking for great intellectual property. And I 
think coming from my background in film and television that the places where 
I’ve imagined people don’t always get it right is also investing in character.

“Character is the thing that puts you into the best of filmed entertainment, 
character and storytelling.”

Those mistakes are reflected in the more miss than hit record of computer game 
adaptations. World of Warcraft, based on Activision’s online role playing game, 
was critically panned andlost a reported $15m 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-analysis-warcraft-avoids-910268?utm_source=Sailthru&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=THR%20Box%20Office_2016-07-13%2006:00:00_awashington&utm_term=hollywoodreporter_boxoffice>
 on a budget of $160m. It was only saved from complete financial failure by a 
strong showing in China. But there are other reasons to want to be more 
directly involved.

Prof Ian Bogost of the Georgia Institute of Technology says: “You could say 
they are doing this to maintain better creative control. Exert more creative 
force. They might also be doing that so they can own more of that profit chain. 
Especially since the mechanics of Hollywood deals are so backwards and 
complicated.”

Activision’s next project after Skylanders is a film version of the Call of 
Duty <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty> franchise, which has 
made more than $10bn worldwide.

Despite the success of titles such as Call of Duty and wider penetration of 
gaming into the mainstream, Bogost thinks Activision will still have difficulty 
escaping the snobbery that stops it going beyond a core audience, in part 
because the games that have truly broken into the mainstream do not lend 
themselves to linear narratives.

“There’s still a kind of handicap at work. The biggest cultural shift is [in] 
the number of people who play rather ordinary games,” he says, citing the likes 
of Candy Crush and Flappy Bird.


“You can imagine an argument that games are widespread enough to justify, for 
the first time, a broad slate of adaptations of games. But I’m still not sure 
that’s likely to produce the kind of mainstream success even of the kind [that 
has come from] comic books, which took 50 years to make it to mass market.


“History seems to show us that it hasn’t been successful doing that. We’ve 
been trying to do that for decades. Is there reason to believe it’s different 
now?”

But Activision’s Van Dyk is targeting exactly that kind of breakout hit with 
the games it chooses to adapt. “We will look for intellectual property that has 
passionate following, but I think we want to make programming for everybody. 
That respects and celebrates players of the game, but also makes this content 
as broadly appealing as it can be.

“If you look at Marvel, they make a Thor movie not just for people who read 
Thor comics. It needs to be a great film for everyone.”
 