
Apple’s unveiling of its Apple Watch smartwatch on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/09/apple-watch-iwatch-wearable-device-smartwatch>
 has thrown wearable technology under the spotlight - but Apple has joined a 
very busy market of useful, internet-connected watches. Here’s everything you 
need to know about smartwatches, and nine of the best.

Apple Watch

The long-anticipated Apple Watch is an extension of the iPhone on the wrist. 
It has a touchscreen display, but also whatApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is calling a “digital crown” on 
the side, which is a jog dial that allows users to turn it to adjust features 
and settings, including zooming in and out of a map, or setting the time.

Apple’s main focus is on apps, health and communications, with third-party 
apps from Twitter and Facebook shown off. A heart rate sensor on the back 
combines with movement tracking for fitness monitoring.

The Apple Watch won’t be available until Spring 2015, which means the rest of 
the pack has quite a head start on Apple.

Expert view: We don’t know until we get our hands on one next year.

Cost: $350 (£215) in spring 2014

• The Apple Watch: light, clever, but how long does the battery last? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/10/apple-watch-light-clever-battery>

• Apple Watch has designs on health industry – but is it good for doctors? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/10/apple-watch-health-app-iphone-smartwatch>

• Apple Watch first reactions: a great bit of kit, or just plain ugly? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/09/apple-watch-reactions-smartwatch-iwatch>

Motorola Moto 360
 The Moto 360, one of the rare round Android smartwatches. Photograph: Jeff 
Chiu/AP 
Motorola’s second smartwatch and its first using Google’s Android Wear 
software, the Moto 360 is the first Android smartwatch to be released with a 
round 1.5in screen.

It runs Google’s latest smartwatch software and connects to Android 
smartphones and tablets via Bluetooth, allowing notifications from apps, calls, 
texts and emails to pop up on the screen as small cards.

The 360 has a heart rate sensor on the back, while steps and activity are 
counted by an accelerometer for fitness tracking.

The interface is simple, the display attractive and the choice of watchfaces 
plentiful. Users can speak into their watch to search with Google or dictate 
messages, while Google Now presents information including aeroplane boarding 
cards or bus stop timetables when needed.

Users can also control their music and get turn-by-turn directions delivered 
to their wrist from Google Maps.

Expert view: The best looking, most comfortable smartwatch, but let down by 
poor battery life of less than a day.

Cost: £200 from the end of September

• Motorola Moto 360 a smartwatch masquerading as a classic time piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/05/motorola-moto-360-a-smartwatch-masquerading-as-a-classic-time-piece>

LG G Watch
 Music Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
LG’s G Watch was one of the first Android Wear watches released, and like the 
Moto 360 connects to an Android smartphone via Bluetooth to display 
notifications and other information. It has a square screen, lasts about two 
days on a single charge and is waterproof.

The G Watch lacks a heart rate monitor, but tracks steps and calories burnt, 
and allows users to control music, get directions and everything else Android 
Wear provides.

Expert view: A good balance of battery life and notification features but the 
design might put people off.

Cost: £160 available now

• LG G Watch review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/11/google-smartwatches-review-lg-g-watch-samsung-gear-live-android-wear>

Samsung Gear Live
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410434554811%2F14865108510_4109480d83_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what's%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what%27s%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410434554811%2F14865108510_4109480d83_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Samsung Gear Live Android Wear smartwatchPhotograph: Maurizio Pesce/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/pestoverde/14865108510/> 
The Gear Live is Samsung’s Android Wear smartwatch, which was launched at the 
same time as theLG <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lg> G Watch. It too 
has a square screen, connects to an Android smartphone via Bluetooth and 
displays information, notifications, direction and music track changes.

The Gear Live also has a heart rate sensor built into the back for fitness 
tracking and is waterproof.

Expert view: The heart rate sensor doesn’t add much, but the bright screen and 
comfortable fit make it a solid Android Wear watch.

Cost: £170 available now

• Samsung Gear Live review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/11/google-smartwatches-review-lg-g-watch-samsung-gear-live-android-wear>

LG G Watch R
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410427790816%2F5a4983d6-c22b-4de0-b997-cd035752147b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what's%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what%27s%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410427790816%2F5a4983d6-c22b-4de0-b997-cd035752147b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The LG G Watch R. Photograph: LG ELECTRONICS/AFP/Getty Images 
The second round Android smartwatch, the LG G Watch R is essentially the 
square LG G Watch above squeezed into a circular frame. It looks more like a 
traditional watch with a completely round 1.3in screen and has a heart rate 
sensor on the back, unlike its square brother.

Expert view: Similar to the LG G watch but a more attractive round design and 
a heart rate monitor.

Cost: around £170 expected to be released in October

• LG G Watch R: the smartwatch that looks like a watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/28/lg-g-watch-r-smartwatch-motorola-google-apple-men>

Asus ZenWatch
 The Asus ZenWatch. Photograph: ASUS 
Asus’s ZenWatch is the company’s first attempt at a wearable and, like the 
others above, runs Google’s Android Wear. It connects to Android smartphones 
via Bluetooth, displays notifications and other information from the phone and 
tracks activity with an acelerometer.

It doesn’t have a heart rate monitor, but has a slightly curved screen and 
polished bezel.

Expert view: It has the same features as most other smartwatches, so only one 
for you if you like the big and perhaps a little over-designed look.

Cost: under £199 from in October

• Asus ZenWatch will retail for ‘under £199’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/03/asus-zenwatch-will-retail-for-under-199>

Sony Smartwatch 3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410429780945%2Fb516c9f3-5e71-4d2a-bf12-f223d387d2c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what's%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what%27s%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410429780945%2Fb516c9f3-5e71-4d2a-bf12-f223d387d2c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Sony SmartWatch 3 was one of the many smartwatches unveiled at the 2014 
IFA trade fair in Berlin. Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
The Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> Smartwatch 3 is the 
only Android Wear smartwatch to date that has a GPS built in meaning it can 
track its position for running and other fitness and navigation activities 
without being connected to an Android smartphone.

It will also be able to play music stored on the watch via Bluetooth 
headphones without a smartphone.

The Smartwatch 3 is waterproof, like the rest, with a square screen and is 
Sony’s fourth generation Android smartwatch.

Expert view: Promises a two-day battery life and more Android Wear features - 
including built-in GPS, which makes it great for fitness apps - than any other 
smartwatch.

Cost: €229 (£182) in October

• Sony joins Google’s Android Wear initiative with the GPS-equipped Smartwatch 
3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/03/sony-google-android-wear-gps-smartwatch-3>

Samsung Gear S
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410428433433%2F866c0e56-0fde-400c-9268-7638e247052e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what's%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smartwatches%3A%20from%20Apple%20Watch%20to%20the%20Moto%20360%2C%20what%27s%20on%20offer%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fbest-smartwatches-apple-watch-motorola-moto-360-google-android%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410428433433%2F866c0e56-0fde-400c-9268-7638e247052e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Samsung Gear S smartwatch being showcased at the IFA consumer technology 
fair in Berlin. Photograph: FABRIZIO BENSCH/REUTERS 
Samsung’s latest smartwatch is the company’s sixth smartwatch in under a year, 
but is the only one so far that can be used completely independently of a 
smartphone.

The Gear S has Bluetooth to connect to and sync with a Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> Android smartphone, but is 
also a complete mobile phone in its own right capable of making calls, sending 
messages and connecting to the internet over Wi-Fi or 3G connection, complete 
with separate mobile phone contract.

It runs Samsung’s Tizen software, which means Android apps are not compatible 
and has a 2in curved screen with a heart rate sensor on the back. Users can 
place calls by directly speaking into the watch, just like Dick Tracy.

Expert view: The only option for those who want the entire 3G-enabled 
connectivity of a mobile phone, on their wrist.

Cost: Not yet announced

• Samsung’s new Gear S smartwatch: just don’t mention Dick Tracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/28/samsungs-curved-gear-s-smartwatch-dick-tracy>

Pebble
 Pebble smartwatches. Photograph: Handout 
The Pebble was one of the first smartwatches to work with both the iPhone and 
Android. It was successfully crowd-funded with $10.3 million through 
Kickstarter in April 2012, before being released in 2013.

It has a low power e-ink screen that stays on all the time but gives the 
Pebble a battery life of seven days. It is waterproof, supports third party 
apps, and is available in a range of colours. An updated version with a 
stainless steel case was released this year.

The Pebble displays alerts from the connected smartphone, but has no 
touchscreen with tradition buttons allowing users to switch between 
notifications and the time.

Expert view: Pebble gets the basics right, lasts longer than any smartphone on 
a single charge, but is limited in functionality without a touchscreen

Cost: from $150

The others

There are many, many more smartwatches from various different companies 
offering similar functionality like notifications on the wrist including the 
SamsungGear Fit and Gear 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/11/samsung-gear-fit-review-smartwatches>
 theWithings Activité <http://www.withings.com/activite/en-US>, which is an 
alternative vision of a smartwatch and packs a fitness tracker directly into a 
traditional analogue watch.

How the Apple Watch will stack up against the competition is unknown. Most of 
the current crop of smartwatches do not work with Apple’s iPhone, giving the 
company a captive market within iPhone buyers.

Given smartwatches have struggled to reach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/01/wearables-consumers-abandoning-devices-galaxy-gear>
 beyond the geek elite, Apple and others might struggle to convince the general 
consumer that they actually need a smartwatch.

• Two months with Android Wear: the best smartwatches yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/02/best-android-wear-smartwatches-ifa-show-berlin>

• Android Wear: the nine best free apps for Google’s smartwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/14/android-wear-best-apps-for-google-smartwatch>

• Wearables: one-third of consumers abandoning devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/01/wearables-consumers-abandoning-devices-galaxy-gear>
 