
The ranking of tennis on the fashion-sport matrix has long been a 
contradictory one. Tennis is arguably the most elegant and beautiful of all 
sports – theWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> whites, the 
balletic grace, the absence of unsightly mud – but it has felt, in recent 
history, some way from the pop-cultural zeitgeist. The very power of the 
cucumber-sandwich, blond-ponytailed aesthetic has kept tennis as an eternally 
popular catwalk reference, but it has simultaneously distanced it from the 
present day. Until now.

Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> in 2016 is about more than 
blond ponytails. As the sport becomes more modern, more diverse and more 
inclusive, it becomes more relevant. This is not, of course, primarily about 
fashion. But how tennis players look is crucial to the general perception of 
the sport, because snapshot visual images are the information about tennis that 
reach beyond the sport’s fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ead450b0e844673c6a0f9f99a56cf4c0172ea7b%2F0_171_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ead450b0e844673c6a0f9f99a56cf4c0172ea7b%2F0_171_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
 Serena Williams with Beyoncé in the video for Sorry. Photograph: Beyonce 
No one understands this better than Serena Williams. The winner of 21 grand 
slams and two-timeVogue cover girl 
<http://www.vogue.com/12135713/serena-williams-april-cover-caroline-wozniacki/> 
has redefined both what a tennis player looks like, and what a 
best-dressed-lister looks like. Already a sporting icon, a month ago she 
positioned herself closer than ever to the watercooler when she made a cameo 
appearance twerking next to Beyoncé in the video for Sorry. Lemonade, the album 
that the song comes from, challenges the audience on issues of race, feminism 
and sex. That the reigning queen of tennis is right there next to Queen Bey 
says something about where tennis is at.

If Williams is the queen of tennis, then Anna Wintour is a powerful fairy 
godmother. To say that Wintour is a tennis fan understates how central tennis 
is to her world, and her image. The editor of US Vogue arrives at New York’s 
Midtown tennis clubevery weekday morning at 5.45am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/nov/12/fashion.jesscartnermorley>
 for an hour of tennis before work. She is a close friend of Roger Federer, 
sitting in his box for matches and having him along as her plus-one at fashion 
shows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F518bf9e5a7eaf4549e4f6bcc353375aa78e05f9d%2F0_133_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F518bf9e5a7eaf4549e4f6bcc353375aa78e05f9d%2F0_133_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Kim Kardashian at the 2015 US Open. Photograph: Jean Catuffe/GC Images 
Wintour’s work ethic is formidable – despite the power to have a show held 
until her arrival, she is a meticulous timekeeper, and often among the first to 
be seated by the catwalk – but her commitment to tennis is so strong that she 
has been known to skip entire afternoons of New York fashion week in favour of 
the US Open. Tennis is the one passion to which Wintour, with her cultivated 
ice-queen image, will happily admit. And she has powerful front-row friends 
with whom to talk tennis, including the French fashion mogul Bernard Arnault 
and Stella McCartney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d4cd0aa27d2e753d5c9167d7cc5fe634352be6e%2F0_0_1647_2470%2F1647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d4cd0aa27d2e753d5c9167d7cc5fe634352be6e%2F0_0_1647_2470%2F1647.jpg>
 Rafael Nadal of Spain at the Internazionali BNL d’Italia in Rome, Italy. 
Photograph: Dennis Grombkowski/Getty Images 
Tennis has always been a see-and-be-seen occasion. There are theatrics to 
being a tennis spectator, as well as to being a competitor. The elaborate hush, 
the strawberries and cream – and, increasingly, the celebrity-spotting. The 
front-row interest has helped update the tennis audience from a society venue 
with a slightly old-fashioned,Slim Aarons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jul/17/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
-set profile to a more contemporary, unexpected clientele. Drake was spotted at 
both Wimbledon and Flushing Meadows last year. The US Open celebrity count 
included Justin Timberlake, Oprah Winfrey, Martha Stewart, the Trumps and the 
Kardashians. At Wimbledon, the regular patronage of London paparazzi’s two 
favourite targets – the Duchess of Cambridge and Victoria Beckham – has made 
the All-England Club an essential stop on the new British season, halfway 
between Glastonbury and Glorious Goodwood.

But the designer sundresses worn in the stands are not the clothes making 
tennis fashionable. The most stylish looks on the tennis court are the sweaty 
racer-back vests. The convergence of fashion and sport has had a striking 
impact on how we perceive sportswomen. Look at an image of 22-year-old Canadian 
Eugenie Bouchard, on court in her Nike vest and shorts: the outfit is close to 
what you might find any fashion-conscious 22-year-old wearing. When young women 
look at images of tennis players on court, they see girls who are dressed like 
them. This puts tennis in a position of power in fashion.

This is, at first sight, a simple and wholesome connection. But the vogue for 
athleisure is never far from the pursuit of bodily perfection, or from sex, and 
the new connection between tennis and fashion seems also to have revived a 
lecherous interest in short skirts that had seemed moribund. See, for instance, 
Calvin Klein’s new advertising campaign, with “upskirt” shots that call to mind 
the bottom-scratching tennis girl of 1970s poster fame.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f51c56b540715ae8af261d7d6ede661be194eb%2F0_246_3309_1987%2F3309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0f51c56b540715ae8af261d7d6ede661be194eb%2F0_246_3309_1987%2F3309.jpg>
 Serena Williams at the 2015 French Open. Photograph: Jean-Paul 
Pelissier/Reuters 
The men of tennis have more than kept pace with the 21st-century 
broadmindedness around what a man can wear. Rafael Nadal has made something of 
a trademark of wearing colours beyond those that would traditionally be 
considered alpha male. He often wears orange on court, and flirts with purple. 
(Nadal also appeared in a music video, for Shakira, some years ago.) The French 
player Gaël Monfils is adored by the fashion world, and has proved himself game 
for stepping outside traditionally sportsmanlike iconography. A 2009 shoot by 
Arthur Elgort for US Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13375331/date-night-sports-theme/> starred Monfils 
alongside Karlie Kloss, with Kloss wearing the finest Paris haute couture. In 
one photo, the pair read Proust in a Parisian cafe; in another, they posed 
against a dove-grey Citroen 2CV, with Kloss accessorising her Christian Dior 
dress with a tennis racquet.

The upshot of all this is that, when the French Open begins on Sunday, Paris 
will be hosting a style event as much as a sporting one. Tennis is having a 
fashion moment, and while Wimbledon runs away with the prize money for powerful 
brand image, the relaxed dress code of Roland Garros, and the style pedigree of 
the host city, makes it something of a fashion week for tennis. In last year’s 
women’s final, Williams wore tangerine-hued leopard print with matching 
high-tops to beat Lucie Safarovain a lilac-and-coral co-ord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jun/07/serena-williams-wins-french-open-lucie-safarova-in-pictures>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ba3c96ac8379854daf29ff6d6202dc77e597d1c%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ba3c96ac8379854daf29ff6d6202dc77e597d1c%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Ralph Lauren’s uniforms for Wimbledon’s court officials. Photograph: Ralph 
Lauren 
Nadal and others may rail against the strict dress code 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/05/sports/tennis/at-wimbledon-white-is-in-style-whether-players-like-it-or-not.html?_r=0>
, but Wimbledon remains the most iconic fixture on the tennis calendar. The 
French Open has the carnival colours, but the white-on-green of the All-England 
Club, dotted with strawberries, is the most classic aesthetic in tennis. And 
this year’s Wimbledon will have not only the added excitement of an in-form 
Andy Murray once more, but also a more modern look, with Ralph Lauren having
updated the uniforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/05/stylewatch-wimbledon-2016-uniforms>
 for the court officials. The new pieces bring the umpires, ball boys and ball 
girls right in line with contemporary athleisure. There are new performance 
fabrics for the polo shirts, and on-trend, wide-legged trousers for female 
umpires, while the navy zip-through tracksuit has more than a touch of Chloé 
SS16 about it. Tennis appears to be making a concerted landgrab on the 
tracksuit, hoping to remind the fashion world –always suckers for a Wes 
Anderson style reference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/24/fantastic-mr-wes-anderson-how-tenenbaum-chic-took-over-the-catwalks>
 - that Richie Tenenbaum of the Royal Tenenbaums was, after all, a tennis 
prodigy. Le Coq Sportif’snew vintage-inspired range of tenniswear 
<http://www.lecoqsportif.com/uk-en/e-shop/man-tennis-collection> majors in 
block-coloured tracksuits with piped edging that are one part Tenenbaum, two 
parts John McEnroe and Chris Evert-era tennis.

While tennis looks more and more like fashion, this summer, fashion looks more 
than a bit like tennis. Stella McCartney put polo-shirt-collared dresses on the 
catwalk at Paris fashion week. Lacoste’s catwalk shows – which have cast the 
net wide in previous years, riffing on skiing and American football looks – 
this year saw the label circle back to its roots in tennis. Uniqlo, a label 
with a high profile in fashion currently due to collaborations with Carine 
Roitfeld and Lemaire, is prominent on court as the sponsor of Novak Djokovic. 
The new Gucci collection features a centre court-length pleated skirt in navy 
with floral appliques (£595) and a white gaberdine sundress with pleated skirt 
(£745).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c1f1a4cd6ea9080f97133752d02b3dd9a87f97%2F0_0_2591_1878%2F2591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c1f1a4cd6ea9080f97133752d02b3dd9a87f97%2F0_0_2591_1878%2F2591.jpg>
 Luke Wilson as Richie Tenenbaum in The Royal Tenebaums (2001). Photograph: 
Allstar/Touchstone 
In fact, sport owns fashion in 2016. Athleisure sales boom as traditional 
retailers struggle. A half-zip tracksuit top by Chloé does brisk business at 
£1,125, while Versace’s summer haute couture collection hawks mesh-effect 
evening gowns for the price of luxury cars. Rihanna has made the ab-baring, 
sport-bra-style crop top this year’s red carpet update on the cleavage-hoiking 
corset top.

As a result, tennis is finding its trendsetting form – or, rather, refinding 
it. The history of the game boasts a roll call of rule-breakers, after all. In 
the 1920s, Suzanne Lenglen revolutionised the women’s game with her athletic, 
“unladylike” playing style, her habit of drinking brandy on court and her 
short-sleeved gowns. She liked to be known as the Goddess. “She had that thing 
we love in our public figures – a sense of drama,” said her biographer, Larry 
Engelmann. Almost a century later, her spirit is holding serve once again.

Five players’ classic looks

Jess Cartner-Morley and Morwenna Ferrier
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc1db6f0108df959f24c71d3cc431989366f0b1%2F0_0_2672_2507%2F2672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc1db6f0108df959f24c71d3cc431989366f0b1%2F0_0_2672_2507%2F2672.jpg>
 Photograph: Daily Mail/Rex/Shutterstock 
Roger Federer

Such is his status (and friendship with Anna Wintour), Federer can pick and 
choose his whites. His sponsorship with Nike is defined by white or red 
classics, but it was this 1920s-style quasi-cricket cashmere cardigan, worn in 
2008 at Wimbledon, that proved a feted homage to the home of tennis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07711948706a27e7904eff8ad4e15fc6d0a8f1ed%2F4_0_2808_3508%2F2808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07711948706a27e7904eff8ad4e15fc6d0a8f1ed%2F4_0_2808_3508%2F2808.jpg>
 Photograph: Gamma-Keystone via Getty Images 
Billie Jean King

King’s success was about much more than just tennis: it was also about 
feminism, not least her win against Bobby Riggs in 1973 and the fact that she 
was excluded from a tournament photo as a child for not wearing a dress. She 
also took her fashion game seriously, working with Ted Tidling, whose bold, 
nylon designs became her staple.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed9613912690511a95a677c2dd2397cda5c91db%2F0_0_3858_2884%2F3858.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ed9613912690511a95a677c2dd2397cda5c91db%2F0_0_3858_2884%2F3858.jpg>
 Photograph: George Rinhart/Corbis via Getty Images 
Suzanne Lenglen

Lenglen dominated the women’s game for most of the 1920s. A contemporary of 
Coco Chanel, she brought a formidable ego to the court – she was known for 
loudly berating bad line calls – and her newly liberated attitude was clear in 
shorter hemlines and more transparent fabrics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F981b2398ff67fb5a10f05464e056392d9efcaeb5%2F0_214_1865_2331%2F1865.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F981b2398ff67fb5a10f05464e056392d9efcaeb5%2F0_214_1865_2331%2F1865.jpg>
 Photograph: Rex Features 
John McEnroe

Part-comical, part-confrontational, McEnroe’s late 70s/early 80s designs 
became almost as memorable as his style of play: the red headbands, ultra-short 
shorts and preppy polo shirts were his defining look, soon to be adopted by 
Shia LaBeouf in a forthcoming biopic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00435edddbb48a96c32c3a4c58fd05155b340189%2F0_0_4144_5245%2F4144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Smash%20hit!%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Smash%20hit%21%20Why%20tennis%20is%20having%20a%20fashion%20moment%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fsmash-hit-why-tennis-is-having-a-fashion-moment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00435edddbb48a96c32c3a4c58fd05155b340189%2F0_0_4144_5245%2F4144.jpg>
 Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
Gussie Moran

“Gorgeous” Gussie caused a sensation at Wimbledon in 1949 when she and Tinling 
took a creative approach to the championships’ all-white dress code and added 
frilled knickers beneath her tennis dress. Photographers on court on the day 
lay flat, the better to catch the effect for posterity.
 