
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, Amanda 
Knox and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill are three of the controversial 
real-life dramas being brought to the big screen at this year’s Toronto film 
festival.

Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/film/snowden>, Oliver Stone’s retelling 
of the NSA whistleblower’s life, was rejected by most major studios, with the 
Oscar-winning film-maker claiming “self-censorship” to be the cause. It was 
finally made independently, with Joseph Gordon-Levitt in the lead role.

“I really didn’t want to do this at first,” Stone said at Comic-Con in San 
Diego earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/21/oliver-stone-snowden-self-censorship-film-industry>
. “You get beat up when it’s [based on] current [events]. You get killed with 
lawsuits. Often the protagonist of the movie will turn on you. This story’s not 
over yet, we’ll see when it comes out, but I’ve been hopeful that it’s been 
smooth.”

The film also stars Nicolas Cage, Rhys Ifans, Shailene Woodley, Tom Wilkinson 
and Snowden himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002ae12e3536f8b8079ed8f5695a81bf36e08101%2F0_118_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002ae12e3536f8b8079ed8f5695a81bf36e08101%2F0_118_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Joseph Gordon-Levitt in Snowden. Photograph: Allstar/Open Road Films 
The festival will also have the world premiere of Deepwater Horizon, a $156m 
(£116.6m) budget disaster thriller from Lone Survivor director Peter Berg that 
re-creates the devastating oil spill of 2010. Mark Wahlberg plays the real-life 
hero at the centre of the tragedy that led to BP being ordered to pay $4.5bn in 
court. Berg denies that the film lays blame for the spill, focusing instead on 
the loss of life.

“I want to make a film about people,” Berg has said 
<http://www.nola.com/movies/index.ssf/2015/03/deepwater_horizon_movie.html>. 
“Everybody knows that there was a horrible environmental disaster. Everybody 
knows that a lot of animals were killed. But what people don’t know is 11 men 
were killed and many more were injured and there were some real heroes on that 
rig. That was a very compelling human story, and that’s the story we all want 
to tell.”

Netflix will also premiere an expansive new documentary about Amanda Knox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amanda-knox> and the murder of Meredith 
Kercher. Film-makers Rod Blackhurst and Brian McGinn gained unprecedented 
access to Knox, as well as to the controversial Italian prosecutor Giuliano 
Mignini.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d1a73d563559ccfa9569bc181d4a39c01d9ea5%2F0_0_2216_1329%2F2216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4d1a73d563559ccfa9569bc181d4a39c01d9ea5%2F0_0_2216_1329%2F2216.jpg>
 Truth-seeking … Amanda Knox will preview in Toronto ahead of its Netflix 
release. Photograph: Alessia Pierdomenico/Reuters 
“When we started the film in 2011, I wasn’t sure we had all the answers,” 
Blackhurst toldVanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/08/amanda-knox-netflix-documentary>. 
“I told my wife, ‘I don’t think we know everything that happened in this 
story.’ And I find it frustrating that we live in a post-factual world when 
truth doesn’t matter any more. And there are no repercussions when you write 
something wrong. So I thought, ‘Let’s see if we can find out the truth.’”

The festival will also see the Canadian premiere of writer/director/star Nate 
Parker’s The Birth of a Nation, the slavery drama that has gained attention
after Parker recently learned that a woman who accused him of rape in college 
killed herself in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/17/nate-parker-devastated-by-suicide-of-accuser>
. Parker cancelled select interviews, but he plans to attend Toronto and take 
part in a press conference.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20United%20Kingdom%20trailer%3A%20interracial%20marriage%20causes%20outrage%20in%20true%20story%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fa-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video&media=>
A United Kingdom trailer: interracial marriage causes outrage in true story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/25/a-united-kingdom-trailer-interracial-marriage-causes-outrage-in-true-story-video>
Toronto is also seen as a launch pad for films aiming at Oscar glory, with 
previous years seeing the premieres ofDallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/06/dallas-buyers-club-review>, Still 
Alice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/08/still-alice-review-julianne-moore-superb-alzheimers>
 andArgo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review>. This year, 
films with awards potential include Lion, a fact-based drama starringDev Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/21/dev-patel-didn-t-know-what-getting-into-slumdog-marigold-hotel>
 as a man searching for his family, andA United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/a-united-kingdom-london-film-festival-david-oyelowo-amma-asante>
, starring David Oyelowo and Rosamund Pike as an interracial couple who caused 
an international outcry in the 1940s.

Following on from an increased police presence at this year’s Cannes film 
festival due to terrorism fears, organisers have also promised more security in 
Toronto.

“Over the years, we have heightened our security, mostly behind the scenes, so 
the public do not notice,”festival CEO Piers Handling said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/23/toronto-film-festival-organisers-predict-awards-glory-for-la-la-land-musical>
. “This year, we did a revisit of our entire security plan from top to bottom. 
We’re very involved with all levels of police in the Toronto area, and we’re 
very aware of potential terrorist attacks.

10 key fact-based films to world premiere at Toronto 2016 

Snowden 
Oliver Stone’s drama stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt as the NSA informant, with 
support from Nicolas Cage and Tom Wilkinson.


Deepwater Horizon 
Mark Wahlberg takes the lead in a big-budget disaster movie about the BP oil 
spil in 2010 that took 11 lives.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36619a875314c654584353a7f552b93059c75d2c%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36619a875314c654584353a7f552b93059c75d2c%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Real-life hero … Mark Wahlberg in Deepwater Horizon. Photograph: Allstar/Lions 
Gate 
A United Kingdom 
David Oyelowo plays a member of Botswana’s royal family, whose marriage to a 
British woman, played by Rosamund Pike, causes international outrage in the 40s.


Why is Lyndon B Johnson suddenly prevalent in pop culture?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/03/lyndon-johnson-pop-culture-all-the-way-lbj>
LBJ 
When Harry Met Sally director Rob Reiner’s biopic of Lyndon B Johnson stars 
Woody Harrelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/10/woody-harrelson-interview-we-live-in-a-completely-corrupted-world>
 as the president and support from Bill Pullman and Jennifer Jason Leigh.


Denial 
Rachel Weisz stars as Deborah E Lipstadt, a historian who was taken to court 
by writer David Irving for calling him a Holocaust denier.


Lion 
A true story that sees Dev Patel playing a man trying to track down his family 
in India using Google Earth.


Amanda Knox 
A Netflix documentary about the outfall of the death or Meredith Kercher, 
featuring Knox herself.


Queen of Katwe 
Oscar-winner Lupita Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/12/lupita-nyongo-interview-star-wars>
 stars in this fact-based drama about a chess champion in Uganda.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0154b7af4d98680a00f0ed4513bc2f1f02f691%2F0_205_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%20to%20Amanda%20Knox%3A%20true%20stories%20set%20to%20make%20headlines%20at%20Toronto%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fsnowden-amanda-knox-deepwater-horizon-true-stories-41st-toronto-film-festival-tiff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0154b7af4d98680a00f0ed4513bc2f1f02f691%2F0_205_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Check mates … Lupita Nyong’o and Madina Nalwanga in Queen of Katwe. 
Photograph: Edward Echwalu/AP 
Barry 
A biopic of a young Barack Obama that focuses on his time as a college student 
in New York.


Rats 
The latest film from Super Size Me is billed as a “horror documentary”.


And five key fictions 

The bigger they come: how to film an 'unfilmable' book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/challenge-film-adaption-individual-reading-great-novels-the-english-patient-the-wings-of-the-dove-great-characters-powerful-cinema>
American Pastoral 
Ewan McGregor’s directorial debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/challenge-film-adaption-individual-reading-great-novels-the-english-patient-the-wings-of-the-dove-great-characters-powerful-cinema>
 is an adaptation of Philip Roth’s Pulitzer prize-winning novel, in which he 
stars alongsideJennifer Connelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/dec/09/celebrity>.


Colossal 
In this offbeat drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/toronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup>
, Anne Hathaway plays a recently dumped woman who develops a psychic connection 
to a giant monster attacking South Korea.


A Monster Calls 
The Impossible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/27/the-impossible-review> director 
JA Bayona brings together a cast that includes Felicity Jones, Sigourney Weaver 
and Liam Neeson to adapt the fantasy novel about a boy befriending a tree 
creature.


Mascots 
The latest mockumentary from Best in Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/mar/11/philipfrench> director 
Christopher Guest centres on the world of competitive mascots, withParker Posey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/14/parker-posey-woody-allen-irrational-man>
 andChris O’Dowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/21/chris-odowd-q-and-a> 
starring.


Their Finest 
A comedy from One Day director Lone Scherfig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/12/film-changed-lone-scherfig-east-eden>
 about film-makers trying to boost morale during the London blitz.

 