
Iain Duncan Smith will today have the chance to give his personal response to 
a case that has placed the darkest of clouds over his programme of welfare 
reforms, when he addresses theConservative conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/toryconference>.

The discovery that a coroner had directly attributed a man’s suicide to his 
being found “fit for work” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/fit-for-work-assessment-was-trigger-for-suicide-coroner-says>
 was a significant moment in thework capability assessment (WCA) scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/05/work-programme-adviser-box-ticking-sanctioning-sick-people>
. It appeared to be the first time that a coroner had blamed theWCA process 
<http://www.rethink.org/living-with-mental-illness/money-issues-benefits-employment/work-capability-assessment>
 – designed and overseen by Duncan Smith’s Department for Work and Pensions – 
for directly causing a death.

Fit for work assessment was trigger for suicide, coroner says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/fit-for-work-assessment-was-trigger-for-suicide-coroner-says>
“The anxiety and depression were long-term problems,” said Mary Hassell, the 
north London coroner, in her verdict on the death of Michael O’Sullivan. “But 
the intense anxiety that triggered his suicide was caused by his recent 
assessment by the Department for Work and Pensions (benefits agency) as being 
fit for work, and his view of the likely consequences of that.” Hassell felt so 
strongly that something had gone badly wrong that she completed a Prevention of 
Future Deaths report, because she believed there was “a risk that future deaths 
will occur unless action is taken”.

But the significance of the coroner’s conclusion – and the report – would have 
been far less clear if it weren’t for aheartwrenching ITV News interview 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2015-09-21/daughter-of-man-who-took-his-own-life-after-being-declared-fit-for-work-says-he-had-no-chance/>
 with Michael O’Sullivan’s daughter, Anne-Marie. “If they continue to assess 
people the way they assessed dad,” she said, “we will continue to lose lives. 
Vulnerable people need support and need help and we should be able to give them 
that support. We shouldn’t just let them fall by the wayside.”

Without her testimony it would have been all too easy to ignore the emotional 
impact of her father’s death on his family and friends, because the DWP’s 
energy-sapping resistance to openness and clarity about the true impact of the 
WCA process can too easily lead us to drift into a battle over numbers.

These numbers include the 10,600 people who died between January and November 
2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/01/tory-vilifcation-disabled-sick-george-osborne>
 while claiming employment and support allowance (ESA), and within six weeks of 
their claim ending; the41,000 people who died  
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/long-awaited-deaths-stats-do-not-tell-the-whole-story/>
within a year of receiving a decision on their supposed “fitness for work”, 
between May 2010 and February 2013; the 81,140 people who died while claiming 
ESA or incapacity benefit (IB); and the 2,650 ESA and IB claimants who died 
soon after being found “fit for work”. We still don’t know exactly how 
significant these numbers are. But I believe that what is hidden within these 
figures are scores of Michael O’Sullivans, and every one of them will have left 
behind shattered lives.

And then there are the “peer reviews”, carried out internally by the DWP in 
cases of concern “following the death of a customer”. The DWP initially 
responded to press inquiries and freedom of information requests fromDisability 
News Service <http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/> by saying that no such 
information was collected. It later admitted that there have been at least49 of 
these reviews into the deaths of “customers” since February 2012 
<http://www.disabledgo.com/blog/2015/02/government-opts-again-for-secrecy-on-benefit-deaths/>
, and 33 of those contained recommendations for improvements in DWP procedures 
at either a national or local level;40 were carried out following the suicide 
or apparent suicide 
<https://fullfact.org/factcheck/law/review_suicides_welfare_reform-44932> of a 
benefit claimant, and 10 concerned claimants who had had their benefits 
sanctioned at some point. To date, the content of these 49 reviewsremains secret
 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/watchdog-backs-dwp-refusal-to-release-49-benefit-deaths-reports/>
.

But again, these are just numbers. Each of these DWP “customers” was someone 
with family and friends, and their death destroyed lives and relationships. 
Which was why it was so important to hear from Anne-Marie O’Sullivan, something 
I probably lost sight of myselfwhen breaking this story 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/author/john-pring/>. What a contrast her 
words made to the pompous bluster and fake outrage of Duncan Smith every time 
he has been challenged about the damage caused by his social security reforms.

Disabled activists who have campaigned on this issue have been written off by 
some as scaremongers and extremists, but politicians would do well not to 
underestimate their persistence and bloodymindedness. And so would the other 
individuals and organisations who have questions to answer: the coroners who 
have not fulfilled their legal duty and reported concerns about the ESA system 
to the DWP (only Hassell has done this so far); the assessors themselves (not 
all of them of course, but a significant minority); and, of course, Atos, which 
will not sayif the former surgeon who assessed Michael O’Sullivan was still 
carrying out benefits assessments 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/michael-osullivan-inquest-atos-has-no-idea-if-surgeon-is-still-assessing-claimants/>
 of people with mental health conditions. (Atos has subsequentlybought itself 
out of the WCA contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/18/after-hated-atos-quits-will-maximus-make-work-assessments-less-arduous>
.)

It is only the arrogance of politicians, their willingness to listen to the 
executives in the insurance industry who devised the system, and their 
reluctance to listen to the disabled people actually forced to undergo it, that 
has kept the WCA afloat this long.

Nothing that causes this degree of risk and avoidable harm can survive such a 
degree of scrutiny for ever. The evidence is slowly emerging: in inquests; in 
academic research; in the stories of bereaved families; in suicide notes; in 
freedom-of-information responses; and now in a PFD report.

Enough is enough. It’s time to replace this spiteful, jaw-droppingly 
bureaucratic and harmful assessment process, and finally start listening to 
sick and disabled people. And to Anne-Marie O’Sullivan.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Calls are free and 
won’t appear on bills. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 
1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 
14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 