
It was obvious from the outset that The Idiots could be problematic for the 
censors. Graphic orgy scenes included footage of "real sex", but this was no 
cheap porn video. It was a European arthouse movie, directed by Lars von Trier, 
the respected Danish director who made Breaking The Waves. Von Trier used a 
video camcorder to shoot his story about a group of middle-class people who 
pretend to be mentally handicapped and was clearly challenging attitudes on a 
number of issues, including censorship. Some directors might threaten to 
withdraw their films if a single frame were threatened, but not Von Trier. He 
decided to make it easy for the censors by producing a second version with the 
controversial bits blacked out, Japanese-style. Basically he called the 
censors' bluff. And it worked. Just about the only black spot on the horizon is 
the US. "They want more black spots," said a spokeswoman for the Danish sales 
agents. "It's very entertaining."

 The Idiots has been passed uncut in more than 30 countries in Europe, South 
America and Asia, including Britain, where shots of erections and sexual 
penetration are virtually unprecedented. It would have been relatively simple 
for Von Trier to show a scene of naked, writhing bodies, without shots of 
penetration, and rely on the worldliness of the audience to work out what was 
going on. The distributors offered to submit the black-spot version to the 
British Board of Film Classification, but it wanted the hardcore one.

"We considered the view of real sex and group sex to be so brief and so 
crucial to the story - because after that the group breaks up - that it was 
OK," says BBFC president,Andreas Whittam Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith>. The Idiots, which 
opens on May 14, is just one in a series of potentially controversial films 
passed in recent weeks by the BBFC, ranging from sexually explicit European 
arthouse films to old American horror and slasher movies.

 The Exorcist has received clearance for video release for the first time 
since the introduction of video certificates in the eighties and is now 
available. The Driller Killer, demon of the "video nasties" hysteria of the 
eighties, was passed after the distributor itself made cuts. And, after a 
quarter of a century of prevarication, The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was 
approved for cinema release, and the only cuts were those inflicted by 
Leatherface. Whittam Smith expected the villain to be "a ferocious and scaring 
and worrying sort of figure"; all he got was "a feeble figure panting around in 
a rather wonky mask."

 We have certificates for "video nasties", the seal of approval for hardcore 
sex, and no public or media outcry whatsoever. Whittam Smith is as surprised as 
anyone. "To tell you the truth I was expecting a big row on Happiness," he 
says. "It's about child abuse."

 Robin Duval, the BBFC director, had similar fears about The Exorcist, after 
Whittam Smith decided to review the video ban without any prompting from the 
film company. Whittam Smith concluded it was "a very fine film" and found no 
evidence of any harm to viewers, which makes you wonder why it was banned in 
the first place.

 In recent times Britain has had the toughest film censorship regime in 
western Europe. It is only nine months since the Edinburgh Film Festival - 
which traditionally provides a platform for uncertified films - decided The 
Idiots was too big a risk in the current "climate of censorship".

 Home Secretary Jack Straw had publicly criticised the BBFC's director, James 
Ferman, for his liberal attitude to the sort of hardcore pornography which has 
a special certificate restricting it to licensed sex shops. Ferman, who had run 
the BBFC as a personal fiefdom for almost 25 years, accused Straw of pandering 
to the "puritanical vote". Straw blocked the appointment of Lord Birkett, the 
insider choice for BBFC president, and installed former Independent editor 
Andreas Whittam Smith. Sight and Sound magazine said the appointment was "a sop 
to Middle England".

 Whittam Smith insisted the BBFC's constitution should be rewritten and that 
ultimate authority be invested in the post of president (ie him). A year after 
his appointment, Ferman is gone, replaced by Robin Duval, a professional 
"regulator" from the Independent Television Commission. Everything was in place 
for a dramatic clampdown on sex and violence. But it has not happened.

 There was an early indication last year of Whittam Smith's independent 
thinking when he passed the violent French film Dobermann uncut, despite 
reservations from Ferman. There was not a single complaint from the public. The 
BBFC's own guidelines ban erections and penetration even in sex videos, but it 
had made an exception in the case of the Japanese classic Ai No Corrida, passed 
in 1991 after a 15-year delay, and Whittam Smith and Duval cited it as a 
precedent in their decisions on both The Idiots and Seul Contre Tous.

 However there is a wonderful get-out clause attached to the BBFC guidelines 
for every certificate: "Context may justify exceptions". But is that the 
context of the films or the context of the censors? Against all the odds, has 
the toughest film censor in western Europe adopted a new liberal strategy? "I 
would rather you judged that," says Whittam Smith. "I'm not setting out to be 
either liberal or restrictive." Put it another way - would The Idiots have been 
passed uncut three or four years ago? "Possibly not."

 Whittam Smith, and indeed the legislative framework, differentiate between 
films in the cinema and videos in the home, which can more easily be seen by 
unsupervised children. It seems typical of Whittam Smith's relative naivety 
that it had never previously occurred to him that videos could be slowed down 
or paused while viewers examined a sequence in slow motion. Some viewers may be 
tempted to do this to study criminal techniques, he says.

 But when it comes to adult audiences in the cinema, Whittam Smith's philsophy 
is simple. "There is an overwhelming duty on the board to interfere as little 
as possible with what adults want to see, unless what is portaryed on the 
screen is illegal." Whittam Smith maintains this was always his view: it is the 
definition of a liberal approach.

 Among the many elements which the British censor must now consider is the 
right to free expression under the European Convention of Human Rights, though 
there is no question of Britain adopting the same standards as France, where 
the sex scenes in the new film Romance have attracted considerable media 
attention on both sides of the Channel in the last few weeks. Whittam Smith did 
intervene in the case of the French film Seul Contre Tous, which contains a 
longer scene of penetrative sex than The Idiots, which he considered breached 
the Obscene Publications Act. It occurs when the central character visits a 
cinema to watch a porn movie. The BBFC was able to blur the image of the film 
within the film and leave the sense of the scene intact.

 Whittam Smith may not have changed his fundamental views on censorship, but 
he has quickly learned that cutting films is no easy task. That is not entirely 
true: it is perfectly easy to cut films, or stick black spots over offending 
bits; the difficult thing is to censor them without the audience realising they 
have been censored. "I originally thought 'Oh well, if there's a problem, we 
can cut our way out of it'," he says. "That's not really an option. Anything 
good is too intricately made to cut."

 Taking the scissors to Happiness was never feasible. Todd Solondz's film 
interweaves the lives of various New Jersey characters, including a pathetic, 
overweight man who gets his kicks from obscene phone calls, and a devoted 
father who is attracted to pubescent boys. There are a couple of scenes in 
which characters masturbate: the act remains unseen, but the end-result is 
shown, in the first instance, hitting the wall, and, in the second, being 
licked by a dog. They are no more gross than the hair gel scene in There's 
Something About Mary.

 The acts of pedophilia take place off-camera, though the father subsequently 
confesses to his son. "It's very, very powerful," says Whittam Smith, "a 
searing conversation between the child-abusing father and his 10-year-old son."

 It is the most serious and poignant scene in the film, ending with both 
characters in tears. To cut the scene would be to destroy the film - it would 
be as well to ban it. The film attempts to understand the depth of the father's 
compulsion, though that is not to say it condones it, and his life is utterly 
destroyed. "I passed it with some trepidation, because I fancied there could be 
a big row," says Whittam Smith. "To my amazement the Mail liked it and Chris 
Tookey gave it five stars." The BBFC has received few complaints about any of 
these films. The Exorcist and The Texas Chain Saw Massacre elicited more 
letters of support than complaint. Amazingly the news that the BBFC had 
approved the video re-release of The Driller Killer brought no complaints at 
all.

 Whittam Smith is unsure why there has been so little controversy. Both he and 
Duval believe it is only a matter of time, but they are preparing their 
defences every step of the way. The BBFC now issues statments to explain how it 
arrives at decisions, and they have the effect of forcing critics to engage in 
debate on specific points. Or not at all. Whittam Smith and Duval have made 
themselves available to the press, whereas journalists could get access to 
Clint Eastwood more easily than Ferman. In line with the new policy of glasnost 
the BBFC has belatedly decided to appoint a press officer and is currently 
advertising the post.

 Ferman disliked banning films and had a habit of simply postponing decisions, 
hoping the fuss would die down, while managing to infuriate everyone, including 
small distributors who had paid sizeable sums for films which lay gathering 
dusk in the BBFC offices. "It just seemed to be completely wrong, whenever 
there was a problem, to sit on it," says Whittam Smith. "If it's difficult - 
get the answer out as quickly as you can."

 Distributors are delighted with the speed with which he and Duval are making 
decisions, with the decisions they have been making, and with the readiness to 
look again at old films and videos. Is there any move to re-release A Clockwork 
Orange, which was withdrawn by Stanley Kubrick and would need a new certificate 
now? There have been no representations on it. How about Salo, Pasolini's final 
film, a portrait of degradation in fascist Italy? Whittam Smith has never heard 
of that one.

 In Whittam Smith, the government seems to have appointed a censor who brings 
none of the prejudices of Middle England and the pro-censorship lobby to the 
post, but the open-mindedness of someone who knows hardly anything about films. 
He will learn film history on the job. It is too early to say what his own 
place will be in that history. But it seems unlikely that he will be taking a 
chainsaw to films, much to the relief of the industry and of cineastes.

 The Exorcist is out on video this week, Happiness goes nationwide on May 7, 
The Idiots opens on May 14.
 