
I am a man with an immoderate number – some might say a houseful – of comic 
books, which is probably why people ask me questions like: “Where on earth do I 
start with all this stuff?” and “Is that really a wedding ring?”

I sympathise – with the former query, anyway. The sheer variety in the 
“graphic novels” section of the bookstore or library contains everything from 
memoirs to mysteries. Plus, comics have their own grammar and syntax and often, 
comics fans are exhaustingly absorbed in their own favorite kind of literature, 
their references like an endless set of matryoshka dolls. A strand of 
conversation can lead fromDoctor Fate <http://dc.wikia.com/wiki/Doctor_Fate> to 
Watchmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/21/superheroes-cultural-catastrophe-alan-moore-comics-watchmen>
 toDetective Comics 
<http://www.dccomics.com/comics/detective-comics-2011/detective-comics-1> to 
Optic Nerve <https://www.drawnandquarterly.com/optic-nerve-14>, all in a flash 
<http://www.dccomics.com/characters/the-flash>.

To make matters worse, some of those comics are much more accessible than 
others.Kate Beaton’s Hark! A Vagrant  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/14/kate-beaton-hark-a-vagrant-step-aside-pops>
andAlison Bechdel’s Fun Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/28/comfort-reading-alison-bechdel-fun-home>
 are straightforward and easy to read, though they’re wildly different.Chris 
Ware’s Acme Novelty Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/aug/15/live-webchat-chris-ware-graphic-novelist>
, on the other hand, is unapologetically challenging and often involves 
intricate systems of smaller and smaller pictures that don’t necessarily tell 
you where to start or stop reading.

Ware, like Dan Clowes <https://www.theguardian.com/books/daniel-clowes>, 
Charles Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/13/charles-burns-sugar-skull-review-xed-out-the-hive>
andLynda Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/14/lynda-barry-art-comic-books>, is 
drawing on a very different tradition from superhero artists and writers. It’s 
a kind of storytelling that evolved out of the “underground” comics movement of 
the 1960s and 70s, when artists likeRobert Crumb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-crumb>, Aline Kominsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/mar/25/robertcrumb.comics>, S Clay 
Wilson <http://www.tcj.com/in-the-first-circle-of-hell-with-s-clay-wilson/> and 
others were trying to find ways to make dirty, weird, intensely personal work 
that had more in common with the iconoclastic fine art of the period than with 
pulp fiction – the prose genre that birthed the first superheroes. Independent 
comics used to be considered as disreputable as pornography (maybe more so), 
but now they’re rightly recognized as fertile ground for artists.

In fact, the two parts of the industry are increasingly coming together. Avatar
 <http://www.avatarpress.com/>, Image <https://imagecomics.com/>, Dark Horse 
<http://www.darkhorse.com/>, Dynamite <http://www.dynamite.com/htmlfiles/> and 
Boom <http://www.boom-studios.com/> all publish plenty of creator-owned, 
artist-driven books. In many cases, they’re by people who made names for 
themselves writing superhero comics and want to write with more freedom at a 
place where they own their work. The state of the industry makes for some 
strange bedfellows:Top Shelf <http://www.topshelfcomix.com/> publishes pensive 
ruminations on life and absurdity byEddie Campbell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/17/lovely-horrible-stuff-eddie-campbell-review>
andJennifer Hayden <http://www.jenniferhayden.com/>, but they also publish Alan 
Moore’s action-packed pulp-fiction mash-upThe League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/23/league-of-extraordinary-gentlemen-century>
.

For longtime comics fans like me, it’s a kick to see the form evolving in so 
many fascinating ways. Image in particular has landed right at the nexus of art 
comics and action comics and produces books driven by beautiful, often 
hilariously strange art (James Stokoe’sOrc Stain 
<https://orcstain.wordpress.com/>, Warren Ellis and Declan Shalvey’s Injection 
<https://imagecomics.com/comics/releases/injection-1>) and old-fashioned 
high-concept sci-fi action, sometimes on the same page. The innovation is 
opening up the form to a whole new generation of readers.

Here are the 16 books I recommend to get you started, if you’re so inclined. 
They’re all in print, they’re all readily available from Powell’s or even a 
local independent bookstore, and you don’t have to do any preliminary reading 
to understand them. Happy reading. And looking. And good luck finding space for 
them all.

The Calculus Affair, by Hergé
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450194489981%2F9c2d779e-dc10-4ded-9013-e21c8c695d1a-1480x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450194489981%2F9c2d779e-dc10-4ded-9013-e21c8c695d1a-1480x2040.jpeg>
 The Calculus Affair, by Hergé. 
All 23 Tintin albums follow the globetrotting boy reporter and his companions, 
chiefly his dog Snowy and his tipsy, short-tempered sailor friend Captain 
Haddock. Butthere’s a long-running debate about which is best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/23/1000-novels-tintin-herge>; the 
settings are vastly different, ranging from China to the Moon. My vote is for 
1960’sThe Calculus Affair 
<http://them0vieblog.com/2011/12/16/the-adventures-of-tintin-the-calculus-affair-review/>
, a thrilling and lighthearted story of cold war espionage and a secret weapon 
in the Balkans.

Hergé’s characters have exaggerated features, but they exist in a meticulously 
detailed world where there are no misplaced lines or scratchy pencil-work 
anywhere on the page. Joost Swarte, a cartoonist and illustrator who admires 
Hergé, coined the term “ligne-claire” (clear-line) to describe it. The phrase 
didn’t just stick, it came retroactively to describe the whole coterie of 
cartoonists who came after Hergé, calledthe Brussels school 
<http://www.brusselslife.be/en/article/comic-strips-in-belgium-two-schools-two-approaches-one-great-art>
.

Can’t We Talk About Something More Pleasant? by Roz Chast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F764c8e14c07717c0f4e128da22d92822af20758e%2F0_0_2048_2503%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F764c8e14c07717c0f4e128da22d92822af20758e%2F0_0_2048_2503%2F2048.jpg>
Roz Chast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/14/life-drawing-to-close-parents-roz-chast-graphic-memoir>
 is probably best known to non-comics readers for her wry and wordy New Yorker 
covers, and her cartoons for same. You’ve probably seen them – they’re often 
lists of anxieties and phobias and distractions. In her half-prose, half-comics 
memoir,Can’t We Talk About Something More Pleasant? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/13/cant-we-talk-about-something-more-pleasant-review-roz-chast-hilarious>
 Chast pitilessly itemizes in excruciating and hilarious detail exactly the 
share of suffering allotted to her beloved parents as they rapidly enter the 
last years of their lives.

Chast’s sense of humor never deserts her even when her parents’ bodies fail 
them, and the resulting volume,which won a National Book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/12/toni-morrison-claudia-rankine-and-roz-chast-honoured-at-nbcc-awards>
, is both an ingenious depiction of a part of life most people studiously avoid 
thinking about, and a slow-burn dissection of Chast’s own obsessions, and her 
love of distraction as a momentary respite from entropy.

Ice Haven, by Daniel Clowes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bafbf4f33d2cea80ec43e4574baead3df354dbe%2F0_0_1000_700%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bafbf4f33d2cea80ec43e4574baead3df354dbe%2F0_0_1000_700%2F1000.jpg>
Daniel Clowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/28/daniel-clowes-interview-comics-ghost-world-art-school-confidential>
 has been pretty open about his love for both Nabokov and for Charles Schulz’s 
Peanuts cartoons. In Ice Haven, he combines the two melancholy artists’ styles 
to beautiful effect.

Clowes’s formidable skill is anything but cold: the little book (only 88 
pages) follows the interlocking lives of a few people in a small town and works 
out childhood fear, teenage ennui and grownup eccentricity. These themes play 
out across pages designed to look like comic strips from the local newspaper; 
it’s so subtle and sweet you might not even notice the kidnapping at first.


Top 10, by Alan Moore, Gene Ha and Zander Cannon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4611fc89881265a369f7c7690fba6bbed884542c%2F0_0_1178_1764%2F1178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4611fc89881265a369f7c7690fba6bbed884542c%2F0_0_1178_1764%2F1178.jpg>
 Top Ten #2, by Alan Moore, Gene Ha and Zander Cannon. 
The premise of Top 10 is so fundamentally opposed to the way superhero comics 
work that most writers would have run from it screaming: what if everyone in 
town, from the hot dog guy to the mayor, was a superhero? Bursting with flashy 
costumes, terrific sight gags and all the strange settings you’d need to build 
a city for such a diverse populace, the book isn’t so much an introduction to 
superhero comics as it is a hilariously off-kilter sci-fi detective novel.

Top 10 is also some of the most purely fun comics storytelling available, 
thanks to a first-rate script by ingenious Northampton comics writer Alan Moore 
and art byGene Ha 
<https://twitter.com/GeneHa?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 andZander Cannon <https://twitter.com/zander_cannon>. The three work together 
as seamlessly as a jazz trio: The story is a complex procedural involving 
multiple murders that follows our heroine, Robyn, as she joins the force and 
gets used to having a boss who’s a dog, a partner who’s a Viking and a 
workplace filled with drinking buddies who range from the figuratively 
hotheaded to the literally radioactive. Though he’s perhaps better-known for 
Watchmen and V for Vendetta, Moore’s unparalleled skill at making the reader 
look left when the plot is just about to go right might be at its very best 
here.

Killing and Dying, by Adrian Tomine
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe32ecb1a8ecd0625a35227061635f33099670bb3%2F0_0_1280_1827%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe32ecb1a8ecd0625a35227061635f33099670bb3%2F0_0_1280_1827%2F1280.jpg>
Adrian Tomine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/30/adrian-tomine-comics-killing-and-dying-the-new-yorker>
’s most recent collection follows six different sets of characters through six 
different styles of artwork so distinctive they appear to have been drawn by 
six different people. It’s a feat of virtuosity that could only have come from 
Tomine, who has been telling tender stories like these for over a decade; with 
its incredible stylistic diversity – always surprising, never jarring – it’s 
his finest hour so far.

In each story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/19/killing-and-dying-by-adrian-tomine-review>
, Tomine seems to announce he’ll be telling one kind of story only to tell a 
completely different one in hints and suggestions. Like his friend Clowes, 
Tomine’s ambitions are primarily literary and comics are simply his chosen 
literary mode. Here, he makes a compelling case for comics as a medium for the 
same intricacies as contemporary fiction – and for the possibility that comics 
can do some things prose can’t.

Cages, by Dave McKean
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53305455e901c1850eee55adf7f9a355c7154208%2F0_0_768_1024%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53305455e901c1850eee55adf7f9a355c7154208%2F0_0_768_1024%2F768.jpg>
Dave McKean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2013/jun/14/dave-mckean-working-on-pictures>
’s sprawling, generous graphic novel about life, sex and jazz is a necessary 
jolt of pure, intelligent optimism among a lot of very dark work from his 
contemporaries. The artist is probably best known for the beautiful collage 
covers that became his trademark at DC Comics’ “mature readers” imprint, 
Vertigo, but he’s a formidable writer on his own, here drawing the parallel 
stories of a half-dozen people living in the same apartment building and 
falling in and out of love with art, life and each other.

The book is bigger than most – tall and wide, as well as almost 500 pages long 
– but it’s a surprisingly fast and engaging read, with McKean’s beautiful, 
scratchy two-color linework giving way at strategic points to breathtaking 
pages-long sequences of full-color collage and painting in which McKean 
illustrates a weird and charming cosmology of his own devising.

Hawkeye vol 1-4, by Matt Fraction and David Aja
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d88fda33421f52dc472f3f5766695a3c3769b4%2F0_0_994_1528%2F994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d88fda33421f52dc472f3f5766695a3c3769b4%2F0_0_994_1528%2F994.jpg>
It hasn’t been easy to find Marvel Comics stories that let the new reader in 
the front door, butMatt Fraction and David Aja’s Hawkeye 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/03/02/farewell-bro-how-matt-fractions-hawkeye-changed-marvel-comics>
 is arguably the best of the company’s recent crop of beginner-friendly comics. 
(Dan Slott and Mike Allred’s kid-friendly Silver Surfer 
<http://marvel.com/universe/Silver_Surfer> is a close second.) Marvel’s books 
are carefully orchestrated across a universe that spans more than 50 years of 
material, but Hawkeye ignores most of that, to its great benefit.

The book follows the least reputable of the Avengers as he tries to keep 
sleazy Russian crimelords from stealing his apartment building out from under 
his working-class neighbors. The book’s vision of factions fighting for a piece 
of gentrifying Brooklyn is dead-on, and Fraction’s cast of offbeat characters 
could be culled from the co-op next door. Aja’s artwork is spare and clever and 
the pair hit a serious Lennon-McCartney groove near the end of the second arc, 
in a story told entirely from the perspective of a dog who listens in on scenes 
from previous issues with a deep understanding of human emotion but a very 
limited English vocabulary.

Fun Home, by Alison Bechdel
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2e3f41fbeb9f1d5f653b89a4ff6d0de659e09e9%2F0_0_1000_1500%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2e3f41fbeb9f1d5f653b89a4ff6d0de659e09e9%2F0_0_1000_1500%2F1000.jpg>
In Fun Home, Bechdel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/01/alison-bechdel-fun-home> 
steadfastly refuses to sentimentalize the way her discovery of her own 
sexuality paralleled her discovery of her father’s secret life. The book is 
beautifully constructed, with her declared annoyance at her father’s fussy, 
baroque tastes informing her work’s own spare beauty. And for all her teenage 
self’s eye-rolling over her funeral home director dad’s love of artifice and 
adornment, Bechdel’s ability to draw her characters’ most revelatory tics and 
habits remains razor-keen, often painfully so, for the length of the book.


The love between a father and daughter is complex in the best possible version 
of the relationship, and Bechdel and her dad’s is particularly fraught, not 
least by the latter’s suicide. Because Fun Home is ultimatelyan exploration of 
devotion and longing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/25/duke-students-alison-bechdel-fun-home>
, its frankness is that much rarer and more precious.

The Portable Frank, by Jim Woodring
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba29c742d61014aa7af1efd18be6c5e3ed66898%2F0_0_915_1280%2F915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba29c742d61014aa7af1efd18be6c5e3ed66898%2F0_0_915_1280%2F915.jpg>
All of Jim Woodring <http://www.jimwoodring.com/>’s glorious Frank stories are 
so terribly inviting that it is difficult to pick just one. Woodring draws the 
wordless adventures of a bear-cat-chipmunk-type creature named Frank, whose 
travels take him around a surreal black-and-white world populated by adorable 
creatures and nightmare horrors, and nearly all those travels manage to end on 
an unexpectedly poignant, funny or terrifying moment. Woodring’s style is 
fanatically controlled – every panel looks like a woodcut – but his monsters 
are unspeakably inventive, like something Hieronymus Bosch would have made in 
pottery class.


The plots are as simple as the art is complex: Frank usually makes what seems 
like a reasonable decision from the his own perspective and a horribly, 
horribly wrong one by the standards of the broader world. (Come to think of it, 
that is probably the shortest possible biography of anyone alive, from a 
certain angle.) Fantagraphics’ collection of short Frank stories is a great 
sampler, like a glass of water from the Challenger Deep.

The Sandman: Endless Nights, by Neil Gaiman et al
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1811b9909b005b225c273f8c7b6946aed005b9%2F0_0_1082_1500%2F1082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1811b9909b005b225c273f8c7b6946aed005b9%2F0_0_1082_1500%2F1082.jpg>
For the better part of 20 years it was very difficult to pick a volume of The 
Sandman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sandman> to introduce readers to its 
charms.Neil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/neil-gaiman> doesn’t 
hit his stride until the second book in the 12-volume series, and the art 
doesn’t really take off until then, either. But who wants to begin in the 
middle?

The writer solved this problem by penning seven stand-alone short stories for 
the one-off volumeEndless Nights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/25/comics.neilgaiman>. The result 
was as attractive a volume of comics as a superhero publisher (DC, in this 
case) has ever managed to produce. In it, readers meet the seven Endless, 
Gaiman’s pantheon of anthropomorphized abstractions including friendly, frank 
Death; moody Dream; alluring hermaphrodite Desire and his/her twin sister, 
Despair. Every story is illustrated by a different artist and each one is worth 
getting to know, particularly the great Italian artistMilo Manara  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/21/spider-woman-comic-cover-erotic-artist-sexualisation>
andP Craig Russell <http://www.artofpcraigrussell.com/>, probably best known 
for his stylish comics adaptations of operas by Wagner and Mozart.

The fun with The Sandman – like Gaiman’s best novel American Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/29/book-beach-american-gods-neil-gaiman>
, a calculated hodgepodge, if there is such a thing, of stories short and long 
– is often the way the author allows insight into his otherworldly central 
characters through the pinhole of a seemingly normal, knowable person’s 
perspective. Here, he’s mastered that technique. The adroit short pieces are 
one of the reasons the series remains so popular despite its far-flung sci-fi 
and fantasy conceits: it’s less a three-course meal than a box of candy you 
didn’t mean to eat in its entirety.

Co-Mix, by Art Spiegelman
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0b294e38099415d1276ac840e02f419dfc5b65%2F0_0_1000_1418%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0b294e38099415d1276ac840e02f419dfc5b65%2F0_0_1000_1418%2F1000.jpg>
For people needing a primer on grownup comics, the ur-text didn’t really exist 
until two years ago, and that’s because the evolution of high-art comic books 
from greasy underground innovation to literary supplement is largely the work 
of a single guy:Art Spiegelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/aug/28/comics.politics>.

Spiegelman is justly famous for his comics memoir Maus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/fiction.art>, about his father 
Vladek’s escape from Auschwitz and the relationship between Art and Vladek in 
the years when the book was being composed. ButSpiegelman was also the editor 
of Raw <http://www.culturalweekly.com/spiegelman-other-masterpiece/>, an 
anthology series that drew together the best and brightest of the underground 
comics world at a time when the market was sagging under the weight of too many 
people trying to ride the same gravy train.

As other publishers collapsed or radically shrank, Raw became the Paris Review 
of comics, every page risky, bizarre and invariably beautiful, with 
Spiegelman’s own work as the book’s anchor. Co-Mix is partly an exhibition 
catalogue of a Spiegelman career retrospective bearing the same name; it’s also 
a collection of excerpts from Raw and other ephemera, and a wholly necessary 
study of the form’s escape from the gutter and (in this case literally) into 
the museum.

Hark! A Vagrant, by Kate Beaton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41a5f22f89e7d8df1fa108e5ea3abdbc1ae95f4b%2F0_0_946_1024%2F946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41a5f22f89e7d8df1fa108e5ea3abdbc1ae95f4b%2F0_0_946_1024%2F946.jpg>
Kate Beaton’s hyperliterate webcomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/cartoon/2012/jul/20/cartoonist-worldview-kate-beaton>
 is on the cutting edge of any number of social realities.Her Sexy Batman strips
 <http://www.harkavagrant.com/index.php?id=295> are as clever a parody of 
tightly clad contemporary superheroics as anyone has written. But she’s also 
fascinated by the arcane, the old-fashioned and the obscure, particularly as 
they pertain to women through the ages. Never preachy or shrill, the strip’s 
meticulous consideration of history’s funniest footnotes run counter to her 
excellently messy artwork.


It’s often said, and correctly, how smart the comic’s writing is, but 
artistically Beaton has few equals and fewer competitors; she’s working in a 
style almost no one practices anymore, where what looks like a quick pencil 
rough is specific enough to convey a whole range of complex emotions. Beaton 
listsRonald Searle <http://www.ronaldsearle.co.uk/> among her favorite artists, 
and it’s easy to see the great illustrator’s influence.

Seconds, by Bryan Lee O’Malley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb72db0cb2d249ebb3c1de18ca4312dde3124c16a%2F0_0_1432_1857%2F1432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb72db0cb2d249ebb3c1de18ca4312dde3124c16a%2F0_0_1432_1857%2F1432.jpg>
Bryan Lee O’Malley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/08/seconds-bryan-lee-omalley-review-graphic-novel>
 is probably best-known for his series of manga-style action comics about a 
slacker living in a version of Toronto that plays by the same rules as a video 
game, Scott Pilgrim. In Seconds, he’s in the same place – well, Canada – but 
his twist is more fantastical than science-fictional.

Without giving too much away, O’Malley is an accomplished chronicler of 
post-adolescent longing. What if we’d taken this job instead of that job? What 
if we’d never broken up with that guy or that girl? His heroine, immature, 
compelling and unhappy, gets to find out – it’s like if It’s a Wonderful Life 
was a fantasy manga about restaurant workers. O’Malley is that rare artist who 
works in confessional and speculative modes simultaneously; his world may have 
fantastical quirks in it, but it also has quotidian heartbreak.

The Fixer, by Joe Sacco
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004050e4df8572fae29d1bccc497a3d44ea0df3c%2F0_0_1400_1953%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F004050e4df8572fae29d1bccc497a3d44ea0df3c%2F0_0_1400_1953%2F1400.jpg>
Nobody is doing what Joe Sacco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/09/great-war-joe-sacco-review> is 
doing; the writer-artist has visited some of the world’s worst war zones and 
not merely written movingly about them but carefully drawn them, as well. The 
effect is transporting – Sacco drags readers into war-torn Bosnia and gives 
them both a sense of place and a sense of urgency, and like the best 
journalists, he’s got an eye for the rich, contradictory, infuriating people 
who can make you care about something you ought to care about.


In the title story of this astonishing collection of short nonfiction, Sacco 
focuses on a bored ex-mercenary with nothing to do after the end of the long 
and horrifically bloody war. On the one hand, it’s about wartime abstractions 
like reparations and displacement; on the other, it’s the incredibly urgent 
tale of an edgy, frightening guy who’d rather be killing people and may yet get 
to.


Acme Novelty Library #20, by Chris Ware


Chris Ware <https://www.theguardian.com/books/chris-ware> is intimidating. The 
artist’s biggest works are pointedly impossible to read from the beginning – 
just trying to get past the dust jacket onJimmy Corrigan: The Smartest Kid on 
Earth <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jul/21/biography.highereducation> 
can take days. But the final “issue” so far of Ware’s long-runningAcme Novelty 
Library 
<http://www.amazon.com/Novelty-Library-Pantheon-Graphic-Novels/dp/0375422951> 
is a little hardbound graphic novel that follows one man from birth to death 
and many strange points in between. In just the first few pages, Ware invents 
new narrative tools to describe learning to recognize your own name, 
discovering colors, and what it feels like when you see your father hit your 
mother.


Eventually, the book may simply end up a footnote in Ware’s ongoing graphic 
novel,Rusty Brown <http://classic.tcj.com/tag/rusty-brown/>. But at the moment, 
it’s the purest distillation of his ingenious use of hard lines, flat colors 
and an engineer’s genius for describing complexity without reducing it.

All-Star Superman, by Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da60f5e6dd69b0072711b3bdec91101dd0fcd8a%2F0_0_900_1384%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20you'd%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here's%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20you%27d%20like%20to%20get%20into%20highbrow%20comics.%20Here%27s%20where%20to%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F17%2Fomic-books-recommendations-graphic-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6da60f5e6dd69b0072711b3bdec91101dd0fcd8a%2F0_0_900_1384%2F900.jpg>
You can leave most superheroes off a list of great comics at this point, but 
not Superman. The Man of Steel’s mark on American culture has been indelible, 
and it has also resisted updating – the last four Superman films have been 
disastrously lame.

But in All-Star, writer Grant Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/21/grant-morrison-wonder-woman> and 
artistFrank Quitely <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24AQRRtdKyQ> strike 
exactly the tone that film-makers have missed: modern and clever without being 
snide or ironic, optimistic without naiveté, and, thanks especially to Quitely, 
utterly beautiful. The artist’s rendering of the Man of Steel is sneakily 
reverential – if the cover of the book looks like you’ve seen it somewhere 
before, that’s because it’s a fairly overt homage to images of Jesus at the 
last judgment. It’s also playful and fun, with a gorgeous sequence on the 
inverted-logic Bizarro World (the planet is square, of course) and the kind of 
lighthearted interplay with Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen that aren’t usually found 
outside much older books.

 