
In Cuiabá, this ragged frontier town on the fringes of the Amazon, whose 
historic centre sits almost perfectly equidistant between the Atlantic and 
Pacific oceans, first impressions don’t last long.

The city is squat and dusty, but heaving with life. It bakes during the day 
but comes alive at night under a cloudless sky, in small, leafy squares dotted 
with kiosks selling beer and tapioca crepes. The sun is relentless but the 
locals make it work in their favour, air-drying steak to make carne de sol, a 
Cuiaban specialty, and the surrounding region is threaded with rivers teeming 
with local fish such as caxara, pintado, pacu and pera putanga, creatures so 
removed from an ordinary notion of the piscatorial life it seems pointless to 
offer a translation of their names.

Even the trees in the Parque Mae Bonifacia to the city’s north, which appear 
stunted, are stunted for a reason, the compactness of their design an ingenious 
method of conserving water amid the famously molten heat.

The World Cup is always the season of the spurious analogy, and this World Cup 
in particular, theCopa das Copas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/11/brazil-croatia-opener-world-cup-2014>
, a footballing return to nature to tug at even the flintiest heart’s strings, 
coaxes us towards heights of lyricism more powerfully than any other in recent 
memory.

Virtually everyone has written off the Socceroos, and every day a new global 
media outlet steps forward with a fresh, data-assisted spin on the 
near-impossibility of their task. ButAnge Postecoglou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou> will surely be hoping 
that the disjuncture between appearance and reality, magically at work in the 
city that fans out around the Arena Pantanal, will somehow rub off on this 
Australian team, so easily cast aside in the global consciousness as a cute and 
willing band of friendly no-hopers.

The Socceroos take to the field on Friday night (8am Saturday AEST) in hope 
more than anything else, but the hope comes with a decent foothold in reasoned 
expectation. Performances in the warm-up games have traced an encouraging arc 
of improvement, and the starting XI now has a pleasantly settled, familiar look 
to it.

 Graham Arnold may be getting ahead of himself with his suggestion of an 
imminent transfer to Real Madrid, but Mat Ryan is one of the world’s brightest 
young goalkeepers. In defence, Matthew Spiranovic and Alex Wilkinson have 
developed a man-forward, man-back synchronicity to their positioning that will 
be critical for the counter-attacking game Postecoglou wants to play, while 
Ivan Franjic has done a decent job of curbing his enthusiasm for the bombing 
run down the flank – a staple of his career at club level – and now has the 
self-possessed air of a player who feels he belongs at international level.

And in midfield, the mantle of captaincy plainly agrees with Mile Jedinak, who 
looks to be on the cusp of finally translating some of his club form to the 
national team, while Tommy Oar supplies the Socceroos’ one true jolt of 
on-field electricity.

The spine gives cause for optimism that Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia> won’t be totally embarrassed, 
but in truth that optimism carries a heavy qualification. The real thing 
missing from this side is a sprinkling of stardust in the final third. Against 
Croatia the Socceroos were tight at the back and composed in midfield, but they 
struggled to unlock the Croatian defence once they made it to the edge of the 
penalty area.

Mark Bresciano, who is likely to start against Chile, still represents our 
most productive playmaking outlet, but his record atWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> level is patchy at 
best and it will be a miracle if he can stay fit for all three group games. 
Perhaps Australia’s best hope is to lose the commitment, so patiently 
accumulated over the past decade, to the technical, one-touch game, to cast off 
the aspirational pass-and-move cosmopolitanism of the New Football era. The 
alternative is to Route 1 the ball towards Tim Cahill, who remains, even at 34, 
one of the best headers in world football, a galvanising, uplifting presence at 
the front of the line with an unflagging appetite for the fight and a forehead 
tailor-made for the type of game Australia will have to play. Where Cahill’s 
head goes, so go the Socceroos’ chances in Brazil.

For Australia, which has, in its short recent World Cup history, always 
travelled to the tournament more in need of early momentum than most, the first 
group match is always The Match That Must Be Won. In 2006 the plan worked, 
miraculously; in 2010, it failed, spectacularly.Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> is, in that sense, the most 
forgiving opponent to have first up, presenting Australia with the most 
winnable match of its group at precisely the stage when victory is at a premium.

One look at the Chilean team sheet, however, and it’s hard for much of that 
head-held-high, boys-are-excited, spring-a-surprise positivity not to 
evaporate. This isn’t just a story about Arturo Vidal, one of Serie A’s 
pre-eminent box-to-box midfielders. Chile, who play with three at the back, 
don’t bother much with defence, but between Valencia’s Eduardo Vargas, 
Barcelona’s Alexis Sánchez and Jorge Valdivia, the withdrawn No. 9 who figures 
as one of the most underrated players in the tournament, Chile have an attack 
to mess with the best defences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsocceroos-quietly-hope-world-cup-surprise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F13%2F1402621819951%2F21059e84-8036-40b4-a593-441112962055-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Socceroos%20quietly%20hope%20to%20spring%20a%20World%20Cup%20surprise%20against%20Chile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsocceroos-quietly-hope-world-cup-surprise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Socceroos%20quietly%20hope%20to%20spring%20a%20World%20Cup%20surprise%20against%20Chile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fjun%2F13%2Fsocceroos-quietly-hope-world-cup-surprise-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F13%2F1402621819951%2F21059e84-8036-40b4-a593-441112962055-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kindred spirits: Chile's coach Jorge Sampaoli and Ange Postecoglou. 
Photograph: Martin Bernetti/Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
And in Jorge Sampaoli, the Argentine most often compared to his compatriot and 
predecessor as Chile coach, Marcelo Bielsa, they have a coach unafraid to 
gamble, relentlessly, on the forward-thrusting ability of that attack. The 
contest between that front line and the inexperienced back four of Spiranovic, 
Wilkinson, Franjic and Jason Davidson is shaping as the World Cup’s first 
Thermopylae moment, a mismatch with virtually no limit.

Still, the boys are excited, their heads are held high, and they know they 
have the ability to spring a surprise. The team is in transition and the real 
goal, as has been exhaustively stated and restated by seemingly everyone in the 
Socceroos camp, is to put together the nucleus of a team that can win next 
year’s Asian Cup on home soil. At the carnival of football’s return to the 
heartland, the Socceroos are manning the stall of anchored expectations. The 
theme of this World Cup for Australia will be evolution and education, not 
revolution and celebration.

This is as true for Postecoglou himself, a kindred spirit of Sampaoli saddled 
with a vastly different task. Postecoglou: take a moment to listen to the 
musicality of that word. It spills out of the mouth, a forward roll of 
half-swallowed, humpty dumpty, run-on vowels enacting its own internal, 
tumbling, lavish momentum. As a club coach Postecoglou has been true to the 
onomatopoeia of his own name, forging a signature style built around speed, 
pressing, width and attack above all else.

As Socceroos coach, Postecoglou has kept a firm lid on his emotions in the 
months leading up to the World Cup, discarding the round, gabby volubility of 
the public persona he had built up with Brisbane Roar and Melbourne Victory and 
embracing something closer to the folded-arm surliness of Allan Border in his 
post-1989 captaining pomp. Via an extreme economy of words, through a grey veil 
of guarded praise, Postecoglou seems to want to convey the extreme discipline 
of the Socceroos’ set-up and preparation, the camp’s commitment to technical 
correctness over headless emotion.

This is perhaps no accident for a team whose simple ability to be organised, 
in defence as much as anywhere else, will play a big part in determining their 
fortune in Brazil. That’s the peculiarity of Postecoglou’s task in Brazil: his 
natural instinct is to flick the switch to attack, but he knows that against 
these opponents the task will be more about containment and opportunism on the 
break than flinging open the gates and setting loose the dogs of war.

The Socceroos will have to make their luck in the negative, by exploiting the 
spaces left behind by rivals of superior ability going forward. If Australian 
can’t Postecoglou to victory against Chile, they might yet Wilkinson their way 
to a spoiling draw – or, better yet, snatch, grab and Cahill a path to three of 
the unlikeliest points in the national team's history.

None of this matters much in the end, of course. It’s the World Cup. In 
Brazil. And we’re there. If that isn’t enough to excite Australia, nothing can. 
Bring on the sun-dried steak and the tapioca crepes; it's showtime on the edge 
of the Amazon.
 