
Ange Postecoglou <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ange-postecoglou>, 
introduced here as “Angie Postessoglou” by a FIFA media handler who could 
easily have passed for Vicente del Bosque’s slimmer younger brother, was having 
no talk of a future beyond Monday, 23 June. “The players are being prepared for 
the game tomorrow, not for the next four years,” he told reporters gathered at 
the Arena da Baixada. “Our focus doesn’t go beyond those 90 minutes.” But so 
very plainly, the broader narrative unfolding for Australia at this World Cup - 
a story of rebirth and stylistic awakening, the early exultances of a national 
football team at last playing the way it wants to play - does.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-have-plenty-to-play-for&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403495131045%2FSocceroos-train-in-Curibi-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Socceroos%20have%20'plenty%20to%20play%20for'%2C%20Postecoglou%20says%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-have-plenty-to-play-for>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Socceroos%20have%20%27plenty%20to%20play%20for%27%2C%20Postecoglou%20says%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-have-plenty-to-play-for&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403495131045%2FSocceroos-train-in-Curibi-016.jpg>
 Ange Postecoglou and Mile Jedinak on Spain game. 
When the Socceroos take to the field early on Tuesday morning (Australian 
time), they will be without their wisest heads. There will be no Tim Cahill, no 
boxing corner flag celebrations, no Van Basten volleys, no fizzing, wriggling 
anger to animate the front of the line. The midfield will be shorn of the 
invigorating baldness of Mark Bresciano’s beacon-scalp. Even Mark Milligan, by 
now a World Cup veteran if never quite a card-carrying member of the golden 
generation, might fail to be fit in time to take his spot next to Mile Jedinak 
in front of the back four. Instead, the team will have a decidedly new 
generation, A-League-heavy cast to it.Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, guided so courageously by the 
glorious sunset light of its fading greats in the first two group games, is 
about to get a taste for what life might look like once Tim Cahill retires. The 
future arrives slowly at first, then all in a rush.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F21%2Faustralian-players-commentate-tim-cahill-goal-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F21%2F1403377804542%2FWorld-Cup-2014-Australian-005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202014%3A%20Australian%20players%20commentate%20Tim%20Cahill's%20wonder%20goal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F21%2Faustralian-players-commentate-tim-cahill-goal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202014%3A%20Australian%20players%20commentate%20Tim%20Cahill%27s%20wonder%20goal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F21%2Faustralian-players-commentate-tim-cahill-goal-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F21%2F1403377804542%2FWorld-Cup-2014-Australian-005.jpg>
 Alternative commentary of Tim Cahill's wondergoal. 
The Socceroos enter the encounter plump on the adrenaline of their thrillingly 
competitive showings against Chile and, especially, Holland;Spain arrive in 
something more like a state of existential despair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/22/spain-world-cup-what-went-wrong>
, everything about their approach - from the emphasis on tiki taka to the 
geriatric composition of the squad - called into question. If the point of this 
match is to provide a guide, however provisional, to the future shape of these 
two sides - separated as they are by an almost immeasurably vast sea of 
experience, achievement, and age - Postecoglou, arguably, is in a much better 
position to execute his mandate. He will turn to youth because his squad 
selection gives him no other choice; Del Bosque will cling to experience for 
exactly the same reason.

Oliver Bozanic supplied a performance of sustained incisiveness when he came 
on in place of Bresciano early in the second half in Porto Alegre, and it will 
be no surprise if he starts against the Spanish, Postecoglou likely to make a 
belting bet on raw energy over the more cultured, Bresh-lite ball-keeping of 
Dario Vidosic. It’s trite, if factually correct, to say it’s a long way from 
Hunter Stadium toCuritiba’s Arena da Baixada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/22/spain-australia-curitiba-pitch-concerns-world-cup>
 - but it is a long way from Hunter Stadium to Curitiba’s Arena da Baixada, and 
in the striker’s position, Adam Taggart, who recalls Nicklas Bendtner in 
everything but soundbites, relationship to automobiles, and steady record of 
chronically wasted early-career potential (let’s put it more succinctly: 
there’s a slight physical resemblance between the two), looms as the man most 
likely to be rewarded with a starting place, especially after his late cameo 
against the Dutch. Taggart runs Chile’s Arturo Vidal and 80% of the French 
squad close for the most impressive sleeve tattoo in the World Cup; if nowhere 
else than in the area of body tats, the Socceroos will leave Brazil knowing 
that they have matched it with the world’s best on the grandest stage of all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-can-continue-rejuvenation-in-lively-dead-rubber-against-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403483287741%2F76ff1315-cee9-4a08-b8a0-45c5345a139b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Socceroos%20can%20continue%20rejuvenation%20in%20lively%20dead%20rubber%20against%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-can-continue-rejuvenation-in-lively-dead-rubber-against-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Socceroos%20can%20continue%20rejuvenation%20in%20lively%20dead%20rubber%20against%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fsocceroos-can-continue-rejuvenation-in-lively-dead-rubber-against-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403483287741%2F76ff1315-cee9-4a08-b8a0-45c5345a139b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Could Adam Taggart be given a chance to showcase his wares against Spain? 
Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
On Sunday, Postecoglou, sporting the five o’clock shadow of a uni student into 
the final stretch of a particularly impassioned all-nighter, maintained a 
predictable, dogged silence on the question of who will start up front, his 
only hint, which was really no hint at all, being that speed might be held back 
for impact later in the game: between Taggart and Ben Halloran, the other main 
striking option, there’s nary a leg’s hair difference in pace. Matthew Leckie 
provides another option for the central role, although Postecoglou will 
doubtless be reluctant to remove him from the right, where his razing, 
machine-like runs have provided Australia with such irresistible attacking 
momentum so far this World Cup. Leckie’s wing, right now, is a conveyor belt of 
Australian destruction; why switch it off when it’s working so well? Perhaps 
the final make-up of the front four doesn’t matter all that much; the larger 
point is that between Leckie, Taggart, Halloran, Tommy Oar, Mat Ryan, and Jason 
Davidson, all players in their early 20s, the nucleus of the Socceroos’ next 
generation is already clear. Many of these young players are not only playing 
for their country against Spain, of course - they’re also playing for their 
club futures. This match represents an opportunity for them to hawk themselves 
at theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> meat 
counter; for once, club and country, self-interest and patriotism, aren’t 
antithetical forces.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F22%2Faustralia-mile-jedinak-spain-world-cup-2014-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F22%2F1403460266078%2FAustralias-Mile-Jedinak-k-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%202014%3A%20Australia's%20Mile%20Jedinak%20defends%20Spain's%20performances%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F22%2Faustralia-mile-jedinak-spain-world-cup-2014-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%202014%3A%20Australia%27s%20Mile%20Jedinak%20defends%20Spain%27s%20performances%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F22%2Faustralia-mile-jedinak-spain-world-cup-2014-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F22%2F1403460266078%2FAustralias-Mile-Jedinak-k-017.jpg>
 Mile Jedinak on Spain. 
Cahill noted after the loss to the Dutch that from the very first moment of 
the tournament, “the first pass we played was forward - not back. Forward.” A 
month ago the match againstSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> 
loomed as the sternest test of Australia’s reconnected commitment to passing, 
moving football - and even though the reigning world champions ride into 
Curitiba enveloped in the battle-mist of calamitous defeat, casting a blanket 
of sporting melancholy over the match, the Socceroos will need little 
motivation to test themselves against a team still miles-deep with talent. The 
masters of possession football against their would-be disciples: even dead, 
this is one rubber that reverberates with life. Postecoglou struck a reflective 
note in that key on Sunday. “Who’s to say whether I’ll be here on four years’ 
time?” he said. “We’ve got plenty to play for - it’s our fourth World Cup and 
we’ve only won two games. If we want to be taken seriously and become the 
football country we want to be, we have to start winning games at this level. 
For a nation like ours, there is no greater test.”

Postecoglou doesn’t want to leave Brazil nurturing regrets. Spain, already 
retreating in disarray from the fortress of their half-decade of glory, latest 
victims of the same champions’ syndrome that did for France in 2002 and Italy 
in 2010, need to salvage something, anything, from the game to dispel the 
suggestion of a return to the pre-2008 dog days, to show that there will be no 
post-Xaviesta funk and that Next Time Will Be Different. But in both cases, the 
tournament’s big teachables are already set, the storyboarding is done: for 
Australia, rejuvenation; for Spain, disintegration. Monday’s result will 
provide only a footnote, but in the taxonomy of the genre it will be a David 
Foster Wallace footnote; a footnote, that is, of great and potentially lasting 
significance, telling more about the story than the story itself perhaps can 
ever convey.
 