
The sights and smells of poverty in Charles Dickens were harvested during his 
walking tours through London streets. That much is familiar. Less appreciated 
is where he learned about the attitude that the haves harbour towards the 
have-nots. A recentHansard Society event 
<http://www.hansardsociety.org.uk/blogs/recent_events/archive/2012/11/23/3560.aspx>
 celebrated the novelist's early career as a parliamentary reporter. Listening 
to wealthy men thrash out the New Poor Law – a measure that, in the name of 
"reform", imprisoned the penniless in workhouses – taught him all he needed to 
know about how well-fed burghers and beadles thought about their wards.

Perhaps the literature of the future will one day gain from the many losses 
meted out in the autumn statement this week. The chancellor announced that 
social security would no longer keep pace with the rising costs of buying baked 
beans, fixing broken boilers or doing anything else. Instead, it would be 
slowly ratcheted down in real terms. He said this was necessary to be "fair to 
the person who leaves home every morning to go out to work" and walks past 
houses where – in his phrase to Tory conference – workshy paupers are "sleeping 
off a life on benefits". Dickens would have had fun with a baronet-to-be 
implicitly likening the condition of unemployment to an eight-pint bender.

This agenda contradicts the inaugural words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/11/david-cameron-speech-full-text>
 that David Cameron spoke outside the door of No 10. In May 2010, he promised a 
government that "always looks after the … poorest in our country". Today, 
however, Downing Street believes there is unlimited mileage in setting the 
striving majority against supposed skivers. After all, wages have now slipped 
behind inflation for years on end. Leftists might protest that the poor are 
getting poorer, but the Conservative bet is that the working majority will 
regard it as right and proper for benefits to share in the great wage squeeze. 
Most ofthe polling <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-15460427> suggests as much, 
and then there is the additional political attraction of setting a trap for the 
opposition. The chancellor is delighted with his ruse to effect this 
retrenchment through an entirely gratuitous piece of legislation. He will defy 
Ed Miliband to vote against. Should he do so, the Tories will be able to argue 
that the looming public service cuts – cuts that the IFS already calls 
"inconceivably" deep – would have to be deeper still under a Labour government, 
since it would squander more resources on bigger benefit cheques.

For all these reasons Mr Osborne spent Wednesday struggling to suppress a 
smile at his own cunning, and the dilemma posed is undeniably a real one for 
Labour. Some whisper that commonsensical caution requires Mr Miliband to 
acquiesce in a popular move he cannot stop. And yet the pitch that snatched the 
party leadership for him centred on narrowing Britain's financial gap.Research 
has shown <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/3045> that the single most 
important force behind the great economic divergence of the 1980s was the 
decoupling of benefits from earnings, so Mr Miliband cannot now with any 
integrity support a further decoupling from prices which will make things very 
much worse.

In his bid for the top job Mr Miliband also highlighted the coalition's 
lopsided coalition retrenchment. The imbalance between slashed social spending 
and taxation has got starker since – cuts are now doing 85% of the work. If 
economies need to be made, let them address the real divide in this country: 
that between the rich and the rest. Anew Compass pamphlet 
<http://clients.squareeye.net/uploads/compass/documents/COM_J307_strikers_scroungers_shirkers_30%2011%2012%202_1.pdf>
 cheekily reclaims the Osborne lexicon, blasting "scrounging" employers whose 
low pay is topped up by benefits, and corporate "shirkers" who dodge their tax. 
Mr Osborne's own discourse retains traction for now, but don't assume this will 
last. His schism between skivers and strivers is an illusion: working parents 
claim tax credits too. As the benefit squeeze bites on these, its popularity 
will surely wane. Mr Miliband should hold his nerve and vote against – for in 
the end, the truth has power.
 