
Less than a month after the abrupt resignation 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-softbank-pres-idUSKCN0Z71DL> of Masayoshi 
Son’s anointed successor raised questions about SoftBank’s appetite for 
overseas investments, the group has made its ambitions clear with a£24bn move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 on ARM Holdings, Britain’s most successful technology company.

Monday’s cash deal marks the start of the mobile technology company’s quest to 
add semiconductors to its eclectic business portfolio and be a key part of the 
shift towards artificial intelligence, something that Son, SoftBank’s chief 
executive, has described as “the biggest paradigm shift in human history”.

While declaring his determination to devote the rest of his career to AI and 
the“internet of things” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
, Son has specialised in the acquisition of things since he founded the company 
35 years ago.

ARM Holdings to be sold to Japan's SoftBank for £24bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
In the years leading up to what was supposed to be his retirement, just over a 
year from now, he has overseen an array of overseas investments, culminating in 
the agreed takeover ofARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings>, 
SoftBank’s biggest acquisition, on Monday.

SoftBank previously acquired 
<http://www.softbank.jp/en/corp/news/press/sb/2006/20060317_01/> Vodafone’s 
Japanese business and is attempting to transform the fortunes of the lossmaking 
US telecoms company Sprint, after taking a $20bn (£15bn) majority stake in 
2013, in what was thebiggest foreign acquisition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/oct/15/sprint-stake-japan-softbank-20bn>
 by a Japanese company at the time.

“This is one of the most important acquisitions we have ever made, and I 
expect ARM to be a key pillar of SoftBank’s growth strategy going forward,” Son 
said.

“ARM will be an excellent strategic fit with the SoftBank group as we invest 
to capture the very significant opportunities provided by the internet of 
things.”

In Japan, overseas acquisitions are a sign of weakening confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/japans-economy-shrinks-again-as-shinzo-abe-kickstart-plan-is-blown-off-course>
 in the outlook for the domestic economy, as the country deals with more than 
two decades of stagnation and faces long-term population decline.

Despite a group portfolio that includes Yahoo Japan, the country’s 
third-largest mobile carrier, and ahumanoid robotics unit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/06/pepper-chatty-robot-japan-softbank>
, Son has spoken of his hunger to explore “a few more crazy ideas”, funded by 
the $18bn war chest that SoftBank accumulated by offloading some of its assets, 
includingpart of a stake 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-softbank-aliaba-idUSKCN0YP1J6> in Chinese 
e-commerce company Alibaba.


Son took a $20m stake in Alibaba, founded by Jack Ma in 1999. The bet paid off 
handsomely, with the value of SoftBank’s stake soaring to $65bn after Alibaba’s 
record IPO in the US in 2014.

However, as recently as last month, corporate Japan had been readying itself 
for his exit, as he prepared Nikesh Arora to lead the company into the next 
information revolution.


Arora’s shock resignation in June, nearly two years after he moved to SoftBank 
from Google, came after Son indicated that he was going to renege on an 
agreement to hand over the reins on his 60th birthday next year.

Many consider Son, 58, born in Japan but of Korean heritage, to be a rarity in 
the Japanese business world: charismatic, visionary and willing totake on the 
establishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/09/fukushima-reactors-nuclear-free-japan>
.

With an estimated net worth of $14.9bn, Japan’s second-richest man 
<http://www.forbes.com/japan-billionaires/list/> has also built a reputation as 
a philanthropist, having pledged todonate 10bn yen 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-04-04/softbank-s-son-pledges-120-million-salary-for-quake-relief>
 and all his salary until retirement to support victims of thecountry’s triple 
disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/11/japan-remembers-the-18000-victims-of-2011s-triple-disaster-fukushima>
 in March 2011.

Last month, Son stood before 2,000 SoftBank shareholders, still reeling from 
Arora’s departure, and admitted that he had been “somewhat greedy” in wanting 
to stay on for at least another five to 10 years. “I asked myself whether I 
have run out of energy and ambition,” he said.

As ARM prepares to sell up for £17 a share, 43% more than its closing share 
price on Friday, and for the promised doubling of its UK workforce, Son has 
answered his own question in typically emphatic fashion.
 