
The £24.3bn takeover of ARM Holdings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
, Britain’s biggest technology company, could be in doubt after investors in 
the Japanese group behind the deal – SoftBank – gave it the thumbs down.

The chancellor's reaction to SoftBank's takeover of ARM was ludicrous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/18/philip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors>
Shares in SoftBank fell by more than 10% in Japan as investors and analysts 
expressed concerns about theprice of the deal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
and the increasing debt of the telecoms and tech group.

The acquisition of ARM would be the biggest deal yet for SoftBank and its 
charismatic founder,Masayoshi Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
, but SoftBank already has $113bn (£86bn) of debt. “A fresh acquisition is not 
what the market wants from SoftBank,” Mitsushige Akino, the chief fund manager 
at Ichiyoshi Asset Management, told Reuters. “It’s Mr Son’s style to keep 
expanding, but isn’t he stretching too much?”

Atul Goyal, an analyst at Jefferies, added: “To us, the ARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> acquisition announced 
yesterday [Monday] appears largely inconsistent with SoftBank’s investment 
strategy. It does not inspire much confidence and requires deeper review.”

The proposed deal for ARM has given Theresa May, the new British prime 
minister, a dilemma less than a week into her new government. May and Philip 
Hammond, the chancellor, have welcomed the deal as a sign that international 
investors are still willing to invest in the UK after the EU referendum. 
However, critics claim that the UK should not give up ownership of one of its 
few world-leading companies.ARM designs the chips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
 that power more than 95% of smartphones around the world and its technology is 
effectively thebrains behind the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/armed-for-the-next-technological-revolution>
.

Hermann Hauser, who helped to found ARM in 1990, said that SoftBank’s debt 
mountain meant that some of the money earned by ARM could be used to pay 
interest or reduce debt, rather than be invested back in the company. “If [ARM 
were] allowed to remain independent, all that cash could be ploughed into 
further development, now some of it will have to be spent on servicing debt,” 
Hauser said.

Son dismissed concerns from SoftBank shareholders at a press conference in 
London on Monday. “If the investors do not like it, they will sell,” he said. 
“I am the largest shareholder in SoftBank. I share the same interest as the 
other shareholders.”

Later, in a conference call with investors, Son evoked Star Wars to try to 
persuade them to back his plan and invest in SoftBank. “If you listen to the 
force, this is the best company to invest in the debt,” he said.

Son owns 19% of SoftBank and has faced criticism about his deals before, 
notably in October 2012 when the company revealed a $22bn plan to take control 
of US mobile phone network Sprint. This was the last time that SoftBank’s 
shares fell as heavily as they did on Tuesday, when they closed down 10.3% to 
¥5,387 (£34.70), their lowest since March.

Neil Campling, an analyst at Northern Trust Capital Markets, said Apple, 
Intel, Qualcomm, Microsoft and Google could emerge as rival bidders for ARM. 
“Softbank themselves did a poor job explaining the rationale on the conference 
call in our view and it seems to have been an opportunistic strike.

“ARM is an awesome asset we think and, if they execute and keep the culture as 
promised then, in 10 years time it may look to be a masterstroke. But short 
term is a different matter.

“The other thing is: there is no break-up fee, no lock in. ARM has opened the 
doors to a counter in our view. And the more we think about it the more likely 
and sensible it is for others to run the rule over this.”

SoftBank is offering a £17 a share for ARM. This is 43% higher than its 
closing share price last week and 63% higher than ARM’s share price before the 
EU referendum.

Shares in ARM have risen sharply since Britain voted for Brexit because the 
weakness in sterling has made ARM’s profits in the US and abroad more valuable. 
ARM conducts less than 1% of its business in the UK.
 