
Up for critical consideration this week:

Feelings

The first emotion I feel when looking at this photo is shock. I don’t like 
feeling shocked – it’s the emotion that can lead to a bit of accidental wee 
coming out – so this particular emotion only gets3/10 

Once the shock has worn off, I begin to feel bafflement. What is this, this 
plastic baby in a bag? And why? I don’t like being baffled either – it makes me 
feel inadequate and stupid – so this emotion also only gets3/10

Next comes curiosity. The need to fill in the gaps, to understand. Who is the 
person who carries a plastic baby in a bag? Are those the shelves of a Co-op or 
a Waitrose? What else is in the bag? I like curiosity. Yes, it kills cats, but 
its also led to every significant scientific breakthrough in the history of 
humanity, including the lint roller. So this emotion can have a cool9/10

Then, once curiosity has led to the envisagement of a scenario – one in which 
a lady in red shoes browses the microwave meals-for-one section of a 
mid-to-upper range supermarket with an ersatz baby in a bag – I feel sad. Read 
that scenario again. It’s the saddest scenario that’s ever been scenarioed. And 
sadness can only ever really get1/10

Finally comes excitement, because I now know either the Co-op or Waitrose is 
selling hefty portions of microwave chilli for £3.29, and I’m definitely 
getting one on the way home. Chilli is great. So is excitement. So it can have
9/10

And that is all the emotions I felt.

LH

A lovely bus stop

Waiting at the bus stop isn’t fun. Not in the middle of the city, at least. 
There are swarms of schoolkids playing Kiss out of their phones, there are 
pensioners side-eyeing them, there are City workers sighing loudly because the 
stock market will crash unless the 77 turns up pronto. The air feels dirty and 
making direct eye contact with anyone else is asking for trouble. A few miles 
out of the metropolis, however, it’s an altogether different experience. The 
bus stop we’ve been asked to review this week is in Worcester Park, a town in 
Kingston, south-west London, that’s around half an hour to Waterloo on the 
train.

It’s one of those sought-after areas of Zone 4 of the London transport network 
that are the stuff of estate agents’ dreams; all green spaces, Ofsted-approved 
schools and easy commuter links. The bus stop in question is sheltered by 
towering trees on Cheam Common Road close to an outlet called Worcester Park 
Charcoal Grill, which – according to the internet’s amateur Jay Rayners – 
serves the best kebabs in London. This looks like a wonderful corner of 
suburbia with great doners to boot, and the kind of place where you could truly 
have a thoroughly enjoyable bus-waiting experience. Top notch.

10/10 

HJD

A machine that puts plastic on things
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b61275330e95f1374cfa63bc12745b5c79cf37b%2F66_0_920_552%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Some%20emotions%2C%20a%20bus%20stop%2C%20a%20laminator%2C%20a%20curtain%3A%20we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Some%20emotions%2C%20a%20bus%20stop%2C%20a%20laminator%2C%20a%20curtain%3A%20we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b61275330e95f1374cfa63bc12745b5c79cf37b%2F66_0_920_552%2F920.jpg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67339915b7973fcc958992e163c19796191114e4%2F0_0_958_279%2F958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Some%20emotions%2C%20a%20bus%20stop%2C%20a%20laminator%2C%20a%20curtain%3A%20we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Some%20emotions%2C%20a%20bus%20stop%2C%20a%20laminator%2C%20a%20curtain%3A%20we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fsome-emotions-a-bus-stop-a-laminator-a-curtain-we-review-anything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67339915b7973fcc958992e163c19796191114e4%2F0_0_958_279%2F958.jpg>
A home laminating machine? It’s an oddly exciting thought, isn’t it? But why? 
Why would anyone possibly need one? Surely the functional business of the 
laminating machine is innately professional? Any list of things that might 
actually need laminating would be dominated by items related to the 
professional sphere. The lanyard. The workplace lunch menu. The over-demanding, 
slightly sinister list of company targets. In short, precisely the kind of 
stuff that no sane person really wants to be reminded of in their leisure time.

And yet the idea of the home laminator still tantalises. To the extent that 
one might be tempted to consider a range of domestic clutter that might be 
improved by a good, hard lamination. A child’s painting of a tiger, perhaps, or 
a weekly copy of the Guardian Guide? That way, a person might be able to 
justify bringing a laminator into the home.

Could it be that any item, divorced from its primary intention, has a capacity 
to promise fun? Probably. There’s an undeniable sensuality to the smooth yet 
invisible plasticating functionality. But these items also feel like forbidden 
fruit. They’re singular and mysterious and yet alluring in their own right. Who 
hasn’t marvelled at the play potential of work-related hardware in other 
people’s professional spheres? Who hasn’t walked past a building site and found 
themselves gawping at a cement mixer in full cry or an expertly wielded blow 
torch? The laminator is a post-industrial version of this fetish; the Gareth 
Keenan to the industrial forge’s Yosser Hughes. These items are portals into 
alternative realities. With that in mind, the question is surely not “why would 
anyone want a home laminating machine?” but “why would anyone not want one?”

10/10

PH

A creepy shower curtain

Yup, great, thanks, that’s exactly what I want to see when I wash my hair. A 
shower curtain from the murder scene in Psycho. As a fair and balanced and only 
99% cynical reviewer, I can see some plus sides: it’s scary enough to blow your 
sleep-crusted eyes open in the morning, possibly even a way to save water as 
you limit your shower time to 0.02 minutes (because any longer is just freaky 
and weird and a strange man will almost certainly come through the door with a 
knife). Maybe, it would be handy for if you’re the dramatic sort who likes to 
practise your “scream face” as a way to warm up for the day job.

But let’s be real here. If you went home with a Tinder date and you saw that 
hanging in their loo, you wouldn’t think: “Ooh, savvy, they’re so into films”, 
or: “Wow, they know their Hitchcock”, you’d think: “How quickly can I climb out 
of the bathroom window and jump over the garden fence without them noticing?” 
This shower curtain is basically a way of saying: “Hi, my name’s Norman, and I 
live with my mum.” And remember: his mum was dead all along. You are right, 
dear tweeter, it is needlessly horrifying and no one needs a reminder of a 
fatal stabbing as they wash. Get out. Get out while you still can.
-0.5/10

KH

 * Got a suggestion for next week’s Review Anything? Leave it in the comments 
or tweet it to @guideguardian  