
Survival in the Premier League is everything but even though he undoubtedly 
represents the best chance of Crystal Palace extending their stay in England’s 
top flight for a fifth successive season, the impending appointment of Sam 
Allardyce toreplace Alan Pardew at Selhurst Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-sacked>
 is one that will fill many supporters with dread.

It is less than three months since Allardyce was ousted as the England manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 before he had even named his second squad as the result of the Daily Telegraph 
sting that showed him negotiating a fee of £400,000 to represent an overseas 
firm hoping to profit from Premier League transfers. Whatever your views on 
that episode – and there are strong arguments to suggest Allardyce was unlucky 
to be forced out given he did not break any rules – it was an awful way to bow 
out from what the 62-year-old from Dudley has always described as his dream job.

Sam Allardyce sting: agent Mark Curtis has history of controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-sting-agent-mark-curtis-controversy>
Given the suspicion that has surrounded Allardyce since the BBC’s Panorama 
investigation in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-history-suspicion-dream-job-ended-67-days>
, which alleged his son Craig had taken illegal payments for transfer deals 
while employed by the agent Mark Curtis, perhaps he should have known better. 
Allardyce threatened to sue the BBC but never did, later stating in his 
autobiography he was advised it would cost too much money and take too long.

Curtis, who first met Allardyce in 1995 when he signed the goalkeeper Steve 
Banks for Blackpool from Gillingham, remains his close friend and agent. He 
will be instrumental in discussions with the Palace chairman, Steve Parish, 
when they meet on Friday to iron out the details of his contract at Selhurst 
Park, although with Allardyce having sent a detailed dossier to the club’s 
American investors Josh Harris and David Blitzer as long as six weeks ago, it 
seems those negotiations will be little more than a formality.

While there is no doubt about Allardyce’s coaching ability, given a track 
record that includes taking Bolton Wanderers into Europe and the saving of 
Blackburn Rovers and Sunderland from relegation, what will concern Palace 
supporters is the amount of control he will demand at a club which has always 
prided itself on promoting local talent. It has been several years since a 
youth team graduate has forced his way into the senior side because of the 
increased pressure of avoiding relegation at all costs, yet the likely 
appointment of Allardyce bears the hallmarks of when Tony Pulis was brought in 
to replace Ian Holloway in November 2013.

Sam Allardyce set to take Crystal Palace job after Alan Pardew’s sacking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-sacked>
Pulis famously led Palace to safety before quitting less than 48 hours before 
the start of the next season – a decision that ended up in the high court after 
Pulis was paid a £2m bonus early. He wasforced to repay almost double that, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-appeal>
 having been found to have deceived a Premier League tribunal. It will be up to 
Parish to ensure there is no repeat of that episode, although keeping a lid on 
a personality as big as Allardyce’s will be no easy feat.

The story of Ravel Morrison should also act as a cautionary tale. The former 
Manchester United youngster accused Allardyce of pressuring him to sign with 
Curtis as his agent while at West Ham – an allegation Allardyce described as 
“nonsense”. The former player and now BBC pundit Kevin Kilbane has also claimed 
to have been subjected to the same pressure by Allardyce and Curtis almost 20 
years earlier, even attending the next meeting with his brother Farrell “to 
provide a bit of muscle” in case his rejection did not go down too well.

But with Parish admitting he will “wind the dial back the other way” after 
Pardew’s introduction of a more expansive style of football failed, there 
appears to be only one man for the job. For those who value results above 
anything else, Allardyce fits the bill perfectly.
 