
That would be my holiday, not yours.

Being called an idiot, a racist and a one-eyed bigot is tiring work for a golf 
blogger so I have decided to take a week off - (a) to replenish the thickness 
of my skin, and (b) to get over my embarrassment at having tipped the US women 
to beat the European women by eight points at the Solheim Cup. (Incidentally, 
I'm writing this before the singles have taken place. The score currently 
stands at 8-8, so if - by chance - the Yanks win the singles 10-2, then (b) is 
no longer operative and I will in fact be a certified soothsayer.)

Anyway, I digress. 

To keep you occupied/entertained/amused/bemused for the next week here are a 
few links to some good golf reading. Pay attention please, there will be a test 
when I come back.


First up, it is Arnold Palmer's 80th birthday soon and to celebrate Golf 
Digest asked Tom Callahan, probably the best sports feature writer in America, 
to writethis stunning profile of the man.
 <http://www.golfdigest.com/magazine/2009/09/arnoldpalmer_callahan>
The first three paragraphs set the tone:

Records speak for themselves, but Arnold Palmer's splendid record speaks too 
softly. As he turns 80 on September 10, how important he is has obscured how 
great he was.

Palmer didn't invent golf, just grace and golf, just television and golf. 
Raymond Floyd says, "Arnold was the epitome of a superstar," even before that 
word was coined. "He set the standard for how superstars in every sport ought 
to be, in the way he has always signed autographs, in the way he has always 
made time for everyone." In his patience. In his decency.

"On the golf course," Floyd says, "all I ever saw was a mass of people. I saw, 
but I didn't see. He was able to focus in on everyone in the gallery 
individually. It wasn't fake." He was able to make eye contact with the entire 
world.

Also from Golf Digest. I've read a ton of stuff about Y.E Yang over the past 
few days but nothing has told me as much about the man asthis piece  
<http://www.golfdigest.com/golfworld/special/pga/2009/hazeltine_yang_game_changer_rosaforte>
by Tim Rosaforte.

Mark Reason in the Telegraph has interviewed the Aussie great Peter Thomson 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/golf/tigerwoods/6067129/Peter-Thomson-takes-Tiger-Woods-to-task-for-attitude.html>
, who has this to say about Tiger Woods.

"Woods is the major professional in his sport. No one else is so intense and 
leaves so little to chance. He'll win most of the events he plays in until he 
gets sick of it.

"He will probably win five Opens in his career before he stops, but he's up 
against an increasing number of young people who are matching him. He will find 
it harder and harder.

"I will add one other thing. I wish he'd smile more. He injures his image by 
being morose and petulant. There is also very little consideration for the 
fellow he is playing with. He could show more humility."

Didn't Thomson get the memo about Tiger being unimpeachable?

Here's an interesting feature in the New York Times  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/17/nyregion/17golf.html?_r=2&scp=1&sq=MOREFAR&st=cse>
about a golf course in New York state, which locals believe is (or at least 
was) the private playground of executives from the shamed insurance company AIG.

As this is the first summer after A.I.G. received $182 billion in the largest 
government bailout in American history, the envy among locals has become tinged 
with anger.

"All I've heard is that it's a course for A.I.G. executives and that guys like 
us will never get to play it," said Steven Woolf, 52, after playing the 12th 
hole at Richter Park. Mr. Woolf, an electronics salesman from Watertown, Conn., 
who was recently laid off, added, "It's frustrating because in a sense, we're 
paying for it."

I don't know why people are complaining. After all, it's tiring work, 
destabilising the global economy, and a man needs some time on the links, right?

This piece about golf in Minnesota by Michael Bamberger at Golf.com 
<http://www.golf.com/golf/tours_news/article/0,28136,1916737,00.html> was 
written during the PGA Championship and is, I suppose, nominally past its 
sell-by date. But it's a lovely piece of writing and it changed my mind about 
Tom Lehman, of whom I have never been a big fan (don't ask me why - we all have 
our blind spots, right?)

And finally...

I know I said when this blog started that I would never discuss my own golf 
game but the noted blogger Geoff Shackelford  <http://www.geoffshackelford.com>
has got hold of some secret footage of me and my mates playing our usual Sunday 
10-ball at Augusta National and has posted this video of my swing on his 
website. Watch and learn (how not to do it).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCvg7650y6MM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCvg7650y6MM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCvg7650y6MM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=> 