
Former Liberal frontbencher Sophie Mirabella says she had secured $10m for 
hospital funding for her Victorian seat, but Indi missed out on the money when 
it elected independentCathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan> 2013.

Sophie Mirabella denies 'aggressively' blocking Cathy McGowan photo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/21/sophie-mirabella-denies-aggressively-blocking-cathy-mcgowan-photo>
Mirabella’s defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/18/sophie-mirabella-concedes-defeat-indi>
 was one of the biggest upsets of the last election, and she is challenging 
McGowan in this year’s poll.

During a lively Sky News debate from a Wangaratta pub on Thursday night, 
Mirabella answered a question from Northeast Health Wangaratta board chair 
Brendan Schutt, who asked candidates what they would do to secure health 
funding for the area.

“I had a commitment for a $10m allocation to the Wangaratta hospital that if 
elected I was going to announce a week after the election,” Mirabella said. 
“That is $10m that Wangaratta hasn’t had because Cathy got elected.”

Greens candidate Jenny O’Connor challenged Mirabella, saying, “this is what is 
wrong with politics” if funds could be withdrawn when voters didn’t support a 
particular candidate. But Mirabella said it was “about who has the ability and 
the knowledge and the contacts to go the top of the list [for hospital 
funding]. Cathy wasn’t able to do it. I will be.”

McGowan said independents were able to work with both sides of politics to 
achieve results.

Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, said on Friday the Turnbull 
government should apologise to the voters of Indi, and needed to explain what 
had happened to the $10m.

“This is a deeply disturbing insight into the Liberal party’s approach to 
health policy, which puts political payback before the needs of patients,” King 
said.

Whether an independent is best able to secure investment in regional towns or 
whether a major party member will do better is likely to be one of the key 
issues in Indi at the federal election. McGowan holds the seat by just 0.3%.

Mirabella said she had been defamed by a local newspaper, the Benalla Ensign, 
which this week reported that Mirabella “very publicly pushed” McGowan out of 
the way to prevent her from being photographed with the assistant health 
minister, Ken Wyatt, during a recent event at an aged care facility. Mirabella 
hasemphatically denied the report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/21/sophie-mirabella-denies-aggressively-blocking-cathy-mcgowan-photo>
.

Cathy McGowan says poll shows she could lose seat to Sophie Mirabella
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/cathy-mcgowan-says-poll-shows-she-could-lose-seat-to-sophie-mirabella>
McGowan’s campaign had issued a statement saying the Mirabella had 
“intervened” to stop the photograph, but did not mention whether there was any 
physical contact. .

“Can you imagine the impact on a candidate, someone high profile, a mother…., 
to have an accusation that you committed assault, it just gutted me,” Mirabella 
said. She also said that supporters of McGowan had attacked her on Twitter and 
Facebook over the incident.

McGowan was reluctant to speak about it, suggesting it should be discussed 
privately.

“I think I’d actually rather leave it Sophie. I think it’s a time for another 
place, that’s my sense of it. Tonight’s about policy, the future of the 
electorate.”
 