
When Sophie Okonedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/feb/20/awardsandprizes.film> learned 
that the director Kenny Leon had cast her in the Broadway revival ofLorraine 
Hansberry <http://www.biography.com/people/lorraine-hansberry-9327823>'s A 
Raisin in the Sun, she commenced a series of high kicks.

Hansberry's play, about an African-American clan crowded into a cramped 
apartment on Chicago's South Side, was named after a line in theLangston Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/langston-hughes> poem Dream Deferred; when 
we speak a few days after the show's triumphant opening, Okonedo describes her 
Broadway debut as a "dream come true".

Before the revival's producers contacted her, Okonedo, who was born in London 
to a Nigerian father and a Jewish mother, had never seen or read Hansberry's 
play. Hansberry, who died of cancer in 1965 at the age of 34, became the first 
female African-American playwright to have a work on Broadway whenA Raisin in 
the Sun opened in 1959 
<http://www.playbillvault.com/Show/Detail/4376/A-Raisin-in-the-Sun>, with 
Sidney Poitier and Ruby Dee in the main roles.

Okonedo bought a copy of the play and discovered a masterpiece. She says that 
Hansberry – whose work inspired the songTo Be Young, Gifted and Black 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5nbG3f9NGg8> – "knew so much about the human 
spirit – men, women, relationships, getting older, living in the world when you 
don't have much". She also says that she finds the play particularly relevant 
now, when "the gap between the rich and the poor is bigger than ever. That 
grips me."

In the play, a life insurance cheque offers the Younger family the promise of 
a new home, which might be scuppered by the competing ambitions of son Walter 
Lee, who would prefer use the money to open a liquor store.

Denzel Washington, in his first Broadway role since August Wilson's Fences 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/27/theater/reviews/27fences.html?_r=0> in 2010, 
plays Walter Lee. Okonedo is Ruth, his harried wife, a woman drained by the 
pressures of working as a cleaner while caring for her unhappy husband and son. 
"Life can be a barrel of disappointments, sometimes," says Ruth.
 'Trying to keep it together' ... Sophie Okonedo and Denzel Washington in A 
Raisin in the Sun on Broadway. Photograph: Brigitte Lacombe/AP 
In Okonedo's sardonic, loving, performance, you feel it. You can see Ruth's 
weariness in the carriage of Okonedo's shoulders, the set of her mouth. Leon 
praises the depth: "She embraces every part of the character," he comments. 
"The ugly and the pretty, the darkness and the light."

To find her way into Ruth, Okonedo worked with a dialect coach for weeks so 
that she could arrive on the first day of rehearsal with a faultless Chicago 
accent. (This hasn't prevented LaTanya Richardson Jackson, who plays the clan's 
matriarch, from nicknaming Okonedo "British".) She chose to focus her energies 
on Ruth's strength rather than her fatigue. "She's quite tough, quite robust," 
says Okonedo. "She couldn't be falling apart every second. She'd have to be 
trying to keep it together."

Okonedo also worked to understand Ruth's reality, researching the legacy of 
slavery in America and pushing director Leon towards more stage realism. Leon 
recalls that on the first day of rehearsal she said, "I need the iron to be 
real and hot, I need real running water on stage."  Leon told her that if she 
worked toward "a great, honest Ruth … I will give you everything that you need".

Despite an impressive array of film and television performances including 
Hotel Rwanda (2004) and The Slap (2010), and London stage roles at the Royal 
Court, the RSC and the National Theatre, Okonedo says she felt somewhat shy at 
the beginning of the rehearsals forA Raisin in the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-raisin-in-the-sun>, owing to Washington's 
presence in the room. "You try to behave normally but you're aware that he's 
famous and it's a bit awkward," she recalls. But she and Washington developed a 
rich, volatile stage chemistry. "We're similar in that we like to try out 
different things all the time, every night," she says. "I never know quite what 
he's going to do and he never knows quite what I'm going to do." But she is 
reticent when asked to describe the scene in which Ruth and Walter Lee kiss, an 
embrace that moved some women in the audience to envious sighing.

Okonedo marks that audience – voluble, responsive – as one of the signal 
differences between Broadway and the West End. She marvels, too, at the number 
of previews Broadway productions enjoy, which allowed the cast to "change 
things quite radically" during the initial weeks. She also enthuses about a 
Broadway tradition "where on opening night all the other casts from all the 
other plays onBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> send you 
cards to wish you luck. I find it very touching."

The theatrical community, the receptive audiences, the generous actors, the 
neon-lit streets of Times Square have all made her eager to work on Broadway 
again, even as she voices regret that similar opportunities don't wait for her 
in the UK, particularly when it comes to television and film. "Half the stuff 
there is costume drama," she explains. And even though she has occasionally 
appeared in such series, as when she played Nancy in Oliver Twist, most 
producers won't think of casting a mixed-race actor in such roles. "That's very 
limiting," she says.

"I just get offered a lot more work in America than I do in Britain. I may be 
here now," she says. "There are just more roles for me in America. Sadly. 
Because I love working in Britain. It's my home."

• A Raisin in the Sun – four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/04/a-raisin-in-the-sun-review-denzel-washington-broadway-revival>
 