
A result in the knife-edge seat of Indi probably won't be known for another 
two weeks, according to the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC), with senior 
Coalition figure Sophie Mirabella now looking likely to face defeat.

An AEC spokesman told Guardian Australia the counting and scrutiny of about 
15,000 postal and pre-poll votes means a further delay in the declaration of a 
result, with an automatic recount triggered if the difference between the two 
leading candidates is less than 100 votes.

Earlier on Thursday, Mirabella ruled herself out of contention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/12/sophie-mirabella-ruled-out-as-minister>
 for the new Coalition ministry, despite having been shadow science minister in 
opposition. In a statement she said that due to the uncertainty over the Indi 
result, Tony Abbott would need to have "absolute freedom" to choose his 
frontbench team, which he is expected to announce on Monday.

Independent Cathy McGowan is currently 1,471 votes ahead of Mirabella. The 
incumbent appeared to be on course to overtake McGowan due to her clear 
majority among postal votes, until the dramaticdiscovery of 1,003 uncounted 
votes for McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/11/bill-shorten-to-stand-as-labor-leader-live-updates>
.

Steve Kennedy, director of operations at the AEC, told the ABC the error was 
due to an "accounting problem".

"When [AEC staff] were doing the Wangaratta early voting centre, an anomaly in 
the tally sheet was found of around a thousand votes," he said.

"So the ballot papers have always been there with the other 6,000 ballot 
papers for that early voting centre, but there was a 
transposition/transcription error made on a bundle for candidateCathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan>, the independent. It 
had 1,115: it should have been 2,115. So they weren't lost – they've always 
been there – it's just been incorrectly accounted for."

The unexpected addition of the votes has given McGowan's lead a cushion that 
many analysts expect cannot be overhauled by Mirabella.

A spokesman for McGowan's campaign told Guardian Australia: "It will be very 
close, but it's an uphill battle for Sophie now. These extra votes have made 
things a lot more comfortable."
 