
Musician, model, and wife of the former French president, Carla Bruni-Sarkozy 
has been talking about how beingillegitimate led to her craving attention 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/11287468/Carla-Bruni-I-have-an-infantile-need-to-exhibit-myself-because-I-am-a-bastard.html>
. Bruni-Sarkozy, whose legal father was not her biological father, says that 
there was a part of her that always felt “rotten, alone or infantile”. She 
continued: “It’s as if there is an inconsistency in who I am, an uncertainty of 
being alive, that pushed me to exhibit myself.” And while she didn’t know where 
“the devouring need for recognition” came from, she felt that it was probably 
because she was a “bastard”.

A diehard show-off trying to explain away her enduring narcissism? Perhaps. A 
more generous view could be that, at 47, Bruni-Sarkozy was born into an era 
when illegitimate children could be left feeling inferior, constantly needing 
to prove themselves.

On another tack, maybe, like me, you involuntarily flinched at the use of the 
word “bastard”? Used in the traditional context, it seems so Catherine Cookson 
somehow – cruel, damning, antiquated. Fractured images flash across the brain 
of desperation, workhouses, pinch-faced foundlings in wooden cribs. Which is 
irrational because, long after such times have passed, illegitimate babies 
continue to be a fact of life. Still, “bastard”? Hasn’t society completely 
moved on from this ugly, pejorative term, and aren’t we all so much the better 
for it?

Some say that unmarried parents remain bad for children. When the National 
Office of Statistics reported that the majority of babies born in 2016 would 
have parents who weren’t married, it was viewed in some quarters as a disaster. 
TheMarriage <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/marriage> Foundation 
thinktank said that unmarried parents were four times more likely to split than 
those who were married. And that, while low income and poor education were 
often cited as the main reasons behind family breakdown, it had doubled since 
the 1980s. This breakdown resulted, so ran the argument, in lower quality, less 
committed parenting, higher stress levels and more economic hardship, with 
children going on to achieve less at school, and in their own relationships, 
with far more likelihood of substance abuse and mental health problems.

While such issues can’t be discounted, real life is more complex. No one is 
telling me that money and resources, and the stability they bring to family 
life, aren’t a major factor. There can be shaky marriages with miserable 
children, rock-solid cohabiting couples raising rock-solid families, and 
everything in between. Couples who start off married but split; people who 
marry later on. There can also be cohabiting couples who decide to share the 
same surname, married couples where the child is given the wife’s name only, 
and the now-prevalent hyphenation of both names. All of which seems to have 
happened in a strangely seamless unofficial way, as if, without thinking about 
it, different kinds of parents have colluded in a New Flexibility regarding 
family infrastructure. And it comes with the attitude: “This parenting gig is 
hard enough. Whatever the different ‘packaging’, let’s all just get on with it.”

Certainly it seems interesting that while people may be aware (verging on 
hyper-aware) of their attitudes towards, say, gay parenting, it’s likely that 
they haven’t even noticed this sea change in their own hetero-parenting 
universe. If you’re married, when was the last time you cared whether or not 
the parents of your child’s playmates were also hitched? Similarly, if you’re 
unmarried, when did it last enter your mind that anyone had any right to look 
down on you or your children?

Indeed, for all the statistical doom surrounding unmarried parents, doesn’t 
this count as a major positive? The low-key deletion of the concept of 
“bastards” (that grotesque, institutionalised stigmatising of children from 
birth) from the family lexicon is as a big a social revolution as any other – 
all the more powerful because it’s been achieved without the blunt instrument 
of political correctness.

The stigma of illegitimacy has faded to the point where someone such as 
Bruni-Sarkozy can refer to herself as a “bastard” and the term seems ugly, 
jarring, just plain wrong. As it always should have been. This generation isn’t 
getting everything right, but shouldn’t it at least be proud that the concept 
of the “bastard” has been forced out into the wilderness?

I’m so very sick. (Of you being ill!)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F13%2F1418464872262%2F66d633ce-0ecb-4ab4-962b-7046aa513f66-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sorry%2C%20Carla%2C%20but%20nobody%20cares%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20%E2%80%98bastard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sorry%2C%20Carla%2C%20but%20nobody%20cares%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20%E2%80%98bastard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F13%2F1418464872262%2F66d633ce-0ecb-4ab4-962b-7046aa513f66-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dying? No, you’re not. You’ve just got a runny nose. Photograph: Martin 
Leigh/Getty Images 
A recent survey discovered that men are more sympathetic than women 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2870897/Men-sympathetic-sex-partner-cold-Patience-lasts-19-hours-compared-16-hours-women.html>
 when their partner has a cold. Male sympathy lasts longer and they are also 
less likely to become weary of their partner “overreacting” about their 
illness. However, 40% of men admit to exaggerating their symptoms, while 77% of 
women say they just get on with it when they have a cold.

Ah, now we’re getting somewhere. It seems to me that those last two pieces of 
information explain the first bits about men having more patience and sympathy.

I admit to being a hard-faced cow about male illness. It’s true that someone 
would have to be dying at my feet to qualify for a measly Lemsip. I’m not a 
pleasant nurturing person to be around when you’re ill – Nurse Ratched would be 
more likely to plump your pillows and stroke your hair.

However, is this “female” attitude to male illness any real surprise when 
there’s just so much of it? Clichéd though it is, there truly are a lot of men 
who spend an inordinate amount of time declaring themselves to be unwell with 
some bug or other, to the point where it comes across as a form of self-willed 
hypochondria. There is only so much wailing and “dying” a woman can take. 
Especially as often these men have the exact same cold as you do, only with a 
vague unsubstantiated self-diagnosis of “but it’s so much worse”.

So, fine, I’m a callous meanie. However, could it be that generally women 
aren’t less sympathetic, rather that male-female ratios of illness, and 
complaining about illness, are completely out of synch?

Oh, Charles… I always saw you as a bit mushy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F13%2F1418465189137%2F0a81f27a-82d9-41e8-916d-0041895b0095-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sorry%2C%20Carla%2C%20but%20nobody%20cares%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20%E2%80%98bastard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sorry%2C%20Carla%2C%20but%20nobody%20cares%20if%20you%E2%80%99re%20a%20%E2%80%98bastard%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsorry-carla-bruni-sarkozy-nobody-cares-if-bastard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F13%2F1418465189137%2F0a81f27a-82d9-41e8-916d-0041895b0095-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alan Titchmarsh: magic mushrooms aren’t for him. Photograph: Chris 
Jackson/Getty Images 
How charming that gardening presenter Alan Titchmarsh  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2871043/Now-S-Royal-trip-Alan-Titchmarsh-finds-psychedelic-mushroom-Queen-s-garden.html>
found a variety of magic mushroom growing in the grounds of Buckingham Place, 
while filming a show calledThe Queen’s Garden. Titchmarsh gave the 
hallucinogenic fungi a miss, but could he have been too hasty?

In my misguided youth, I – and others with a keen interest in nature – spent 
many hours searching for “mushies”. Once located, perhaps we had a cheeky 
nibble, stewed them in tea, mashed them up inside toasted sandwiches. I can 
report that the results were varied. Either nothing happened, or you spent half 
an hour getting out of a chair because you couldn’t stop laughing, or you 
became incredibly excited because (wow – dazed stare) clouds are just so 
beautiful.

Certainly it’s amusing to think of members of the royal family wandering 
around the grounds, stroking leaves, talking to ladybirds, not knowing where 
their noses are, and the rest. Suddenly there’s a rational explanation for 
Prince Charles feeling the urge to talk to plants.

Pure rubbish and conjecture of course, but I don’t think I’ve ever felt more 
fondly about the royal family.
 