
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> has banned a 
Holocaust-denying, anti-gay American pastor from entering the country, after an 
outcry from rights groups over his characterisation of gays as “sodomites” and 
“paedophiles”.

Steven Anderson, who in 2009 infamously prayed for Barack Obama’s death 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2010/02/14/praying-for-obamas-death.html>
, had planned a “soul-winning” visit to South Africa at the weekend.

But home affairs minister Malusi Gigaba declared the Christian preacher a 
“prohibited person” following objections over his “hate speech”.

“Steven Anderson and members or associates of his church are prohibited from 
entering the Republic ofSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>,” Gigaba said at a press 
conference in Cape Town.

“We have a duty to prevent harm and hatred, in all forms, against LGBTI 
(lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual and intersex) as against any other person 
in a democratic state,” the minister said.

Anderson has frequently courted controversy through his Arizona-based Faithful 
Word Baptist Church, which preaches a literal reading of the Bible.

A Holocaust denier, he prayed for the death of the US president in 2009 over 
his pro-choice stance on abortion, and called the victims of the November 2015 
attack on the Bataclan nightclub in Paris “devil worshipers”.

After the deadly shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando earlier this year, he 
said, “there’s 50 less paedophiles in this world”.

Desmond Tutu's daughter: 'painful' to give up ministry after marrying woman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mpho-tutu-van-furth-its-painful-to-step-down-from-my-priestly-ministry>
And in an interview with a Cape Town radio station earlier Tuesday, Anderson 
called Nobel peace prize winner and former Anglican archbishop Desmond Tutu –a 
vocal supporter of the LGBTI community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/04/homosexual-africa-arrest-desmond-tutu>
 whose daughter is lesbian – a “pervert … who goes around in a pink dress”.

An online petition against the planned visit to South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> garnered over 60,000 signatures.

Responding to his ban in a Facebook post, Anderson said: “I feel sorry for 
people who live in South Africa.”

He said a planned visit to neighbouring Botswana, where homosexual acts are 
illegal, was still scheduled to go ahead.

Americans do not require visas to travel to South Africa, but Gigaba on 
Tuesday also revoked Anderson’s visa exemption status.

“If we find him at any of our ports of entry, we will detain and deport him,” 
said Gigaba.

“We don’t want him in this country.”

South Africa is one of the few countries in Africa that recognises gay rights 
and the only one that allows same-sex marriages.
 