
 At least seven tornadoes ripped through South Australia on the day of the 
statewide blackout in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/south-australia-braces-for-storm-that-could-be-most-severe-in-50-years>
, a new report by the Bureau of Meteorology says.

 Severe storms tore down three major transmission lines in the state’s 
mid-north, overloading the main interconnector with Victoria and causing a 
power outage across all of SA.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsouth-australian-storms-leave-devastation-in-their-wake&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Australian%20storms%20leave%20devastation%20in%20their%20wake%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsouth-australian-storms-leave-devastation-in-their-wake>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Australian%20storms%20leave%20devastation%20in%20their%20wake%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsouth-australian-storms-leave-devastation-in-their-wake&media=>
South Australian storms leave devastation in their wake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/sep/29/south-australian-storms-leave-devastation-in-their-wake>
“Multiple supercell thunderstorms produced damaging to destructive wind gusts, 
including at least seven tornadoes, very large hailstones and locally intense 
rainfall,” the report, released on Monday, said.

“These supercell thunderstorms and tornadoes impacted the South Australian 
power network, contributing to a statewide power outage.”

South Australia's blackout explained (and no, renewables aren't to blame)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/south-australia-blackout-explained-renewables-not-to-blame>
The bureau found that one tornado at Wilmington cut across several 
transmission lines and destroyed five transmission towers, and also collapsed a 
farm shed, overturned a caravan and tore down gumtrees.

Another tornado at Wild Dog Creek had winds up to 260km/h and cut a 23km path 
of destruction, including hurling a one-tonne field bin about 300m.

The bureau described the storm as “one of the most significant severe 
thunderstorm outbreaks in recent decades”.

The SA treasurer, Tom Koutsantonis, said the report should put to rest the 
debate over who or what was to blame for the blackout.

“Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull and deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce have 
bothused the blackout to attack renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/jay-weatherill-accuses-barnaby-joyce-of-pushing-anti-windfarm-agenda-over-blackouts>
 policies in other states,” he said.

“This report clearly and definitively states that tornadoes destroyed 
transmission lines in the north ofSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, triggering the 
blackout. It’s time opponents of renewable energy accept that fact.”

An earlier report by the Australian Energy Marker Operator found that nine of 
13 windfarms switched off during severe storms and this played a role in the 
shutdown.

AEMO said in October that safety settings on these windfarms forced them to 
disconnect or reduce turbine output when transmission lines were brought down.

But it said the intermittent nature of wind energy was “not a material factor” 
in the blackout.
 