
Let's imagine, for a moment, that beauty is the central plank in the 
government's manifesto. Let's go further, and imagine that I have been sworn in 
as a government minister charged with responsibility for public space. The 
first thing I would discover, once I was behind my Whitehall desk, would be 
that the job wasn't only fun but also really inexpensive.

I would first organise a Day of Common Delight, an annual carnival of beauty 
that could turn the world upside down. The second item on the agenda would be 
to draft a new law for billboards. They would no longer be allowed to sell 
products; only poetry, wit and art would be allowed.

Transforming public art

That should take up the first few days. After that it would be a matter of 
getting theft-proof and waterproof pianos installed in public squares and 
fields. There would be legislation to allow an Italian Pavement Art Day, when 
people could paint and decorate the pavement, and Art Car Days, when you could 
decorate your car any way you wanted - covered in grass, emblazoned with 
coloured glass or covered in cake.

In fact, my work as a minister of state would be made much easier because the 
traditional notion of public art - a discrete object made without much 
consideration for a particular place - is already undergoing a transformation. 
Artists seem much more aware of what it means to work in the community, 
increasingly in prisons or schools or among homeless people.

I have seen death row art: prison art where the artist plays the role of a 
facilitator, helping to draw forth the stories. Sometimes, you barely need an 
artist at all. I remember travelling by tube from Victoria recently and, as I 
entered the train, someone hijacked the loudspeaker system and sang: "Hi, ho, 
hi, ho, it's off to work we go!" Commuters burst out laughing, and looked at 
the reactions of others. It was an amazing transformation - the community of 
commuters finally having fun.

As minister in charge of public space, I would put myself alongside the work 
of the younger artists who are trying to make art change the world, doing 
reclamation art projects in degraded sites, creating dialogue between polarised 
groups, working in foster homes. At the Battle of Seattle in 1999, when the 
World Trade Organisation was countered by tens of thousands of environmental 
activists, it was exactly those groups I met. They were working to create a 
sense of carnival, designing flags and puppets, dropping banners from 
impossible sites. I thought then, and I think now, that they are an energetic 
future, which is helping to knit art and life back together again.

The economist John Maynard Keynes talked about the hideous waste of an 
economic system that could not recognise art or beauty. In a speech to the 
Irish government in 1933, he urged politicians and economists to raise their 
ambition, and spend the money on beauty.

Keynes was an economist with a deep interest in art. He launched the Arts 
Council, poured money into the Cambridge Arts Theatre and married a ballerina. 
We might take his word for this. Yet a short walk through the outer estates of 
many of the greatest cities in Europe, let alone America or Asia, betrays the 
hideous ugliness that we expect large groups of the world's population to live 
in. Often it is ugliness that has been deliberately designed as a concrete 
monstrosity, using regeneration money, which remains an unpaid debt long after 
the new Bastilles have crumbled away.

Nor is it just the buildings. It is the litter and pollution and the inhuman 
absence of green trees and plants, which are a vital human need. Why is it that 
our political masters and business leaders believe that the poor uniquely need 
nothing green or natural in their lives?

So you can expect me, as minister of public space, to argue in the Cabinet 
that the ambition of beautification means a different measure of success, a 
different currency and a different means. It is an objective that requires 
human ingenuity, human warmth and imagination. Nor is there a trade-off between 
beauty and economic success. The most successful places on the planet are 
mostly beautiful, and if they are not they don't remain successful for long, 
because people want to live and invest in places that make them feel alive.

Imagination needed

I have spent a quarter of a century trying to use retailing as a lever to 
change the world, so I am not one of those puritans who think that shopping 
should be beneath the notice of civilised people. But beautifying our public 
space is not primarily about shopping: consumerism will not help us here. 
Retail-led regeneration will need beautifying in itself. What we will need is a 
new currency altogether.

We will succeed or fail according to how much imagination is in circulation. 
We will succeed to the extent to which we encourage human connection and 
conversation. We will succeed also to the extent to which we spend the small 
change of imagination - the human stories about people and places and what they 
aspire to do.

Â· Dame Anita Roddick, activist and co-founder of the Body Shop, died on 
September 10. A longer version of this article, written in August, appears in 
this month's edition of Resurgence magazine, atresurgence.org 
<http://resurgence.org/>
 