
Fiction's privilege is to make intelligible what in life would not be so. In 
Bel Canto,Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> has 
chosen a cast of characters who all speak different languages, and for the most 
part cannot understand each other. Guests at a diplomatic party, now taken 
hostage by insurgents, they divide into small linguistic groups. Yet, as the 
narrative unwinds, they have to find ways of communicating with those to whom 
they cannot directly speak.

So the strange thing is that, although all the printed dialogue is in English, 
English is hardly ever being spoken. We spend the whole novel inside the 
besieged residence. Yet, if we were really there, we would hear a babble of 
tongues. The most commonly spoken is Spanish (for we are somewhere in Latin 
America), but many of the guerrillas speak their own native language, while 
leading characters among the hostages are speaking Japanese, German, French, 
Russian or English.

What is the novelist up to? Some reviewers have muttered about her contriving 
a way of bringing together merely various national stereotypes. Yet she has 
done this so as to highlight the difficulties of making them comprehensible to 
each other. Indeed, in reality one might have expected the diplomats to be 
better at languages: wouldn't the French and the Germans be fluent in English? 
But Patchett is determined to keep them to their own languages. The Japanese 
comfort each other with the mere soft sound of their Japanese. The French 
ambassador and his wife, who had expected a better posting, joke together about 
"ce pays maudit" (translated for us, but no one else, as "this godforsaken 
country").

Novels often take us into some foreign language, miraculously turned into 
English by the novelist's alchemy. The characters in George Eliot's Romola live 
in 15th-century Florence, but converse in the English of educated Victorians. 
The Greeks and Italians of Captain Corelli's Mandolin have their words 
Englished as soon as they speak.

Sometimes a novelist will feel the need to register that he or she is 
"translating". The French characters in Dickens's A Tale of Two Cities may 
speak in English, but it is marked with traces of "foreignness". They use 
"thee" and "thou" and frame locutions that designedly sound un- English. "Say, 
then, my Gaspard, what do you do there?" is the novel's first supposedly French 
sentence. It is rather like the way that Germans in British war films used to 
speak to each other in English, but with bizarre, pseudo-German accents.

Probably the first British novelist to experiment with "translated" dialogue 
was Sir Walter Scott, who did it pretty awkwardly. In Ivanhoe, divided between 
Norman rulers and Anglo-Saxon "inferior classes", there is a Monty Python 
quality about the heightened English of the French-speaking noblemen and the 
demotic Anglo-Saxon of the bumpkins. "'The curse of St Withold upon these 
infernal porkers!' said the swineherd." Scott has already told us that to give 
this speech "in the original" would "convey but little information to the 
modern reader, for whose benefit we beg to offer the following translation".

Patchett offers the formal awkwardness of such translation as a virtue of her 
fiction. Her novel delights in the slowing down of conversation, the simplest 
comments sometimes having to go through several languages. Gen, the character 
who is a professional translator, becomes the manager of exchanges which are 
always having to pause and dawdle. "These were not men who were accus tomed to 
waiting or speaking precisely." But now they must. And the translator becomes 
the busy crystaliser of their sentiments. "Every person in the room had a 
thought that was in need of translation."

Gestures and affections carry characters beyond their languages. Roxanne Coss, 
the diva, sings the aria from Dvorak's Rusalka with matchless expressiveness, 
and only the translator realises that "this woman does not know a word of 
Czechoslovakian". He himself falls in love while giving a language lesson to 
one of the would-be terrorists. Reaching between languages becomes a special 
intimacy. "She wanted gerunds and infinitives and participles." What could be 
sexier?

Â· John Mullan is senior lecturer in English at University College London. Have 
your say about Bel Canto on the Guardian talkboards atbooktalk.theguardian.com 
<http://booktalk.theguardian.com> or write to The Review Book Club, Review, The 
Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER.
 