
After surviving two millennia with his reputation for obscenity intact, the 
comic poetAristophanes <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aristophanes> 
(c.447-c.385BC) suffered a terrible indignity: he was reconceived as "bawdy". 
The play Lysistrata , which infamously imagines a sex strike ending the 
Peloponnesian war, was dusted off in the late 1960s and celebrated as a 
peace-loving, feminist classic. When I was in my final year at an all-girls' 
school, the satire had made its way on to the state syllabus, and we were cast 
as vampish pacifists, or - if we happened to be tall - as wild-eyed, priapic 
soldiers.

It takes a broad mind to read this farce as an expression of girl power - and 
a particularly earn-est troupe of schoolgirls to believe it. In Lysistrata 's 
opening scene, the eponymous heroine convinces the women of Athens their 
celibacy can save Greece. Fighting over a wine-jar, they swear: "I will live at 
home... wearing my best make-up and most seductive dresses to inflame my 
husband's ardour. But I will never willingly yield to his desires. I will not 
raise my legs towards the ceiling. I will not take up the 
lion-on-a-cheese-grater position..." Rereading, I felt a rising sense of 
retrospective mortification. Clearly, I had only understood a fraction of the 
innuendo. Who could have imagined that the ancients had so much slang for 
genitals? Take any animal, vegetable or mineral reference and assume a 
euphemism. But worse: how could it not have dawned on any of us, as we shimmied 
around, how camp it is?

This play has been proudly claimed as the first comedy about women. More 
precisely, it's the first drag act. In 411BC, Lysistrata and her temptresses 
were all men dressed in extravagantly padded costumes, and without the trans 
vestism the jokes fall flat. The old comedy of Athens, of which Aristophanes is 
believed to be the greatest practitioner, emerged, according to Aristotle, out 
of the "phallic songs" - a genre now long lost. If Aristophanes is anything to 
work back from, the songs may have involved ritualised obscenity; the mixing of 
high lyricism and scatology; the lampooning of politicians, philo-sophers and 
fellow poets; and what the classicist Erich Segal has referred to as the 
"institutionalised celebration of the male member". This celebration is 
particularly noticeable in Lysistrata.

After the Athenian women, very reluctantly, barricade themselves into the 
Acropolis, peace talks soon become a necessity. Lysistrata 's male chorus would 
have originally accessorised with an oversized leather member connected to a 
string, which could be pulled to display excitement, or, in the second act, 
pain. The speed of the sex strike's dire effect didn't seem unlikely to anyone 
in our all-girl production, even if it was startling. We mimed the soldiers' 
mysterious agony, being counselled by the drama teacher to imagine "a burning 
watermelon" between our legs.

As much of his satire's venom was directed at contemporary politicians, it 
often dated within a couple of years. Many of its references are now completely 
impenetrable; on each page footnotes appear to be multiplying. Considering this 
massive impediment, it seems churlish to point out that Aristophanes has not 
always been served well by modern translators. All that was obscene is now 
mildly risqu√©; the too-overt misogyny is carefully muted. His work has been 
relieved of sharp edges. For instance, the translation I'm revisiting takes 
advantage of one of the principal Aristophanic metres coincidentally being 
found in Gilbert and Sullivan, hence Lysistrata 's chorus has been set to 
Princess Ida . Ancient Greece never seemed so quaint.

Less sober translations are av-ailable on the internet, with the Beardsley 
etchings. But perhaps Aristophanes practised the ear-liest absurdism, and 
although the feminist and pacifist movements would have been inconceivable to 
him, he might have enjoyed the irony of schools staging such well-meaning 
misinterpretations. In this moment of escalating global strife, the idea of 
mass chastity as a political weapon seems beyond ridiculous. But that is to 
miss his genius. Surely only if warlords' wives are played in drag can the 
requisite Aristophanic scorn be poured on their husbands. If it's true the word 
"comedy" may de-rive from the Greek "koma" (sleep), let's dream of an 
all-singing, all-dancing collective of modern strikers, resplendent in wigs and 
padding, while more leaders are left lonely at night.
 