
They are creepy, crawly and, for some, a source of irrational fear. Now 
scientists have found that spiders can hear you from across a room.

The discovery came as a surprise because, technically, spiders do not have 
ears. However, the latest research shows that the hairs on spiders’ legs are so 
sensitive that they can detect human speech from several metres away.

World's widest web? Flood-hit spiders find higher ground
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/08/flood-hit-spiders-stake-claim-to-higher-ground-in-mass-ballooning-australia>
Paul Shamble, an arachnologist who led the research at Cornell University, 
said that the finding is exciting because it overturns the idea that the world 
of arachnids is dominated by sight and touch.

“Surprisingly, we found that they also possess an acute sense of hearing,” he 
said. “They can hear sounds at distances much farther away than previously 
thought, even though they lack ears with the eardrums typical of most animals 
with long-distance hearing.”

“I’m not sure that everyone’s going to be thrilled that spiders can hear them 
as well see them,” he added.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4gnKnn0Q0aA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4gnKnn0Q0aA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4gnKnn0Q0aA&media=>
 Hearing in a jumping spider. 
Shamble and colleagues made the discovery after succeeding in making direct 
electrical recordings from the brains of North American jumping spiders. This 
was a technical feat because the spider’s body is pressurised like an inflated 
tyre, meaning that previous attempts to record from their brains typically 
caused the spider to explode as soon as a hole was drilled in the outer shell.

The team had initially been investigating how the creatures process visual 
information, but noticed that their brains were responding when chair were 
moved around the lab or one of the team clapped their hands.

“That was remarkable because the received wisdom at that point was that 
spiders can’t hear sounds,” said Prof Ronald Hoy, senior author of thepaper 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(16)30985-X>, which is 
published in Current Biology.

Peacock spiders: scientist finds seven new species of 'fairly cute' creatures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/30/peacock-spiders-scientist-finds-seven-new-species-of-fairly-cute-creatures>
The spiders’ sense of hearing appeared to rely on tiny hairs on their forelegs 
- when the scientists placed water droplets on the spiders’ legs to dull the 
vibrations of the hairs, the auditory neurons in the brain stopped firing in 
response to sounds.

Further investigation showed the spiders could hear claps from more than five 
metres away and that they were most sensitive to low frequencies (about 
80-130Hz), which would match the wingbeats of parasitoid wasps, a predator of 
jumping spiders, or the pitch of a very deep male voice.

The overall sensory experience would probably be a lot less rich than that of 
humans. “It probably sounds like a really bad phone connection,” said Shamble. 
“They probably can tell that you’re talking from across the room, but they’re 
certainly not listening to you.”

The researchers believe that other spider species are likely to have similar 
hearing abilities are now recording from the brains of fishing spiders, wolf 
spiders, and others.



 