
Splendour in the Grass kicks off on Friday, with almost 100 acts performing 
over three days. Guardian Australia will be on the ground at the festival, but 
before we leave Sydney to don our gumboots, what are our team most looking 
forward to?

Splendour in the Grass 2015 lineup: Blur, Mark Ronson, Florence and the Machine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/15/splendour-in-the-grass-2015-lineup-blur-mark-ronson-florence-and-the-machine>
Nancy Groves, culture editor: I’m not usually stuck to headliners but Blur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur>’s Sunday night reunion gig at 
Glastonbury 2009 was one of the best endings to a festival ever, and they 
repeated the feat at the London 2012 concert. Can they bring that energy to 
closing out Splendour? Emotions will be high. Damonplayed Sydney Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/oliver-milman> the day after the Sydney 
siege, and the band’s new album, The Magic Whip, has a song inspired by the 
experience:There Are Too Many of Us. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UQQObIQ63T0>

Alan Evans, deputy news editor: Flight Facilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/oct/31/flight-facilities-down-to-earth-review-a-familiar-playlist-of-daydreamy-hits>
’ big, silly, unashamed dance-pop was the highlight of Laneway festival in 
Sydney until they were cut off mid-song by overzealous curfew enforcers, so 
it’ll be fun to see them finish a set. I’m also hoping to win the “What Excuse 
WillAzealia Banks Use To Cancel At The Last Minute?” sweepstake. My money is on 
a strained larynx after a heated argument about Australia’s stance on same-sex 
marriage.

First Dog, marsupial-based cartoonist: “We are advised that First Dog on the 
Moon will be too busy saving democracy to attend any events other than the one 
I am in.” Tell them I said that. Although I might have a look atBlur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur>. I don’t want to seem uncool to the 
young people but I really didn’t recognise many of the bands on there. 
Disappointed Kraftwerk couldn’t make it. And all the Ramones are dead now so …


Adam Brereton, comment editor: I’m looking forward to being handed the cold 
one.

Alexandra Spring, guide editor: Looking forward to seeing if Azealia Banks is 
still as bratty and brilliant as she was last time, and whether sibling musos 
Kitty, Daisy and Lewis are still talking to each other after so long on the 
road.

Fred McConnell, deputy video editor: I’m looking forward to seeing Kirin J 
Callinan(even if it is as part of Mark Ronson’s band) because he’s an 
Australian artist I’ve fallen hard for.

Jonny Weeks, picture editor: Tame Impala: A reminder of years gone by when, to 
be honest, I used to give much more of a shit about music. Never saw them live 
back when Innerspeaker was released and wish I had, so I’ll be pretty happy to 
be in the pit shooting them on Sunday night.

UV boi: Flume showed if you make what you love, you can achieve anything
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2015/jul/18/uv-boi-flume-showed-if-you-make-what-you-love-you-can-achieve-anything>
Bill Code, video editor: UV Boi: This teenager from Brisbane brings abstract 
808-style goodness amid catchy vocals and dubby bass and is promising to break 
through as a leading electronic producer.Japanese Wallpaper, another Australian 
young gun, produces quality downbeat soundscapes to make you mellow. Then 
there’s Melbourne’sEcca Vandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/18/the-mixtape-ecca-vandal-troy-cassar-daley-saskwatch-ry-and-jep-and-dep>
. She has so much energy and edgy brawn, her live show is one to look out for.


And when pubescent hip-hop ensemble Odd Future broke through like some kind of 
modern day Wu-Tang, there was one MC standing above the rest in terms of talent 
…Earl Sweatshirt does wonders with words and his laconic flow, and with Jay 
Electronica having pulled out of the festival, he’s flying the flag for rap.

Elle Hunt, deputy audience editor: I believe Azealia Banks will make it to the 
stage at Splendour, though whether or not she’ll be any good remains to be 
seen. As much as I liked 212 three-and-a-half years ago, my expectations aren’t 
high. I’m more excited about seeing Australia’s ownTkay Maidza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/07/tkay-maidza-on-drugs-drake-and-music-industry-snakes>
, about whom I’ve only heard good things, and whose hit U-Huh is among my 
favourite discoveries of this year. (Yes, I know, I got to it late.)

Earl Sweatshirt on Hollywood parties, deconstructing Hermann Hesse and therapy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/16/earl-sweatshirt-hollywood-parties-deconstructing-herman-hesse-therapy>
Plus I’m looking forward to seeing Earl Sweatshirt again. I last saw him 
perform with members of Odd Future at a Laneway festival sideshow in New 
Zealand, and it was no less enjoyable a set for its obvious haphazardness.

My fingers are crossed that Shlohmo plays a couple of tracks from his No More 
EP with Jeremih at his late-night DJ set – and I’ll be heading along toDeath 
Cab For Cutie to see if there’s any joy to be had in revisiting the feeling of 
being 15 years old. I need you so much closer, etc.

Van Badham, columnist: There’s a goddamn monk-led sand mandala dissolution. 
Why would anyone go to anything else? Clearly, western culture has just 
climaxed. Hard.

Guardian Australia is a sponsor of the Splendour Forum 
 