
Sports Direct will open its doors to the public on the day of the retailer’s 
annual general meeting, giving people an opportunity to speak to board 
directors following months of criticism over the treatment of workers.


A timetable for the event 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/sports-direct-international-plc-open-day-registration-27211479267>
 said non-shareholders are welcome to attend the Sports Direct AGM on 7 
September, which is being held as usual at the company’s headquarters in 
Shirebrook, Derbyshire.


“The board would like to encourage all of those with questions about the 
company to attend ... so that we may be able to answer as many questions as 
possible,” the retailer said in an announcement to the stock market.


The 11am-5pm event will be hosted by all board directors, including the Sports 
Direct founder and executive deputy chairman, Mike Ashley, the chairman, Keith 
Hellawell, and the chief executive, Dave Forsey.


Sports Direct had previously been unwilling to open up the meeting to 
outsiders. Last year, not for the first time, the retailer initially banned 
reporters before having a last-minute change of heart.


Only a handful of shareholders usually attend the meeting, unlike the mass 
events hosted by the likes of Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury’s and Tesco in London, 
and Morrisons in Bradford.


This year, Sports Direct is offering a tour of the Shirebrook site, although 
it is not clear whether that includes the warehouse where the Guardian revealed 
that workers spent so long being searched by security that they were 
effectively being paidless than the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

After a lunch break, there will be a presentation by board directors and a Q&A 
session, where topics up for discussion include the retailer’s “people 
strategy”.

The rare open day comes as Sports Direct faces increasing pressure from 
shareholders to improve corporate governance and its treatment of workers.

Shareholders will vote on a union-backed plan to commission an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/sports-direct-agm-to-vote-on-review-of-firms-treatment-of-workers>
 into working practices that will report back within six months.


Last week, the company said it would publish an independent report on working 
practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/18/sports-direct-vows-to-publish-report-into-staff-working-conditions>
 put together by its lawyers, RPC. Sports Direct said the report would review 
an internal investigation announced in December afterthe Guardian’s Shirebrook 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
.


But some shareholder groups have said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/23/sports-direct-faces-more-pressure-over-working-practices-review>
 they do not regard RPC’s report as independent and have threatened to vote 
against the re-election of board directors including Hellawell.


Pressure on Sports Direct ramped up earlier this month, when it emerged that 
thousands of its warehouse workerswould receive back pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
 totalling about £1m after the retailer admitted breaking the law by not paying 
the national minimum wage.


The company and its employment agencies are facing fines of up to £2m imposed 
by the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) after 
they were found to have been underpaying workers for four years.

 