
1 ) With the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/30/andy-murray-tyson-fury-bbc-sports-personality-of-year>
 announced on Monday, here’s a look at the candidates for the awards which will 
be held on 20 December.Lizzie Armistead 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=klCyQgQI0Z0> became World Road Race champion 
in the USA;Lucy Bronze <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmYBCi9zFD0> made her 
mark at the Women’s World Cup;Jessica Ennis-Hill 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymb5dFh-u-w> won her second world heptathlon 
title 13 months after the birth of her son;Mo Farah 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5wU1hxJHTA> did the 5000m/10,000m double for 
the third time at a major global championships;Chris Froome 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8e39EMkpTpc> won his second Tour de France 
after a devastating attack on stage 10;Tyson Fury 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyRpgVPy1Dg> became Britain’s first world 
heavyweight champion for six years;Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNYRhMncFDM> won his third Formula One world 
championship;Andy Murray <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n9e4_dFexgc> steered 
Great Britain to their first Davis Cup title for 79 years;Adam Peaty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FRmhCFHUD5g> became the first swimmer to win 
both sprint breaststroke events at the same World championships;Greg Rutherford 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Q6Y5vRR8kU> added the World Championship 
title to his Olympic, European and Commonwealth golds;Kevin Sinfield 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oRwEy1Ax-2g> ended his league career with 
Leeds Rhinos’ treble-securing Super League Grand Final win against Wigan; and 
finallyMax Whitlock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KKADtH_zMQA>, on the 
pommel horse, became the first man to win a gold for Great Britain at the World 
Gymnastics Championships.

2) Odell Beckham Jr pulls off another exceptional touchdown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RNV0J498xc> for the New York Giants – but 
it’s only the close-up slo-mo that does it real justice. He breaks downhow he 
made it here <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yya1pfRJpRU> but this is nothing 
new <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=818_M8gOnqQ> for an extraordinary young 
talent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lbjqLEFmPPg>. 

3) Sticking with gridiron the Cleveland Browns somehow conjure defeat from 
victory needing only to kickthis field goal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pBkjOrYv1Gk> to win at the death. Their 
long-suffering fansdid not take it well 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5YJSJLwYsUM>, while their travails are 
well-documented in this entertaining little packageof bottle-throwing and fail 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6qrW1mdRmQ>.

4) Musical interludes: Southern University marching band does huge version 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xPKqr9z71FU> of Adele’s Hello 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQHsXMglC9A>, stick around for the choruses to 
see just how much they put into it and then:Tyson Fury 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rlWlyRUDte0> channels Aerosmith 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JkK8g6FMEXE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxPKqr9z71FU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxPKqr9z71FU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxPKqr9z71FU&media=>
5) Last month saw the 70-year anniversary of the late, great Australian Brian 
Bevan making his debut for Warrington. He still holds the world record for 
tries scored in a rugby league career, with 796. Very little footage of him in 
his pomp exists, but he pops up in this Pathé coverage fromthe 1950 Challenge 
Cup final <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uDKhUccSoc8>. And here he is in 
action in 1964 aged 40,scoring two tries 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Ou2GX4ee88> for “Other Nationalities” against 
Scotland in a sevens competition.


6) 27 passes and, of course, a goal. Lionel Messi and Barcelona 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gG9RA7tW7_4>. Several passes, possibly a goal 
and, of course,a premature teddy bear toss 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/nhl/post/_/id/40197/teddy-bear-toss-backfires-after-goal-is-overturned?ex_cid=sportscenterTW&sf16251013=1>
.

Our favourites from last week’s blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/26/classic-youtube-best-sports-clips>

1) Following up from our bumper footballers-in-adverts spot last week, it 
turns out this there was still more to come. As Adam and Joe have noted 
Brosnan’s“Maybe you shouldn’t be living here!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXcgt6l_LcA> from the film Taffin is a moment 
of genius committed to celluloid but is surely now rivalled by the understated 
genius of Rooney’s:“The boss said that a new devil is arriving” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q6MkmonoaSw>. More low budget gurning as 
Blackburn Rovers feel the need to cross themselves beforetucking into some 
Venky’s chicken <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IYwf2SBWa5o>; Ian Wright makes 
a decent fist of being himselfwhile flogging coffee 
<http://uk.adforum.com/creative-work/ad/player/19950/out-of-gas-nescafe>; 
Arsène Wenger furiouslyplugs the J League Pro Soccer Club game 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0uzegqG1D8A> and a fascinating little 
collection of ads prove that the ghastly 80s were, in fact hale and hearty in 
1990 asKenny Dalglish steps up for NatWest and John Barnes, with some state of 
the art “blue fizz” effects, for Lucozade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RanCsasUOcM>. The latter collection is a 
lovely period piece worth watching through as a reminder of a time when telly 
could sell cigars via monkeys and golf, Mars thought nothing of repurposinga 
Duran Duran video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3W6yf6c-FA> to shill sugar 
to kids and Barclays flogged mortgages with a “ghost banker”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6MkmonoaSw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6MkmonoaSw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6MkmonoaSw&media=>
2) Commentator Roddy Forsyth v pigeon. Pigeon wins 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uxdETjyjB08>. 

3) Touching stuff <http://www.baseballlovestory.com/> as Leigh Anne Walker 
Young, the daughter of Chicago Cubs coach Verlon “Rube” Walker, who died when 
she was only three years old,finally hears her father’s voice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hjpkVHSH_e4&feature=youtu.be> 44 years later.

4) Bong! Notts County’s Roy Carroll clears, Ben Williamson’s back scores 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAgwBLjf3Ao&feature=youtu.be&t=1m27s>.

5) Glorious slice of the 70s from the World Invitational Classic in 1977 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lDQTIGZzLZM> when Rod Laver and Arthur Ashe 
took on Bjorn Borg and Ilie Nastase; then the latter also feature in William 
Klein’s, director of Muhammad Ali, The Greatest, infamously “lost” documentary 
on the 1981 French Open – The French – inan excerpt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vPWLylD7Yg> and the full film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kx8E9Clwgvk>; oh, and here’s that Davis 
Cup-winning point <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HcNSJIML-3M> in full.

6) Working the ball: from 1974, Oakland’s bid to employ a sprinter just to run 
comes undone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vWb80Qz75bk>; and from a more 
recent era,53 reasons <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9p_6sw2djA> Australia 
will sorely miss Mitchell Johnson.

Spotters’ badges: BostonLager, markymark12, Cryogenic, Vesuvial, 
GrahamClayton, TheCedarRoom, postcolonialboy, whobroughtoranges.


Guardian YouTube football channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy. <https://www.youtube.com/user/GuardianFootball>

And the Guardian YouTube sport channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy. 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwD9E_QNwFwrQC7OnPnrg2Q>
 