
Oscars 2016: Spotlight shocks as DiCaprio wins actor and Mad Max scorches 
competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/oscars-2016-spotlight-shocks-as-dicaprio-takes-actor-and-mad-max-scorches-competition>
Insofar as it’s possible to get a surprise at the Academy Awards – an event in 
which outcome-permutations are notoriously reduced almost to zero before 
anything happens at all – we had one tonight. Spotlight has won best picture: a 
high-minded, heartfelt and thoroughly absorbing movie about a journalism 
campaign pursued at the beginning of the last decade by the Boston Globe’s 
investigative reporting teamSpotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight>. It exposed child sex abuse by the 
Catholic church and the way the city’s conservative and clubbable institutions 
conspired to cover it up and look the other way: and this included the Globe 
itself.

It was a classic issue movie, in this case about journalists caring about 
something other than building their personal brand on Twitter. And it reminds 
everyone working in today’s digital, atomised world of journalism that 
sometimes only big, old-fashioned newspapers have the collective, institutional 
weight and clout to go up against wholesale wrongdoing. Perhaps after the 
#OscarsSoWhite controversy, the Academy has found a way of showing its accusers 
that it does care about progressive issues. But by next year the Academy will 
have to find a way to show the world it is a more modern, transparent 
institution — perhaps by publishing its membership criteria and even the voting 
breakdown?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&media=>
 Chris Rock tackles Oscars diversity row head on during opening monologue 
The Revenant was such an exciting and sensual piece of work that it seems 
strange that its victories in this year’s Academy Awards feel like an 
anticlimax. It picks up best director forAlejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> (his second in a 
row after last year’s Birdman), best cinematographer for Emmanuel Lubezki, and 
of course best actor for Leonardo DiCaprio for his highest-of-high-octane 
performances as the 19th-century fur trapper Hugh Glass who endures an ordeal 
of survival and revenge – and an unforgettably grisly encounter with a bear. 
DiCaprio is, to use an old-fashioned, studio-era phrase, an above-the-title 
player: a real star. In truth, he made the other nominees look a little dull, 
although The Revenant was not really about his acting. It was the spectacle, 
the physical immersive effect. As for DiCaprio, this was his night, although I 
prefer him in comic roles, such as the ones he played in Django Unchained and 
The Wolf of Wall Street. But he really embodied the muscular power and 
fanatical concentration in The Revenant.

Now I have to utter a futile howl of rage and pain on behalf of that wonderful 
film Carol, directed by Todd Haynes, adapted from the Patricia Highsmith novel 
by Phyllis Nagy and with sublime performances fromCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> and Rooney Mara. How on earth 
has this superb movie been so overlooked by the Academy? I now hope that Carol 
has a kind of One Direction career: snubbed by the awards establishment, it may 
get an underdog bounce as everyone realises that it is better than most of the 
films being showered with praise.

As far as the screenplay Oscars go, I applaud the prize going to Spotlight, 
which cleverly approximated the steady and relentless drumbeat created by 
effective and consistent investigative journalism. However, at the risk of 
being churlish, I have to reiterate my scepticism aboutThe Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-big-short> – the winner of best adapted 
screenplay – a smug, shallow film endlessly congratulating itself on how clever 
it is and not seriously interested in challenging the status quo. The film 
simply goes along with the system, and worships the half-dozen or so money guys 
who found a way of doing well out of the 2008 crash. Ryan Gosling and Steve 
Carell give awful performances. But Christian Bale was good in it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Facademy-awards-2016-stars-arrive-on-the-red-carpet-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Academy%20Awards%202016%3A%20stars%20arrive%20on%20the%20red%20carpet%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Facademy-awards-2016-stars-arrive-on-the-red-carpet-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Academy%20Awards%202016%3A%20stars%20arrive%20on%20the%20red%20carpet%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Facademy-awards-2016-stars-arrive-on-the-red-carpet-video&media=>
 Academy Awards 2016: stars arrive on the red carpet 
In the best supporting actor category, Mark Rylance delivered a technical 
knockout to Sly Stallone, up for his sentimentally revered revival of Rocky 
Balboa in Creed. Rylance was a worthy winner. A few years ago, when Christoph 
Waltz won this Oscar for Inglourious Basterds, he gave a gallant speech noting 
that everyone else was supporting him. This in its way was true of Rylance, who 
was (in the nicest possible way) such a scene-stealer inBridge of Spies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridge-of-spies> that he drew the eye 
magnetically and made it seem as if everyone else, including the veteran star 
Tom Hanks, was just there to lend more lustre to this unique performer. As the 
convicted spy Rudolph Abel in cold war America, Rylance was wily, calm, 
unreadable, with the deadpan air of a villain – a distant cousin to Anthony 
Hopkins’s Hannibal Lecter in his imperturbable stillness – and yet on the side 
of the angels. Or rather: Tom Hanks is on his side. And the fact that his 
accent is so unlocatable makes his performance even more exotic: a weird blend 
of English, Scottish and Hollywood Russian.

I have been a partisan for best actress nominee Saoirse Ronan who gave a 
lovely, ingenuous performance as Éilis, the young Irish girl forced to emigrate 
and then partially re-immigrate, and therefore contemplating parallel 
life-choices, in the heartfelt drama Brooklyn. But I have to concede the 
justice of Brie Larson’s win forRoom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/room>, 
in which she plays the mother forced to bring up her infant son in a tiny cell, 
having been captured by an abuser. It was a challenging role in which Larson 
really showed what she could do in that film’s remarkably subtle and complex 
final act.

'Hollywood is sorority racist' - the best Oscars 2016 quotes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/best-oscars-2016-quotes-hollywood-is-sorority-racist>
Alicia Vikander’s win for The Danish Girl in the best supporting actress 
rewards a performance and a performer with beauty, charisma and guile, although 
I would have preferred to see her get the prize for Ex Machina, the sci-fi 
thriller in which she was more interesting as the automaton who may or may not 
have a mind of her own. Vikander’s success is a conservative if plausible 
choice, though I feel that Vikander’s best is yet to come, and I think the more 
powerful turns came from Jennifer Jason Leigh in Tarantino’s incendiaryThe 
Hateful Eight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight> and of course 
Rooney Mara who was so good in Todd Haynes’s Carol.

What a remarkable win for Ennio Morricone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ennio-morricone>, who at 87 years old gets 
his very first Oscar, for best original score. It is genuinely exciting that 
this remarkable man is doing vital creative work. His theme for The Hateful 
Eight was insistently and insidiously catchy, trailing its own disquiet across 
the landscape, and played its own crucial dramatic role. What a glorious Oscar.

Leonardo DiCaprio finally wins best actor Oscar for The Revenant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/leonardo-dicaprio-wins-best-actor-oscar-for-the-revenant>
The least surprising win of the evening was for Pete Docter’s Inside Out, 
which of course best animation: it is a thoroughly decent, overwhelmingly 
attractive and good-natured film. The fact that it won over Charlie Kaufman’s 
conceptually stunning stop-motion film Anomalisa is no surprise and though in 
terms of strict merit Anomalisa should really have won – and in fact should 
have been nominated for best picture and best work of art and indeed best sex 
scene – Inside Out has developed an enormous claim on everyone’s loyalty and 
love. In fact, its win casts an interesting light into how cinema competes with 
literature. The movies traditionally offer spectacle, drama, action and speech: 
they offer the thrilling interplay of those externals, while literature can 
give you direct, unmediated access into consciousness: you can go inside 
characters’ minds and hearts to discover what they are feeling. But actually, 
that is exactly what Inside Out is offering. With those five characters, Joy, 
Sadness, Fear, Anger and Disgust,Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out> gives you a most accessible and 
unpretentious version of the stream of consciousness.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&media=>
 Inside Out - video review 
This year’s best foreign language film has its own claim to be the best film 
tout court and is one of those occasions where the Academy really has got it 
right. László Nemes’s Son of Saul is the extraordinary film about Auschwitz in 
1944, telling a brutal story the Sonderkommando, the inmates forced to do petty 
tasks and police the actual business of extermination itself – and imagines one 
survivor’s discovery of the body of his own son. It is hardly something to 
compare to Spielberg’s far more conventional Schindler’s List which by 
comparison pulls punches. But the remarkableSon of Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/son-of-saul> is something to compare with 
Klimov’s Come and See.

Asif Kapadia’s Amy has become in its own unshowy way, an awards-season 
juggernaut, now effortlessly demolishing the last obstacle in its way: the best 
documentary Oscar. Perhaps strict justice should have given this to Josh 
Oppenheimer for his The Look of Silence, effectively the second panel in a 
masterly film-diptych about the way Indonesia’s ruling classes have perpetrated 
horrific human rights abuses since the 1960s, and became blandly content with 
this grisly achievement. But Amy packed an enormous punch: it was a viscerally 
passionate picture aboutAmy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse> and her music and made the 
best possible use of its treasure-trove of home video.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992019308%2FKP_219162_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%3A%20Asif%20Kapadia's%20documentary%20on%20Amy%20Winehouse%20%E2%80%93%20exclusive%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%3A%20Asif%20Kapadia%27s%20documentary%20on%20Amy%20Winehouse%20%E2%80%93%20exclusive%20clip&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fasif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-documentary-clip-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1430992019308%2FKP_219162_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Amy: Asif Kapadia’s documentary on Amy Winehouse – clipœ 
Finally: a host of technical wins for Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, including best costume 
design for Jenny Beavan. It’s great to see a rewards for that terrifically 
enjoyable film which was not encumbered by looking like a solemn piece of Oscar 
bait.
 