
The Kids Are All Right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137233/kids-are-all-right> has several 
things going for it. Close behind Mark Ruffalo at his most adorably 
Ruffaloesque, Julianne Moore's scrumptious rump and the title being The Kids 
Are All Right and not The Kids Are Alright, is the rare but pleasurable 
spectacle of a woman my age up on screen in big close-up. We haven't seen much 
of Annette Bening of late, and apparently she's been too busy rearing children 
to worry about getting lifted or Botoxed, because she looks older. Well, hurrah 
for that! That's what my neck looks like too!

There are, of course, inevitable online comments by wet-eared oiks who sneer: 
"She's beginning to look like the Crypt Keeper." But this is what 
fiftysomething females look like, tykes, so get over it. The perennial whine is 
that men age better than women, but I honestly don't think that's true – it's 
all down to conditioning, and the fact that lived-in female faces are so absent 
from approved commercial images that we haven't learned to appreciate them by 
adjusting our aesthetic expectations accordingly. Cosmetic surgery has been 
queering the pitch as well; personally, I'd rather look like theCrypt Keeper 
<http://www.imdb.com/media/rm1230608640/ch0012489> than a mad clown in a wind 
tunnel with an allergy that has made my lips swell up like sausages.

Sixtysomething Helen Mirren currently seems to be cornering the market in 
surgically unaltered broads of a certain age, and it'll be hard not to get a 
kick out of seeing her firing a Browning M2HB inRed 
<http://www.imdb.com/video/imdb/vi4089185817/>. It's not that I want to see 
women wielding rocket-launchers all the time, but it's more fun than seeing 
them as the wittering old biddies of Driving Miss Daisy or Ladies in Lavender. 
Hollywood has always been ageist, and it still shocks me to look atAll About Eve
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36183/all-about-eve> and realise Margo 
Channing is a has-been at 40, thatSunset Boulevard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36184/sunset.boulevard>'s Norma Desmond 
is a crazy old bat at 50, and that Davis and Crawford were only in their 
fifties when they went full-on grotesque forWhatever Happened to Baby Jane? 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0056687/>

Yet there are types of older woman that Hollywood used to do rather well, and 
who nowadays seem almost extinct. I'm talking about the wisecracking broads 
with attitude, as incarnated by the likes ofJoan Blondell 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000951/>, Thelma Ritter 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0728812/>, Kay Thompson or Eve Arden 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000781/>, only 36 when she played Cornelia 
"Stonewall" Jackson in Cover Girl, but who went on to play variations of that 
character for the rest of her career.

My generation's first exposure to Agnes Moorehead 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001547/> wasn't her work for Orson Welles, but 
when she was well into her 60s and perfecting the waspish put-down of her 
daughter's attempts at domesticity on a weekly basis in Bewitched. Maybe, 
instead of the abominable big-screen Bewitched with Nicole Kidman, Nora Ephron 
should have given us Endora: the Movie. No, scratch that thought – Ephron 
shouldn't be allowed anywhere near it.

I wish there were more leading ladies like Margaret Rutherford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/26/screen-legends-margaret-rutherford>
, who did her best screen work after the age of 50, including four outings as 
Miss Marple. "I may be what is termed a spinster, but I do know the difference 
between horseplay and murder!" she declares in between bouts of undercover 
snooping and – at the age of 71 in Murder at the Gallop – doing the twist. But 
I'm not fussy; I'll take harpies as well. I'll wager I'm not the only one who 
thinks it a crying shameRosa Klebb <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosa_Klebb> 
(as played byLotte Lenya <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotte_Lenya>, 65) bought 
a bullet at the end of From Russia with Love instead of popping up with 
Blofeld-like regularity to liven up some of the lesser Bond films with her 
butch haircut and sensible but deadly shoes.

Just in case there are any questing producers reading this, may I put in a 
plea for one of them to make a film of ETA Hoffman'sMademoiselle de Scudery 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mademoiselle_de_Scuderi>, in which a spry and 
still glamorous 73-year-old lady novelist and poet at the court of Louis XIV 
singlehandedly solves a case of multiple murder and saves an innocent man from 
the guillotine. Judi Dench (75)? Eileen Atkins (76)? Susannah York (71)? You 
can bet they'd all be up for it.
 