
The Six Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> sometimes feels 
like a giant scrapbook. People tend to recall snippets rather than the whole 
story. They remember names but not necessarily faces. Or vice versa. The 
tournament passes in a blur of passion, patriotic fervour, pints and pit-stops. 
Was it Edinburgh where – ahem – some idiot student fell off a giant pair of 
spectacles jutting out from the wall of an optician's and fractured his wrist? 
Could it have been Dublin where they wheeled the same bloke home to bed in a 
supermarket trolley? Or did I just imagine it all? Let's hope so.

Two mornings I do remember with clarity. One was in Ireland when our friend 
Jim said he'd cook breakfast for the 14 comatose bodies curled up on the 
living-room floor. He stuck the pan on, went outside for a fag, forgot about 
the stove and ended up reducing three dozen eggs to blackened embers. Genius.

The other was also in Dublin, at a guest house near the old Lansdowne Road. 
The landlady, in casual conversation, told me her son was heading to the game 
that afternoon. Lucky him, said I, to have a ticket. "Oh, he hasn't," she 
replied airily. Sure enough, 90 minutes before kick-off, an ambulance pulled up 
outside her front door. The back doors opened, her son jumped in and the doors 
slammed shut. Around the corner went the ambulance and, within moments, the 
stewards were ushering it through the main gates. I guess security might be 
slightly tougher nowadays.

The moral is that the Six Nations' special vibe is not just related to what 
happens on the pitch. It is about strange annual brotherhoods, morning fixtures 
against Welsh touring sides, cherished tickets being mislaid, steaming train 
windows, pre-match sharpeners, vaguely familiar faces – "Didn't that use to be 
Jean Pierre Rives?" – and unlikely new friends. Whenever England go to Ireland, 
as they will in March, I think of the ferry trip from Holyhead and the bunch we 
once met from Preston Grasshoppers. Their version of Molly Malone – "We've come 
down from Barr-ow, Down the M6 so narr-ow …" - has stayed with me for 25 years.

The press boxes of Europe have proved similarly convivial. How fortunate we 
are to be associated with a sport which, for all its flaws, still itself 
retains such a depth of soul. Which brings me to this week's experiment in Abu 
Dhabi, where Wasps and Harlequins will be incongruously doing battle in the 
Anglo Welsh LV= Cup. Now I've never been to the United Arab Emirates but I 
suspect it may lack something in the street party department. Not to mention, a 
few ex-pats aside, much in the way of rugby-themed soul. Assuming, of course, 
you have the money to jump on a plane and discover for yourself. And that the 
game matters sufficiently for you even to think about doing so.

I think that's my problem with the Gulf initiative. It'll be on Sky, say the 
promoters, so everyone can watch it. Let's sidestep that dangerous assumption 
for a moment and focus on what rugby should ideally be about. First and 
foremost it has to mean something, both to the players and those watching. 
Sunday's game is a competitive fixture of sorts but would attract barely a 
second glance were it being staged in High Wycombe. Why should foreigners be 
entranced if no one in the UK is bothered? What value is there in spreading the 
gospel if the passages of the gospel you're spreading are insignificant?

And another thing. Rugby remains a players' game but, as some of us keep 
saying, it has to think more about the travelling fan. People simply don't want 
to end up in a quarter full football ground with nil atmosphere, miles from 
home, without any chance of getting to work the next morning, watching 
reserve-grade rubbish. They want to be inside a heaving stadium at a convenient 
hour, with anticipation gleaming in their children's eyes and good food and 
drink within easy reach. Television pays the bills, of course, but you cut the 
umbilical cord with the on-site paying spectator at your peril.

Think I'm over-egging it? Well, imagine Lions tours without any visiting 
support. The concept would shrivel instantly. Imagine a Six Nations game played 
in Asia. That would kill the golden goose stone dead. The only exceptions might 
be pre-season tournaments, one-off games involving the Barbarians and the 
southern hemisphere elite or a showdown between the European and Super 15 
champions. All could occasionally satisfy the need to promote the game abroad, 
swell the coffers and woo new sponsors. Failing that, offer more Six Nations 
tickets to non-believers. It would certainly reduce the carbon footprint.

For let's be realistic. This is the Anglo Welsh Cup. Divorce domestic 
15-a-side rugby from its natural habitat, strip it of its traditional off-field 
character and partisan fans, dump it in the corner of an indifferent foreign 
field and what do you have? A forgettable experience, even if they serve you a 
perfectly cooked breakfast the next morning.

Castro takes a revolutionary road

Even Leicester thought he was going. How happy they will be at Welford Road, 
then, to have retained the services of Martin Castrogiovanni. The prop could 
have taken his pick of wealthy French destinations; instead he has decided to 
sign a new contract and stay put in the east midlands. If the "Castro 
Precedent" helps to convince a few more Galácticos there is more to life than 
money and a sun-drenched Mediterranean climate, all of English rugby will be 
grateful.

Worth watching this week …

England Saxons. It is probably too late for England's up-and-comers to make 
this World Cup but Saturday's game against Italy A in Worcester is still an 
opportunity to catch Martin Johnson's eye. There are some good young players in 
the squad; now is the perfect time for them to prove it.
 