
Recently, I’ve heard from two theatre companies who have been around for a few 
years and enjoyed some success – including touring abroad – but are on the 
brink of calling it a day. In both cases the increasing difficulty of securing 
funding viaGrants for the Arts 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/grants-arts> and the way venues have 
shifted risk away from themselves andon to the artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/feb/04/arts-funding-paines-plough-redistribution>
 were cited as major reasons.

In the past, graduate companies kept body and soul together on breadcrumbs for 
maybe eight to 10 years, always with the hope that if you were good enough you 
would eventually secure more regular funding. That expectation now seems to 
have gone. Most of those who have graduated in recent years know that it is 
unlikely that they will ever becomeNational Portfolio Organisations 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/our-investment-2015-18/national-portfolio-organisations>
 (NPOs).

Look before you leap into theatre's mainstream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jan/27/look-before-you-leap-mainstream-experimental-independent-theatre>
This wouldn’t necessarily be catastrophic if there was enough money in the 
Grants for the Arts pot to allow companies to keep on applying with a 
reasonable expectation that, while they may not be successful with every 
project, if their work was proven and the proposed project was exciting enough, 
they had a significant chance of securing funding at some point. But 
increasingly companies say it feels like a lottery, which means it is becoming 
impossible to make work and to get it programmed. In Scotland, too, there is 
similar pressure on arts funding viaCreative Scotland 
<http://www.creativescotland.com/funding/funding-programmes>.

When I spoke to Scottish theatre-maker Rob Drummond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/02/rob-drummond-in-fidelity-edinburgh-festival>
 earlier this year, he highlighted the absurdity of a situation in which people 
got money to research and develop a production and yet even when they could 
demonstrate that the R&D was a good investment, they couldn’t secure further 
funds to bring the show into full production. It means artists end up 
continuously developing new shows rather than bringing a tried and tested idea 
to full production. That’s not good for artists or for audiences.

Something similar goes on all across the UK with venues and companies that 
hand out seed commissions but then don’t develop the work further. Of course 
not every good idea will turn out to be a good show but some get lost because 
there is no further money available. Venues or flagship companies do it because 
because it ticks all the boxes and it costs them far less than bringing 
projects to full production. But it keeps theatre-makers in a constant state of 
development without any hope of making work of increasing ambition. It stops 
artists developing the high quality touring work that is so desperately needed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftheatre-companies-difficulty-securing-funding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27a090731581bc0df552d678ecb5060db364180c%2F0_308_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Squeezed%20theatre%20companies%20are%20facing%20the%20final%20curtain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftheatre-companies-difficulty-securing-funding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Squeezed%20theatre%20companies%20are%20facing%20the%20final%20curtain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftheatre-companies-difficulty-securing-funding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27a090731581bc0df552d678ecb5060db364180c%2F0_308_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Rob Drummond, centre, in his Edinburgh festival show In Fidelity. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Speaking at the Peter Brook awards, where the Empty Space award went to the 
New Diorama 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/londons-new-diorama-wins-empty-space-peter-brook-award-2016/>
 in London, for its outstanding work supporting new companies, the RSC’s deputy 
artistic director,Erica Whyman 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/news/special-achievement-award-for-erica-whyman>, took 
issue with the idea that there is some kind of ladder that takes companies from 
studio spaces to the main house. She’s right: not every company and every 
artist has ambitions to play the Olivier and we need to value work that is made 
on the smaller scale.

One of the winners at this year’s Peter Brook awards was Gecko, a terrific 
company who have madesome memorable shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/19/institute-review-gecko-theatre>. 
For all their talent, they didn’t spring fully formed. It took time to become 
established and scale up ambition, and it took 11 years before they were 
recognised in the Arts Council’s 2012-15 round of funding. A couple of years 
before securing that funding, members of the company talked to me openly about 
the serious doubts they had about being able to continue as they tried to 
develop work and sustain family lives. If they hadn’t got NPO funding when they 
did, perhaps they would have stopped, too.

Being an NPO in the current climate is by no means easy, but at least it gives 
you the chance to plan. That’s impossible if you are having to constantly apply 
either to Creative Scotland lottery funding or Grants for the Arts. Even 
companies that enjoy some early success often have to make a significant body 
of work before they become really good at what they do, which takes time and 
money. That’s increasingly hard to sustain, and, as more of them throw in the 
towel, the question is how many potential Geckos orThird Angel 
<http://thirdangeluk.blogspot.co.uk/>s or Complicite 
<http://www.complicite.org/>s might we be losing along the way.

There have always been dropouts, but in the past they tended to happen within 
the first few years of setting up a company, when people decided making theatre 
wasn’t for them or opportunities took them in different directions. Now what 
might once have been seen as established companies are calling it a day. It 
makes me wonder whether 10 years from now we will be missing an entire layer of 
experienced and mature companies. It’s not an encouraging prospect because in 
our theatre culture we need maturing and mid-career artists every bit as much 
as we need the acclaimed veterans and the young whippersnappers bursting with 
new ideas and enthusiasm.
 