
Dirty Dancing is back in the West End this week, a beneficiary of the 
unexpected demise of the unfortunately named Spice Girls musicalViva Forever! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/may/02/spice-girls-viva-forever-close>, 
whose run was cut short with massive losses for investors and producer Judy 
Craymer alike. I was at the excellentStage One <http://stageone.uk.com/> new 
producers workshop a couple of weeks back, where the advice was: "Don't do a 
musical on your first show – unless you're Judy Craymer." But it seems even 
Craymer, who scored a huge hit with Mamma Mia!, isn't impregnable. Maybe her 
mistake was to attempt two shows with an exclamation mark in the title.

Despite the failure of Viva Forever!, though, the jukebox musical certainly 
isn't dead, and in fact shows no signs of distress. There is little incentive 
for producers to support a new generation of composers when all you have to do 
is rifle through the back catalogues of Abba, the Beatles, or Queen. It takes a 
great deal of time and money to produce aMatilda 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/nov/25/matilda-review> or a Book of Mormon
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/oliver-burkemans-blog/2013/mar/26/why-british-critics-dont-get-book-mormon>
.

Not that the screen-to-stage adaptation is necessarily a guarantee of 
satisfaction. For everyOnce 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/mar/17/once-the-musical-enda-walsh> there 
is a Dirty Dancing, for every Lion King there's a Little Mermaid. I've never 
seen a stage version ofThe Wizard of Oz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/jul/25/wizard-of-oz-70> that comes 
anywhere near the movie.

But audiences like familiarity, and they know exactly what they are getting 
for the price of a ticket to Ghost orFrom Here to Eternity 
<http://www.fromheretoeternitythemusical.com/>, which premieres in the West End 
in the autumn. Which is no doubt what 20th Century Fox is thinking of, as it 
follows Disney and others in creating a new venture toturn at least nine of the 
studio's movies into stage musicals 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-23285733>. 

Of course 20th Century Fox turned some of Broadway's most famous shows into 
Hollywood movies in the first place – including Carousel and the King and I – 
but a glance through their back catalogue makes the mind boggle at what they 
could be planning. Lassie, the Musical? Possibly, but getting the title casting 
right could be a mite tricky. Star Wars? Planet of the Apes?Predator 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/nov/04/my-favourite-film-predator>
? Stranger things have come true.

Tell us the movie that you think would make the unlikeliest West End musical – 
and how you'd like to cast it.
 