
The Stale Solbakken era at Wolves got off a winning start in round one of the 
Capital One League Cup, though it was hardly the most auspicious of 
introductions for the Norwegian coach as his side were taken to extra time and 
penalties byAldershot Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aldershottownfootball> of League Two.

Wolves had any number of chances to win the game before penalties, 
particularly in extra time when Jamie Young made a string of saves from Sylvan 
Ebanks-Blake, though without Steven Fletcher the home side looked worryingly 
toothless up front. At least all their penalties went in, and the contest was 
into the sudden death phase when Jordan Roberts was unsuccessful with the 14th 
kick from the spot, Carl Ikeme diving to his left to make a save.

Aldershot held their own from the outset and produced the first attack of any 
real note when Craig Reid brought the first save of the game from Ikeme with a 
snap shot after Michael Rankine had won an aerial challenge.

Wolves failed to come up with anything half as threatening in an uneventful 
first half-hour, though when they did finally put a move together, with Stephen 
Ward freeing Ebanks-Blake to cross from the left, Kevin Doyle's far-post header 
flew narrowly wide in the closest either side came to a goal before the 
interval.

It was fairly dismal fare for the Wolves spectators in the vertiginous Stan 
Cullis stand, newly opened before kick-off, though one promising run from the 
splendidly named Tongo Doumbia brought an approving cheer.

The 23-year-old Malian international is at Molineux on a season-long loan from 
Rennes, despite West Brom's best effort to capture him, and it would seem 
Wolves have beaten their local rivals to a midfielder of some poise and promise.

Doumbia played a large part in laying on the opening goal for Wolves, though 
the new stand may take longer to settle in. Wolves had to issue an apology 
after the game to around 900 fans who missed the start due to "technical 
issues" at the turnstiles.

Ward opened the second half with a rising drive that only just cleared the 
Aldershot crossbar, before Wolves took the lead in the 52nd minute, 
Ebanks-Blake turning and beating Jamie Young from a narrow angle after Doumbia 
had found room on the right to cross low to the near post.

That should have settled the home side down, yet first Karl Henry and then 
Richard Stearman made mistakes in their own half to give Aldershot chances from 
set pieces, and from the second Rankine crashed home an unstoppable far post 
header from Josh Payne's deep corner. The Wolves' lead had lasted less than 10 
minutes.

The impressive Doumbia again broke free on the right as Wolves searched for a 
winner and this time picked out a teammate near the penalty spot, though all 
Anthony Forde could manage was a shot straight at Young.

Solbakken could have done with Fletcher to throw on at this point, though the 
distracted striker was not in the squad, his head presumably still spinning 
like everyone else on discovering his latest transfer valuation.

The new manager waited until extra time to make any changes, and while none of 
them had much effect, in the closing stages Wolves were lucky to get to the 
penalty shootout in the closing stages. Forde struck the foot of an upright two 
minutes from the end of extra time â€“ an inch the other way would have won it.
 