
First came the set-up; now it’s the payoff. After a tidal wave of hype, 
promotion and anticipation,Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> has finally gone on 
general release. It debuted in the UK, most of Europe and parts of Asia and 
South America on Wednesday and Thursday, while Friday sees the first public 
screenings in the US. And all the indications are that even the most optimistic 
predictions of its box office performance will turn out to be justified.

Daniel Craig's stormtrooper cameo in Star Wars: The Force Awakens 'revealed'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/daniel-craig-stormtrooper-cameo-in-star-wars-the-force-awakens-revealed>
In the UK, where cinemas began showing the film at 00:01 on Thursday morning, 
The Force Awakens took £9.6m in its first 24 hours, well ahead of the recent 
James Bond film Spectre, which managed £6.3m on its opening day in October. It 
would appear to be on courseto beat Spectre’s opening weekend record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/nov/03/spectre-magic-makes-harry-potter-uk-box-office-record-disappear>
 of £41.3m, even though Spectre was released on a Monday, giving it three more 
full days to achieve the figure. And there seems little doubt it will eclipse 
the three year-old total of £102.9m of the previous Bond film, Skyfall, which 
is the current British box office all time champion.

In the US, which will undoubtedly form The Force Awakens’ most lucrative 
territory, the rollout is only just getting underway, but its commercial 
strength is underlined by the fact it hasbroken online agency Fandango’s record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/star-wars-the-force-awakens-box-office-world-record-us-europe-opening>
 for advance ticket sales. Fandango have not released any figures, but analysts 
estimate the film has taken over $100m in total presales in the US. The raft of 
previews scheduled for Thursday, the day before the official release,brought in 
some $57m 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/box-office-force-awakens-harry-potter-thursday-night-record-1201665037/>
, beating the previous Thursday best held by Harry Potter and the Deathly 
Hallows – Part 2, and therefore looks likely to pass the domestic opening 
weekend record of $208.8m set by Jurassic World in June.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450270270225%2FKP_795717_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450270270225%2FKP_795717_crop_640x480.jpg>
The benchmark, however, is the all-time box office record, currently the 
$2.8bn piled up by Avatar on its release almost exactly six years ago in 2009. 
Avatar set a US domestic record of $760.5m, and augmented it with some $2bn 
internationally;Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, however, 
will be able to call on a considerably more powerful Chinese box office, which 
is could supply double the $204m Avatar earned there.

China’s rigidly controlled system of releasing non-domestic films has resulted 
The Force Awakens is opening there on 9 January, meaning the film cannot call 
on what is expected to be a mammoth total to help it try to get pastJurassic 
World’s mighty worldwide opening weekend total 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/15/jurassic-world-record-dinosaur-reboot-scores-monstrous-5118m-on-debut>
of $511.8m. However, the film’s producer\s have gone to great lengths to 
maximise its chances there, where familiarity with the long-running franchise 
is significantly less than elsewhere. None of the original trilogy, released in 
the 1970s and 80s, were shown in Chinese cinemas, but in recent months all six 
films have been made available for online streaming there. And in what must 
count as a major publicity coup, some500 stormtroopers took up position on the 
Great Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/22/500-star-wars-stormtroopers-march-on-great-wall-of-china-in-epic-disney-event>
 in October.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fstar-wars-fans-london-premiere-the-force-awakens-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450302428512%2FKP_802994_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20fans%20geek%20out%20at%20London%20premiere%20of%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fstar-wars-fans-london-premiere-the-force-awakens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20fans%20geek%20out%20at%20London%20premiere%20of%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fstar-wars-fans-london-premiere-the-force-awakens-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450302428512%2FKP_802994_crop_640x480.jpg>
Star Wars star tells of day he took Han Solo to Nigerian restaurant in Peckham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/star-wars-star-tells-of-day-he-took-han-solo-to-nigerian-restaurant-in-peckham>
As fans continued to flock to cinemas – many in costume – the vexed question 
of spoilers continued to raise its head. Speaking in London on Thursday after 
the film’s European premiere,the film’s director JJ Abrams conceded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/star-wars-director-jj-abrams-women-the-force-awakens-daisy-ridley-lupita-nyongo-carrie-fisher>
 it was “no surprise” that some internet users would give away plot details, 
even as popular websiteReddit started to block any of its users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/star-wars-the-force-awakens-spoilers-illegal-philadelphia-police-department-twitter>
 it considered were indulging in “spoiler jihad”. Philadelphia police have even 
suggested that spoiler should be made illegal. However, actor Harrison Ford 
thanked the press for agreeing to “respect their readership and not spill the 
beans”.

As ever, though, Carrie Fisher stole the show at the film’s London press 
conference with her unconventional take on the movie-making process. Whe asked 
what advice she gave to the younger members of the cast, who were new to the 
Star Wars franchise, she replied: “Don’t go through the crew like wildfire.”

Additional reporting by Ben Child
 