
Roger Waters and Alice Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker> 
have penned open letters asking Alicia Keys to call off a forthcoming concert 
in Tel Aviv. Walker, the author of The Color Purple, invited Keys to join a 
cultural boycott of Israel, visiting "the children in Gaza" instead of 
supporting "a system that is cruel, unjust and unbelievably evil".

"Dear Alicia Keys," Walker wrote on the website 
<http://www.usacbi.org/2013/05/open-letter-from-alice-walker-to-alicia-keys/> 
for the US Campaign for the Academic & Cultural Boycott of Israel. "I have 
learned today that you are due to perform in Israel very soon. We have never 
met, though I believe we are mutually respectful of each other's path and work. 
It would grieve me to know you are putting yourself in danger (soul danger) by 
performing in an apartheid country that is being boycotted by many global 
conscious artists."

In his own letter, Waters <http://www.pacbi.org/etemplate.php?id=2196> 
admitted that Keys may not know who he is. "I used to be in a band called Pink 
Floyd and, believe it or not, I still work," he wrote. The English musician 
implored Keys to "join the rising tide of resistance" and refuse "to give 
legitimacy to the Israeli government policies of illegal, apartheid, occupation 
of the homelands of the indigenous people of Palestine."

Keys is due to appear at Tel Aviv's Nokia Arena on 4 July, as part of her 
ongoing Girl On Fire tour. It will be her first appearance inIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. As the concert approaches, 
activists have begun ramping up their Facebook and Twitter campaign, asking the 
long-time HIV/Aids activist to consider dropping the gig in solidarity with the 
Palestinian rights movement.

"I have kept you in my awareness as someone of conscience and caring, 
especially about the children of the world," Walker went on. "A cultural 
boycott of Israel and Israeli institutions (not individuals) is the only option 
left to artists who cannot bear the unconscionable harm Israel inflicts every 
day on the people of Palestine, whose major 'crime' is that they exist in their 
own land, land that Israel wants to control as its own."

Elvis Costello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/18/elvis-costello-cancels-israel-concerts>
, Santana,the Pixies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/07/pixies-cancel-israel-gig> and 
Gil Scott-Heron are among the other artists to have boycotted Israel in recent 
years, while acts including Madonna andPaul McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/26/paul.mccartney.survives.israel.gig>
 have dismissed calls to cancel shows. Earlier this month, physicist Stephen 
Hawking announced he wasjoining the movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2013/may/13/stephen-hawking-boycott-israel-science>
, adding his name to a list of supporters that includesdozens of Nobel laureates
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/28/nobel-laureates-call-israel-boycott>
.

Keys has yet to respond to activists' requests.
 