
Premiers and chief ministers have reacted to a radical proposal to let state 
and territories levy their own income taxes, with at least one leader saying 
the idea is worth pursuing.

Turnbull looks to income tax-raising powers for states to fix school and 
hospital funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/states-offered-5bn-hospitals-funding-income-tax-raising-powers>
Guardian Australia on Wednesday revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/states-offered-5bn-hospitals-funding-income-tax-raising-powers>
 the federal government may offer the states and territories a proportion of 
income tax from 2020 onwards at this week’s Council of Australian Governments 
(Coag) meeting.

Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> chief 
minister, Andrew Barr, said the proposal was the “next logical step” in 
changing the tax mix and eradicating “inefficient” state taxes.

“I think there’s certainly scope for reform of taxation,” he told ABC’s 
Lateline program. “It’s an option that needs to have a public debate and we 
certainly look forward to what the prime minister [Malcolm Turnbull] will put 
on the table this week.

“Income-taxing powers would be part of a broader tax mix than for state and 
territory governments. In the spectrum of taxes that are levied in Australia, 
they are relatively efficient. They certainly pass the test of being able to be 
levied progressively so that you can certainly tax higher-income earners more 
and have a fairer tax system as a result,” Barr said.

“So they are a better form of tax than, for example, some of those blunt 
measures like the GST, for example. So to the extent that they become part of 
the state and territory tax mix, I am relaxed about that.”

The proposal is in line with the recommendations of the national commission of 
audit.

Head of the audit, Tony Shepherd, told ABC Radio that it was a necessary part 
of fixing the budget.

“Let’s get back to the basics ... and get rid of these inefficient state 
taxes,” he said. “We keep squibbing the thing that we keep spending more money 
than we’ve got.”

Colin Barnett, the premier of Western Australia, has spoken to Turnbull about 
tax reform, but did not say if he supported the income tax proposal.


“If the prime minister can get the states to agree I think it could be quite a 
significant Coag,” he told ABC Radio.

Northern Territory chief minister, Adam Giles, would not comment until he had 
a clear idea of the nuts and bolts of the proposal.

“We need to see what’s the offer on the table,” he told Sky News. “What’s the 
quid pro quo?”

The health minister, Sussan Ley, would not be drawn on the “frenzy of 
speculation” ahead of Coag, saying only that the states and commonwealth were 
“working cooperatively” to tackle increased expenditure in health care.

Malcolm Turnbull promises states hospital funding in budget after Abbott cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/malcolm-turnbull-promises-states-hospital-funding-in-budget-after-abbott-cuts>
Labor’s Ed Husic told Sky News the income tax proposal was a “Band-Aid” for 
health funding. “This is just an election fix that will create a tax mess.”

The commonwealth is expected to offer $3bn more for hospital funding, but no 
extra cash for education, following the axing of billions of dollars of funding 
under Turnbull’s predecessor, Tony Abbott.

Turnbull in February assured the states they would receive extra funding for 
hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/malcolm-turnbull-promises-states-hospital-funding-in-budget-after-abbott-cuts>
, in direct contrast to comments made at the time by his treasurer, Scott 
Morrison, who said jurisdictions needed to manage their own budgets rather than 
expect a blank cheque from the commonwealth.

The issue of vertical fiscal imbalance – that is, the difference in earning 
and spending capacity between the states and the commonwealth – will be high on 
the agenda when Turnbull hosts a dinner for chief ministers in Canberra on 
Thursday night, ahead of Friday’s Coag meeting.
 