
This may sound strange, but the Golden State Warriors’ most logical course of 
action could involve sitting their best player for the remainder of their 
series against theHouston Rockets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/houston-rockets>. Steph Curry, the reigning 
MVP, did not play in Monday night’s Game 2 after tweaking his ankle in the 
series opener. While the injury, at this point, doesn’t seem to be too serious, 
the Warriors are being super-cautious with their star player. It’s hard to 
blame them, especially since the postseason is only a few days old and there 
are already signs that some teams won’t be able to overcome injuries to key 
players.


“We will definitely err on the side of caution,” Kerr said on Monday 
<http://blogs.mercurynews.com/kawakami/2016/04/18/steve-kerr-steph-currys-status/>
, “if he’s not right, then he’s not going to play. It’s not worth risking 
turning this into a long-term issue.”

That’s why, even though an exploratory MRI on Curry’s foot showed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/19/steph-curry-mri-no-concern-warriors?CMP=twt_a-sport_b-ussports_c-us_g-1>
 “nothing of concern,” the Warriors have listed Curry as “questionable” for 
Thursday’s Game 3. The Warriors can afford to be patient because, to be frank, 
they should be able to easily and quickly defeat the Rockets even if Curry 
doesn’t step on the court again. Playing without Curry on Monday, the Warriors 
beat Houston 115-106, with the final score making the game look a lot closer 
than it actually was.

The Rockets are now in an 0-2 hole and have shown absolutely no signs of life 
<http://deadspin.com/the-rockets-are-a-miserable-basketball-team-1771739847>. 
If there’s any real possibility of Curry injuring himself further, there’s no 
reason to risk it when the upside is sweeping the Rockets rather than beating 
them in five or six games.

Although Curry’s ankle tweak has received the most attention, it may not have 
even been the most significant injury to happen on Saturday. Earlier in the 
day, the Celtics’ Avery Bradley went down with a hamstring injury in the middle 
of what was shaping up to be a dramatic comeback against the Hawks.

Without Bradley, the Celtics fell just short in Game 1, as the Hawks hung on 
to win 102-101. The next day, head coach Brad Stevens announced that it was
“very unlikely” 
<http://nesn.com/2016/04/brad-stevens-avery-bradley-very-unlikely-for-rest-of-first-round-vs-hawks/>
 that Bradley would be able to return this series, leaving them without their 
most valuable defensive player and most reliable three-point threat.

They missed him. On Tuesday night, without Bradley or Kelly Olynyk, who was 
out with a shoulder injury, the Celtics scored a mere seven points in the first 
quarter of game two,the lowest-scoring first quarter 
<http://deadspin.com/the-celtics-just-had-the-worst-first-quarter-in-nba-pla-1771918830?utm_campaign=socialflow_deadspin_twitter&utm_source=deadspin_twitter&utm_medium=socialflow>
 in NBA playoff history. While Boston’s defense managed to keep them in the 
game after that laughable start, the Hawks ended up winning 89-72. With the 
Celtics now 0-2, Bradley’s hamstring injury could end up being season-ending 
for the simple fact that Boston’s season might only last a couple more games.

Since we’re speaking of season-ending injuries, let’s turn to the sad case of 
the Grizzlies who staggered into the postseason despite suffering more 
casualties than an average Crystal Lake camping expedition. Any chance the 
Grizzlies had of going deep into the playoffs ended when they lost both Marc 
Gasol and Mike Conley. Even if fully healthy, the Grizzlies would have had 
little chance in upsetting the scary good Spurs, but they would at least made 
them work. Instead, the Spurs blew them out 106-74 in Game 1. Last night’s Game 
2 was hardly any better, with Memphis eventually losing 94-68.

At least Grizzlies fans knew this series was hopeless heading into the 
playoffs. Fate might be playing an even more cruel joke on Mavericks fans. On 
Monday they were celebrating Dallas’s stunning, series-tying win over the 
Oklahoma City Thunder. On Tuesday, they received word that Dirk Nowitzki 
bruised his knee andis now questionable 
<http://www.nba.com/2016/news/04/19/mavs-nowitzki-knee-injury.ap/index.html> 
for Thursday’s Game 3. That’s not the news you want to hear about your team’s 
most important player, especially when he’s 37 years old and the entire team 
was built around him.


The biggest “what if” team among those playing without key players might be 
the Miami Heat. While the Heat are up 1-0 in their series against the Charlotte 
Hornets without Chris Bosh, who isout indefinitely 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/sports/nba/miami-heat/article72116502.htmlhttp://www.miamiherald.com/sports/nba/miami-heat/article72116502.html>
 because of blood clots, his absence still looms large. With Bosh, one could 
make the case that the Heat were the Eastern Conference team with the best 
chance of knocking out the Cleveland Cavaliers. It’s difficult to imagine them 
pulling that off without him.

It feels strange to dismiss the chances of so many teams so early, but, in the 
NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> postseason, a team’s fate is always 
tied to the health of its star players. Yes, the current Warriors team is 
incredibly talented, and clearly well-coached, but they also have been lucky 
when it comes to injuries to their key players. Don’t expect them to push that 
luck by putting Curry on the court any sooner than they have to.


Quote of the week

It kind of feels like playing a scrimmage in practice.

– the Golden State Warriors’ Andre Iguodala on playing the Rockets 
<http://www.sbnation.com/lookit/2016/4/19/11457210/andre-iguodala-compared-an-nba-playoff-game-to-a-practice-scrimmage>
.

One of the reasons the Warriors can afford to take their time with Curry is 
that the Rockets are absolutely dreadful. The Rockets are already down 0-2 in 
the series, but they’re playing as if they’ve already been eliminated. Maybe 
Iguodala’s almost comical level of disrespect here will inspire the Rockets to 
step up their level of play when the series resumes in Houston, but it’s just 
as likely that we’ll see a frustrated Dwight Howard quasi-intentionally foul 
out of the game.Yet again 
<http://www.cbssports.com/fantasy/basketball/news/rockets-dwight-howard-double-doubles-but-fouls-out-of-game-2-loss/>
.


Video of the week
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzce8O34WNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzce8O34WNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzce8O34WNo&media=>
Sometimes the difference between winning and losing ends up being barely a 
second. Here we see Steven Adams’ would-be-game-winning putback for the Thunder 
being (correctly) waived off by the officials. Had Adams gotten the ball off 
just a bit earlier, the Thunder would have a commanding 2-0 series lead over 
the Mavericks. Instead, Dallas were able to hold on to a 85-84 victory to even 
the series at 1-1. The bad news for Oklahoma City is that their season-long 
fourth quarter struggles have carried over into the playoffs. The good news is 
that there’s absolutely no way that Kevin Durant will be limited to seven
-for-33 shooting 
<http://thebiglead.com/2016/04/19/kevin-durant-shot-7-33-calls-charlie-villanuevas-pregame-antics-fake-sht/>
 again this series.


How did LeBron carry the Cavaliers this week?

The Cavaliers’ first game of the playoffs wasn’t the smoothest of starts as 
they needed a late rally todefeat the Pistons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/kyrie-irving-kevin-love-cavaliers-pistons>
 106-101. While Kyrie Irving was Cleveland’s leading scorer with 31 points, 
James scored 22 and dished out 11 assists. Of course,if you ask 
<http://www.si.com/nba/2016/04/18/nba-playoffs-detroit-pistons-stan-van-gundy-lebron-james>
 Pistons head coach Stan Van Gundy, if LeBron was carrying the Cavaliers, he 
was getting some help from the officials.

“A couple calls have upset our guys,” Van Gundy said in an in-game interview, 
“they’ve got to understand, LeBron’s LeBron. They’re not going to call 
offensive fouls on him. He gets to do whatever he wants. They’ve got to 
understand that.”

The NBA ended up fining Van Gundy $25,000 for his comments, which is 
phenomenally silly. Saying that star players tend to get calls in their favor 
during the playoffs should be about as controversial as saying that the team 
that ends up scoring the most points in a game tends to win. In any case,Van 
Gundy v LeBron 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/15272216/lebron-james-says-focused-first-round-not-stan-van-gundy>
 looks to be a diverting subplot in a playoff series that may very well end up 
being brief and uneventful.

Assuming that everyone stays healthy, of course.
 