
It seems Steven Tyler never tells Aerosmith anything. After only recently 
patching things up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/03/joe-perry-aerosmith-steve-tyler-reunited>
, Tyler is back to his old tricks – this time plotting a move to reality TV 
without alerting his band-mates. "I found out on the internet like the rest of 
the world," said guitarist Joe Perry. "We'd like to plan our lives, you know?"

Although nothing is confirmed, Tyler is reportedly one of several candidates 
under consideration to join the judging panel on American Idol. "I'm doing it. 
What do you think? I'm doing it," he recently told reporters. "[I'm] probably 
going to be a judge onAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>." Producers are 
looking to replace the departing Simon Cowell and Ellen DeGeneres, with 
Jennifer Lopez another reported front-runner.

The speculation infuriates Perry, who apparently wasn't even invited to a 
recentAerosmith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith> after-show event. 
"There was a party at Studio 54 after the Vegas show, which none of us in the 
band knew anything about, and [Steven] said some stuff there," Perry told the 
Boston Herald. "After working with me for 40 years, he couldn't tell me about 
this? Why so secretive?"

This isn't the first time Tyler has left Aerosmith in the dark about his 
plans. Last year, he announced that he would be quitting Aerosmith – at least 
temporarily – to focus on "Brand Tyler". "I got off the plane two nights ago 
[and] saw online that Steven said that he was going to leave the band,"Perry 
said at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/09/aerosmith-guitarist-steven-tyler>
. "To disregard his brothers to the point where we have to find out about [his 
plans] on the internet – it's like, 'See you later, Bud.'" While Aerosmith went 
so far as to audition replacement singers, the group finally reconciled and are 
currently touring.

Perry said he confronted Tyler in his dressing room last weekend, asking him 
about the American Idol rumours. Tyler claimed that he was not allowed to 
discuss it. Perry is still incredulous. "We're told it's a done deal," he said. 
"If Steven is committed to a TV show, that kind of affects the rest of us."
 