
Steve Dennis seems heavy with relief and exhaustion rather than elated with 
victory. He has just won a landmark case against his former NGO employer. Now 
he is trying to come to terms with what comes next.

“It is a shock, and a disappointment, that it got this far,” he says. He 
brought the case against his former employer, the Norwegian Refugee Council 
(NRC) after he and three other staff members were kidnapped while working in 
Dadaab refugee camp in Kenya in 2012. The incident left aid worker Dennis with 
a gunshot wound in his leg, PTSD, and the Kenyan driver of his car dead. The 
Oslo courts last week found NRC guilty of gross negligence and failing in its 
duty of care.


The case has been hailed a landmark ruling 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/canadians-680000-for-three-nights-in-hell>
 and wake-up call 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/102243/nrc-kidnap-ruling-is-wake-up-call-for-aid-industry>
 for the industry. But it is one Dennis never imagined he would be filing – let 
alone winning. Its success, which Dennis hopes will force the industry to take 
security more seriously, comes at the end of a long and unforeseen journey, 
beginning back in 2012.

“I was interviewed for the NRC position on the Monday, got a job offer on the 
Wednesday, the info pack on a Friday, and by Sunday I was flying out to 
coordinate a response to a famine in the world’s largest refugee camp,” Dennis 
remembers. Three years later he was taking his employer to court. “I have to 
say, I didn’t see the 20 moves ahead on the chess game,” he says.


After the incident, where Dennis and his colleagues were held captive for four 
days before being rescued by a pro-Kenyan government Somali militia, the 
Canadian returned home and focused solely on recovering. “I was really 
struggling,” says Dennis. “I couldn’t sleep. And I had real problems engaging 
with people and being in public.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsteve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56a41acbf49d3c5df29a5d80f58fa07601a26c75%2F0_202_2999_1798%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Dennis%20and%20the%20court%20case%20that%20sent%20waves%20through%20the%20aid%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsteve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Dennis%20and%20the%20court%20case%20that%20sent%20waves%20through%20the%20aid%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fsteve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56a41acbf49d3c5df29a5d80f58fa07601a26c75%2F0_202_2999_1798%2F2999.jpg>
 A refugee camp outside Dadaab, eastern Kenya, near to where Dennis and his 
colleagues were working in 2012. Photograph: Jerome Delay/AP 
It was over the months following his return to Oslo for an NRC debrief that he 
became displeased with what he saw as an unsatisfactory follow-up 
investigation. Dennis grew suspicious that basic security practices and 
considerations had not been followed prior to the incident. He then also began 
to struggle to get adequate insurance cover for the medical costs of his leg 
injury and diagnosed PTSD and depression.


“I met with HR and senior management for discussions, but ultimately the 
support I received and the explanations they gave were really disappointing,” 
says Dennis, explaining the months of back and forth leading up to legal 
action. “I thought going to court was the last resort, but eventually I had 
exhausted every other option.”


The verdict of the case, which found the NRC liable for physical and 
psychological injuries and awarded compensation for gross negligence that 
totalled 4.4m krone (£350,000), broke through the numbness that had set in for 
Dennis after almost two years of what he saw as failed attempts to negotiate. 
“Hearing it all presented in the verdict from someone anew… wow, it sounded 
horrible,” he says. “Actually some details that came out in court were worse 
than I thought.”


What we need to do to prevent sexual harassment and violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/18/humanitarian-security-prevent-sexual-harrassment-violence>
In a statement in response to the ruling, the NRC commented: “It is important 
for NRC to express that we are sad that this case ended in court. NRC and Steve 
Dennis met early in 2015 for negotiations. Dennis did not accept NRC’s offer to 
settle, and NRC could not meet Dennis’s demands for financial compensation and 
his absolute demand that NRC publicly admitted gross negligence. To ensure that 
we exhausted all possibilities for out-of-court settlement, NRC met Steve 
Dennis for court led mediation on 30 September this year. The mediation did not 
lead to a settlement.”

What the case reveals about the industry

The case’s significance lies not in the uniqueness of the incident, but in 
fact it has put the issue of security in the industry under public scrutiny, 
argues Steve McCann, security specialist and director at Safer Edge.


For many, this is linked to the particular working culture of aid work. “We 
have all put ourselves in harm’s way at one time or another, but no one wants 
to be the special snowflake who is precious about their safety,” said one aid 
worker, who wished to remain anonymous. “In most situations you just put up and 
shut up. Steve’s case is interesting because he has actually challenged that 
and said you [the NRC] are liable for the situation I found myself in.”


Despite the financial <https://fundrazr.com/campaigns/712IC2> and moral 
support Dennis has received, there is still an anxiety among many people about 
speaking up publicly on the issue, as was illustrated by the reluctance of many 
interviewees about going on the record to the Guardian. The reaction to the 
victory has been one of firm, but measured, applause.

“There is a lot of fear in the industry about using the ‘n’ word – 
negligence,” says McCann. While security practices have been mainstreamed into 
major NGOs, there is still among organisations in the industry a difference 
between what is said in terms of security policies, and what is actually done 
in the field, McCann explains.


Raped by a colleague then fired: the aid worker who refused to keep quiet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/raped-by-a-colleague-then-fired-the-aid-worker-who-refused-to-keep-quiet>
 While McCann supports Dennis’s claims of negligence against the NRC, he 
argues that they are far from the worst in the industry. “There are many, many, 
lower quality organisations operating out there ... and sometimes they don’t 
have security at the heart of things.”

Lessons for aid organisations

“Good can come of this case because organisations will really have to get 
their houses in order,” says McCann. “Not just in terms of security policies 
but behaviours and consistent attention to detail.” While there are guidelines 
on security best practice in the industry, they are currently voluntary 
standards for individual organisations to adopt. Dennis also suggests the 
industry should look closely at how security risks and insurance cover differ 
between international and national staff.


McCann argues that the industry should, however, be careful about the 
conclusions it draws from the case. “The potential downside is that there will 
be a culture of ‘you can’t do that’, rather than security policies aiming 
towards enabling people to do their jobs,” he explains. Some suggest that the 
case may push up insurance premiums for aid organisations, forcing them to pull 
back in their operations.


I can’t do this work now. As they say, 'put on your own mask before assisting 
others'
Steve Dennis 
Emmanuelle Lacroix, people capacity and development manager at the CHS 
Alliance, agrees that there is a two-fold lesson to be learned from Dennis’s 
case. “We need to ensure comprehensive duty of care is applied consistently for 
all staff to protect them (both in terms of risk mitigation and post-incident 
appropriate support), while enabling agencies to continue reaching out the 
communities most in needs without fear of litigation or restriction of their 
work in high risk environments.” While Dennis is familiar with the arguments 
that aid workers are aware of the risks they take on with the job, he argues 
that there needs to be a conversation about what it is reasonable to ask staff 
to do.


Dennis’s case should also be seen in the wider context of the pressures and 
expectations put on staff and organisations in the industry argues McCann: 
“Donors are a double-edged sword – they may well do funding, but they can also 
be demanding in a way that makes people go to the edge and beyond ... and miss 
stuff.”


With recent criticisms of the industry’s level of mental health support for 
staff, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
 the case is also significant in holding the NRC liable for the psychological 
injuries Dennis received as a result of the incident. “Whether you have a 
mental or physical injury shouldn’t make a difference to your insurance,” says 
Dennis. “It is a bit intimidating to talk openly about PTSD but it is not that 
difficult to talk about a leg injury. I want them to be treated equally – so 
I’ve been open and taken a stand.”


Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
Now that the battle is won, what next? “I just want this whole thing to be 
over,” says Dennis. “The prolongation of my case has been an obstacle to 
getting better.”


“I was an extremely passionate aid worker, but this case has left a really bad 
taste in my mouth. I have strained myself with this case and I need to get back 
to full health. I can’t do this work now. As they say, ‘put on your own mask 
before assisting others’.”


 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationally can be found
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 