
Silicon Valley billionaires, with their boundless digital dreams, have lately 
turned their attention to the ultimate challenge: the disruption of death. They 
want to live forever.Peter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/21/peter-thiel-paypal-luck-atheist-god>
, PayPal’s founder, Larry Page of Google andLarry Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2001/jun/24/news.theobserver> of Oracle 
have each poured some of their millions into projects that scour evolutionary 
history for the secrets of longevity, that aim to improve the DNA they were 
born with, or that explore ways to copy and save the circuits of a human brain 
– notably their own consciousness – to survive digitally long after their 
physical shutdown. Like moguls and megalomaniacs through the ages, they refuse 
to believe the timing and nature of their ending might be beyond their compass.

Immortality takes many forms, however. Old-fashioned myth and legend remain an 
option. Much of the tragedy ofSteve Jobs’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/06/steve-jobs-apple-cofounder-dies>
s truncated life – he died in October 2011 at 56, eight years after being 
diagnosed with pancreatic cancer – lies in the fact that for all his 
ungrammatical ability to “think different”, even he had no answer to the rogue 
cells that killed him. Indeed, it seems the Apple co-founder’s stubborn hubris 
itself helped to dictate his last act. When he received the initial diagnosis 
of his cancer, he put off recommended surgery for nine months in his obsessive 
search for alternative cures on the internet, including contacting a psychic, 
by which time it was too late.

Jobs was, throughout his life, restless for alternative truths. Not 
surprisingly for an advocate of the eternal upgrade, he believed death, 
nature’s built-in obsolescence, to be “life’s greatest invention”. He was well 
aware that his own contribution to the fast-forward evolution of technology 
would necessarily be superseded by others.

However, although he never specifically embraced the idea of trying to 
incorporate his own consciousness into a digital circuit, he did the next best 
thing and made products that seemed to embody his singular philosophy. Not for 
nothing after he died did some of the legions of worldwide mourners, real and 
virtual, with their all-night vigils atApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> stores and to-camera eulogies, 
reimagine logos that revealed their creator’s image, or hold aloft iPads 
picturing candles burning bright. Jobs was, or seemed to be, the eternal soul 
of their machines.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&media=>
 Steve Jobs: the trailer. 
“Sometimes I believe in God, sometimes I don’t,” Jobs said to his chosen 
biographer,Walter Isaacson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/30/steve-jobs-exclusive-biography-review>
. “I think it’s 50/50 maybe. But ever since I’ve had cancer, I’ve been thinking 
about Him more and I find myself believing a bit more. Maybe it’s because I 
want to believe in an afterlife, that when you die, it doesn’t just all 
disappear… the wisdom you’ve accumulated, somehow it lives on.” Then, Isaacson 
recalled, Jobs paused for a second and said: “Yeah, but sometimes I think it’s 
just like an on/off switch. Click and you’re gone. And that’s why I don’t like 
putting on/off switches on Apple devices.”

One of the uncanny traits of the intimate machines that Jobs pioneered – iPods 
and iPads and iPhones – is their illusion of vitality. Like us, they sleep, and 
then they wake, all systems go, with all their – and our – memory intact. Even 
those defunct Apple models, the moribund iMacs and chunky MacBooks that went 
from box-fresh to antique in a few short years and now clutter attics and 
landfill, could theoretically be tweaked back to life and with them the traces 
and dreams of users who lived with and through them.

Jobs had plenty of time to think about his own legacy and, inevitably, control 
freak that he was, he left as little of it as possible to chance. Nothing he 
did in life seemed unconnected to his sense of his – and Apple’s – brand and 
death would be no different. His choice of Isaacson as biographer no doubt was 
in part due to the fact that the writer had previously published an acclaimed 
life of Einstein, one of those “think different” people with whom Jobs claimed 
affinity. (Isaacson had also written a biography of Henry Kissinger, perhaps a 
more useful apprenticeship for approaching his Machiavellian subject.) Jobs 
stage-managed all he could of the life story that would be published in the 
event of his death – giving Isaacson extensive interviews, making those who 
knew him best available – right down to choosing the gnomic cover image for the 
book.

Afterlives are not so easily choreographed, however, and four years on from 
Jobs’s death two films are about to appear that stray significantly from his 
prepared brief. The first,Steve Jobs, a drama directed by Danny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle> and written by Aaron Sorkin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>(whose pedigree on The West 
Wing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>, and the 
Zuckerberg biopicThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/the-social-network-review> could 
hardly be more apt) is loosely based on the first half of Isaacson’s book, up 
to 1998 and the launch of the iMac, and hasMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/25/michael-fassbender-steve-jobs-macbeth-creed-profile>
 as its flawed tragic hero. The second,Steve Jobs: Man in the Machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/15/steve-jobs-man-in-the-machine-first-look-review-apple-founders-sour-side>
, a wonderful documentary by Alex Gibney (who recently got under the skin of 
that other pervasive cult, Scientology, inGoing Clear), is a film that seeks to 
answer a single question: why were people so affected by Steve Jobs’s death?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1b027b185f417ce86ed1f77d43dec0c14fe51%2F0_28_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac1b027b185f417ce86ed1f77d43dec0c14fe51%2F0_28_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Michael Fassbender as Steve Jobs and Seth Rogen as Steve Wozniak in a scene 
from Danny Boyle’s film about the Apple boss. Photograph: Francois Duhamel/AP 
Some of the answers to that latter question, one that goes somewhere near the 
heart of our love affair with digital technology, have been supplied by the 
initial reactions to the release of the films in the States. Jobs inspired and 
demanded fierce loyalty in his friends and acolytes.

Apple’s head of design and Jobs’s close friend, Sir Jonathan Ive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jonathan-ive>, hadn’t seen Sorkin’s 
film when he spoke to theWall Street Journal about it, but reports from friends 
were enough to convince him of his “primal fear” that it depicted a man “I 
don’t recognise at all”. His response mirrored that of John Travolta to Alex 
Gibney’s Scientology exposure. “I don’t like it. I haven’t seen it and I don’t 
want to.”

One of the telling aspects of watching the Jobs films back to back is the 
possibility of objectively comparing Fassbender’s portrayal with the reality in 
the footage assembled in Gibney’s documentary. Both films dwell extensively on 
Jobs’s much-mythologised early years: the emotional scars he carried as a child 
not only given up for adoption, but rejected in turn by his original adoptive 
parents, who decided they wanted a girl; his flirtation with California’s hippy 
culture that came to something of a halt when he fathered a child with 
girlfriend Chrisann Brennan, (a child, Lisa, he both tried for years to disown 
in the courts and after whom he named one of Apple’s first personal computers); 
his ability from the start to inspire and discard those close to him with equal 
ease; and his ruthless, often impossible, demands for perfection. Fassbender 
captures all of the dramatic nuances of the conflicted reality you see in real 
life in Gibney’s film. In neither movie does Jobs come across as a particularly 
likable young man, but in both you feel the pull of his irresistible charisma.

Responding to suggestions that Jobs appeared to be tyrannical in the films, 
Ive admitted that Jobs was an uncompromising boss, but said: “That doesn’t mean 
you’re an a-hole. You could’ve had somebody who didn’t ever argue, but you 
wouldn’t have the phones you have… There are sons and daughters and widows and 
very close friends that are completely bemused and completely upset [by the 
films]. We’re remembering and celebrating Steve Jobs’s life and at the same 
time there is this movie and I don’t recognise this person.”

Tim Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> not only took over 
as chief executive of Apple two weeks before Jobs died, he also offered his 
mentor half of his liver to keep him alive.In an interview with Stephen Colbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/apple-ceo-tim-cook-attacks-steve-jobs-film-as-opportunistic>
, he described the films as “opportunistic” and again, though he hadn’t seen 
either, said he “hated” them because he knew that they misrepresented Jobs, who 
“was an amazing human being… someone that you wanted to do your best work for”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjhWKxtsYrJE&media=>
 Steve Jobs: the Man in the Machine: the trailer. 
Aaron Sorkin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>, in response 
to this, suggested that Cook should perhaps see his film before judging it, and 
noted: “If you’ve got a factory full of children in China assembling phones for 
17 cents an hour, you’ve got a lot of nerve calling someone else 
opportunistic”, a comment for which he later apologised.

It is a curious world where it is apparently considered off-limits or 
opportunistic to make a drama or a documentary about a figure as visible and 
central to our global culture as Jobs, but among more zealous technophiles, 
that appears to be received wisdom. Jeff Jarvis, former professor of digital 
journalism at City University, New York, and creator of the blog BuzzMachine, 
compared Sorkin’s film in particular to a kind of heresy, an envious piece of 
work that peddled the myth that new media were not to be trusted. Jarvis’s most 
recent book likened Jobs to Johannes Gutenberg, inventor of the printing press, 
and found both “accomplished greatness through trial and error, vision and 
determination”.

In trashing Sorkin’s films about Zuckerberg and Jobs as acts of spite, he 
wrote: “Sorkin is Salieri to their Mozart. They are greater artists than he 
will ever be. They and their impact will be remembered for generations – and 
not because of Sorkin’s films about them, which will be soon forgotten. They 
have changed the world more than Sorkin or his beloved, imaginary president or 
journalists could ever hope to. Yet Sorkin is doomed to make movies about these 
damned, fucking geeks. Pity.”

***

It is hard to read such comments or watch either film about Jobs and not think 
of the parallels in the genesis of Apple with the birth of a religion. Sorkin 
structures his script around three product launches, first that of the original 
Macintosh, second the launch of the ill-fatedNeXT computer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NeXT_Computer> made by Jobs after he had been 
kicked out of the company he created and was in the wilderness, and lastly his 
triumphant return as saviour of Apple in the launch of Ive’s colourful iMac.

These launches, as Gibney’s film also makes clear, were above all acts of 
evangelism. By the time the iPad comes along, Jobs has created a singular 
spectacle by bringing tablets down into the valley and demonstrating their 
miracles to the faithful. And of course, from the beginning, as in all cultish 
movements you either believed and were enlightened or you did not and were not.

As with any long-term Apple user – I’ve never had any other PC or phone since 
I first was enthralled by a Macintosh desktop in 1991 – these emotions are both 
familiar and curious. The simple magic, the intuitive quality of the 
technology, the sense of rebellion against soulless mainframes and impenetrable 
software it appeared to represent, was always hard to resist. You can detect 
that fact not only in the clips that Gibney has assembled of the #iSad millions 
weeping for Jobs’s loss – “Steve Jobs invented everything!” says one young boy 
– but also in the technical homage employed byDanny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle>, who directed Sorkin’s film.

Boyle shoots the first act, the first product launch, on 16mm film, to give a 
homemade hacker feeling to Jobs’s early efforts – based in his parents’ garage 
with co-founder Steve Wozniak – to change the world. He moves on to 35mm for 
the second operatic act of wilderness and revenge, and for the final launch 
shoots in pin-sharp HD digital. Much is improved in the progression, but 
something of the original innocent, human-scale ambition seems to have been 
lost: a metaphor which looks like a useful way to examine the shiny-happy 
corporate world domination that Apple came to embody.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446142288199%2Fca1618d3-725d-4dd1-8636-3be81e3377f4-1020x750.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446142288199%2Fca1618d3-725d-4dd1-8636-3be81e3377f4-1020x750.jpeg>
 Jobs in his parents’ garage with Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, 1976. 
Photograph: DB Apple/DPA/Press Association Images 
With some of this in mind, I spoke to Boyle – and later to Gibney – about how 
they had approached the myths around their subject, and how close they felt 
they got to the truth. I wondered first of Boyle if he had, despite everything, 
learned to love Jobs in the months of making his epic?

“I certainly got obsessed with him,” he said. “One of the reasons I agreed to 
do the film was that I felt for him, on an emotional level. The father and 
daughter stuff with Lisa, which was at the heart of the script, is something I 
really recognise. I hope I wasn’t quite as extreme as him in his relationship 
with his daughter but I’m not sure that I am faultless either in my 
relationship with my kids. I felt for him in that respect. But in other 
respects, he is not someone I would call a hero, no. What was great about the 
script was that it didn’t pull any punches. It wasn’t a glorification of him 
really, and he’s not particularly likable, but especially in Michael’s 
performance you do get drawn to him, to his way of seeing the world. I think 
that is how he was. I mean people remain in orbit around him even four years 
after his death. But no, my heroes are people like Woz [Steve Wozniak]. Or 
people likeTim Berners-Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/timbernerslee>, who give all this power 
away for free. Cost should not be put upon this knowledge. Jobs certainly 
wouldn’t agree with that… ”

In some ways it seems that Boyle’s and Sorkin’s film is the gospel according 
to Woz, who was in many ways the genius behind Apple’s original revolutionary 
personal computing concept, and whose hacker mentality Jobs marketed so 
successfully. How much, I asked Boyle, did Wozniak help with the film?

“He was certainly a key source for Sorkin,” he said. “He came in and talked to 
the actors. He has been very complimentary about the film. Fortunately he 
really liked it. If he didn’t he would have been equally clear about that.”

Wozniak is played by Seth Rogen and the pair of them apparently became close. 
Wozniak is something of an amateur magician and he and Rogen spent a lot of 
time bonding at the Magic Castle, a magicians’ club in LA. Boyle suggests he 
was the conscience of the movie. “Seth doesn’t look anything like him really,” 
Boyle says, “but there is something about him that is very decent, along with 
him being a comic genius. In that his decency and genius are inseparable he is 
perfect for the role. As Woz gets to say to Jobs at one point, ‘Being decent 
and gifted is not a binary opposition… ’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446142466287%2F963d3821-954f-472f-bbf8-17e317b141d1-1391x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446142466287%2F963d3821-954f-472f-bbf8-17e317b141d1-1391x2040.jpeg>
 Jobs leans with the Macintosh 128K, the original Macintosh personal computer, 
1984. Photograph: Bernard Gotfryd/Getty Images 
Given that the film is a drama, and born out of much disputed territory, in 
particular Jobs’s perversely cruel treatment of Brennan and his daughter, I 
wonder how much responsibility Boyle felt to the truth?

“There are a lot of omissions. But it felt very truthful, I believed. It is 
very difficult to justify it, speaking drily about it. How can you say it is or 
is not? Everything that is in there is true, we think, but of course it is not 
the whole story. We used to say it was a bit like Shakespeare – you took some 
key facts and then you explored your own obsessions about him through that.”

In that sense, it seems that Fassbender, who is currently also starring on 
screen asMacbeth, found a properly Shakespearean tragic hero in Silicon Valley. 
A genius undone by his megalomania – had Boyle come across other men like that 
in his time?

“Yes,” he says, “I have come across people like him. Scott Rudin, the 
producer, sent this to us. On set, we used to say that the film was the sound 
of his mind. By this of course we meant Jobs but we also meant Sorkin and I 
also meant Rudin; it becomes the sound of Michael Fassbender’s mind as well, 
and maybe mine, too. But yes, I have worked with a couple of people like Jobs. 
They just will not compromise, and if they do, beware, because there is 
something bad hidden behind the compromise that you can’t quite perceive yet. 
We always used to say the second part, Jobs in exile as it were, was a 
subterranean river of intention that no one except him could perceive. ”

I asked Boyle if he had been an Apple user over the years and of course he 
said he had: “Creative people have been the gateway for Apple, the Trojan 
horse,” he said. “Jobs had this notion that he worked at the intersection of 
fine art and technology and we, those of us in the arts, media world, amplified 
that for him.”

We have all been complicit, I suggest, in the rise of Apple to be world’s most 
valuable company, in the journey that Jobs engineered from rebellion to 
ubiquity and all that it entails. Did Boyle want the film to comment on that 
complicity?

“I think so. Ultimately it is about his character, and a father and a 
daughter. But you do want it to try and be part of the big story of our 
relationship with these giant corporations. All the companies that were easy to 
criticise, banks, oil companies, pharmaceutical companies, they have been 
replaced by tech guys. And yet the atmosphere around them remains fairly 
benign. Governments are not powerful enough any more to resist them and the law 
is not quick enough. One of the reasons I wanted to do this is that sense that 
we have to constantly bring these people to account. I mean, they have 
emasculated journalism for one thing. They have robbed it of its income. If you 
want to look at that malignly you certainly could do: they have made it so 
nobody can afford to write stories about them. Their tentacles are so far 
reaching in the way the world is structured that there is a danger they become 
author and critic at the same time. Exactly what Jobs used to accuse IBM of.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F956a90e90e5ff2c84dd20f2a5caf956a6cf2a873%2F0_237_4850_2910%2F4850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F956a90e90e5ff2c84dd20f2a5caf956a6cf2a873%2F0_237_4850_2910%2F4850.jpg>
 Argumentative? Jobs as he appears in Alex Gibley’s documentary, The Man in the 
Machine. Photograph: Allstar 
And obviously, I suggest, those tentacles go very deep into the film world. 
Steve Jobs was originally to be made by Sony Pictures and be directed by David 
Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher>, who worked with 
Sorkin onThe Social Network. It was to star either Christian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> or Leonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/03/leonardo-dicaprio-drops-out-steve-jobs-biopic-danny-boyle>
. In the event, however, of Fincher opting out and financiers, including Megan 
Ellison, daughter of Larry Ellison, chief executive of computer firm Oracle and 
Jobs’s old friend, refusing support, Scott Rudin was forced to take the film to 
Universal. All of this heated internal drama became public whenSony’s emails 
were hacked by North Korean spies 
<http://defamer.gawker.com/leaked-the-nightmare-email-drama-behind-sonys-steve-jo-1668882936>
 (in protest over Rogen’s filmThe Interview). Boyle was caught in the fallout 
of all that.

“It was a tough film to make for many reasons,” Boyle says with a laugh. 
“After Sony pulled out we had a day where we went around Hollywood, literally 
with hour-long slots to pitch the film to try and find a home for it. And we 
were trying to sell it to people who had known Jobs or had been in business 
with him and were coloured by that. We eventually got a couple of offers, which 
was great, and we were delighted to go with Universal. They have been exemplary 
in the support that they have given us in difficult circumstances, which I 
can’t talk too much about right now though I hope to one day. Let’s just say 
they have been very supportive.”

The tentacles that Boyle described, which tried to squeeze the life out of the 
film, were also felt by Gibney, who made his documentary with the support of 
CNN. Even for someone who has dealt with the Scientology movement and lived to 
tell the tale, Gibney admits his experience was “extremely hard”. His first 
phone call was to Laurene Powell Jobs, Steve’s widow, and initially he was 
confident that she would engage with the film.

“But then,” he says, “a phone appointment was cancelled and I never heard from 
her again. I learned along the way as I began to approach former executives at 
Apple that she was forbidding everyone to speak to me. She cast a long shadow. 
It was tough. I was aided in a sense, in that I wasn’t trying to be definitive, 
I could go on a kind of road trip and try to make sense of it along the way. I 
stole that idea fromCitizen Kane: you structure the thing according to who you 
find.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052597809%2Ff40d4e00-fe35-48ea-a35a-ac7fa9f3d254-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052597809%2Ff40d4e00-fe35-48ea-a35a-ac7fa9f3d254-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Steve Jobs during one of his showy presentations of new Apple products. 
Photograph: Christoph Dernbach/Corbis 
Most of the interviewees Gibney finds are therefore people who were either 
betrayed by Jobs or escaped from Apple. He punctuates his film with the 
impressions of Chrisann Brennan, mother of Lisa, and with the memories of 
Daniel Kottke, Jobs’s closest friend as a young man, with whom he travelled in 
India and who was Apple’s first employee (and to whom he infamously granted 
zero stock options). Both seemed still bemused by Jobs’s cruelties. Most 
telling perhaps, though, is Bob Belleville, who was seduced by Jobs to lead the 
project team on the first Macintosh and who was subsequently ostracised. Thirty 
years on, the gentle-seeming engineer is still traumatised by the events, not 
only the betrayal, but in the love he still clearly feels for Jobs. Talking 
about those years, he begins to sob uncontrollably.

“Bob Belleville is the heart and soul of the film really,” Gibney says. “It 
was hard to understand. I asked him why he was crying and he couldn’t really 
tell me. He was so deeply conflicted about Steve, which is what I found to be 
so interesting, and by the way it was not something I suspected. I expected to 
get from him some factual detail about the early Macs. I knew that Bob had gone 
to Japan with Steve and Japan was interesting to me, but I had no idea he had 
this deep well of emotion.”

**

Gibney frames the answer to the question of why consumers were so affected by 
Jobs’s death in the same contradictory terms. He dwells in particular on the 
importance of Jobs’s understanding of Zen Buddhism in the development of Apple. 
His journey to billionaire, he had convinced himself, was a spiritual one. (In 
the memorial service his family designed to Jobs’s wishes at Stanford 
University, at which Al Gore spoke and Bono and YoYo Ma played, each of the 
congregation was given a present in a small brown box that turned out to be the
Autobiography of a Yogi, by Paramahansa Yogananda).

“I don’t think Walter Isaacson was very interested in the Zen Buddhist thing,” 
Gibney says. “I think he thought that Steve got some design ideas from it, end 
of story. But it was interesting to me. The fact is he did have this long-term 
spiritual adviser, Kobun Chino. That makes him pretty different from Lloyd 
Blankfein [boss of Goldman Sachs].”

There is a memorable moment in the film where Gibney has unearthed footage of 
the Zen monk recalling how Jobs first came to him aged 18 and confessed to him 
that he felt chosen, enlightened. Koben Chino asked Jobs for proof of this 
revelation and he came back with the first Apple circuit board.

In his self-mythology, his veganism, his apparent asceticism channelling 
Gandhi in his round specs, his devotion to minimal design, to the godhead in a 
silicon chip, it often seemed that Jobs never lost his aspiration to be a monk. 
It was not a humble life, however. As Gibney’s film makes clear – in tracing 
the tax-avoidance schemes, in dwelling on the terrible working conditions of 
those low-paid workers in China putting iPhones together, in allowing illegal 
backdated share options – Jobs and Apple were always as much about money as 
spirituality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052877049%2F268ed758-fa42-48ab-99f5-d12f4fb97ee9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple's%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%3A%20the%20legacy%20of%20Apple%27s%20mysterious%20co-founder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsteve-jobs-the-afterlife-film-michael-fassbender-danny-boyle-alex-gibney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052877049%2F268ed758-fa42-48ab-99f5-d12f4fb97ee9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Condolence notes in memory of Steve Jobs at the Apple store on October 6, 2011 
in San Francisco, California. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images 
“There are a lot of people who said Steve didn’t care about money,” Gibney 
says, “and I think in some ways they are probably right in that he didn’t care 
about buying himself a lot of fancy things, but he certainly cared about how 
money allowed you to keep score with other people and it was very much tied up 
with how he felt appreciated or not appreciated. It was a way of validating 
himself emotionally and God knows he got a lot of it.

“He could have given some of it away, but the fact is he hardly gave a dime of 
it away. There was a famous story I wasn’t able to get into the film. When he 
returned to the company he said, ‘I want the company to buy me a jet.’ I don’t 
know how much it was, maybe $45m. Somebody said, ‘Look Steve, if we buy you the 
jet we will also have to pay the taxes due on it, so it’s going to cost us 
almost double. How about the company buys the jet and you have it for your 
exclusive use?’ He said, ‘No, buy me the jet.’”

Along the way in the film Gibney confesses to have been as much in thrall to 
Apple products as anyone. Has making the film cured him of that devotion?

Sign up to our Film Today email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/17/sign-up-guardian-film-daily-email>
“It has, I think,” he says. “I look on my phone just as a tool now. Steve was 
extraordinarily clever in suggesting somehow by using an Apple product you were 
taking on the man. It was like the elves of Rivendell giving you some ancient 
elven blade that was good and allowing you to vanquish the orcs. It was like it 
was a device born of the counterculture. That remains a problem in how we 
understand these companies. Jobs’s genius was in erasing that boundary between 
the human being and the tool: if you criticise Apple you are criticising 
everyone that uses them. ‘Hold on, you are criticising me, I have my family’s 
photos on this thing!’ Part of why I made the film was not to do a simple 
exposé, or say this is good and this is bad so go and boycott this product, it 
was to point out these contradiction and to ask these questions.”

And that overarching question, why did so many people care so much when Steve 
Jobs <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> died, that instant 
beatification of a billionaire? Did Gibney answer that to his satisfaction as 
well?

“I think it ends up still a question,” he says. “I answered parts of it in my 
own mind but if I had the definitive answer I would have put it in at the end 
instead of superimposing Jobs’s face over my own. But I think that part of it 
is: he was Daddy, and I say that knowing all of the issuesSteve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/steve-jobs> had with paternity. He was there 
for this journey we have taken with the computer. He was such a convincing 
storyteller in persuading us that his machines were really part of us that when 
he died there was something about us dying at the same time. He was Daddy.”


 