
‘It was a huge opportunity for me. I didn’t think twice about it. It would 
have been crazy not to accept it.” Steve Carell is talking abouthis role in 
Foxcatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/foxcatcher>, playing the 
wrestling-obsessed millionaire John du Pont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/30/foxcatcher-schultz-brothers-offer-they-should-have-refused-wrestling-champions-nancy>
, who in 1996 shot dead Dave Schultz, the coach of the US Olympic wrestling 
team that Du Pont had set up.

Despite his track record of goofy comic turns and nice-as-pie straight men, 
Carell had no qualms about playing the role of a deeply disturbed killer. It’s 
actually turned out pretty well, career-wise: this spruce, neatly dressed 
52-year-old already hasa Golden Globe nomination under his belt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/11/birdman-soars-over-the-competition-at-2015-golden-globe-nominations>
, and there’s serious talk of an Oscar run.

That, no doubt, explains Carell’s serious mien: Foxcatcher marks a new 
development in his profile. He’s done drama before, but always with a comedic 
edge –Crazy, Stupid, Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143219/crazy-stupid-love>, for example, 
orThe Way, Way Back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156160/the-way-way-back>. Foxcatcher is 
downright disturbing, a slowly accreting study of dysfunction and dependence 
that erupts in a startling act of violence. There are one or two half-smiles in 
it, but none associated with Carell’s Du Pont, who cuts a disturbing figure 
throughout.

Carell is considered in his analysis of Du Pont, an eccentric individual to 
say the least, who was described by psychiatrists as psychotic and a paranoid 
schizophrenic during his trial after the Schultz murder. “I never saw him as a 
villain, and I didn’t want to depict him in that way,” says Carell. “Here was a 
guy who was the product of his upbringing, his enormous wealth. He was isolated 
to a great extent from many of the things that he longed for – and it was 
compounded with mental issues, of course. He was someone who didn’t possess the 
tools to achieve what he wanted out of life; and in that regard, incredibly 
heartbreaking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352092047%2F6487f03f-c5d8-4a03-a212-81467fe5eed1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352092047%2F6487f03f-c5d8-4a03-a212-81467fe5eed1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Steve Carell in Foxcatcher. Photograph: Photograph: Allstar 
Foxcatcher’s main narrative deals with Du Pont’s installation of the 
gold-medal-winning Schultz brothers – first Mark, then Dave (Channing Tatum and 
Mark Ruffalo) – on his estate in Pennsylvania, part of his increasingly 
capricious plan to dominate the US Olympic team. By dangling large sums of 
money, Du Pont could buy up the largely college-based, amateur freestyle 
wrestlers who, the film is at pains to make clear, are very different from the 
razzle-dazzle pantomime acts of the pro circuit. (That particular branch of the 
sport, of course, has been mined in theMickey Rourke film The Wrestler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wrestler>.)

Carell says he and Foxcatcher’s director Bennett Miller – previously 
responsible forMoneyball <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moneyball> and Capote
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/110281/capote> – didn’t want to get 
into all “the lurid details”; meaning that, while Foxcatcher shows Du Pont 
imposing himself as a wrestling coach, giving himself odd nicknames, and 
devoting time to other hobbies such as the appreciation of heavy weaponry, it’s 
apparent that considerable pruning has been done. Perhaps most notably, the 
film makes no reference to Bulgarian wrestler Valentin Jordanov,with whom Du 
Pont was apparently obsessed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/30/foxcatcher-schultz-brothers-offer-they-should-have-refused-wrestling-champions-nancy>
, and for whom, the real-life Mark Schultz suggests, Du Pont committed the 
murder, as a “bizarre gift”.

Carell takes the approach – clearly following Miller’s lead – that less is 
more as far as his portrayal of Du Pont. “Du Pont’s behaviour in real life was 
much more outrageous than what is depicted in the film. It would make it a more 
difficult leap for an audience to accept. How could these people stay within 
his circle in the face of the delusional, aggressive behaviour he exhibited? 
How could these people be so complicit? There was a transaction there; they all 
had a part in it, they all accepted it, they accepted the benefits.”

They even shot a sequence in which – following a well-documented episode where 
Du Pont was given a wrestler’s haircut by Mark Schultz – the multimillionaire 
picked up a machine gun and began wildly firing from a veranda at imaginary 
enemies. “Didn’t get used,” says Carell. “It wasn’t Bennett’s agenda. It’s such 
a spare kind of movie. As a director, there’s nothing extraneous there. It’s 
very clean, very quiet. That was the approach to Du Pont as well, to reveal 
bits and pieces of him, and not reveal too much.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352451063%2F392862f6-fc07-4670-8dfe-5aaffa0bf9d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352451063%2F392862f6-fc07-4670-8dfe-5aaffa0bf9d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carell in his breakthrough role, The 40-year-old Virgin. Photograph: 
Allstar/UNIVERSAL/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Dwelling extensively on Du Pont’s psychosexual disposition would have made 
Foxcatcher a different film, but Carell – perhaps betraying a little of the 
uncertainty ofsomeone dipping their toes into water outside their comfort zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/steve-carell-foxcatcher-when-good-guys-go-bad>
 – appears somewhat in awe of his director. He is fulsomely outspoken in his 
praise for Miller (“a special and talented film-maker”) and still appears 
slightly baffled how he got the role at all. “He saw in me the potential to do 
something I hadn’t done before.” Carell says his agent put him forward for the 
role without telling him; when he got the call from Miller it was “a pleasant 
surprise”. He also seems happy to be steered by Miller’s assessment of his 
career profile: “Bennett says I have a benign public persona, and Du Pont did 
too. I think that’s why he cast me.”

Miller is not wrong. Carell, for all his renowned comedy-improv skills, exudes 
a niceness that verges on the bland. It’s hard enough to connect him with the
stellar goofiness of Anchorman’s Brick Tamland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/19/anchorman-2-legend-continues-review>
, let alone the creepy self-infatuation of John du Pont. In the nicest possible 
way, Carell gently knocks back any suggestion that he has “dark places” himself 
that may have proved rewarding to disinter. “That would be a discussion with a 
therapist,” he says coyly. “But I didn’t need to do anything. Just to feel 
those rhythms, and feel where Bennett is going, and what the other actors are 
doing.”

The closest Carell gets to suggesting anything remotely off-beam is the effect 
on his fellow cast members when he climbed into the unpleasant teeth-hair-skin 
additions necessary for the Du Pont role. “I was treated differently when I 
looked like that. It wasn’t anything we anticipated. Once I arrived on set, 
people kept a distance from me. I think that, in a way, paralleled how Du Pont 
felt in life, so it was a good thing.”

This, apparently, extended to a remoteness from his co-stars Channing Tatum 
and Mark Ruffalo. “I didn’t get to know Mark or Channing very well while we 
were shooting. It wasn’t anything planned, we just naturally didn’t interact, 
aside from the scenes we were doing. We didn’t hang out, or bond.”

However Carell takes fright at any suggestion he may be getting into method 
acting – “I’m so hesitant to talk about that, because it sounds so pretentious” 
– preferring instead to heap more praise on Miller. “To be honest, it comes 
from the director. Bennett set a tone that the film wasn’t going to be glib.” 
It also seems to have helped that both the real-life Mark Schultz and Dave’s 
wife, Nancy, turned up to watch the filming: “That added a responsibility and a 
weight to what we were doing. I think we all felt the impetus to take it 
seriously.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352505256%2F5e04c7e8-2653-4b5d-b34f-89d9beb04a46-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Carell%20on%20Foxcatcher%20and%20fame%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20cared%20about%20being%20taken%20seriously%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsteve-carell-interview-foxcatcher-john-du-pont%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419352505256%2F5e04c7e8-2653-4b5d-b34f-89d9beb04a46-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carell with Mark Ruffalo in Foxcatcher. Photograph: Sony Pictures/Courtesy 
Eve/R 
All of which is a far cry, of course, from the competitive chuckleheadedness 
of Anchorman; he rolled on to the sequel straight after finishing Foxcatcher. 
“God, it could not have been more different. There was no levity at all when we 
were shootingFoxcatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/foxcatcher>. 
Anchorman 2 was nothing but silly.” It begs the question: how did he manage it? 
Wasn’t there a culture shock? “I try to approach it all in the same way. I 
don’t think a character knows they are in a comedy or a drama. If Du Pont’s 
life hadn’t ended the way it did, it could be an absurdist comedy: a 
millionaire who likes wrestling.”

Yes, but Carell is far from the first comic who has headed over to the serious 
side of town – and more than one has ended up losing the funny. Is he 
concerned? “Not really. To me, they are different styles of entertainment, with 
different methods.

“I’ve never cared about being taken seriously – I just see myself as an actor. 
Most of my career, I’ve just taken what I’ve been offered. I always feel most 
comfortable as part of a ensemble. Whether it’s a comedy or a drama, I like to 
fit in. It’s best not to stick out.”

By now, I’m thinking Carell is a most cautious film star. Perhaps the clue to 
it all comes via a throwaway line as it gets close to chucking-out time. 
Discussing his near-ubiquity since he hit the big time withThe 40-Year-Old 
Virgin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107816/40-year-old-virgin> and 
the US version of The Office in 2005, Carell suddenly turns hard. “You know, 
that didn’t happen till I was 40. All of that came to pass after I had a long 
career as an actor. It sounds such an aw-shucks kind of thing to say, but I 
just wanted to make a living. That was the goal: to be able to have a family 
and support them.”

All the carapace of professionalism, the studious responses, the thoroughly 
non-anarchic kidding around make a lot more sense if you consider what must 
have been a 20-year hack through the lower reaches of the improv comedy 
circuit, the painful process of guest-actor auditions and down-the-bill status 
jockeying. Carell has always been a bit of a poster boy for the joys of family 
life, but his stories about the impact of parenthood become intensely resonant. 
He launches into a well-rehearsed anecdote about trying out for a Julia 
Louis-Dreyfus sitcom called Watching Ellie shortly after the birth of his 
daughter. For him, the point is that fatherhood made him “relaxed”, and he 
ended up nailing it. But his analysis is telling: “For so long, the struggle 
was the career. The aim and goal was how to get the part, how to audition 
better, how to get ahead.”

For once, I don’t feel sceptical when Carell says he feels “very thankful to 
be part of a movie like this” and “even more thankful for the success” he’s had 
in general. Hollywood cliches they may be, but in the decade or so since The 
40-Year-Old Virgin, Carell has defied all expectations – his, as well as ours – 
to find himself inching closer to the very top of the tree. An Oscar nomination 
may or may not be waiting for him in the next fortnight, but he remains 
admirably phlegmatic about his future acting prospects. “You always strive to 
be part of something decent, or even good. That’s the hope. But I don’t have a 
masterplan; I never did. The worst thing that could happen is that you’re 
terrible. And you learn from that.”

• Foxcatcher is released in the UK on 9 January
 