
Universal has had a record-shattering run at the box office this year thanks 
to the titanic successes of Jurassic World, Furious 7 and Minions – but this 
weekend somewhat tarnished the studio’s glow.

Steve Jobs flops in US as The Martian travels back to the top of box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/us-box-office-films-movies-martian-steve-jobs-paranormal-acivity>
The company’s teen-skewed Jem and the Holograms debuted dismally to one of the 
worst opening weekends in box office history. Given the film’s poor tracking 
numbers (potential box office earnings predicted by analysts), its performance 
didn’t shock many. What did surprise was how Universal’s major awards hope for 
this year, Steve Jobs,tanked when released across America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/us-box-office-films-movies-martian-steve-jobs-paranormal-acivity>
.

After starting strongly with the year’s best per-screen average 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/box-office/steve-jobs-box-office-1201615549/> in 
its opening weekend, the Danny Boyle-directed Aaron Sorkin-scripted drama 
failed to make an impact nationally, taking a poor $7.3m over the weekend.

To make matters even more embarrassing, the film didn’t do that much better 
than Jobs, the 2013 critically derided film about the former Apple co-founder 
with Ashton Kutcher in the lead role, which made a comparable $6.7m in its 
first weekend.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20premieres%20at%20Telluride%3A%20what%20did%20the%20audience%20think%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fsteve-jobs-premieres-at-telluride-what-did-the-audience-think-video&media=>
Tracking figures suggested that Steve Jobs’s opening weekend takings would be 
as high as $19m, so its failure to net an audience over the weekend must have 
come as a shock for Universal.Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/box-office/steve-jobs-flops-1201626243/> reports 
that the film isn’t likely to make a profit for the studio: it cost $30m to 
make and at least as much to market. So far, domestically, Boyle’s film has 
only cracked $10m; it needs to make around $120m to break even.

Studio executives told Variety that they’re adamant the film can rebound, 
arguing that it performed well in major markets like New York and San Francisco 
(near where Apple is based), and positive word of mouth will quickly spread.

Since it first premiered at the Telluride film festival to largely favourable 
reviews, Steve Jobs has drawn comparisons toThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network>, another Sorkin-scripted 
film about the tech industry and one of its most controversial figures. The 
film was a big hit, earning $22.4m in its opening weekend in 2010, leading many 
to believe Steve Jobs could pull off a similar feat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447337353294%2FKP_594371_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Jobs%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fsteve-jobs-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F12%2F1447337353294%2FKP_594371_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Steve Jobs - video review 
In hindsight, that proved unduly optimistic. The Social Network was timely: it 
came out just as Facebook was exploding. The Social Network’s protagonist, Mark 
Zuckerberg, was also deemed as an enigma to most at the time of the film’s 
release. David Fincher’s film promised to uncover the man behind the phenomenon.

Boyle’s film on the other hand centers on a figure with whom the world is 
wholly familiar. Jobs has already been the subject of a best-selling biography 
by Walter Isaacson, the Kutcher film, a critically acclaimed documentary from 
Oscar winner Alex Gibney that opened earlier this year, and countless articles 
following his death.

Many entertainment trades have blamed the casting of Michael Fassbender in the 
titular role as the main culprit in the film’s failure to cross over.Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/box-office/steve-jobs-flops-1201626243/> went so 
far as to say “his casting may have been disastrous from a commercial 
standpoint”.

Steve Jobs review: Fassbender excels but iWorship required if you're to care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/steve-jobs-movie-review-michael-fassbender-telluride>
Indeed, the German-Irish actor has never established himself as a bankable 
actor in the league of Leonardo DiCaprio or Christian Bale, who both passed on 
the project when it was initially with Sony, before Universal swooped in to 
save the film. But lack of pulling power wasn’t the only factor behind Steve 
Jobs’s underperformance.

In the end, the film might have just been too experimental for mainstream 
audiences to embrace. Unlike the standard biopic approach he took on The Social 
Network, Sorkin’s script forSteve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/steve-jobs> focuses on three key product 
launches. The end result plays like an engrossing three-act play, with barely a 
moment of silence during its two-hour running time. It’s a film that demands a 
lot on the part of its audience – and chances are, the prospect of that 
challenge scared many away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfJ1O1vb9AUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfJ1O1vb9AUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfJ1O1vb9AUU&media=>
The film’s performance calls to mind that of Paul Thomas Anderson’s last film, 
The Master – another thought-provoking and unconventional drama that opened 
amid deafening awards buzz.

In 2012, the Scientology drama broke the record for the best limited debut of 
all time 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/specialty-box-office-the-master-shatters-per-theater-average-record-arbitrage-also-very-strong>
 after opening in five theaters to astronomical theater averages. Analysts were 
sure at the time that its success boded well for its national release. But as 
soon as it went wide, The Master flopped with mainstream audiences.

In the end, the film failed to even crack $20m, only netting just over $16m 
over its entire domestic run, which proved disastrous for Annapurna Pictures 
and the Weinstein Company, both of whom contributed to its $60m production and 
marketing costs.

A similar fate looks to have befallen Steve Jobs, another film that proves 
quality doesn’t always translate into box office figures. Its awards prospects, 
however, still look bright.
 