
Forty years ago, had you told Steven Tyler <http://www.steventyler.com/> that 
in order to stay relevant he eventually would need to “go country”, it’s likely 
the famed Aerosmith frontman would have attempted to strangle you with one of 
his multicolored scarves.


Not anymore. Tyler recently moved to Nashville to work on what would become 
his first solo record. We’re All Somebody From Somewhere, released last month, 
is the product of a team of collaborators – producers, songwriters, a label (
Big Machine <http://www.bigmachinelabelgroup.com/>) also home to Tim McGraw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/13/tim-mcgraw-traditional-country-music-diamond-rings-old-barstools>
 andRascal Flatts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PPRjqnOjVTc> – who are 
helping relaunch Tyler as a modern country newcomer deserving of a place on the 
charts alongsideDierks Bentley <http://www.dierks.com/> and Jason Aldean 
<http://www.jasonaldean.com/>. Why? Because that’s where the fans are.

Country music is presenting new opportunities to artists who once enjoyed 
non-stop airplay on rock radio playlists but who now have fewer outlets since 
the format eroded. Besides Tyler, Don Henley, Sheryl Crow, Sammy Hagar, Uncle 
Kracker, Kid Rock and Aaron Lewis of Staind have all rebooted their fanbase.
Darius Rucker <http://www.dariusrucker.com/> of Hootie and the Blowfish 
launched an entirely new career by turning to Nashville. Within the city lie 
the publishing houses, major labels and studios that work with collective 
precision to create and market hits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIgzZpuv6A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIgzZpuv6A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIgzZpuv6A&media=>
The county music industry is an insular world which understands its market 
like a science: by contrast general pop music has no geographic base and 
therefore is more prone to interruptions in sound, message and cultural quirks. 
In Nashville, traditions are set from years past. As other genres have 
splintered into relying on niche platforms such as satellite radio and 
podcasts, mainstream country music has remained reliably consistent.

One reason is down to the city itself. It is an industry town that has done 
very well in protecting its No 1 asset. The promotional machinery – theCMA 
Music Festival <http://www.cmaworld.com/cma-music-festival/>, CMT 
<http://www.cmt.com/>, multiple television awards shows throughout the year, the
Grand Ole Opry <http://www.opry.com/> and, of course, terrestrial radio (AM or 
FM stations) – is built to create and market stars as well as keep their 
careers humming for years to come.

As one of the most recognizable voices in rock, Tyler doesn’t need respect. 
But he does need to be heard, which for an artist nearing 70 can be difficult. 
(He’s 68.) Baby boomers, those aged 52 to 70 in 2016, no longer represent the 
demographic that advertisers want to reach via terrestrial radio, which has 
forced many older artists to settle for reaching their fans through alternative 
media or online. There exists a yawning gap for rock formats on the dial, now 
controlled largely by three companies: Cumulus Media, CBS Radio and 
iHeartMedia, the former Clear Channel. Pop, EDM and hip-hop continue to be 
viewed as the cutting edge and the population surge in Latinos over recent 
years has resulted in far more stations catering to them, creating more 
competition for airwaves’ ad dollars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsteven-tyler-country-new-album-were-all-somebody-from-somewhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905181428e6cf6ea2d6a454e81b98fad73b95140%2F0_182_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steven%20Tyler%3A%20walking%20this%20way%20into%20country%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsteven-tyler-country-new-album-were-all-somebody-from-somewhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steven%20Tyler%3A%20walking%20this%20way%20into%20country%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsteven-tyler-country-new-album-were-all-somebody-from-somewhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905181428e6cf6ea2d6a454e81b98fad73b95140%2F0_182_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Room for one more on the bandwagon? Tyler on the Tonight Show. Photograph: 
NBC/Getty Images 
So to get on the radio often means jumping the fence to country. The numbers 
make sense: terrestrial radio still remains the number one way people discover 
new music, according toa 2014 report by research and polling firm Edison 
Research <http://www.edisonresearch.com/the-infinite-dial-2016/>. Thirty-five 
percent of US listeners rely on the radio for new music, giving it the edge 
over streaming services such as Spotify and satellite radio giant Sirius XM. 
Among listeners aged 12-24, that percentage nearly doubles to 65%, making it a 
second choice only to YouTube.

Red, White and You sums up the glaring problem with the plug-and-play of 
Nashville songwriting

But older listeners have discovered country music and are sticking with it. A 
2015 report by Nielsen discovered that country is the second-most preferred 
radio format among listeners aged 25-54 (contemporary pop is first). The same 
goes for millennial-aged listeners. Overall, terrestrial radio loyalists, 
regardless of age, prefer country music as their third choice, preceded by 
news/talk and contemporary pop. Classic rock is a distant seventh.

So when Tyler wants the challenge of making a solo record, he is also 
challenging his fans who tend to be loyal only to the hits. Classic rock radio, 
the only rock-oriented radio format in the Nielsen top 10, has conditioned them 
that way, making it difficult for marquee artists to get new music on the air 
because they’re forced to compete with their old songs.

But country radio adores new songs. If anything, the format is criticized for 
its short attention span because of its churning demand for fresh faces and hit 
songs that catch fire with audiences.

To make the leap to country, Tyler signed with the Big Machine Label Group, 
the company best known for breaking Taylor Swift. From the start the company 
put him on the rounds of country music awards shows and he was spotted hanging 
out at the Bluebird Cafe, the incubator for Nashville songwriters. The 
connection also helped place his music in areas where he would find a friendly 
audience, such as events produced by theProfessional Bull Riders 
<http://www.pbr.com/> where a song off Tyler’s new album is now aired in arenas 
before the main attraction and in advertising campaigns.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0n40GVcj64&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0n40GVcj64>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0n40GVcj64&media=>
The credits for the new album are lined with familiar names in modern 
Nashville. Co-producers T Bone Burnett, Dann Huff and Marti Fredericksen are 
all veterans from the rock and pop worlds who have crossed over to country 
while co-producer Jaren Johnston has co-written hits for Tim McGraw and Keith 
Urban. Providing co-writes with Tyler are also a group of current hitmakers: 
Hillary Lindsey (Carrie Underwood), Rhett Akins (Jason Aldean, Luke Bryan), 
Brad and Brett Warren (Tim McGraw, Toby Keith), Chris DeStefano (Jason Aldean, 
Miranda Lambert) and Alyssa Bonagura, a 28-year-old singer-songwriter whose 
2012 ukulele hitI Make My Own Sunshine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUFDFePer_c> was first popularized on a Lowe’s 
commercial that year.

Tyler covers that song and doesn’t change a great deal – the ukulele and 
handclaps suggest he too wants a piece of the feel-good vibe that permeates 
much of modern country radio. In fact, much of the album is faithful to that 
calculation. The acoustic ballads Love Is Your Name and It Ain’t Easy are 
refreshing new turns for the singer, and for songs with rougher edges like My 
Own Worst Enemy (“I could play Seagram’s for all the whiskey/And for the tipsy 
that’s still here on my breath”), Tyler’s vocal rasp suggests a life experience 
that younger singers are forced to fake.

The album fails when it sounds too greased for chart jockeying. The Good, The 
Bad, The Ugly & Me is the worst of generic southern rock and Sweet Louisiana 
sounds nothing like it ever came from that state musically – and no, adding a 
few seconds of accordion before the bridge won’t do it.

But maybe the dumbest song Tyler has ever recorded in his 46-year career is 
Red, White and You, a song that sums up the glaring problem with the 
plug-and-play of Nashville songwriting. Here are all the cliches — 
name-checking a southern state (Georgia), southern food (sweet potato pie), a 
classic rocker (Tom Petty), a summer holiday (Fourth of July), an awkward 
sexual euphemism (“bang, bang baby like the Fourth of July!”), girls in cut-off 
jeans, jingoistic patriotism and, of course, trucks. Always the trucks. In a 
different context, this is satire.

You can imagine the committee that put Red, White and You together rubbing 
their hands in anticipation of a summertime smash. Especially with Tyler 
committing to sing the wink-wink lyric about him “free-falling into your 
yum-yum”.

Except summer is almost over and the song has already fallen off the charts. 
Which brings us to a big lesson all classic rock icons need to learn when they 
blindly go all-in for modern country: Nashville may be the pipeline to the 
people, but that doesn’t mean it wouldn’t benefit from a great big flushing now 
and then.
 