
It could be a very cunning plan even beyond the realms of Baldrick. Perhaps 
Australia's ineptitude is designed to sow a fatal complacency in the England 
camp when the real contest – next year's Ashes – comes around. But it is 
doubtful.

At Chester-le-Street Australia, albeit handicapped by losing an important 
toss, were thrashed for the third time in this series. England may not have 
been flawless – they dropped a couple of catches – but they do not have to be 
against an unusually frail Australia side. On Saturday too many of their 
batsmen were undermined by the pace of Steven Finn and two of their senior 
bowlers, Brett Lee and Shane Watson, returned to the pavilion prematurely, 
nursing ailments.

The odds must be on a fourth and final England victory at Old Trafford on 
Tuesday. But the Ashes are not quite sealed yet. Remember that this is little 
more than a reconnaissance mission for the Australians. It will be a little 
trickier in 12 months' time.

Trickier still for England will be the series against South Africa. Two of the 
home side's ODI players are putting down markers for inclusion for the Oval 
Test.

Ravi Bopara is demonstrating good form with the bat and was very handy with 
the ball at the Riverside. It would be a surprise if he was not chosen instead 
of Jonny Bairstow.

The more difficult decision will be whether to include Finn, who twice found 
himself on a hat-trick on Saturday and who was palpably England's best bowler 
on the day. Finn knows that he can take nothing for granted. It was only two 
Tests ago that his most obvious rival, Tim Bresnan, was given the man of the 
match award for his efforts against the West Indies at Trent Bridge.

After this latest win, Finn said: "Everything is focused towards playing Test 
cricket – I have always wanted to do that. But at the minute, it is trying to 
be a good one-day team. I am trying to focus on bowling and enjoying the 
responsibility of opening the bowling, trying to thrive on it and putting my 
name into the hat for Test selection. The main way I am going to do that, 
though, is by going back to Middlesex in four-day cricket rather than taking 
one-day wickets."

But a few one-day wickets do not do his cause any harm. Australia on Sunday 
called up left-arm pace bowler Mitchell Starc as cover for the rest of the 
series while they assess Lee and Watson's calf injuries.
 