
Last Saturday, I took my children on a tour of the Freemasons’ Hall in Covent 
Garden. I explained to them that they were going to visit the magical 
headquarters of an ancient secret society, to blow their childish minds. Be 
honest. Don’t you wish I was your dad? Where’s your dad taken you this weekend? 
The Cumberland Pencil Museum? Barometer World? The Morpeth Bagpipe Centre?

Sadly, the temple and museum were closed that day, as the freemasons were 
assembled within, deciding the future of the world. But, luckily for my 
disappointed children, suddenly hundreds of freemasons streamed from the temple 
into Covent Garden, each dressed in trademark black suit, and carrying a little 
bag just big enough to hold his apron, his dagger and some Shippam’s fish paste 
sandwiches from his freemason mum, in case he got hungry while manipulating 
global events.

One friendly freemason engaged my three-year-old, who was dressed as Dracula, 
in banter about her outfit, rich coming from a man who moments before was 
blindfolded in a pair of one-legged trousers, like the singer from Imagination. 
Nonetheless, I wished I could be a member of a secret society that controlled 
the destiny of nations. Then I remembered. I already am!

Accused last week by the disappointed standup Andrew Lawrence 
<https://www.facebook.com/andrewlawrencecomedy/posts/10154749255720253>, star 
of Radio 4 and all TV standup shows, of being biased in favour of talentless 
women and “ethnics”, and by Nigel Farage of the Ukips of representing a liberal 
media elite of Ukips-hating luvvies, British comedy is having its Pastor 
Niemöller moment. “First they came for the immigrants, but I did not speak out 
because I was not an immigrant. Then they came for Lenny Henry, but I did not 
speak out because I was not Lenny Henry. And then they came for the TV 
panel-show comedians – and there was no one left to speak for me.”

As long ago as the 19 July 2011, Jan Moir of the Daily Mail posited the 
existence of a shadowy and “deeply unpleasant cabal of foul-mouthed leftwing 
comics”, so secretive that her stupid article was only able to name two members 
of it – me, and Frankie Boyle, a man I have met only once – and disappeared 
from the paper’s website within days due to its actionable idiocy. Besides, I 
wouldn’t want to belong to any deeply unpleasant cabal that would have me as a 
member.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415214404928%2F92837838-76f0-4b8d-bc86-3cde1f1ec5c6-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stewart%20Lee%3A%20The%20Imaginary%20Liberal%20Comedy%20Cabal%20will%20crush%20the%20Ukips%20into%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stewart%20Lee%3A%20The%20Imaginary%20Liberal%20Comedy%20Cabal%20will%20crush%20the%20Ukips%20into%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415214404928%2F92837838-76f0-4b8d-bc86-3cde1f1ec5c6-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Andrew Lawrence. Photograph: Idil Sukan 
Last Thursday, in the regular column he has in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/good-on-andrew-lawrence--hes-exposed-the-liberal-consensus-that-blights-what-passes-for-comedy-9828931.html>
 as part of the biased liberal media’s attempt to silence him, Nigel Farage 
similarly asserted that the Ukips were targeted by a liberal elite of 
relentless bores and opined: “While I’m used to the ire of the PC-brigade, it 
must be disconcerting for [Andrew Lawrence] to be embroiled in all of this for 
speaking his mind.”

The truth is that, in our comedy community, everyone I met, including all the 
black and Asian comics I worked with last week, expressed genuine and 
sympathetic concern for their colleague Andrew Lawrence’s mental wellbeing. 
(Could I just point out here that I met three black and Asian people I am 
friendly with on the live circuit last week just by chance. I wasn’t going 
around with a quota to firm up my liberal credentials, even though it was, 
admittedly, next on my “to do” list.)

Jokes about the Ukips are, according to Farage, “low-hanging fruit” for people 
who misunderstand the Ukips. “Aren’t comedians supposed to be witty and 
subversive?” he asked, before citing four comedians – Carlin, Pryor, Mayall and 
Rivers – our generation should learn from. All four are conveniently recently 
dead, otherwise they would be involved in the same kind of panicked 
damage-limitation exercises currently performed by any musician David Cameron 
confesses fondness for.

You don’t need to be part of a liberal media elite controlling the flow of 
information to find the Ukips funny. They are funny because David Silvester said
gay marriage had caused flooding in the Thames basin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/18/uk-storms-divine-retirubtion-gay-marriage-ukip>
; because Godfrey Bloom assaulted a reporter with a conference brochureand 
condemned aid to “bongo bongo land” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/06/ukip-godfrey-bloom-bongo-bongo-land>
; because their celebrity Mike Read sanga pro-Ukips calypso in a West Indian 
accent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/20/ukip-calypso-song-number-one-nigel-farage-mike-read>
; because William Henwood saidLenny Henry should emigrate to a “black country” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/27/ukip-farage-racism-lenny-henry-politics-europe>
; becauseWinston McKenzie <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winston_McKenzie> has 
the fame-crazed air of a man who would join a Skrewdriver tribute band if he 
thought it would get him on Channel 5 news; and because the Ukips’ deputy 
leader, Paul Nuttalls, is so pleased to be the centre of attention he sports 
the perpetual expression of a baby that has just used a potty for the first 
time, holding up his arse muck delightedly for his parents to coo over.

If you can’t play the video below, click here 
<http://instagram.com/p/onmeLbRtTQ/?modal=true>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2FonmeLbRtTQ%2F%3Fmodal%3Dtrue&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2FonmeLbRtTQ%2F%3Fmodal%3Dtrue>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2FonmeLbRtTQ%2F%3Fmodal%3Dtrue&media=>
 Stewart Lee 
(Note: Any deceased liberal 18th-century newspaper cartoonists interested in 
elaborating upon this idea should take care to label the potty “BRITISH 
POLITICS”, while the poo itself should have a tiny flag marked “UKIPS” planted 
in it. The baby himself, of course, should be wearing a Union Jack top hat, 
holding a pint and smoking a cigar.)

Oddly, despite Farage’s and Lawrence’s criticism of positive discrimination in 
favour of liberals, talentless women and unfunny “ethnics”, the current trend,
made explicit by the departing head of BBC radio comedy 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2291952/We-struggle-right-wing-comedians-admits-BBC-chief.html>
, is towards positive discrimination in favour of rightwing comedians, the 
dearth of talent in the field making it hard to maintain balance. This is an 
exercise in politically correct social engineering I myself am guilty of when I 
programme standup bills, tours and cable television showcases. I am as 
delighted to find a funny rightwinger as I am to find a funny person with a 
terrible disability or a bewildering sexual orientation, and when I find one I 
treasure and nurture them.

Even a member of the imaginary liberal comedy cabal would rather watch a funny 
rightwing standup on a panel than have to listen to the honking of Katie Hopkin 
again. Sadly Henning Wehn, Simon Evans and Liam Mullone, the only three 
right-of-centre standups funny enough to fulfil the brief, can’t do all the 
jobs, so the spaces are filled with non-comedian columnists such as Rod Liddle 
and Daniel Finkelstein, who reap the benefits of this blatant pro-rightwing 
tokenism in an act of political correctness gone mad.

The Ukips’ position on comedy is, like so many things, ill-thought out. In 
March,Paul Nuttalls called for Johnny and the Baptists to be banned from any 
venue receiving public subsidy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/09/vision-life-under-ukip-steel-capped-hush-puppies>
 – basically everywhere – for doing a funny song about the Ukips, even though 
the same places host Jim Davidson, Roy Chubby Brown, John Gaunt and Top Gear; 
the same week Farage defended the booking of an old-school non-PC comic at the 
Ukips’ conference saying: “Let people tell their jokes! If what they say is 
inappropriate they won’t earn a living.” But the position that there is no 
moral dimension to comedy and that the free market should be its only arbiter, 
while consistent with Nuttalls’ plan to scrap the “uncompetitive” NHS, is at 
least preferable to the one Farage now occupies, namely that satire should be 
silenced by his exaggerated victimhood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415214546963%2Fd7489719-816c-45bb-accd-f24e9183de26-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stewart%20Lee%3A%20The%20Imaginary%20Liberal%20Comedy%20Cabal%20will%20crush%20the%20Ukips%20into%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stewart%20Lee%3A%20The%20Imaginary%20Liberal%20Comedy%20Cabal%20will%20crush%20the%20Ukips%20into%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fstewart-lee-the-imaginary-liberal-comedy-cabal-will-crush-the-ukips-into-dust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415214546963%2Fd7489719-816c-45bb-accd-f24e9183de26-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Deputy Ukip leader Paul Nuttall, aka Paul Nuttalls. Photograph: Fabio De Paola 
There is no liberal comedy cabal. At least there wasn’t a week ago. But maybe 
Farage has created one. I don’t speak for comedians. They all hate me. And 
Lawrence and Farage do have unlikely supporters in standup. But last Thursday, 
on the day Farage’s Independent rant ran, I was doing a homeless benefit with 
five other acts – an Asian man, a black woman, an Australian woman, a man who 
was Irish, and a poor bald man with a terrible speech impediment who only gets 
gigs out of sympathy. I, a white middle-class man, was the only normal person 
on the bill, and the only one who had got into the show by his own merits. 
Nonetheless, by sheer coincidence, three of the acts ended up talking about 
race, prejudice and the Ukips (I myself talked only about urine). That night, 
threatened as we are now by the rise of a party that wants to see satire 
silenced, their routines seemed powerful, bold, relevant, vital, alive, 
dangerous and electrifying.

So. Let this Imaginary Liberal Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Cabal will itself into existence. 
And when our liberal grandchildren ask us: “What did you do in the war, 
grandperson of indeterminate gender?” we can say: “I said Paul Nuttalls was 
like a baby doing a poo.” Come at us. For we are slayers, of gigantic 
melancholy and gigantic mirth, coming hither, killing the rooms, night after 
night, microphones in hand. And we will crush your constituencies under our 
sandalled feet. We will see you driven before us like the dust, and scattered 
to the four winds. And we will hear the mewling of your followers, and we will 
rejoice in the lamentations of your German women.

Stewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle (Series 3) DVD is released on 10 November. His 
2015 touring dates are now on sale.www.stewartlee.co.uk 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/>
 