
Coalition MPs left parliament last week with a lot of back-slapping and 
self-congratulatory cheer about the Turnbull government’s legislative wins. 
Whoop, whoop indeed! They spent several days consumed by setting the tax rate 
paid by backpacking seasonal fruit pickers. Jobs and growth!

And they gutted their own Australian Building and Construction Commission 
(ABCC) legislation of any actual force, just so they could pass a bill with 
ABCC in the title. How exciting.

2016: A year of delivery indeed.

Yes, Malcolm Turnbull, you've Got Things Done. You've tidied your sock drawer 
| Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/yes-malcolm-turnbull-youve-got-things-done-youve-tidied-your-sock-drawer>
While the government was fart-arsing around solving problems of their own 
making, plenty of real-world challenges with real impact on real Australian 
families were left undone. Save this column. Stick it on the fridge. Use it as 
a form guide for 2017. Let’s see how far the government progresses next year on 
the following:

Paid parental leave – end to ‘double dipping’ 

The Coalition took a “rolled gold” paid parental leave scheme 
<http://lpaweb-static.s3.amazonaws.com/The%20Coalition%E2%80%99s%20Policy%20for%20Paid%20Parental%20Leave.pdf>
 to the 2013 election. It was more generous than the Labor government’s PPL 
scheme and was scheduled to commence on 1 July 2015.

Then, in May 2015 – on Mother’s Day, no less – the Coalition moved in the 
opposite direction: itannounced 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/budget-2015/budget-2015-hockey-to-end-doubledipping-on-paid-parental-leave/news-story/aaa211c95f19d445ec0410a9e0bfdc7c>
 changes that barred mothers from receiving taxpayer support if their employer 
also offered parental leave benefits. In doing so, the Coalition ignored that 
the government PPL scheme wasdesigned 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/ems/r4347_ems_e301683b-7b39-4fde-a5f5-f7935d163802/upload_pdf/342572.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 to allow mothers to combine government benefits with parental leave benefits 
employers offered. However, that factdidn’t stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/19/joe-hockey-presses-on-with-double-dipping-ppl-ban-as-a-matter-of-honour>
 social services minister Scott Morrison from describing the government PPL as 
a “rort”, or treasurer Joe Hockey from agreeing it amounted to “fraud”. The 
change is meant to save some $968m over four years.

The legislation to introduce the Coalition’s plan to “end PPL double-dipping” 
failed to gain support in the Senate prior to the 2016 election. A new bill is 
currently before the parliament. Despite reports last week that the Turnbull 
government may have reached compromises with some Senate crossbenchers on PPL, 
the bill remains in limbo.

Child care reforms 

The Coalition is dedicating the savings in PPL to support a new childcare 
package. Announced in the 2015 budget, the Coalition is promising to reform the 
childcare subsidy to deliver “simpler, more affordable, accessible, and flexible
 <http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/glossy/families/html/families-02.htm>
” childcare. It is also committing an additional $3bn to childcare support. The 
changes are scheduled to commence on 1 July 2017. Many families will receive 
more support, but there will be some cuts, including to grandparents and high 
income families. Laborargues 
<http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-29/child-care-reforms-fail-to-convince-labor-greens/6984324?pfmredir=sm>
 that the government’s proposal will make one in four families worse off. A 
bill is currently before the Senate, where it is opposed by Labor and Greens.

Education funding 

In the 2013 election campaign, Tony Abbott announced that a Coalition 
government would match Labor’s education funding package – the Gonski reforms – 
dollar for dollar for the next four years, and that no school would be worse 
off. He described himself on a “unity ticket” with Labor. In government, the 
Coalition announced it would only honour the Gonski package for one year. Only 
a week later, Abbottbackflipped 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/gonski-reversal-tony-abbott-backflips-puts-12b-into-schools-20131202-2yl79.html>
 again, announcing that the existing Gonski agreements with NSW, Victoria and 
Tasmania would be honoured. Since 2013, the Coalition has been in discussion 
with the states about a new funding agreement due to start in 2018.

During the 2016 election campaign, education funding was a key point of 
difference, with Laborpromising <http://www.laborsplanforeducation.com.au/> to 
fully fund the Gonski reforms.

Next week, education minister Simon Birmingham meets with his state 
counterparts to continue negotiations. He is putting no new money on the table 
besides indexation.

Birmingham’s problem is that many of the state governments prefer the Gonski 
funding, with the strongest Gonski support coming from the Liberal/National 
Baird government in NSW.

Last week Birmingham said he was “embarrassed for Australia 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/i-am-embarrassed-for-australia-education-minister-slams-appalling-maths-and-science-results-20161129-gt0foe.html>
” that maths and science results have fallen behind developing countries like 
Kazakhstan and Slovenia in international rankings. No doubt the states will 
remind him of that comment in coming days.

University fee deregulation and funding 

The Coalition announced full university fee deregulation and other changes to 
university funding in its 2014 budget. In August that year, the Coalition 
introduced legislation to achieve this budget initiative, with Christopher Pyne
telling 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-08-28/students-to-pay-more-under-higher-education-changes-pyne/5702496>
 the parliament that deregulation is “the only way to set our universities free 
to ensure they can deliver what they need. It is the only way to ensure 
Australia is not left behind.”

In the 2016 budget, the Coalition dumped 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-03/morrison-abandons-uni-fee-deregulation/7380564>
 their deregulation plan, citing community concerns, but remained committed to 
cutting $2bn from higher education and overhauling the university sector.

The government has delayed changes to university funding until 1 January 2018. 
Just a few weeks ago, Birminghamannounced 
<http://theconversation.com/panel-to-assist-in-working-up-long-delayed-changes-for-universities-66749>
 a three-member panel to advise the government on what its new policy should be.

Business tax cuts 

The centrepiece of the Coalition’s “jobs and growth” campaign, tax cuts for 
businesses big and small were supposed to be the first order of business for a 
re-elected Turnbull government. The cuts are proposed to be phased in over 10 
years and will cost the budget $48bn. The government has introduced the 
legislation to implement the cuts, but done little to move it through the 
parliament: there simply isn’t enough support in the Senate. Meanwhile, wages 
are stagnating and the labour force participation rate is falling. The best the 
government can hope for at this stage is to pass tax cuts in the new year for 
small businesses only.

Marriage equality

The Senate voted down the government’s proposal to hold a non-binding, 
expensive national plebiscite on same sex marriage: it seems most senators just 
want the parliament to do its job and consider legislation to amend the 
Marriage Act. It’s completely unclear what the Coalition’s current policy is: 
have another go at legislation for a plebiscite, hold a plebiscite without 
legislation, take the plebiscite policy to another election, or hold another 
marathon joint Liberal and National party room meeting to determine the 
government’s position?

Lifetime ban on asylum seekers who arrive by boat

The Turnbull government only flagged this legislative change late in 2016, but 
said it was so important that Labor must indicate support for the bill before 
the government even released it. Now the legislation is available and it’s not 
just Labor who won’t support it: the government can’t gain enough support from 
the crossbench for the bill to pass. A parliamentary joint committee dominated 
by government MPs has even issued a reportcriticising 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Human_Rights/Scrutiny_reports/2016/Report_9_of_2016>
 the legislation. Immigration minister Peter Dutton has shelved the bill for 
now, saying he doesn’t want it to fail and “send the wrong message” to people 
smugglers.

Year ends with Senate roulette and deals spun as grand bargains and cunning 
plans | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/year-ends-with-senate-roulette-and-deals-spun-as-grand-bargains-and-cunning-plans>
Of course, there are many other issues that could be added to this list: the 
national redress scheme for victims of institutional child sexual abuse; 
renewable energy targets beyond 2020; what to do about 18C and the debate about 
“free speech”; the roll-out of the NBN; resolving the stand-off between South 
Australia and other states over the Murray-Darling basin plan; and of course, 
repairing the budget.

For a government first elected in 2013 on rescuing Australia from a “debt and 
deficit emergency”, the Coalition is potentially about to face an unnatural 
disaster on 19 December when it brings down Myefo. All indications are the 
deficit is blowing out and the return to surplus will be pushed off. The credit 
ratings agencies are flagging a downgrade for Australia: many economists think 
it is likely.

I guess the ratings agencies just aren’t as impressed with a 15% backpacker 
tax and a hollow ABCC as government MPs are.

Meanwhile, in the real world, childcare and education and jobs and growth: the 
people of Australia are still waiting.
 