
“Many of the people we treated had feelings of guilt, that they could have 
done more to help, especially for the young children who died,” says Idit 
Albert, one of several psychologists from the South London and Maudsley NHS 
Trust to provide psychologist support to healthcare workers responding to Ebola 
in Sierra Leone. “It’s not normal for children to die, but we tried to 
normalise the fact that they’re not the only people to find the deaths of 
children difficult.”

Through Skype, phone calls and face-to-face sessions, Albert and her 
colleagues help workers from theKing’s Centre for Global Health 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/lsm/research/divisions/global-health/index.aspx> and the 
NHS to process and reflect on their experiences – before, during and after 
their deployments. TheEbola Psychological Support Service 
<http://www.slam.nhs.uk/our-services/ebola-service> provides different levels 
of support, from being a listening ear to treating the symptoms some health 
workers had developed.

“Some people had – and still do have – intrusive memories of their experience, 
particularly around the time they go to sleep,” says Albert. “What was more 
prominent, though, were the feelings of guilt and self doubt over the care they 
provided: did they do the right things?”


In a survey into aid worker wellbeing and mental health by the Global 
Development Professionals Network,79% of respondents stated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
 that they had experienced mental health issues. The vast majority, 93%, of 
those aid workers believe the problems are related to their work. Of concern to 
66% of survey respondents was the lack of psychological support made available 
to aid workers by their employers.


Guardian research suggests mental health crisis among aid workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
Are organisations supporting their staff? 

“Most aid workers are prone to burnout and many that I have worked with have 
PTSD. But little or no psychological support is provided pre or post-deployment 
to support aid workers deal with these issues,” said one respondent. “Many 
organisations have a hotline that staff can call to talk to a psychologist in 
another part of the world that they have never met – this is simply a tick box 
process.”


The provision of psychological support for aid workers and humanitarians is 
patchy. Some NGOs do offer support, but the quality varies between 
organisations. Fewer still provide support once aid workers return home from a 
mission.


“Even the bigger NGOs don’t seem to have the capacity to provide the full 
package of care; screening, and support during and after deployment,” says 
Albert. “They might do some of it but it’s not consistent in provision and 
quality.”

Why might NGOs not provide adequate psychological support to their staff? It 
may be, says Emmanuelle Lacroix, people capacity and development manager atCHS 
Alliance <http://chsalliance.org/>, that many international NGOs want to 
improve the level of support they provide but are constrained by a lack of 
resources, as well as a focus on output and the delivery of programmes.

Problems may also occur due to a lack of awareness at headquarters. “At head 
office, there are staff who have not been abroad, whose careers have progressed 
well and were probably not affected themselves, or who have gone up through a 
developmental route and so are unfamiliar with the acute cases,” says Graham 
MacKay, director of business strategy and finance atBond 
<https://www.bond.org.uk/>. 


There are, however, guidelines in place to address the psychological needs of 
aid workers. Developed by theAntares Foundation 
<https://www.antaresfoundation.org/> in 2012, the guidelines state 
<https://www.antaresfoundation.org/FileLibrary/file6782.pdftice.pdf> (pdf) that 
it is up to the organisation to develop policies to prevent and mitigate the 
effects of routine and unexpected sources of stress on aid workers.


Aid workers speak out about mental health: 'I was afraid they would think I 
couldn't handle it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
So are the guidelines enough? Probably not, says MacKay, who despite working 
in the humanitarian sector for around 20 years, was not aware that the Antares 
guidelines existed.


“The guidelines are only as good as how you adapt them to the context,” says 
Lacroix. “It is not enough to say: ‘Oh yeah, we have the guidelines.’ because 
they need to be contextualised and reviewed and updated based on feedback and 
the changing contexts. It has to be a living thing.”


While there may be gaps in the system, it could also be true that aid workers 
are not seeking the support they say they want. Despite working in the field of 
psychological trauma since the late 90s, Albert had never treated a 
humanitarian or aid worker before leading the Ebola Psychological Support 
Service. In fact, most of her colleagues in the trust – the biggest mental 
health trust in the UK – hadn’t either. Seeing themselves as help-providers 
rather than help-seekers and worrying about being a burden to their employer 
are some of the reasons Albert hears aid workers give for not seeking help 
through the NHS.

But perhaps one of the main reasons aid workers are reluctant to seek 
psychological support is because of the stigma associated with it. “People are 
starting to realise that if they have an issue they need to be able to face it, 
but it’s true that some organisational cultures maybe don’t facilitate that, or 
that it might be seen as a weakness,” says Lacroix. Because of this, Albert and 
her team think support for aid workers should be an opt-out, not opt-in, 
service.

The pain of leaving communities you love burns a hole in your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/24/the-pain-of-leaving-communities-you-have-come-to-love-burns-a-hole-in-your-heart>
What could NGOs be doing differently? 

Pre-screening aid workers for mental health issues before they are deployed is 
often suggested as a possible solution. “I think screening is a really clever 
idea and I wish more aid agencies would do it,” says MacKay. “But there’s no 
overarching body that says: ‘No, you can’t operate here because you don’t 
screen your staff.’ It’s difficult to imagine a situation where that’s going to 
happen.”


Lacroix says that NGOs have to be realistic about what they can do within 
their own networks and partnerships they have developed. “It doesn’t have to be 
an all-singing, all-dancing provision,” she says. “For example, in one region 
where a number of agencies are working, is there a way to access a pool of 
on-call psychologists if someone has been through a really difficult incident, 
to be able to diffuse the initial trauma?”


While the psychological support available to humanitarians already varies 
across different organisations, there are calls for an industry-wide standard 
that all NGOs would be encouraged to adhere to. Albert and her colleagues at 
the Maudsley Psychology Centre have been meeting with the DfID to raise 
awareness about the need to support aid workers, and push for a standard that 
would meet the needs of the aid industry.


And over the next few years, one of the areas of focus for the CHS Alliance 
will be to set up a standard of excellence around staff care. While it is 
intended for the standard to still be adapted and contextualised, the alliance 
will be working with organisations such as the Antares Foundation andInterHealth
 <https://www.interhealthworldwide.org/>, as well as using data and lessons 
from the sector, to develop it.


Lacroix says: “The idea is to set up a standard that says regardless of who 
you are – whether you’re an expat or national aid worker – and regardless of 
where you are based or currently operating, this is what your organisation 
should have in place to support you.”


We will be continuing to explore the issue of mental health and well being in 
the aid sector this week on Global Development Professionals Network. You can 
follow the coveragehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
.Get in touch on globaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> if you would like to comment on the 
topic.


 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationallycan be found 
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 