
In The Big Picture, Romain Duris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/17/romain-duris-france-cinema-interview>
 plays a prosperous Parisian lawyer who accidentally kills his wife's lover. 
And then, because he has always yearned to be an artist, he swaps identities 
with the dead man and starts a new life as a boho photographer. Taking the 
place of a dead person (as opposed to posing as a dead person, likeShaun of the 
Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99960/shaun.of.the.dead> and 
friends) is a recurring motif of the noirish thriller, most memorably in 
Patricia Highsmith's The Talented Mr Ripley, filmed by both Réné Clément (as
Plein Soleil <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plein_Soleil>, starring Alain Delon 
at the peak of his male pulchritude) andAnthony Minghella 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Talented_Mr._Ripley_(film)>.

Ripley murders the man whose identity he appropriates, but impersonators more 
often drift passively into imposture because circumstances enable or even 
demand it. The Cornell Woolrich novel I Married a Dead Man (published under the 
writerly imposture of William Irish) was filmed by Robin Davis asJ'ai Epousé 
une Ombre <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0084158/>, with Nathalie Baye as an 
abused pregnant wife who, without really intending to, ends up leading the much 
comfier life of another pregnant woman when the latter and her husband are 
killed in a train crash. For once, the French adaptation of an American 
hardboiled novel makes the story sunnier instead of darker, though the idea of 
concealing horrible secrets from one's past with a spot of judiciously applied 
murder is still present.

Then there's Robert Wise's The House on Telegraph Hill 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_House_on_Telegraph_Hill>, in which Valentina 
Cortese plays a Nazi concentration camp survivor who assumes the identity of a 
dead friend and seeks refuge in San Francisco, only to find herself in mortal 
peril of another kind, at risk from a scheming husband even more skilled at 
wearing a mask than she is, and whose every line becomes loaded with sinister 
significance. "Don't forget your juice dear, it will help you sleep." Mwah 
hah hah.

Acting itself, of course, is a form of imposture, and when a skilled actor 
pulls off the double whammy of playing a character who's pretending to be 
another character, as when Jeremy Irons passes himself off as his own twin in 
David Cronenberg'sDead Ringers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Ringers_(film)>, it's thrilling to be 
complicit in the deception. But imposture didn't start with the movies. There's 
barely a Shakespeare comedy that doesn't dabble in stand-ins, or women 
disguising themselves as men; Alexandre Dumas, Wilkie Collins, Mark Twain, 
Anthony Hope all famously exploited it in their stories, and it remains a 
favourite storytelling device. This year alone, prime examples of cinematic 
imposture have cropped up in films as diverse asBlack Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137726/black-swan>, X-Men: First Class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141950/x-men>, Cell 211 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140498/cell-211> and Harry Potter and 
the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141606/harry-potter-and-the-deathly-hallows>
.

And it's that diversity that makes it noteworthy. The films of Alfred 
Hitchcock and David Lynch are rife with imposture, but it doesn't confine 
itself to any single genre; it can inform comedies (To Be Or Not to Be, Some 
Like It Hot) as well as thrillers (Body Heat), war films (Went the Day Well?, 
Where Eagles Dare), caper movies (Ocean's Eleven), musicals (My Fair Lady), 
westerns (Rancho Notorious), rom-coms (Working Girl, Never Been Kissed), sci-fi 
(Invasion of the Body Snatchers, The Thing), horror (Psycho, The Stepfather), 
historical drama (Anastasia, Kagemusha), documentaries (Catfish, Exit Through 
the Gift Shop) and arthouse (The Passenger), not to mention just about every 
spy movie ever made.

The only genre in which I can't think of an example is the socio-realist 
drama, perhaps because as a narrative device imposture is viewed as artificial 
and melodramatic, like the evil twin trick so beloved of soap opera. You're 
unlikely to find it in a Ken Loach movie, for example. But is it as artificial 
as all that? On the contrary, I think we're all imposture experts, so adept at 
convincing ourselves we are what we're not, we no longer even notice we're 
doing it, whether it's pretending to be self-confident, or letting people think 
we studied at the Sorbonne when we didn't.

Admittedly, few of us have gone as far as Frank Abagnale, whose life was 
filmed by Steven Spielberg inCatch Me If You Can 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catch_Me_If_You_Can>. But we all carry a stash of 
peel-off faces in our pockets, one for every occasion, just like Tom Cruise in 
Mission: Impossible.
 