
News that there we have slipped further behind in global rankings in maths and 
science in our schools has brought the usual responses from the usual suspects. 
The federal minister for education Simon Birmingham says that“he is 
embarrassed” at the “appalling results” 
<https://radio.abc.net.au/programitem/pgX4V0AAE7?play=true>.

He says this has nothing to do with funding but everything to do with “teacher 
quality”. That old chestnut. Nothing to do with class sizes either. Birmingham 
is on the record quoting research that says smaller class sizes don’t make a 
difference.

Let’s just put that one to bed once and for all. 

Just because classes of 45 are manageable in other cultures doesn’t mean they 
are here. We are culturally very different to many of the countries on the 
rankings ladder. What can a teacher do in an Australian school do if a student 
tells them to “fuck off” or tosses a chair out the window or doesn’t do their 
homework? Nothing. Where is the support for such situations? In the principal’s 
office? The same principal who is so weighed down with the demands of the 
parents, the departments and the education bureaucracies that they are unable 
to get out of their office even if they want to?

International maths and science rankings: keep calm but change direction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/international-maths-and-science-rankings-keep-calm-but-change-direction>
When are we going to face up to the fact that we have got our priorities all 
wrong? When are we going to stop the blame game and take the steps that need to 
be taken to improve conditions in our schools for both teachers and students 
and, in doing so, inevitably raise standards?

Is it any wonder 30%-50% of new teachers drop out in the first five years of 
teaching 
<http://www.anu.edu.au/news/all-news/teachers-are-leaving-the-profession-%E2%80%93-heres-how-to-make-them-stay>
? Is it because they have been badly trained or have poor skills? Or is it 
because they discover that teaching in contemporary Australian schools involves 
so much work outside the classroom that they never get to do what they are 
trained for? That is, teach.

Our obsession with accountability means that every spare moment of a teacher’s 
life is spent not preparing lessons or finding resources but satisfying the 
bureaucratic demands of the job. In other words filling in forms. Doing 
paperwork, most of which could be done by anyone.

Young teachers need mentors. We all know that. It’s not easy controlling a 
class of teenagers whose respect you have to earn. That’s right, earn. Our 
culture does everything but respect teachers. Why would anyone think our 
students would be any different?

We have very different disciplinary expectations to some of our “rivals” on 
educational ladder tables. We also have students with a range of special needs. 
They are not going to get where we want them to be on their own.

It’s astounding that we can’t make the link between the appalling social 
conditions endured by some of our communities and their educational results. 
People in living in abject poverty aren’t doing well in maths and science. 
Who’d have thought? Must be the teachers. People living is disadvantaged areas 
aren’t doing well at school? Blow me down. You know who to blame. People who 
have escaped war torn regions and for whom English is a second language are 
struggling in class. Really? Must be the fault of that young teacher trying to 
control a class of tearaways.

Here’s a simple suggestion to get the ball rolling: remove all but the most 
essential paperwork from teachers’ inboxes and give them the space to devote 
the time they need to prepare lessons for their classes. Provide them with the 
physical and emotional support they need in the way of mentors. And, sorry Mr 
Birmingham, in this country, keep class sizes manageable.

A conga line of politicians from both sides of the political divide have 
pointed to increased funding over the years as though this in itself is the 
panacea. As Gonski andnow the Grattan Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/turnbull-government-has-unprecedented-chance-to-end-school-funding-debate>
 have pointed out, it’s not the money it’s how it is spent. By providing 
resources on a needs based formula we will go a long way to getting it right.

Turnbull government has 'unprecedented' chance to end school funding debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/turnbull-government-has-unprecedented-chance-to-end-school-funding-debate>
To start on the right foot with this we need to once and for all put an end to 
the tired old private v public debate that chews up way too much air time and 
is preventing the kinds of advances being made that we desperately need.

The government doesn’t even need to increase funding – it just needs to 
identify where it is most needed and, asGrattan’s Peter Goss says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/turnbull-government-has-unprecedented-chance-to-end-school-funding-debate>
, make that transparent. Only a tiny fraction of private schools – 1% – are 
seriously over funded. That could be redressed with the stroke of a pen and 
most of those schools would accept the cuts because, surprise, surprise, they 
are teachers at heart and most teachers support Gonski’s recommendations. Then 
cap the next 2% of private schools that have adequate funding and increase on a 
needs-based formula for those private schools that are struggling. Similarly, 
cap funding to the better resourced public schools and reallocate that funding 
as needs be.

It really is time we took the politics out of this debate. On both sides. And 
stop looking for scapegoats. If we want to lift our rankings on global 
educational ladders we all have to contribute.

After all, in the end these are all our children.
 