
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> is still one of the most 
deprived cities in the UK, but it does have an economy that is slowly 
improving. Only last week, it jumped to fifth place in the table of cities 
most-visited from overseas. The 1,000 new jobs at the Jaguar Land Rover plant 
in Halewood are another welcome boost. Yet the fact that some 35,000 people 
applied for those vacancies shows how it still has a long way to go.

This is why ambitious projects like Liverpool Waters 
<http://www.liverpoolwaters.co.uk>, the controversial plan for new offices, 
homes and other facilities around decaying northern dockland, are important. 
The biggest planning application ever submitted in Britain, seems on a 
fanastastically inhuman scale which naturally makes people uneasy, includingThe 
Observer's London-based Rowan Moore 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/may/06/liverpool-waters-review-rowan-moore>
; but sometimes, especially when you're at the bottom, you have to think big.

When Liverpool's early leaders built the world's first enclosed wet dock 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/nof/docks/access/dock_history7.html>, which 
opened in 1715, they mortgaged their entire modestly-sized town to build it. It 
was a big risk that paid off; so was Liverpool's pioneering of the world's 
first intercity railway, to Manchester, in the face of many who said that it 
would never work. Such risk-taking helped to build Liverpool. But it is 
something we seem to have lost over the last forty years.

There has also been a knee-jerk reaction against Liverpool Waters as a scheme 
of that instinctively mistrusted group, property developers, in this casePeel 
Holdings <http://www.peel.co.uk>. This can be justified, as more often than not 
such organisations focus on profit above all else. Yet if property development 
for profit had never happened here, the historic docks that we now admire would 
have never been built.
 The Three Graces. Influential contemporaries disliked them. Photograph: David 
Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Grade 1-listed Albert Dock <http://www.albertdock.com> was not built to look 
nice. It was built to make money as a fireproof shed, that in 1846 was starkly 
modern and was criticised at the time by local historianJ.A Picton 
<http://www.liverpoolarchitecture.com/past_presidents.php> for its brutal 
mediocrity.

Neither would have the famous 'Three Graces 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/maritime/exhibitions/worldheritagecity/ThreeGraces.asp>
' on the city's Pier Head. Built on redundant dockland, the Graces were the 
Canary Wharf or Liverpool Waters of their day; early examples of corporate 
headquarters built in the latest trendy styles to aggrandise the businesses 
that constructed them. They were not universally popular with the critics at 
the time either. TheRoyal Liver Building  
<http://www.liverpoolworldheritage.com/visitingthewhs/areas/pierhead/royaliverbuildings.asp>
was dismissed byCharles Reilly 
<http://www.enotes.com/topic/Charles_Herbert_Reilly>, professor of architecture 
at Liverpool University, thus:

A mass of grey granite to the cornice, it rose to the sky in two quite 
unnecessary towers, which can symbolise nothing but the power of advertisement.

Today's aggressive heritage lobby and aesthete critics are fond of proclaiming 
Liverpool's past innovations and achievements, with the hindsight which Reilly 
could not have. But they are as blinkered as he could be to the city's need to 
continue to innovate and develop. The threatened loss of theUNESCO World 
Heritage status <http://www.liverpoolworldheritage.com> which covers part of 
the site, if the development goes ahead, would be a blow. But the pluses and 
minuses of having the status are hard to quantify. Dresden in Germany alsolost 
its World Heritage Site <http:/www.thelocal.de/society/20090625-20195.html> 
status when it built an important modern bridge. It remains a prosperous 
tourist magnet.

Meanwhile such critics seem content to oppose Liverpool Waters without 
offering any realistic alternative plan for this huge area, not even a notional 
one. That would condemn the historic structures in the northern docks to 
continue to rot for want of money or a reason for being. Nearly all these old 
buildings would be restored as part of Liverpool Waters, alongside new 
developments.

I believe that the Waters should be compared to Liverpool 1 
<http://www.liverpool-one.com>, the new shopping and leisure area developed by 
theGrosvenor Estate  <http://www.grosvenorestate.com>and opened four years ago. 
It too was heavily criticised during construction, butvox pop on its streets 
today and you would find few who would want to go back to the 1970s Moat House 
hotel, the wasteland car parks, concrete Paradise Street Bus station and the 
Argos Superstore that used to stand there.

Liverpool 1 created thousands of jobs and helped the city to leap from 14th to 
5th in the UK's retail rankings, while not, as many predicted, destroying the 
traditional shopping areas of Church Street and Bold Street. It has also 
attracted dozens of new shops to Liverpool at a time when town centres 
nationally are collapsing, the development creating the demand. I didn't like 
Liverpool 1 while it was in gestation, but now I find it hard to argue now 
against its success in transforming Liverpool's town centre for the better.

I'm not Peel's <http://www.peel.co.uk> PR. They have some questionable 
business arrangements, tend to rely heavily on outside investment and often 
build dull architecture; but again I turn to the critics and ask: what else do 
you suggest? No one else has any workable plans for the northern dock. So do we 
go for it? or do we duck the risk, let Liverpool's economy struggle along and 
allow an historic part of our city to rot indefinitely while wistfully hoping 
for something else?

Even as a supporter of the Waters, I admit that I will believe it all when I 
see it. But I never would have believed the developments that have already 
happened in contemporary Liverpool were possible a few years ago. The city and 
the Government should take a leaf out of our history and go for it. Critics 
should meanwhile put pen to paper or easel, to show us they think could go in 
its place.

Kenn Taylor is a writer and journalist based in Liverpool. You can follow him 
here <https://www.theguardian.com/kenntaylor.wordpress.com/>and here. 
<http://urbantransitionuk.wordpress.com/>
 