
I’m an author that spends a lot of time with my young readers and their 
teachers in schools and beyond. I have heard from teachers that student’s 
responses to the EU referendum have been deeply unsettling, both in rural and 
city schools. For some, their students came into school the day after the 
referendum with a sense of anxiety about their futures. In other schools 
teachers are unsure about the celebratory responses of their students and what 
aspects of referendum campaigning students are responding to. I imagine that in 
every family parents are discussing the outcome of the referendum and what it 
might mean for the next generation.


Books to breed tolerance: what children can read after the terrorist attacks 
in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/12/books-breed-tolerance-children-read-errorist-attacks-paris>
These discussions have been taking place in my home and my older children are 
left feeling troubled and anxious about their futures. I know that this is how 
so many young people are feeling right now.

Whatever you think of the result, my question is how can we start to open up 
conversations across generations around the often heated (and sometimes 
hateful) language and images that have been part of the campaigning around this 
referendum?

Sita Brahmachari: the importance of diverse names in children's books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/15/sita-brahmachari-diverse-characters-diverse-names>
How can we as YA and children’s authors attempt to speak a language in our 
stories that offers young people hope and strength to face the future and 
explore their own political ideas and activism - to make sure that they have a 
genuine and informed say in the future when they finally do get to vote?

The stories myself and so many children’s and YA authors tell, come from an 
instinct to understand and articulate our complex world with compassion and 
empathy. I try to tell stories and find stories that don’t polarise. When I go 
into schools I also ask students about their own family stories and how they 
connect widely in the world. I believe in the power of stories to ignite change 
and to appeal to a common humanity… Malala Yousafazi’sI Am Malala  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-am-malala.html>(and young readers’ edition 
Malala: the Girl That Stood Up For Education and Changed The World 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/299256/>) did just 
that.

Stories have been written and will be written by and for young people that 
might help to create a more hopeful world. My next book Charmed Earth (being 
published by Macmillan) is about an extraordinary older generation of activists 
and protestors igniting that passion in a younger generation who live in a 
world with much injustice.

Refugee week: too many adults have forgotten a very human part of themselves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/22/refugee-week-the-bone-sparrow-zana-fraillon>
How do we write these stories? It takes a long time… and it takes moving away 
from a reactive position, climbing to the top of a mountain and looking at what 
has taken place… both in recent times and throughout history. Writing is not 
done in sound bites, it takes many years of allowing characters to grow before 
the story emerges. It is not about giving your opinion… it’s about creating a 
portal or a lens through which readers may view the world. We need so many 
different lenses.

I don’t have mountains where I live now but I do have a city wood and whenever 
I need to settle with turbulent times I go for a walk in my local woods with 
our little dog Billie – and usually come back with some kind of “settling” 
through which to view events. The process of “settling” is so important for 
authors. When you have written a draft of a book and told the story that you 
want to tell, it’s the space in between, when you move away from it, that you 
start to see what you have really written.

Picture book biographies: best heartwarming true stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/31/picture-book-biographies-best-heartwarming-true-stories>
Ideas of belonging, family, history, identity and finding a voice are 
recurring threads in my work. They are also important factors in Britain’s 
referendum decision. The “settling” is important in times like this when people 
feel very personally about the momentous decision the country has voted for to 
leave the European Union.

In these unsettled times I like to think of some things, some memories, some 
happenings, some stories that are perhaps not what we hear every day in the 
media. I call them my “sustaining stories.”

My father came from India to Britain in 1959 taking up the call to come to the 
“Motherland” to work, like so many other people who came here from ex-colonial 
countries. His role was to help to staff the then newly founded NHS. He met my 
mum, a nurse from the Lake District, while studying in Edinburgh. They married 
in Grassington in Yorkshire four years later, and had four children. Years 
later when we visited Grassington together, we met families who still remember 
this early mixed race marriage with fondness recollecting that local people had 
put up some of the unexpected guests in their homes; interesting and humorous 
cultural connections had come from this impromptu interaction… as they always 
do.

Tales from a diverse universe by Shaun Tan – gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/oct/17/shaun-tan-the-arrival-diverse-books-gallery>
I was born in Derby, we moved to Hull, then the Lake District, then Telford. I 
have lived and worked in Paris for a year and in Greece for another before 
settling in London where I live with my family. Through my life experience and 
work in community theatre and as a writer I have met so many different 
communities of people from all over the world. My connection to all of these 
people, places and their journeys have made me into the writer I am today.

I am Malala: The Girl Who Stood Up for Education and was Shot by the Taliban 
by Malala Yousafazi and Christina Lamb – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/05/i-am-malala-by-malala-yousafazi-christina-lamb-review>
I believe in connection because it’s written in the DNA of my family and all 
of our families if we look beyond the surface. Many young people are angry 
about a decision that has been made that will affect their futures. From the 
conversations I have seen among on social media children’s and YA authors feel 
very strongly about this too.

I write stories of children, young adults and families who live in this world 
of connectedness across culture, religion, history and national boundaries 
because this is the world we experience and our children experience, it’s the 
world that our friends and families in the countryside and cities all over the 
world inhabit… a globe of connectedness.

After the Paris bombings in 2015, I called out for books that breed tolerance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/12/books-breed-tolerance-children-read-errorist-attacks-paris>
 in these pages, and now I’m going to recommend just a few more books with 
human rights hearts that can help us empathise with many different people’s 
stories. Stories that might help us negotiate this complex world and even make 
us want to change it:

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fstories-power-hopeful-world-sita-brahmachari-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5795cc8d34489ee8f5c3f9586b49c0ce79c60dd7%2F0_0_1175_1636%2F1175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stories%20have%20the%20power%20to%20create%20a%20more%20hopeful%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fstories-power-hopeful-world-sita-brahmachari-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stories%20have%20the%20power%20to%20create%20a%20more%20hopeful%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fstories-power-hopeful-world-sita-brahmachari-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5795cc8d34489ee8f5c3f9586b49c0ce79c60dd7%2F0_0_1175_1636%2F1175.jpg>
Alpha 
<http://www.barringtonstoke.co.uk/blog/2016/04/05/announcing-bucket-list/> by 
Barroux Bessora (published by Barrington Stoke). This groundbreaking graphic 
novel isn’t out until 13 August 2016 but one to read and savour. Alpha is the 
heart-rending story of one young man’s journey from the Ivory Coast to France 
in search of his family. Pictures are by the award-winning Barroux (who gave us
Line of Fire <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/line-of-fire.html>) and the 
stunning text is by prize-winning French novelist Bessora.

Footpath Flowers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396440/> by Jon Arno 
Lawson and Sydney Smith
This wordless, beautifully illustrated, gentle, hopeful book has been given 
free to every Syrian Refugee in Canada by IBBY Canada. A little girl collects 
wild flowers while her distracted father pays her - and their surroundings - 
little attention. Each flower the little girl gathers becomes a gift for a 
person or animal, and whether the gift is noticed or ignored, both giver and 
recipient are transformed by their encounter. This book is an ode to the 
importance of small things, small people and small gestures, Footpath Flowers 
is a quiet but powerful testament to the joy that children can find in ordinary 
things and the mutual value of giving.

Why you should record the stories of your parents or grandparents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/30/record-the-stories-of-your-parents-gr-gemin-sweet-pizza>
Sweet Pizza 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408960/s/sweet-pizza/>
 by Giancarlo Gemin
A heart-warming story about bringing a diverse community together and the 
amazing history of Italian immigrants in Wales. You’ll fall in love with the 
main character Joe, a funny and important book.

Chasing the Stars  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-break-girl.html>by 
Malorie Blackman
The author of the groundbreaking Noughts and Crosses brings us her version of 
Othello, set in space. But instead of race, this book is all about class; the 
have and the have nots. And it makes for fascinating reading.

Malorie Blackman: 'Othello was the first thing I read that actually featured a 
black character'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/18/malorie-blackman-othello-shakespeare-chasing-the-stars>
The Emergency Zoo  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396934/>by Miriam 
Halahmy
Inspired by real events during the second world war, Miriam Halahmy’s novel is 
a touching tale of courage, resourcefulness and camaraderie in desperate times, 
as well as a stirring defence of animal welfare.

Shine  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shine-259001.html>by Candy Gourlay
Rosa suffers from a rare condition that renders her mute. She lives on the 
strange island of Mirasol where the rain never seems to stop. In the gloom of 
the island, its superstitious population are haunted by all sorts of fears... 
they shun people who suffer from Rosa’s condition, believing them to be 
monsters.

Peter in Peril 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/428028/> by Helen Bate
This moving graphic novel is published in September 2016 and well worth 
pre-ordering. Peter is just an ordinary boy, who loves playing football with 
his friends and eating cake - until war comes to his city and the whole family 
have to go into hiding..

Pattan’s Pumpkin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/428027/> by Chitra 
Soundar
Pattan has an amazing pumpkin... it grows BIGGER than the goats, BIGGER than 
the elephants, until it is as TALL as the mountains. But can Pattan’s pumpkin 
save his family and all the animals when the storm-clouds burst and the waters 
rise?

Sita Brahmachi is author of Kite Spirit 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kite-spirit.html>, Jasmine Skies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jasmine-skies.html> and 2011 Waterstones 
prize-winningArtichoke Hearts 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artichoke-hearts.html>. Her latest novel Red 
Leaves <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/red-leaves.html>(endorsed by Amnesty 
International) is set in an ancient city wood where all of the characters 
(whose roots stretch over the world from London, America, Scotland, to Somalia 
to Syria, Sri Lanka, Ireland and the Punjab) feel disenfranchised in one way or 
another but come together and struggle to recognise each other. She is also 
writer in residence (together with artist Jane Ray) at London’sIslington Centre 
for Refugees and Migrants <http://www.islingtoncentre.co.uk/>. Young people who 
want to express their thoughts on human rights might want to enter the Amnesty 
International Youth Awards <https://amnesty-youth-awards.org.uk/>. 

Please send us your recommendations of humane books that speak to a common 
humanity for us all to share and be uplifted by. Ideally on Twitter
@GdnChildrenBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> or email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com

By email: Sean Edwards – Principal librarian children and youth, Wood Green 
Library, Haringey, London
The Bone Sparrow  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/417146/s/the-bone-sparrow/>
by Zana Fraillon about an 11 year old child born in an Australian immigration 
detention centre.

By email: Pam Dix - Chair of IBBY
The Breadwinner Trilogy  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/breadwinner.html>by 
Deborah Ellis (Stories from Afghanistan)
Azzi in Between 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281282/> by Sarah 
Garland and The Good Braider 
by Terry Farish

By email: Gill Ward, Senior Librarian of Fortismere school recommends: 
Gaye Hicyilmaz writes excellently about the refugee experience, eg. ‘The 
Frozen Waterfall’ and ‘Girl in Red.’ But my favourite still has to be ‘The 
Weight of Water’ by 2016 Carnegie Winning Sarah Crossan, a story about 
alienation, migration and an amazing girl.
Non Pratt (@NonPratt) 
GIRL WITH A WHITE DOG by @Bridgeanne <https://twitter.com/Bridgeanne> should 
be compulsory reading for all people right now, but especially the young
https://t.co/1UXVihMWi1 <https://t.co/1UXVihMWi1>
 <https://twitter.com/NonPratt/status/747387899130355712> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NonPratt/status/747387899130355712> Caroline Fielding 
(@CazApr1) 
Girl w/ a White Dog, Weight of Water, My Sister Lives on the Mantlepiece, 
Bombs that Brought Us Together#tolerance 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tolerance?src=hash> https://t.co/K2lQ623tz7 
<https://t.co/K2lQ623tz7>
 <https://twitter.com/CazApr1/status/747395187660460032> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CazApr1/status/747395187660460032> Tatum Flynn 
(@Tatum_Flynn) 
Tall Story @candygourlay <https://twitter.com/candygourlay> giant filipino boy 
comes to uk. Weight of Water@SarahCrossan <https://twitter.com/SarahCrossan>, 
polish swimmer girl in uk.https://t.co/OTswTTayQi <https://t.co/OTswTTayQi>
 <https://twitter.com/Tatum_Flynn/status/747427912903704576> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Tatum_Flynn/status/747427912903704576> Anne Thompson 
(@Alibrarylady) 
The Unforgotten Coat @frankcottrell_b <https://twitter.com/frankcottrell_b> 
The Other Side of Truth - B Naidoo Weight of Water@SarahCrossan 
<https://twitter.com/SarahCrossan> #tolerance 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tolerance?src=hash> https://t.co/9XiUZjoKuS 
<https://t.co/9XiUZjoKuS>
 <https://twitter.com/Alibrarylady/status/747443583624577024> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Alibrarylady/status/747443583624577024> rebecca hill 
(@rebeccashill) 
@whatSFSaid <https://twitter.com/whatSFSaid> @ZanaFraillon 
<https://twitter.com/ZanaFraillon> @grgemin <https://twitter.com/grgemin> 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> I loved The Bone Sparrow 
with every bit of my body. Everyone should read.
 <https://twitter.com/rebeccashill/status/747452524991488000> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rebeccashill/status/747452524991488000> SF Said 
(@whatSFSaid) 
Amnesty CILIP Honour winner LIES WE TELL OURSELVES @robin_talley 
<https://twitter.com/robin_talley> gives me hope, as do these kids:
https://t.co/Vg1qTGpWty <https://t.co/Vg1qTGpWty>@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>
 <https://twitter.com/whatSFSaid/status/747446697501016065> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/whatSFSaid/status/747446697501016065> Candy Gourlay 
(@candygourlay) 
The Safest Lie by @angelacerrito <https://twitter.com/angelacerrito> - 
Powerful, positive and strong of heart.https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP 
<https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP>
 <https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747564048686940160> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747564048686940160> Jenny Jones 
(@JennySarahJones) 
More books to promote #tolerance 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tolerance?src=hash> and #empathy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/empathy?src=hash> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> @SitaBrahmachari 
<https://twitter.com/SitaBrahmachari> pic.twitter.com/6NsQUQn8Cn 
<https://t.co/6NsQUQn8Cn>
 <https://twitter.com/JennySarahJones/status/747668852323004416> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JennySarahJones/status/747668852323004416> Candy Gourlay 
(@candygourlay) 
The Miraculous Journey of Edward Tullane by Kate Dicamillo - Empathy inspiring.
https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP <https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP>
 <https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747565480265846784> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747565480265846784> Candy Gourlay 
(@candygourlay) 
One of Us by @JeannieWaudby <https://twitter.com/JeannieWaudby> . Eye opening 
with a shocking twist.https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP <https://t.co/XqvpJcTafP>
 <https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747566966387449856> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/candygourlay/status/747566966387449856>  