
‘Streaming has been invaluable,” begins Glass Animals singer Dave Bayley, from 
the back of a tour bus bound for Glasgow. His band’s 2014 song Gooey currently 
stands at nearly 68mSpotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> 
streams, and was instrumental in turning Glass Animals into what Music Week 
recently described as “international streaming sensations”. Bayley looks back 
on the initial streaming success of Gooey with a mixture of confusion and 
amazement: “We looked at all the streaming services’ viral charts and, for some 
reason, we were at the top of them. Off the back of that, everything else 
happened.”

You could be forgiven for raising an eyebrow at the notion of a “streaming 
artist”. Ten years ago, an unknown singer called Sandi Thom stormed to No 1 
after livestreaming gigs from her south London basement. Her success was a 
masterpiece of implied causality. It wasn’t the livestreams,whose true 
popularity has since been queried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/may/20/cansandithomoutmanoeuvrea>
, that rocketed her to No 1 – it was the fact that they provided an 
irresistible story to the established media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7315d327875bb249b60493b0a4f49564fa96ef5%2F0_321_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7315d327875bb249b60493b0a4f49564fa96ef5%2F0_321_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Glass Animals … streaming sensations, to their own surprise. Photograph: PR 
Company Handout 
But times have changed: in a landscape dominated by services such as Spotify, 
Apple Music <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>, Tidal and 
Amazon, it is possible to have a hit without the press and radio (or much of 
the public) even noticing you. Kiiara, hardly a household name, is currently 
enjoying a global hit with Gold, off the back of 312m streams on Spotify alone. 
(Other services don’t make their numbers public.) You could look at British 
artist James TW, whose song When You Love Someone has 35m streams. Then there’s 
Australian teen Joel Adams, whose one and only song Please Don’t Go has chalked 
up 320m streams on Spotify.

US music consultant John Geraghty lays out the idea of the streaming artist in 
plain terms. “A streaming act is one who entered the mainstream due to support 
from major streaming services,” he explains. This would account, for instance, 
for the success of Lukas Graham’s 7 Years. “Alternatively, it’s an act whose 
streaming support may not have translated, but at the very least earned them 
recognition within the industry and among their target audience.”

Drake is Spotify’s most streamed artist of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/drake-spotify-most-streamed-artist-2016>
Industry exec Chris Anokute has experience of both examples. As senior vice 
president of A&R at Epic Records, he oversees acts including 2016’s pop 
crossover success story Zara Larsson, who recently passed 1bn Spotify streams. 
He also manages the emerging singer-songwriter Léon, whose Tired of Talking hit 
more than 30m streams. Anokute mentions the artist Starley, whose song Call On 
Me appeared as an independent release in July before being picked up by Epic. 
“It came out of nowhere,” Anokute says. “She signed to an indie, put out the 
record and, before you know it, the song’s raising its head. It’s performing on 
Spotify faster and better than any record of the last year. She was unknown a 
couple of months ago.” He also cites US duo Timeflies, whose Once in a While 
reached 220m streams. Epic signed the band to a one-off single deal, making 
what Anokute describes as “a very small investment”. Spotify alone will pay out 
over $1m (£800,000) for the streams of Once in a While. How much of this 
filters down to Timeflies depends on their deal with Epic, and there’s no 
ignoring the music industry’s legitimate concerns over standard payout rates.

Regardless, a million-dollar song is a million-dollar song, and you can 
understand why a major-label exec would find that exciting. But the most 
notable shift for unsigned or independent artists is that streaming success 
needn’t rely on marketing muscle or heavyweight financial backing. The Swedish 
producer Neiked was unsigned when Spotify threw its weight behind his song 
Sexual – its streaming success inspired mainstream radio support, and it has 
been in the top 10 for the last five weeks.

“Spotify has democratised the universe,” is the dramatic, understandably 
Spotify-centric view of Spotify’s George Ergatoudis, who joined the service 
this year after a decade as pop’s most powerful tastemaker at BBC Radio 1. “One 
of our editors can find something, believe in it, put it in a playlist, see an 
interesting result from the audience then accelerate the song.” Systems inside 
Spotify automatically create playlists of what Ergatoudis describes as 
“emerging stories” (songs) which editors then trawl through when they’re 
compiling the playlists vital in achieving true hugeness. “There’s a lot of 
human curation time spent on saying, ‘Right, there’s some noise there, but what 
do we think about it editorially?’” Ergatoudis says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd749fd40c9815f5b221134884b02b86a86127e11%2F0_16_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd749fd40c9815f5b221134884b02b86a86127e11%2F0_16_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Léon … more than 30m streams Photograph: PR Company Handout 
It’s reassuring that discovery isn’t left entirely to algorithms, but this 
editorial aspect creates another question. Namely: has streaming liberated new 
artists from the constraints of regimented radio playlists and the whims of 
ego-crazed music critics, only to replace that system with a different set of 
gatekeepers? Some music journalists (including the one writing this article) 
may have curated playlists for the likes of Spotify and Apple Music, but in a 
broad sense is it not more dangerous, in light of Spotify’s market dominance, 
that there’s now only one gate? “The term ‘gatekeeper’ assumes we’re blocking 
something worthy coming through,” Ergatoudis insists. “I’d argue we’re not 
doing that. We’re letting good stuff through, and amplifying it.”

Ergatoudis argues that the gate being kept is now an extremely large one, or 
perhaps a load of different gates, through which different artists can pass. 
Demographics differ from service to service – Apple Music andTidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tidal> skew urban – but as streaming 
services aren’t restricted by hours in a day, like mainstream radio stations, 
we’re looking at the possibility of multiple concurrent musical zeitgeists. For 
the first time, something like the UK’s long-trumpeted guitar-music resurgence 
wouldn’t have to come at the expense or, say, grime’s increasing popularity. 
Dave Bayley from Glass Animals has seen this shift first hand. “Streaming has 
definitely levelled the playing field,” he says. “It has allowed this tiny band 
from Oxford – us – to be given the same opportunity as Drake.”

It’s worth speculating what might have happened to a band like Glass Animals 
if, in a pre-streaming landscape, their first album had received little to no 
mainstream support. “I don’t think our label would have pushed us in a certain 
direction,” Bayley says. “Though I do think they would have said, ‘Maybe you 
should try something different.’ As it is, we’d released what was quite an 
obscure record, it somehow did quite well through streaming, and our label then 
gave us freedom on our second record to make whatever noises we wanted. They 
were like, ‘We don’t know how that happened, but we’ll let you guys do that 
again.’”

When we speak, Glass Animals have just played the 3,300-capacity Roundhouse in 
London. However, translating streaming success into actual popularity is by no 
means a given. James TW, with his 35m streams of When You Love Someone, is one 
artist hoping to make the transition ahead of a full artist launch through 
Island Records. His manager, Glenn Oratz, is frank about the challenges facing 
artists who, overnight, have a streaming hit on their hands. “There will 
continue to be artists who have very significant responses to single songs on 
streaming platforms but can’t necessarily convert it to what you and I would 
think of as being a well-established artist,” he says. “It’s nothing new – 
there’s a reason we came up with the term ‘one-hit wonder’. You’ve got to back 
it up with other high-quality material.

The day before we speak, Oratz had visited Apple HQ; that was followed by 
James TW performing at a radio conference. “In a perfect world you’d have a 
combination,” Oratz adds. “A presence on streaming, supported by radio. You can 
develop a meaningful fanbase and awareness [with streaming], but you’re missing 
a key component. I don’t know an artist who has been able to develop their 
brand and their awareness at the level you’d think of as well established, 
without some type of radio support.”

Also standing on the precipice of pop stardom is Anne-Marie, the UK-based 
singer whose current single Alarm has received huge support from streaming 
services (147m Spotify streams) and Radio 1. When we talk, Spotify has her 
listed as the world’s 76th most listened-to artist, “which,” she admits, “is 
quite amazing when I’ve only had one song out properly. That’s against artists 
who have been around for ever.” (Anne-Marie, by that measurement, is twice as 
popular as Bob Dylan.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897276873603837b41dcb77ac85405f5010dfa17%2F0_56_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Streams%20ahead%3A%20the%20artists%20who%20made%20it%20huge%20without%20radio%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fartists-made-it-huge-streaming-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897276873603837b41dcb77ac85405f5010dfa17%2F0_56_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Zara Larsson … more than 1bn streams. Photograph: PR 
We talk about Spotify’s New Music Friday playlist, which operates as a 
showcase of big artists’ new releases, and as a testing ground for unheard-of 
acts. Each week the playlist gets a new “cover image”, depicting the artist at 
the top of the list. “It’s like being on the front of a magazine,” Anne-Marie 
says. “It’s strange. I’d love to be on actual magazine covers – that’s the 
dream – but you’ve got to move with the times, haven’t you? I’m not like, ‘Oh, 
for fuck’s sake, I wish it was still like it used to be.’”

A pause. And then, with words that echo those of many in the music industry: 
“I mean, I don’t even fucking know what’s going on any more.”

Somewhere in the confusion, Annie-Marie is converting her streaming stats into 
fans. She has a cunning plan to build on the success of Alarm (“I’m just not 
going to put out a shit song”), and is steadily building up a live following. 
Global artist launches were once plate-spinning exercises that could take years 
of schmoozing international media, starting from scratch in a second territory 
while continuing to nurture relationships in the first. Now, analytics provided 
by some streaming services allow some artists to hit the road before a single 
radio play.

In the age of the algorithm, the human gatekeeper is back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/30/age-of-algorithm-human-gatekeeper>
Chris Anokute is evangelical about the data that’s now at his fingertips: in 
the back end of Spotify, for instance, fans are split into three categories: 
streakers (who have listened to the artist every day in the last week), 
loyalists (who have listened to them more than to any other over the past 20 
days), and regulars (who listened to the artist on the majority of the days in 
the month). “They used to laugh at you if you did research as an A&R guy,” 
Anokute adds. “They’d say you weren’t talented or that you didn’t have good 
ears.” They are, it’s fair to assume, not laughing now. Anokute used analytics 
to leapfrog traditional gatekeepers to a point where his artist Léon, with one 
streaming hit and virtually no radio support, could headline 400-capacity 
venues in multiple territories. “I know exactly who’s listening to Léon, and 
where,” he explains. Combining this information with extra data on factors such 
as age and sex, it’s possible to book tours with incredible efficiency. “It 
works!” he hoots. “I know, because I’ve done it! I’ve put Léon in markets where 
nobody would believe she could sell tickets, and I’ve sold out the venues.”

And for those streaming artists who don’t, or can’t cross over from streaming 
glory to the household-name status that has traditionally defined success? 
Anokute suggests a recalibration of our notion of hit songs, once again 
bringing up his experience with Timeflies.

“We took their song to radio in America,” he says. “The song did not succeed – 
it wasn’t a radio hit. Does that mean it wasn’t a hit? It has 220m streams on 
it. It has made a million dollars. That doesn’t mean it’s not a hit, it just 
means we need to focus on the future. And the future’s streaming.”
 