
It has celebrated everything from a crying coastal defence system 
<http://www.presidentsmedals.com/Entry-24281> to a seaweed-fuelled power plant 
<http://www.presidentsmedals.com/Entry-21721>, a dreamy perceptual observatory 
<http://www.presidentsmedals.com/Entry-20901> to an animated film about robots 
<http://www.presidentsmedals.com/Entry-29391>.

But this year, the RIBA's Silver Medal <http://www.presidentsmedals.com/> 
award – the highest honour for an architecture graduate student – has done the 
most radical thing of all: it has been awarded to a house. And a real one at 
that.

SunBloc <http://www.presidentsmedals.com/Entry-31031> is the work of 10 
students from the architecture department of London Metropolitan University 
(recently reformed as theCass School of Art <http://www.thecass.com/>) who 
spent the last year developing a prototype lightweight dwelling, designed to 
occupy inner-city rooftops and other leftover urban sites. As a response to the 
urgent housing crisis and the wealth of underused spaces, it's a timely topic 
to be tackling. But does the project hold up?
 The 100 sq m house would cost only £12,000 to build. Image: SunBloc 
The scheme came out of a technically driven premise, looking at how best to 
construct a cheap, light, flexible house for the lowest cost and least 
environmental impact. Working in the diploma school's Unit 4,HelioMet 
<http://www.heliomet.org/> – taught by Jonas Lundberg, Nate Kolbe, Eva Diu and 
Toby Burgess – the students developed a construction system using polystyrene 
blocks that could be easily transported and cut by two people with a hot-wire 
cutter.

"The idea was to make it as easy as possible," says tutor Jonas Lundberg. "The 
blocks can fit in a lift and be cut with a template, with both parts used to 
avoid wastage, and assembled with unskilled labour." Once stacked into place, 
these highly-insulating blocks are post-tensioned with steel cables and covered 
with an acrylic render to form a durable, waterproof shell. With its swooping 
geometries and prefab logic, there is something decidedly retro about the final 
product.

"There were some experiments with making foam houses in the 1970s," says 
Lundberg, acknowledging this ancestry. "But, being highly insulated with a low 
thermal mass, the indoor climate was always very humid."

The students have countered this by developing an interior coating that 
combines a natural clay render, which absorbs moisture in the air, with phase 
change wax granules that help to maintain the internal temperature. Fully 
constructed, the house weighs less then 100kg/sq m – and it costs only £12,000 
to build a 100 sq m dwelling. Could this be the bold answer toGrant Shapps's 
lacklustre call for a self-build revolution 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/feedarticle/9701026>?
 The blocks are cut around templates using a hot-wire cutter. Photograph: 
SunBloc 
The project was started in response to an open call for the Solar Decathlon 
<http://www.solardecathlon.gov/>, a global competition established by the US 
Department of Energy that challenges universities to design, build and operate 
a fully sustainable house using just solar energy. The SunBloc house is 
currently being developed in collaboration with students from the Guangzhou 
Academy of Fina Arts in China, to be exhibited at next year's Decathlon, held 
in Datong, near Beijing. The plan is to bring all of the Cass departments 
together to work on the project, from architects and interior designers to 
textiles and ceramics students.

It is one of the first times the Silver Medal has been awarded to a group 
project, particularly one that has resulted in a built structure. It is a 
welcome departure from the recent trend of introspective theoretical schemes 
that often win the gong, which are conjured in the safe realms of academic 
posturing and neglect to tackle real-world issues.

"We are trying to rethink the idea of the single student with their individual 
design portfolio, which is a very strange version of the world of practice," 
says Lundberg. As the project developed, students worked with structural and 
environmental engineers, with each taking responsibility for a different part 
of the building, from the technical design to interior and exterior treatments. 
"We want to create the right circumstances for innovation and experimentation, 
which involves working in a multidisciplinary context with other consultants."
 Every component of the house is designed to fit in a standard lift. Image: 
SunBloc 
The SunBloc house is part of an ongoing trend for live projects in 
architectural education, which have become more common as students shop around 
for experiences they perceive to be more valuable to them in practice – as 
tuition fees rise and job prospects continue to fall.

The Architectural Association has been running a Design and Make studio 
<http://designandmake.aaschool.ac.uk/> for the past few years, which regularly 
sees experimental timber structures built in the school's Hooke Park campus in 
Dorset. The Royal College of Art's architecture department, under the new 
leadership of Alex de Rijke and Charles Walker, has also joined in – this year, 
the entire first year is working togetherto produce a structure for a site in 
Wembley 
<http://thecomingsoonclub.wordpress.com/2012/11/23/make-your-idea-happen-here/>.

But with the rest of your life facing the prosaic realities of construction in 
practice, isn't architecture school the one time to dream?

"It is important that live projects are not just about training or emulating 
practice," says Lundberg. "We are trying to set up circumstances for innovation 
in a way you could never afford to do in practice, because it is too expensive 
or takes too much time. The academy should remain different – a place to do all 
of those things you will never have time to do again."

The Silver Medal was jointly awarded to the following students who worked on 
the SunBloc project: Gustavo Balague, Lucas Dowsett, Nkesi Nduka, Georgia 
Neesham, Anna Nenaseva, Stephen Osborn, Chris Perry, Alex Potter, David Rieser 
and Anca Trestian.
 