
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> on 
Saturday reinstated an Arizona law that makes it a felony to collect early 
ballots, dealing a blow to Democratic get-out-the-vote efforts just days before 
the presidential election.

Specter of election day violence looms as Trump spurs vigilante poll watchers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/election-day-violence-donald-trump-poll-watchers>
The order from the country’s highest court overturned an appeals court 
decision from a day earlier that blocked the new law. Democratic groups had 
already geared up to begin helping voters deliver their ballots to the polls.

The supreme court decision calls into question what happens to ballots such 
groups legally collected from voters in the approximately 20 hours in which the 
law was blocked.

Collecting early ballots is especially effective among minority communities. 
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> allege the law hurts 
minorities’ ability to vote.

The decision comes just days ahead of a presidential election that has Arizona 
Democratshoping to win the traditionally Republican state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/hillary-visits-arizona-in-unprecedented-show-of-bravado-for-democratic-nominee>
.
arizona <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=AZ> 
Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> filed an emergency 
appeal, hours after the ninth US circuit court of appeals blocked the law on 
Friday. Justice Anthony Kennedy referred the case to the entire supreme court, 
and the court issued a brief order overturning the appeals court ruling. The 
ninth circuit will now consider the law in a January session that it set when 
it blocked the law.

Republican lawmakers approved the law earlier this year, over the objection of 
minority Democrats. The GOP governor, Doug Ducey, called it a commonsense 
effort to protect the integrity of elections and eliminate voter fraud.

A split ninth US circuit panel said that by blocking the law, it was 
preserving the status quo for Tuesday’s election, which could come down to the 
wire in Arizona as Democrats spend heavily to get out the vote among Latinos 
and others angered by Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump’s 
anti-immigrant comments.

Chief judge Sidney Thomas wrote that the ninth circuit decision would not add 
or remove any valid votes. He said the law criminalized delivering someone 
else’s early ballot, which would still be counted.

Clinton's rare visit to Arizona is unusual show of confidence for a Democrat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/hillary-visits-arizona-in-unprecedented-show-of-bravado-for-democratic-nominee>
Both parties have used ballot collection to boost turnout by going door to 
door and asking voters if they have completed mail-in ballots. Voters who have 
not are urged to do so, and the volunteers offer to take the ballots to 
election offices. Democrats, however, use the practice more effectively.

The Arizona law does not prevent voters’ family members or caregivers from 
turning in ballots.

The Arizona Republican party chairman, Robert Graham, called Saturday’s 
decision a smart one since the law had been in effect since before the August 
primary. Leaving the ninth circuit decision in place would do “nothing more 
than confuse the voters”, he said.

Graham also criticized Democratic groups for rushing to collect ballots on 
Friday, saying they compromised people who might have trusted them to deliver 
their vote to the polls.
 