
More than a quarter of architecture students in the UK are receiving or have 
received medical help for mental health problems related to their course. 
Another quarter feel they may have to seek help in future.

 Anxiety over the student debts accrued during the seven-year course, and 
workloads that frequently require all-nighters, were the primary sources of 
stress identified by undergraduates.

 Poor-value university courses, architectural practices demanding they work 
for free and sexual and racial discrimination were the other issues highlighted 
by respondents to thesurvey carried out by the Architects’ Journal 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/mental-health-problems-exposed-by-aj-student-survey-2016/10009173.article>
.

 More female students reported seeking medical advice for mental health than 
male students. Nearly one in three women in the survey, 29%, reported receiving 
mental health treatment over issues directly related to their course, compared 
with 23% of men.

 Nearly 90% of the 447 respondents said they had had to work through the night 
at some point. Almost one-third said they have to do it regularly.

Six things students can do to boost their mental health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/03/students-how-to-boost-mental-health-at-university>
Two-thirds of undergraduates said their debt at the end of their course would 
be £30,000 or above. Despite that, almost a third said they had been asked to 
work in practice for free.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> taking part in the 
survey reported seeing friends suffering from hair loss as a result of stress. 
One respondent reported that two course mates had committed suicide, though the 
Architectural Journal was unable to verify that report. Another student wrote: 
“I feel so emotionally drained, without any confidence in my ability.” Another 
said: “A culture of suffering for your art is promoted within education.”

 Anthony Seldon, vice-chancellor at the University of Buckingham and a 
mental-health campaigner, said: “Britain has a near epidemic of mental health 
problems among its students. Those studying architecture appear to be under 
added burdens, emanating perhaps from the very length of the course and time 
taken before earning a proper income.

“Much could be done to rethink the courses so they align with the 
architectural education needs of the future rather than the dictates of the 
architectural big cheeses of the past.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fuk-architecture-students-mental-health-problem-architects-journal-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2abe8c61e64fbb845d99c94e6b413b5b0fd187ef%2F0_303_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Survey%3A%2025%25%20of%20UK%20architecture%20students%20treated%20for%20mental%20health%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fuk-architecture-students-mental-health-problem-architects-journal-survey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Survey%3A%2025%25%20of%20UK%20architecture%20students%20treated%20for%20mental%20health%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fuk-architecture-students-mental-health-problem-architects-journal-survey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2abe8c61e64fbb845d99c94e6b413b5b0fd187ef%2F0_303_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Almost a third of architecture students in the survey said they had been asked 
to work in practice for free. Photograph: Alamy 
 University staff, too, are noticing the emotional strain of architecture 
education on their students. Timothy Smith, architecture course director at 
Kingston University, said there has been a rise in the number of students 
applying for “mitigating circumstances or extensions” in recent years, adding 
that the requirement for many to work part time means there is a “great deal of 
pressure” on them.

Nam Kha Tran, a student at the Sheffield School of Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/architecture>, said mental health 
problems are the “disease of our generation”.

Stephen Buckley, head of information at the mental health charity Mind, says 
university students are not only burdened with the stress of exams and 
coursework deadlines but also with high student loans and debt. He reports a
surge in calls to the charity’s helpline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/13/tuition-fees-have-led-to-surge-in-students-seeking-counselling>
 from those struggling with financial problems in the last few years.


Jane Duncan, president of the Royal Institute of British Architecture, is 
urging architecture students struggling with mental health problems to seek 
help, stressing that they “are not alone”. She said that long hours, a heavy 
workload and intense design scrutiny were embedded in the culture of 
architecture education.

Duncan added: “I am concerned that the combination of tuition fees, rising 
student debt and the necessity for many students to take on paid work outside 
study can trigger or exacerbate mental health problems.”
 