
Ahead of this year’s Academy awards ceremony on 22 February, Susan Sarandon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/susan-sarandon> has sounded a note of 
cynicism amid the feverish predictions and tuxedo bookings.

In an interview with the Guardian discussing her win for Dead Man Walking in 
1996, she says: “There are so many ways that people vote that are just not that 
serious; like, they think, ‘It’s so great that she made herself look ugly and 
stuck on a fake nose’, or ‘I feel good about voting for Nelson Mandela’ and ‘I 
like Gandhi’ – I am not convinced that everyone sat through three hours of 
Gandhi.”

Her comments playfully skewer the likes of Meryl Streep and Nicole Kidman, who 
donned fake noses for performances in The Iron Lady and The Hours, as well as 
Richard Attenborough’s Gandhi biopic starring Ben Kingsley, which won eight
Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> in 1983.

She also laments how driven by lobbying the awards can be, saying: “All actors 
realise that a race for recognition, in a business that is so connected to 
commerce, is a very subjective thing. There are so many performances that don’t 
get recognition – especially these days when you have to have so much money to 
run a campaign.”
 No-one can hear you cheer… Alfonso Cuarón, an Oscar-winner for Gravity. 
Photograph: Pål Hansen for the Guardian 
It’s a sentiment shared by Alfonso Cuarón, director of Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity>, who is also interviewed for the 
feature in which Oscar winners reminisce about their wins. “The campaigning for 
awards is like a parallel industry, and it gets more intense every year,” he 
notes. He celebrates the attention that is brought to a film by a win, but says 
that “the Oscar is not going to make your film a better film”.

Oscars 2015: Clint Eastwood, Julianne Moore and others dine out at the nominee 
luncheon – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2015/feb/03/oscars-2015-nominee-luncheon-clint-eastwood-julianne-moore>
Steve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, who won 
last year with 12 Years a Slave, similarly says that “an Oscar is not a 
measuring stick for what is good or bad”. But he, too, acknowledges the power 
of the awards: “Winning had a huge impact on the money 12 Years A Slave made 
[£85m at the global box office], and opened a lot of doors for black cinema. 
Already there have been films with more black protagonists. I know our film 
helped.”

The full feature, also featuring interviews and photos with past Oscar winners 
Juliette Binoche, animator Nick Park, Sir Ben Kingsley and many others, is in 
Saturday 7 February’s edition of the Guardian’sWeekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2015/feb/07/weekend> magazine.
 