
Swan Boy is eccentric author Nikki Sheehan’s latest novel. It depicts a boy 
named Johnny whose father has died. He moves to London just to find that his 
new flat isn’t anything like what his mum said it would be. At school nobody 
likes Johnny; to them he’s just the ‘new boy.’ One day on a school trip to 
Regent’s Park, the school bully puts a swan’s poo in Johnny’s sandwich. Just as 
the the bully starts laughing at him, a swan comes out of the lake, looks at 
Johnny like he’s its master and then attacks the bully.

The next day at school people start to call Johnny “Swan Boy”because of what 
had happened the day before. Once again Johnny gets bullied by the ‘populars’ 
and somehow ends up in trouble; he has to choose between litter-picking duty 
and doing a male version of ‘Swan Lake’. Meanwhile he finds that he is growing 
feathers and turning into a swan!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fswan-boy-nikki-sheehan-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55fdcae70c579f42cd69906182d2a396608c2073%2F0_0_1526_2339%2F1526.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swan%20Boy%20by%20Nikki%20Sheehan%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fswan-boy-nikki-sheehan-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swan%20Boy%20by%20Nikki%20Sheehan%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fswan-boy-nikki-sheehan-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55fdcae70c579f42cd69906182d2a396608c2073%2F0_0_1526_2339%2F1526.jpg>
The main characters in this book are Johnny, who has to leave his old life to 
start one without his dad, and Johnny’s little brother who likes to pretend to 
be different types of animals, wants to find out more about their dad and loves 
to draw. Then there are the ‘Populars’ who are a group of bullies feared 
throughout the school. We also have Johnny’s mum, a caring woman who mourns the 
loss of her husband. Lastly there’s Mrs Cray, the dance teacher/librarian who 
helps Johnny step by step.

Nikki Sheehan has a beautiful sense of imagination and this book brings out 
that quality creatively. She’s also known for her bestselling novel, Who Framed 
Klaris Cliff.

Swan Boy will captivate it’s readers. I want to thank Nikki, for bringing 
another brilliant book into the world. Keep them coming!

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394724/s/swan-boy/> 
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 