
In 1969 Nina Simone halted a concert at New York's Philharmonic Hall and 
announced that she wished to introduce a new song. The emotion of the moment 
was captured on the live album Black Gold: "I want to talk about a friend ... 
It seems that she comes alive more and more. I'm talking about Lorraine 
Hansberry. This is the story of her life, and each time I do it she comes a 
little bit closer and I miss her a little bit more. It's called Young, Gifted 
and Black."

Ten years earlier Hansberry, who herself coined that beautiful phrase, had 
become an overnight celebrity with her first play,A Raisin in the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-raisin-in-the-sun>. She was the first 
black woman to have a play produced on Broadway and, at 29, the youngest winner 
of the New York Critics' Play of the Year award. Raisin was later made into a 
film, with Sidney Poitier recreating his performance in the leading role. 
Hansberry's striking, statuesque features appeared in Vogue, while Show 
magazine dispatched a list of questions about Shakespeare and published her 
response alongside those of TS Eliot, Harry S Truman and Igor Stravinsky.

In America A Raisin in the Sun now has the status of an unassailable classic. 
Libraries are named after Hansberry and she is studied in college, the cult 
boosted by a dramatisation of her writings called To Be Young, Gifted and 
Black, brought together by her ex-husband, Robert Nemiroff. But in Britain, in 
the words of actor Lennie James, Raisin has become "one of those classics 
people recognise by name but can never remember who wrote it".

James is currently preparing to star as Walter - the role that made Poitier 
famous - in the first major staging of Raisin in this country for 15 years. 
This co-production between the Young Vic and Salisbury Playhouse is one of two 
plays set to re-impress Hansberry's name on the British consciousness. This 
month Manchester's Royal Exchange presents the British premiere of Hansberry's 
last work, Les Blancs, which has never before been seen outside America.

The almost total disappearance of Hansberry's work from the UK - where none of 
her writing is now in print - has less to do with its quality than with its 
quantity. When Martin Luther King proclaimed that she "would remain an 
inspiration to generations yet unborn" he did not know how quickly that would 
be put to the test. Hansberry's second play, The Sign in Sydney Brustein's 
Window, closed on Broadway after mixed reviews on January 12 1965. On the same 
night Hansberry, 34, died. She had been diagnosed with cancer less than 18 
months earlier.

In his memoir Sweet Lorraine, writer James Baldwin fondly recalled days spent 
debating and shooting the breeze with his fellow Greenwich Village 
intellectual. He claimed that A Raisin in the Sun, written while Hansberry made 
a living as a waitress and cashier, "put more of the truth of black people's 
lives on the stage than any other play in the entire history of theatre". That 
statement has been quoted to the point of cliche, but New York-born actress 
Novella Nelson, currently rehearsing the role of Mama for the Young Vic 
revival, was a young student at the time of the original production, and 
confirms its impact. "I saw those people up on stage and thought, 'My God - 
that's my family up there.' There had simply never been plays of colour in that 
arena before - it made me want to become an actress. It changed my life."

A Raisin in the Sun borrowed its title from a line in the poem Harlem by 
Langston Hughes, whom Hansberry met while writing for the radical African 
American paper Freedom. Hughes's poem asks what happens "to a dream deferred":

Does it dry up

Like a raisin in the sun?

Or does it explode? 

Even though the play was written well before the marches on Washington, the 
death of Martin Luther King or the inner-city uprisings, Hansberry, according 
to Nelson, "somehow managed to foresee history whole - the rise of black 
nationalism, the Pan-African movement, even feminism".

Raisin depicts the hostility faced by a black family when they attempt to move 
into an exclusive white neighbourhood - a bitter experience drawn from life. 
Although Hansberry was born in Chicago's Southside ghetto, her father was a 
relatively prosperous businessman. As such, she remembered "being the only 
child in my classes who did not come from the Rooseveltian atmosphere of the 
homes of the 1930s. My mother sent me to kindergarten in a white fur in the 
middle of a depression. The kids beat me up, and I think it was from that 
moment that I became a rebel."

Yet it was the universal dream of material advancement that led to the play's 
overwhelming acceptance by white middle-class audiences on Broadway. When an 
excited interviewer exclaimed: "This is not really a negro play - it could be 
about anybody. It's a play about people!", Hansberry coolly replied: "Well, I 
hadn't noticed the contradiction because I'd always been under the impression 
that negroes are people."

The unprecedented popularity of Raisin changed the face of American theatre. 
Between 1964 and 1974, more than 600 African American theatre companies sprang 
into existence across the US. In 1970 Charles Gordone's No Place to Be Somebody 
became the first play by an African American writer to win the Pulitzer prize. 
But somewhere in there Hansberry got lost. She spent four years drafting what 
would have been her third play, but it was still unfinished when she died.

"I sit at this desk for hours and hours," she once wrote, "and sharpen pencils 
and smoke cigarettes and nothing happens. I begin to think more and more of 
doing something else with my life while I am still young. I mean, almost 
anything - driving an ambulance in Angola or running a ski lodge in upstate New 
York, instead of this endless struggle. I expect the theatre will kill me."

The two plays Hansberry did complete show how hard she pushed herself. After 
the all-black domestic drama of Raisin, The Sign in Sydney Brustein's Window 
turned out to be a sprawling multiracial play of ideas. Les Blancs was more 
ambitious still; Nemiroff, who finally whipped it into shape, declared it would 
stand as his former wife's greatest work. It is a neocolonialist drama set in a 
missionary compound in the middle of an African civil war. A teeming, complex 
drama drawn on an almost Shakespearean scale, the play is a vivid examination 
of an ideological conflict escalating into bloodshed. "Les Blancs could serve 
as an analysis of any war, anywhere, at any time," says Marianne Elliott, who 
is directing the Royal Exchange production.

The stageworthiness of Les Blancs will only become apparent in performance, 
and it will always stand as a historical reconstruction as much as an original 
piece of work. But as the final entry in Hansberry's journal entreated: "If 
anything should happen - before 'tis done - may I trust that all commas and 
periods will be placed and someone will complete my thoughts. This last should 
be the least difficult since there are so many who think as I do."

Â• Les Blancs opens at the Royal Exchange, Manchester (0161-833 9833), tonight. 
A Raisin in the Sun is at Salisbury Playhouse (01722 320333) from May 11-26 and 
the Young Vic, London SE1 (020-7928 6363), from June 1-30.
 