
Roger Federer moved into the semi-finals of the Australian Open with a 
four-sets win over the eighth-seed Argentinian David Nalbandian at Melbourne 
Park.

 Federer always had the edge in a game full of stunningly powerful 
groundstrokes as he triumphed 7-5, 6-4, 5-7, 6-3. The Swiss No2 will now meet 
Juan Carlos Ferrero in the last four. The last time Federer reached the 
semi-final of a Grand Slam, at Wimbledon last year, he went on to win the 
tournament.

Nalbandian had won five of the pairs' six previous meetings, but Federer 
overcame a nervous start to gain the upper hand as the players traded all the 
shots in the book.

 "It is so much fun to stay for two weeks at the same place," said Federer, 
"and after what I experienced at Wimbledon I want to live through that more 
times in my career."

 "This is a very good start to the season." 

Earlier, Ferrero overcame the plucky Moroccan Hicham Arazi to reach his first 
Australian Open semi-final, although his straight-sets win was less comfortable 
than expected.

The Spaniard, seeded third in Melbourne, raced through the opening set in just 
24 minutes but found Arazi a stubborn opponent and required two nerve-jangling 
tie-breaks to seal a 6-1, 7-6 (8/6), 7-6 (7/5) win.

 "I played really good when I started the match but I knew Arazi always plays 
good rallies," he said. "I missed some easy volleys but then I won the second 
set in the tie-break. It was pretty tough. I started to feel a little bit tired 
and finally I won a tough match."

Ferrero held points for the second set at 5-4 when Arazi, who had previously 
threatened little against the French Open champion's serve, pulled a break back 
out of nowhere.

Ferrero made his first ventures to the net and they proved costly as Arazi, 
who beat Mark Philippoussis in straight sets in the fifth round, capitalised to 
even the set and force a tie-break.

Arazi was on the verge of levelling the match when he led 6-3 but could not 
close it out, with Ferrero unleashing two impressive serves and the Moroccan 
wasting his final opportunity with a loose forehand.

An incredible 37-stroke rally then ended with another Arazi error and Ferrero 
let fly with a superb backhand to claw himself out of the hole and take the set.

The quality of the match was high, the rallying supreme, the baseline 
groundstrokes ferocious and the sportsmanship heart-warming as the third set 
went with serve but included some epic moments.

Ferrero saved two break points at 2-2 and then sealed the game after a 
stunning rally that included two net-cords and the Spaniard exchanged friendly 
words with Arazi at the changeover.

Ferrero, bidding to reclaim the world No1 ranking after Andy Roddick's defeat 
yesterday, conceded a break to Arazi and trailed 3-5 after successive backhand 
errors but the Moroccan could not close out the set and was broken straight 
back to 15.

 Cue a second tie-break that once again spawned an incredible exchange as 
Arazi recovered a Ferrero lob before returning to the net only to be passed by 
the Spaniard.

 The two exchanged smiles, both were exhausted and Ferrero went and sat in the 
shade as he regained his breath before stepping back into the sunlight to 
clinch the match as Arazi fired a backhand into the net.

 "I feel tired because it was a long year last year. We start soon again this 
year here but I am in the semi-final so I am very happy," he said.
 