Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9uGy3LlNeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9uGy3LlNeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9uGy3LlNeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Another year, another musketeers movie. What a shame no one thought of 
rereleasingRichard Lester's two-parter 
<http://www.thomasspurlin.com/2011/08/classic-musings-threefour-musketeers-73.html>
, or eventhe MGM version <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M6prWV23jAw> with Gene 
Kelly. But no, swashbuckling on its own is no longer deemed enough to hold the 
attention of today's fidgety kids, so Paul WS Anderson gussies up hisThe Three 
Musketeers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/mar/30/three-musketeers-3d-trailer>
 with 3-D, slo-mo and ninja skills. Phew! No danger of us getting bored there, 
then!

I love swordfights and want to see more of them, preferably not obscured by 
bells and whistles. Lester's Musketeer films have some cracking examples, 
mostly lighthearted, though slapstick gives way to a deadly serious duel 
towards the end, which goes on for so long that Michael York and Christopher 
Lee end up tottering with exhaustion.

That fight choreographer, William Hobbs, was also behind one of the best 
screen swordfights:the end of the otherwise humdrum Rob Roy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEtPluUi0_U> pits heroic, lumbering Liam 
Neeson, in big blouse and kilt, against Tim Roth as a psychopathic fop called 
Archie, a master swordsman. The match is unequal, but the action is terrific, 
and only ends when one man breaks the rules – or at least the rules as I 
remember them quoted byRoger Livesey and Anton Walbrook 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9CL8mh_4-0s>, in The Life and Death of Colonel 
Blimp.

Swords are sexier than guns, and not just because they're longer phallic 
symbols. Any idiot can fire a gun, but it takes training to wield a rapier. The 
best duels are like games of chess with extra sadism – why dispatch opponents 
quickly when you can humiliate them with your footwork, or inflict death by a 
thousand cuts? Duelling can be a substitute for sex – and not just theseductive 
fence-off <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9as3GwRpFk> between Antonio Banderas 
and Catherine Zeta-Jones in The Mask of Zorro; check out Errol Flynn and Basil 
Rathbone, smiling at each other during theirduel on the beach in Captain Blood 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uog-mJYyloQ>. It's enough to make you sorry for 
Olivia de Havilland.

No one cries "Ha haa!" during a sword-fight quite like Rathbone, reportedly 
the best fencer in Hollywood, though owing to story demands, he won only one of 
his on-screen duels. But he provided brilliant opposition for Flynn (The 
Adventures of Robin Hood <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L10fR31jC1w>), Tyrone 
Power (The Mark of Zorro <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=McDfLkLqJAE>) and 
Danny Kaye (The Court Jester <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hSNGeazCW6I>). The 
other man all these fights had in common was fencing masterFred Cavens 
<http://www.weirdwildrealm.com/f-sword-choreographers.html>, also responsible 
for the seven-minute thriller inScaramouche 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MFhfKcwbw5k> in which Stewart Granger (wearing 
slightly distracting stripy tights) and Mel Ferrer swipe at each other all over 
a theatre.

Scaramouche is particularly pleasing from a swordlover's point of view since 
Granger has to train hard to match the skills of his arch enemy. Training is 
also featured inLe Bossu <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118756/>, Philippe de 
Broca's 1997 version of the oft-filmed Paul Féval novel, with Vincent Perez 
enjoying his finest hour as the Duc de Nevers, whose family's trademark attack, 
"la botte de Nevers", entails sticking your blade into a spot between your 
opponent's eyes.

Like other martial arts, swordplay is as much about restraint as brute force. 
While the duelling in Japanese chambara is of a different order to Hollywood 
swashbuckling, it illustrates perfectly how apparent inaction is as important 
as action, when swordsman Seiji Miyaguchi (coolest ofThe Seven Samurai 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76377/seven-samurai>) fells his 
blustering challenger with one movement. Or when the showdown between Toshiro 
Mifune and Tatsuya Nakadai in Sanjuro involves 30 seconds of intense staring 
before a single thrust unleashes a geyser of blood.

I would like to see action films regress to an epoch when swords were as 
prevalent as guns, or maybe hop forward to a time where firearms, for whatever 
reason, don't work. (And no, I'm sorry, but light sabres don't cut it.) Maybe 
it's time actors were taught how to fence again, so their prowess doesn't have 
to be cobbled together in the editing room. It doesn't hurt that fencing can 
also be as graceful as dancing. As Rathbone said: "I would not put it under the 
category of sport; I would put it under the category of the arts."
 