
Australia’s largest Islamic school should no longer be allowed to receive 
federal funding, the administrative appeals tribunal has ruled.

It means the school in Sydney’s west may be forced to close.

The tribunal has affirmed the education department’s decision to revoke 
approval for Malek Fahd Islamic school to receive federal funding after
allegations of financial mismanagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/09/federal-government-revokes-19m-funding-sydney-malek-fahd-islamic-school>
.

Simon Birmingham, the federal education minister, has welcomed the ruling, 
saying the school had been operating for profit in breach of the Australian 
Education Act.

“Australians rightly expect that every taxpayer dollar committed to school 
education is genuinely expended on school education,” Birmingham said. “School 
governance should be of the highest standard and funding should be exclusively 
used for the education and welfare of students.

“Our attention now turns to working with the students and their families, the 
teachers and the whole school community about how we best support them through 
this difficult time.”

The Turnbull government pulled $19m in funding to Malek Fahd in February last 
year after it was found to be operating as a “for-profit” organisation.


The decision was referred to the administrative appeals tribunal but the 
tribunal found the school was being run for profit and was not a fit and proper 
organisation.

Malek Fahd Islamic school wins reprieve as funding withdrawal delayed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/28/malek-fahd-islamic-school-wins-funding-reprieve-as-government-cuts-delayed>
Bernard McCabe, the tribunal’s deputy president, said Malek Fahd appeared to 
be a good school with community support. But contractual relationships with the 
Australian Federation of Islamic Councils means government funding would 
continue to leak from the school to the federation.

“The only appropriate course is to affirm the decision [to revoke federal 
funding],”McCabe wrote in his ruling 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/AATA/2016/1087.html>. “That is a hard 
outcome for [Malek Fahd] and for the students and community it serves. But the 
ultimate responsibility must be laid at the door of the previous management of 
[the school].”

Malek Fahd operates over three campuses in Sydney’s west in Greenacre, Hoxton 
Park and Beaumont Hills. It has more than 2,500 students enrolled in classes 
ranging from kindergarten to year 12, and employs a large number of staff.

Between 2012 and 2015, it received more than $76m in financial assistance from 
the commonwealth, as well as money from the New South Wales government and 
tuition income from parents.

The commonwealth is its largest source of funding. It is estimated roughly 
two-thirds of its income in 2014-15 came from the federal government.
Timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=7d7bae1b-8ca5-4cf4-b789-41ed53ff772c> 