
Median house prices in Sydney and Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> have hit all-time highs 
and are likely to keep rising for the remainder of the year, new property 
figures show.

The September quarter property report 
<http://static.domain.com.au/domainblog/uploads/2016/10/25164342/DM15498_Domain_House_Price_Report_September_2016_v2_FINAL-1.pdf>
 published by Domain Group on Thursday found house prices hit a record level of 
$1,068,303 in Sydney, a 2.7% increase and the strongest quarterly growth rate 
since September 2015. Sydney unit prices reached $685,865 this quarter, an 
increase of 1.1%.

Domain chief economist Andrew Wilson said lower interest rates and a strong 
local economy had fuelled house price growth inSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>, while unit prices also 
continued to rise despite new construction.

Housing 'severely unaffordable' as Sydney price to income ratio worsens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/25/housing-severely-unaffordable-as-sydney-price-to-income-ratio-worsens>
Melbourne house prices reached $773,669, a quarterly price growth rate of 3.1% 
and annual increase of 9.1%, the city’s 16th consecutive quarter of growth. 
Melbourne unit prices rose to $466,779, a growth rate of 4.5% over the quarter.

“A relative shortage of listings and increased interest from investors will 
continue to drive price growth in these capitals for the remainder of 2016,” 
Wilson said.

Darwin and Perth were the only capital cities to see year-on year declines, 
however Brisbane median prices fell 0.9% for the quarter, while median prices in
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> dropped by 0.3%.

The figures come as the former deputy chair of the parliamentary inquiry into 
home ownership, Labor MP Ed Husic,told the New Daily 
<http://thenewdaily.com.au/money/property/2016/10/26/affordable-housing-inquiry/>
 the government was deliberately avoiding progressing the inquiry.

This inquiry lapsed when the Standing Committee on Economics ceased to exist 
due to the triggering of a double dissolution in May.


“We had a lot of people spend a lot of time and thought putting together the 
submissions to help guide the committee, and it’s a slap in the face to those 
people that the inquiry has lapsed,” Husic said.

But Carolyn Whitzman, a professor in urban planning at the University of 
Melbourne, said she doubted that an inquiry was the best way forward.

“There’s a time for inquiries and there’s a time for action,” she said. “I’d 
say this is a time for action.”

Melbourne house rents hit record high as agents report high demand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/14/melbourne-rent-hits-record-high-as-agents-report-high-demand>
She said Australia should follow Canada in putting money into a future fund 
that goes towards social housing, housing development, public transport and 
retrofitting houses to make them more sustainable.

“They’re seeing it as a jobs creation funding program, a global 
competitiveness program, that will also go towards developing new technologies 
as well,” Whitzman said.

“It would be great to see Australia doing the same.”

The former prime minister Kevin Rudd went some way towards this with his 
“national-building” plan announced in 2009 as a buffer against the global 
financial crisis, she said.

 “It’s time the Australian government fronted up with an ambitious investment 
program to take Australia into the 21st century, and social and affordable 
housing needs to be a part of that,” she said.

“Housing affordability is getting worse, including rental affordability, so 
options are lowering for those who can’t afford to buy in the rental market as 
well.”
 