
A ceasefire has come into effect across Syria after the Assad regime and the 
opposition agreed to a nationwide deal brokered byTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and Russia. It is hoped the fragile 
pact could mark a key turning point and usher in peace talks aimed at bringing 
an end to the six-year conflict that has killed nearly half a million people 
and displaced half of Syria’s population.

The deal came into force at midnight (10pm GMT) on Thursday and appeared to be 
holding early on Friday after reports of clashes early on. The Syrian 
Observatory for Human Rights monitoring group said rebels had violated the 
truce deal and taken over a position in Hama province, while a rebel group also 
accused the government of shelling areas in Atshan and Skeik villages in Idlib 
province, which borders Hama. By morning, though, calm prevailed in the areas 
included in the deal, according to monitors.

It is the third ceasefire agreement this year. There was confusion over which 
rebel groups have signed up, but officials from all sides said they hoped this 
time the pact would hold in the run-up to talks next month in Astana, 
Kazakhstan’s capital, that could lay out a path to peace.

“We consider the ceasefire an important step to resolve the Syrian conflict,” 
said Ibrahim Kalin, the spokesman for the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan. “Along with the Russian Federation, we support this arrangement as a 
guarantor.”


Notably absent from the brokering of the deal was the US, which has moved to 
the sidelines in recent months as Moscow has stepped up military and diplomatic 
involvement inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Rebel groups, including the powerful Ahrar al-Sham Islamist movement and Jaysh 
al-Islam, which operates mostly near Damascus, signed up to the agreement after 
hours of negotiations in Ankara. The Syrian military said it would cease combat 
operations except against terrorist groups includingIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, the former 
al-Qaida wing in Syria that has publicly severed ties with the global terror 
network.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsyrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5241a906967298727103a2b26059ce2d1082b924%2F0_94_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syria%20ceasefire%20appears%20to%20hold%20after%20rivals%20sign%20Russia-backed%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsyrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syria%20ceasefire%20appears%20to%20hold%20after%20rivals%20sign%20Russia-backed%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fsyrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5241a906967298727103a2b26059ce2d1082b924%2F0_94_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A Syrian army soldier places a Syrian national flag during a battle with rebel 
fighters at the Ramouseh front line, east of Aleppo. Photograph: Hassan Ammar/AP
“We have just received news that a few hours ago the event we have all been 
waiting for and working towards has happened,” the Russian president,Vladimir 
Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, said of the signing 
of the deal during a televised meeting with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei 
Lavrov, and its defence minister, Sergei Shoigu.

Putin said three documents had been signed: a ceasefire agreement between the 
Syrian government and the armed opposition; a list of control mechanisms to 
ensure the ceasefire would work; and a statement of intent to begin 
negotiations on a political end to the conflict.

Speaking before the midnight deadline, Putin described the ceasefire as 
fragile and said it would “require a lot of attention”.


The deal comes after a series of significant losses for the opposition and a 
shift in the war’s momentum in favour of the regime ofBashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>.

The rebels recently lost control of half of the city of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, the last major city in Syria in 
which they had a presence, their defence lines crushed in weeks of sustained 
attack. They have also come under bombardment in the province of Idlib and in 
rural areas near Damascus. Elsewhere they have made no significant gains for 
much of the past year, their firepower blunted by Russia’s relentless air 
campaign.

Syria map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/syria_control_map/giv-3902Wf3olR9VRJlj/>
The deal may yet founder as others have in the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/syria-seven-day-ceasefire-begins-violence>
, over the competing interests struggling for dominance in Syria. The regime 
and Iran may decide not to honour the agreement, seeking to capitalise on their 
recent victories to finally crush the rebellion.

Jabhat Fateh al-Sham has acted as a spoiler in previous agreements including 
the Aleppo evacuation, and it has entrenched itself among the Islamist rebels 
who have signed up to the pact.

And if the talks in Astana next month fail as other peace initiatives have, 
the fighting is likely to resume. The talks are set to includeRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, Turkey and Iran, whose top 
diplomats met earlier this month in an effort to kickstart peace talks, as well 
as representatives from the regime and the opposition.

The absence of the United States offers a hint at the frustration over 
American policies on Syria, both within Russia, the key backer of Syrian 
strongman Assad, and Turkey, a stalwart supporter of the opposition.

Ankara and Moscow recently mended ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/common-ground-on-syria-unites-russia-and-turkey-against-the-west>
 after a months-long estrangement over the shooting down of a Russian fighter 
jet that had strayed into Turkish airspace. Key differences remain between the 
two powers, with Turkey eager to see Assad leave and the Kremlin playing a 
crucial role in his recent battlefield victories.


The two countries recently negotiated an evacuation deal that saw the defeated 
rebels in Aleppo and tens of thousands of civilians leave the embattled city 
after a ferocious offensive by Assad’s allies, primarily Iranian-backed 
militias from Iraq and Lebanon.


Moscow hopes a peace deal will cement its role as a regional and global power 
that intervened in Syria decisively while the rebels’ backers, including the 
US, dithered. Ankara hopes to limit the fallout from the war across the border, 
which hasdriven over 2 million refugees into the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
, with many more expected to flee if the Syrian government resumes its military 
campaign in Idlib, which borders Turkey. It also wants to blunt the expansion 
of Kurdish paramilitaries in northern Syria, whose plans for an autonomous zone 
it considers a national security threat.


The peace talks also highlight the complex web of interests involved in the 
Syrian war. Turkey and Russia brokered this agreement, as well asthe Aleppo 
evacuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/deal-reached-to-evacuate-rebels-and-civilians-from-aleppo>
, on behalf of Syrian proxies and are now set to play a role as guarantors in 
the absence of American or UN involvement in the talks.


There was confusion over whether Jabhat Fateh al-Sham is included in the deal. 
Turkish officials said groups designated by the UN security council were 
excluded from the agreement, but a senior rebel official said the militants 
were covered by the ceasefire. The group was considered a legitimate target for 
military action under previous ceasefires.

“A general ceasefire that does not exclude any of the areas under the control 
of the rebels, and does not exclude any faction in those areas, will go into 
effect at 12 [midnight] Syria time,” said Osama Abu Zeid, a legal adviser with 
the Free Syrian Army, who is involved in the negotiations.


'I couldn't take anything except dignity': stories of the leaving of Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
In Damascus, the Syrian army said the ceasefire came after the “successes 
achieved by the armed forces”, an apparent reference to thecapture of 
rebel-held neighbourhoods of Aleppo this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/what-next-for-syria-its-allies-and-foes-after-fall-of-aleppo>
.


Lavrov said talks to implement the agreements would take place soon in Astana, 
and would involve Russia, Turkey, Iran and possibly Egypt, as well as the 
parties to the Syrian conflict. At a later stage other players including Saudi 
Arabia, Iraq and Jordan could be asked to join, he added.

Lavrov said the US could be invited to join after Donald Trump became 
president next month, in order that the countries could work “in a friendly and 
collective manner”.


A state department spokesman described news of the ceasefire as a “positive 
development” that the US hoped would be “implemented fully and respected by all 
parties”.

“Any effort that stops the violence, saves lives, and creates the conditions 
for renewed and productive political negotiations would be welcome,” the 
spokesman said.

Erdoğan described the ceasefire as a “historic opportunity” that should not be 
wasted. He told a news conference in Ankara: “This is a window of opportunity 
that has been opened and should not be squandered.”

The ceasefire will be the first nationwide halt to the fighting since a 
week-long truce in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/aid-agencies-on-standby-with-syria-ceasefire-due-to-start-at-sunset>
 that collapsed after several incidents of violence. A previous truce 
implemented in February also fell apart. Both those deals were organised by 
Russia and the US.

Russian state television has presented the country’s intervention as a 
black-and-white struggle against terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/russia-media-coverage-syria-war-selective-defensive-kremlin>
, with none of the distressing images of regime victims and the bombardment of
Aleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> shown. Russian officials were 
quick to talk up the ceasefire as vindication of Moscow’s strategy.

“Russia has again proved its leading role in international peacekeeping 
activities,” said Sergei Zheleznyak, a Russian MP and member of the 
parliament’s international affairs committee. He called the agreement “a major 
diplomatic, military and political success”.

If a ceasefire can hold and meaningful progress is made on negotiations, it 
will indeed be a huge coup for Putin, who launched Moscow’s first intervention 
outside the borders of the former Soviet Union since the Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan, in order to provide backing to Assad.

Putin will also take satisfaction in the successful sidelining of the US from 
the process, after years of fruitless discussions between the two countries’ 
foreign ministers over Syria.

It was no accident that in noting all the “interested powers” who might be 
involved in the talks, the US was mentioned way down the list, after regional 
players. And it was pointed of Lavrov to say the US could be included in talks 
only after Trump becomes president.

The outgoing Obama administration has been scathing of Russia’s role in Syria. 
Earlier this month, the US ambassador to the UN, Samantha Power,launched a 
scathing attack on her Russian counterpart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/14/are-you-incapable-of-shame-samantha-power-criticises-syria-iran-and-russia-video>
 asking him if he was “incapable of feeling shame”.
 