
Illuminated by the lights of Westminster’s Christmas tree and dozens of 
cameras, chants of “Shame on you” went up among the few thousand anti-war 
protesters as news of the result inside spread around those gathered in 
Parliament Square. Others wept as a light drizzle began to come down almost at 
the same time.

Syria airstrikes: MPs approve UK action against Isis after marathon debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-approve-uk-action-against-isis-after-marathon-debate>
“I’m just numb, shocked at the outcome. I really felt that we stood a chance,” 
said Francine Loze, holding a candle as a a friend openly shed tears beside 
her. Like many others at the demonstration, which had grown from a trickle 
earlier in the day into thousands over the evening, Loze counted herself as 
someone who had been re-energised as a Labour supporter by the leadership of 
Jeremy Corbyn.

“To be honest I feel emotional at the moment. It’s rare that you can be out 
here with so many people feeling one way – and then it just goes against you,” 
said Matilda Wnek, a young London writer who had come back to Labour as a 
member after joining the Greens for the general election.

On the fringes of the protest, however, just as inside parliament, the civil 
war in Labour was evident as a pro-airstrikes London Labour councillor 
exchanged angry words with protesters who had heard him describe Momentum – the 
pro-Corbyn movement – as “scum”.

“At this moment in time I have more in common with the Conservatives than with 
Momentum and that is a great shame,” said the councillor, Darren Hackett. 
Nearby, Momentum supporters carried a large red banner bearing the movement’s 
name.

The Guardian view on the Syria debate: crossing the watershed | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-syria-debate-crossing-the-watershed>
Earlier, while speaker after speaker lambasted David Cameron, the role of 
pantomime villain was reserved for the shadow foreign secretary, Hilary Benn, 
with boos and hisses ringing out at the mention of his name.

To cheers, the Stop the War Coalition chair, Andrew Murray, said MPs from 
Labour and other parties who support the government should be “branded with 
infamy for the rest of their political careers”.

Also singled out – by George Galloway – was the Walthamstow Labour MP, Stella 
Creasy, who eventually voted to bombSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> after tweeting earlier in the day 
about her staff receiving abuse from individuals seeking to lobby her over her 
previous undecided stance. A “few angry emails” would be nothing compared with 
the suffering of the Syrian people as a result of military action, said 
Galloway.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fanti-war-protesters-urge-mps-to-vote-against-syria-airstrikes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-war%20protesters%20urge%20MPs%20to%20vote%20against%20Syria%20airstrikes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fanti-war-protesters-urge-mps-to-vote-against-syria-airstrikes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-war%20protesters%20urge%20MPs%20to%20vote%20against%20Syria%20airstrikes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fanti-war-protesters-urge-mps-to-vote-against-syria-airstrikes-video&media=>
Anti-war protesters urge MPs to vote against Syria airstrikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/02/anti-war-protesters-urge-mps-to-vote-against-syria-airstrikes-video>
Lindsey German, the convener of the Stop the War Coalition, said: “I believe 
that those Labour MPs are acting against the interests of their constituents 
and their members. I would say to them: ‘Think again and go into the lobbies to 
vote no. The war and its consequences will be on your consciences. You will not 
be able to escape the consequences of this war.’”

The protest was not addressed by Corbyn, the former chair of the Stop the War 
Coalition, but the SNP MP Mhairi Black did come out to tell the gathered crowds 
they were being heard inside parliament.

Other speakers included Peter Brierley, whose son, L/Cpl Shaun Brierley, died 
in Iraq. “We are coming up to Christmas. We are going to have packed shopping 
malls and little children going out on to the streets,” he said, warning of 
possible terrorist attacks on the UK in retaliation for airstrikes.

If there was a difference to other similar protests on other chilly December 
nights over the years, it was that many of those gathered felt that one of 
their own was finally leading the charge against airstrikes from the helm of 
the opposition.
“Make some noise for Jeremy Corbyn … make some noise for the leader of the 
opposition,” young activists bellowed through loudspeakers as they sought to 
rally spirits in the lead-up to the vote.

A late arrival from the Labour frontbench was Diane Abbott, who told the 
protest: “In 24 hours British bombers could be bombing Raqqa. It will be a 
tragedy. It will not keep the British people safer and will bring forward a 
further spiral of violence in the region.”

Earlier in the day opponents of the government’s plan were gathering in 
Parliament Square. Adam Paigge, 23, Muhammad Abdur Rahman, 23, and Steve Jones, 
37, had never met before, but were sitting together in a vigil outside the 
Palace of Westminster as MPs began debating.

Paigge had travelled down from Manchester on Tuesday to join the protests. He 
had been in the area all night, without sleeping. Visibly tired, he paused when 
asked for his reasons for being here, then said: “We all do a lot of research 
online and, you know, you reach a point when you just snap. We are looking at 
the series of events that could be leading up to the Syria war, which could be 
mirroring the events we saw leading up to the Iraq war.”

Syria airstrikes: Commons emerges with credit from day of bitter division
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-commons-isis-debate>
James Schnieder, a Momentum organiser, rejected the suggestion that the 
movement would be mobilised against MPs who voted for airstrikes. “We have made 
it absolutely clear that we are not campaigning on deselection. Of course, we 
think that people who are voting on bombing are wrong and we are disappointed 
in each person that we were unable to win the argument with them.”
 