
Bashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> has dealt 
a swift blow to international efforts to secure a ceasefire, deliver aid and 
promote a negotiated solution to the war in Syria, vowing to regain control of 
the entire country and warning that it could still “take a long time”.

The Syrian president was speaking to the AFP news agency in Damascus on 
Thursday, hours beforean agreement was reached in Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-ceasefire-munich-talks-us-russia>
 on arranging a cessation of hostilities and the urgent despatch of food, 
medicines and other supplies to hundreds of thousands of civilians in besieged 
areas.

Assad said his armed forces would try to retake all of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> but added that the involvement of 
regional players “means that the solution will take a long time and will incur 
a heavy price”. He warned of the possibility of direct intervention by Turkey 
and Saudi Arabia, who back the rebels.

Syria war cessation deal relies on something in short supply: trust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-war-cessation-deal-something-short-supply-trust>
However, the US state department said Assad was “deluded” if he thinks there 
is a military solution to the war in Syria.

The Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, said on Friday that Assad’s 
removal was vital to defeat Islamic State. “We will achieve it,” he told the 
Munich security conference.

“It might take three months, it might take six months or three years - but he 
will no longer carry responsibility for Syria. Period,” he later told newspaper 
Sueddeutsche Zeitung.

Assad said it would be possible to end the war “in less than a year” if rebel 
supply routes from Turkey, Jordan and Iraq were cut. The signs are that Russian 
airstrikes, which were not mentioned in the Munich statement, are helping him 
achieve that goal. “The main battle is about cutting the road between Aleppo 
and Turkey, for Turkey is the main conduit of supplies for the terrorists,” he 
added.

Russian aircraft were seen in action in northern Syria again on Friday.

The Syrian leader affirmed his readiness to talk – but he offered nothing to 
the forces who have been seeking to overthrow him since 2011. “We have fully 
believed in negotiations,” he said. “However, if we negotiate, it does not mean 
that we stop fighting terrorism. The two tracks are inevitable in Syria.”

The spirit of his comments was familiar, but the defiant tone does not augur 
well for the implementation ofthe fragile and tentative agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/syria-ceasefire-munich-talks-us-russia>
 drawn up by the International Syria Support Group, comprising the US, Russia, 
Britain, Iran, Saudi Arabia and others – some of Assad’s staunchest backers and 
most determined enemies.

Initial efforts to plan aid deliveries were under way on Friday at the UN 
headquarters in Geneva, where a new Task Force on Humanitarian Access in Syria 
was being chaired by Jan Egeland, adviser to the UN’s Syria envoy, Staffan de 
Mistura. “Once we get clearance by concerned parties, the UN and its 
humanitarian partners will be able to reach the civilians in need within the 
coming days,” de Mistura said.
Map of besieged towns 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/syrian_besieged_towns/giv-27167EHzujjPGiU04/>
De Mistura suspended the fledgling Syria peace talks after just three days on 
3 February. Plans to resume them on 25 February were still “cloudy”, said UN 
spokesman Ahmed Fawzi, who told a briefing in Geneva: “Politics is the art of 
the possible”.

Jan Eliasson, the UN’s deputy secretary general, described the Munich 
agreement as a “brake” on the conflict, but not a “breakthrough”.

Humanitarian access was urgently needed, warned Robert Mardini, regional head 
of operations at the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdrone-footage-shows-bab-al-salama-refugee-camp-on-turkey-syria-border-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F13%2F1455358296227%2FKP_1792129_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drone%20footage%20shows%20Bab%20al-Salama%20refugee%20camp%20on%20Turkey-Syria%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdrone-footage-shows-bab-al-salama-refugee-camp-on-turkey-syria-border-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drone%20footage%20shows%20Bab%20al-Salama%20refugee%20camp%20on%20Turkey-Syria%20border%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fdrone-footage-shows-bab-al-salama-refugee-camp-on-turkey-syria-border-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F13%2F1455358296227%2FKP_1792129_crop_640x360.jpg>
Drone footage shows Bab al-Salama refugee camp on Turkey-Syria border – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/feb/13/drone-footage-shows-bab-al-salama-refugee-camp-on-turkey-syria-border-video>
David Miliband, head of the International Rescue Committee, condemned the 
delay to a ceasefire. “You don’t wait a week for an emergency operation and the 
people of Syria should not have to wait a week for relief from bombings. We 
wait with eager anticipation to see whether this agreement is a turning point 
or a false dawn.”

Members of Syria’s moderate, western-backed opposition reacted cautiously to 
the agreement to pause hostilities, saying they did not trust Russia to keep 
its end of the bargain and haltan intense aerial campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/syria-vladimir-putin-russia-running-rings-around-west>
 responsible for the most significant advances by forces loyal to Assad since 
the start of the civil war.


The advance has so far displaced 51,000 civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/10/humanitarian-efforts-aleppo-breaking-point-syria>
 and placed 300,000 more at risk of being placed under siege in Aleppo, 
according to UN officials, who described the humanitarian situation there as 
grotesque.

Rebels also questioned the real impact of the deal on the ground, since it 
excludes the al-Nusra Front, al-Qaida’s affiliate in Syria, which operates in 
large swaths of the country.


'No one believes it': Aleppo losing hope amid doubts over ceasefire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/12/aleppo-syria-refugees-russia-bombs-losing-hope-doubts-over-ceasefire>
An activist close to the powerful Ahrar al-Sham rebel movement said the Munich 
agreement amounted to giving Russia more time and international cover to 
continue bombing the opposition.

Issam al-Reis, a spokesman for the Southern Front, a western-backed rebel 
alliance fighting close to the Jordanian border, said: “We greet this 
announcement with tentative optimism. However, we are sceptical that Russia 
will hold to these commitments when its current policy is to indiscriminately 
bomb all parties in Syria into the dust, in particular civilians and moderate 
opposition, and with complete impunity, while saying they are bombing 
terrorists.

“We are waiting for real action, we have now lost faith in words without real 
action.”

The opposition High Negotiations Committee welcomed the plan but warned that 
the agreement must show benefits before any resumption of the talks in 
Switzerland. “If we see action and implementation, we will see you very soon in 
Geneva,” said spokesman Salim al-Muslet.

The Southern Front says Russia has conducted about 50 airstrikes a day on its 
positions since the end of November, a pace unparalleled since the start of the 
war, andMoscow’s intervention last autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/01/the-guardian-view-on-russian-intervention-in-syria-mixed-motives>
 – advertised as a campaign against Islamic State – hasmostly targeted the 
mainstream opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/russia-airstrikes-syria-not-targetting-isis>
.
 