
We asked our readers if they were happy with their local MP’s vote on 
airstrikes in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/dec/03/syria-airstrikes-britain-launches-bombing-against-isis-targets-rolling-report>
, afteran overwhelming majority of British MPs voted in favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-approve-uk-action-against-isis-after-marathon-debate>
 of action after a marathon debate on Wednesday.

 Of the 1,200 responses we received, a majority were against bombing. Many 
were unhappy, and in some cases angry with their MPs for backing military 
action, though the tone of the responses was largely civil and contrustive. 
Some Labour MPshave complained of abusive and bullying messages via email and 
social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/03/corbyn-urged-to-disband-momentum-after-labour-mps-report-bullying-and-abuse>
 as a consequence of the Syria vote.

Our readers were, in the main, satisfied with their MPs if they voted against 
military action, and thanked them for listening to their reservations.

Here is a selection of our readers’ views on how their MPs voted, starting 
with those whose MPs voted in favour of military action.


“It would be unfair to chastise him in this case”

I disagree with my MP, but this is probably the first time I’ve actually 
sympathised with his decision. There are no clear-cut answers, and whilst I 
fundamentally oppose the man on most issues it would be unfair to chastise him 
in this case. Daesh have made themselves the enemy of compassion and decency. 
We need a comprehensive plan to put an end to their organization for good.

Josh Rogers (MP: Steve Double, Conservative member for St Austell and Newquay)

The parliamentary battle is over, the war of words continues | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/03/the-parliamentary-battle-is-over-the-war-of-words-continues>
“I did not believe there was sufficient information provided to make a 
decision”

 I emailed my MP to ask him to abstain as I did not believe there was 
sufficient information provided to make a decision. In particular, the risk to 
civilians being used as human shields, and the lack of realistic ground force 
numbers. I sent my personal email via 38 Degrees and was surprised to learn 
that he claimed he had received many identical emails via this route. 38 
Degrees had decided not to take a stance on the bombing because not all their 
members agreed and so they did not provide a prepared text. The implication is 
that our MP did not even bother to read any of the emails he received before 
the vote.

Richard Gilyead (MP: Sir Alan Haselhurst, Conservative member for Saffron 
Walden)

“The claims of 70,000 are clearly nonsense”

I did not think the debate adequately addressed issues like ground troops 
which are essential for a lasting resolution nor an effective plan to promote 
stability in the long term. The claims of 70,000 are clearly nonsense as within 
that number there are groups who would be happy to fight each other as much as 
IS/ISIS/Daesh. My MP has not given any adequate explanation of his stance and I 
am considering voting for another candidate at the next election. I am not a
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party member, just a 
normal voter and my elected representative no longer represents my views.

Andrew Snow (MP: Frank Field, Labour member for Birkenhead)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fuk-parliament-votes-397-223-to-support-airstrikes-in-syria-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F2%2F1449098648028%2FKP_644439_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20parliament%20votes%20397-223%20to%20support%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fuk-parliament-votes-397-223-to-support-airstrikes-in-syria-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20parliament%20votes%20397-223%20to%20support%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fuk-parliament-votes-397-223-to-support-airstrikes-in-syria-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F2%2F1449098648028%2FKP_644439_crop_640x360.jpg>
UK parliament votes 397-223 to support airstrikes in Syria.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/uk-parliament-votes-397-223-to-support-airstrikes-in-syria-video>
“[The Lib Dems] are still practising what Cameron preaches”

As a life long Liberal Democrat supporter, I am bitterly disappointed by 
Mulholland’s decision. The party are no longer in government, yet are still 
practising what Cameron preaches. I expected to see the Lib Dems fighting for 
social cohesion at home, not costly foreign wars which cannot be won.

Thousands will be slaughtered, the refugee crisis will worsen, home-grown 
terrorists will have an excuse to retaliate and the wave of xenophobia which is 
currently sweeping the country will come crashing down with disasterous effect.

Have we not learnt our lessons from military intervention in Iraq and 
Afghanistan? Escalation is not the solution, it merely fans the flames of an 
already explosive situation.

Tim Farron recently sent supporters an email asking us if we were liberal at 
heart. Yes, I am liberal at heart, but as of today, a lowercase liberal. The 
party may be democrats, but they are no longer liberal and they have lost their 
heart.

Myn Swift (MP: Greg Mulholland, member for Leeds North West) 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20'We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20%27We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&media=>
Hilary Benn speech in full: ‘We must now confront this evil’.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
“Is Hilary Benn already preparing the argument that ground forces will be 
needed to defeat fascism?”

I did not hear any argument about what happens if the military action proposed 
is effective (in itself a very big if). What is the end game? If IS/DAESH is 
defeated, who replaces them in the areas they hold? We are already told not 
Assad.

Benn’s speech on Syria and the definition of fascism | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/04/benns-speech-on-syria-and-the-definition-of-fascism>
All arguments I heard seemed to reflect airstrikes are not going to bring a 
resolution. Is Hilary Benn already preparing the argument that ground forces 
will be needed to defeat fascism inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>?

The 7/7 bombers were from an area about 2 miles from where I live (within 
Hilary Benn’s own constituency). Anybody likely to be corrupted by this twisted 
version of Islam may never set foot in Syria but be planning another atrocity 
in their own home in my neighbourhood. How are bombs dropped in Raqqa going to 
prevent this?

10 hours was never enough time to debate the complexities of the situation, 10 
days may not be enough; 10 weeks should have been the bare minimum. I fear 
Hilary Benn had made up his mind long ago however.

Joe Lawson (MP: Hilary Benn, member for Leeds Central) 

“ISIS is just a convenient bogeyman for fading colonial power”

Airstrikes will worsen the refugee crisis, draw us into a proxy war with 
Russia over their naval base in Syria and control of Syrian oil, and will lead 
to a drawn-out engagement that will probably require troops on the ground. Even 
if the engagement topples ISIS, which isn’t remotely guaranteed, this does very 
little to tackle the Islamist terrorist threat, which is largely domestic in 
origin and can just as easily be radicalised in Rochdale as in Raqqa. ISIS is 
just a convenient bogeyman for fading colonial powers to prove a point that 
they still ‘matter’ on the world stage, by having another modern-day crusade.

I’m happy that Ann has decided to vote with her conscience, and that the 
Labour party has allowed that. It’s just her conscience has poor judgement.

James Young. (MP: Ann Coffey, Labour member for Stockport) 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdie-in-parliament-square-protest-against-syria-airstrikes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Die-in'%20at%20Parliament%20Square%20protest%20against%20Syria%20airstrikes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdie-in-parliament-square-protest-against-syria-airstrikes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Die-in%27%20at%20Parliament%20Square%20protest%20against%20Syria%20airstrikes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fdie-in-parliament-square-protest-against-syria-airstrikes-video&media=>
Protesters hold die-in outside parliament. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/02/die-in-parliament-square-protest-against-syria-airstrikes-video>
Constituents whose MPs voted against airstrikes

“I’m pleased that at least my representative shared my view”

[My MP Steve McCabe] said he would vote ‘for’ if convinced by the arguments 
put forward. He wasn’t, so he didn’t. He also tweeted throughout the evening. 
It was nice to know how it was going and what his thoughts were; I felt like he 
was including his constituents in the debate. He clearly thought very carefully 
about the issue and didn’t make a knee-jerk reaction. I am personally opposed 
to the air strikes so although I’m disappointed in the Labour MPs who voted 
with the government, I’m pleased that at least my representative shared my view.

Zoe Fletcher (MP: Steve McCabe, Labour member for Birmingham Selly Oak)

The new politics and the enemy within | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/03/the-new-politics-and-the-enemy-within>
“I am happy to say that she did the right thing”

I was one of many of her constituents who e-mailed my MP, begged her to vote 
against the motion, and explained why. She put a detailed explanation of her 
reasons on her blog and FB page, and also sent out replies to e-mails, linking 
to those statements. I am content that she reflected the views of Labour voters 
in her constituency, and of the party.

I am an elderly ‘returner’ to the Labour party, a long-term Labour supporter 
who was driven away after 2003. The change of direction under Jeremy Corbyn has 
been the most welcome thing to happen in politics for a generation, and I 
expect my MP to be part of this. I should have been very angry if, as a Labour 
member, she had chosen to vote for Cameron’s proposal, but I am happy to say 
that she did the right thing.

Catherine Johns (MP: Catherine West, Labour member for Hornsey and Wood Green)

“Britain has a proud history of fighting fascism”

I’m not happy. Britain has a proud history of fighting fascism and getting 
stuck in to an imperfect world to try and make it ever so slightly better. 
Bombing IS in Syria is not a catch-all solution, but it’s needed both to show 
solidarity with our allies and because it has a genuine chance of working.

Akshay Bilolikar (MP: Philip Hollobone, Conservative member for Kettering)


“I am bitterly disappointed in the result”

I was proud that Joanna Cherry and the rest of her party sat in silent disgust 
as other MPs cheered and clapped the prospect of war. Like most in this 
constituency, I share her belief that airstrikes in Syria will be ineffective 
in damaging Daesh - indeed, Daesh will be delighted to recruit survivors of 
British bombs. I am bitterly disappointed in the result of the vote, but I do 
believe that my MP and her party did everything they could to stop it, both on 
behalf of their constituents and on behalf of the Syrian people who asked us 
not to bomb them.


Kate MacDonald (MP: Joanna Cherry, SNP member for Edinburgh South West)

“This is part of a continuous theme of poor decision making in the Middle East”

I am happy with the way Rupa [Huq] voted. I am very concerned that we have 
entered into an area of armed conflict where, once again we have no idea what 
an exit strategy looks like and where we have allies who are allies, allies who 
are enemies and innocent civilians who will be ‘collateral damage’.
No-one seems able to verify the 70,000 fighters the PM seems to rely on. These 
seem to include militias who are in a similar political place to ISIS and are 
united with us only in their desire to unseat Assad. Who knows what would 
happen if Assad wasn’t there. Would they start fighting our other allies? Who 
would we support then?
I accept that war is always messy and allies can turn into enemies and you 
can’t be sure who your friends are, but this is part of a continuous theme of 
poor decision making in the Middle East, none of which has made us any safer.

Colin Sherriff (MP: Rupa Huq, Labour member for Ealing Central and Acton)

 