
A planned ceasefire between regime and opposition groups was struggling to 
take hold in several parts ofSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> 
hours after it was due to take effect, with explosions reported on a supply 
line to rebel-held east Aleppo and in the southern town of Deraa.


Attacks were also reported in Homs, Hama and Deir Azzour after sunset on 
Monday, whenthe truce brokered by Russia and the US was due to begin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/aid-agencies-on-standby-with-syria-ceasefire-due-to-start-at-sunset>
. Hopes for the deal had been low over the weekend, with opposition groups 
insisting that none of its proponents could force each other to comply on 
contested issues, such as which areas remain valid bombing targets, or who 
should receive aid.


Syrian ceasefire deal - the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/syrian-ceasefire-deal-the-guardian-briefing>
Speaking in Washington, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> said early reports spoke of 
some reduction of violence as well as sporadic fighting, but that it was “far 
too early to draw definitive conclusions”.

“There will be undoubtedly be reports of violations here and there and that’s 
the nature of ceasefires,” the US secretary of state said. “For all the doubts 
that exist, and there will be many challenges in the days to come, despite 
that, this plan has a chance to work.”


In his remarks, Kerry suggested the Assad regime would be able to conduct 
airstrikes against the al-Nusra front (which recently changed its official name 
to Jabhat Fateh al-Sham) if it had Russian and US approval.

However, that was later denied by the state department spokesman, John Kirby, 
who said: “The arrangement announced last week makes no provision whatsoever 
for the US andRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to approve 
strikes by the Syrian regime, and this is not something we could ever envision 
doing. A primary purpose of this agreement, from our perspective, is to prevent 
the Syrian regime air force from flying or striking in any areas in which the 
opposition or Nusra are present.”

He added: “The purpose of the JIC, if and when it is established, would be to 
coordinate military action between the US and Russia, not for any other party.”

Kerry applauded opposition groups for showing the “courage” to separate 
themselves from al-Nusra, which has declared itself officially separated from 
al-Qaida, but which is considered by the US still to be an al-Qaida affiliate. 
And Kerry warned other groups to disengage from al-Nusra units on the front.

“We can’t somehow adopt the moral hazard of just because they fight fiercely 
say, oh, we’re going to somehow allow al-Qaida to be the tip of our spear with 
respect to Assad,” Kerry said, adding that such a strategy would be “crazy and 
ultimately self-destructive”, raising the level of terror inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the Middle East and elsewhere.

“It is not advisable for the opposition, who have support from countries that 
are threatened by Nusra to be playing with Nusra. That is a losing 
proposition,” the secretary of state said. “We have made it clear … If they 
choose to join with al-Nusra in attacks, then they have made the choice of 
being with Nusra and they run the risks.”

Syria: bitter foes weigh up chance of peace, but prepare for war to rage on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/10/syria-peace-ceasefire-deal-us-russia-doubts-remain>
Russia insisted it would keep its jets away from opposition areas, which did 
not co-exist with jihadist groups, such as Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, which is 
proscribed by the US as a terrorist group. It had also lobbied unsuccessfully 
for the Islamist groups Ahrar al-Sham, and Jaish al-Islam to be added to the 
list.


The question of which opposition areas are still considered valid targets is 
central to the wariness of opposition groups, particularly in Aleppo and Idlib 
province where global jihadists and Islamists have become prevalent over the 
course of the five-year war.


“We want to know what the guarantees are,” said Salem al-Muslet, spokesman for 
the High Negotiations Committee, Syria’s main opposition organisation.

“What is the definition that has been chosen for ‘terrorism’?”

At the end of the first day of the Eid al-Adha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eid-al-adha> holiday, the Syrian military 
announced it was ceasing operations. Turkey had earlier voiced cautious support 
for the ceasefire, as had two other main protagonists, Iran and Hezbollah.


After spending the past year bolstering the Syrian leader, Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, by bombing groups and 
rebel communities opposing him, Russia has emerged as the main proponent of the 
ceasefire. It has pledged to open aid lines to besieged areas, such as 
opposition-held east Aleppo and to spare rebel communities, if they disentangle 
themselves from jihadists.

map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/syria-zip/giv-22601SFKP0dIYo8d3/>
Ahead of the ceasefire, Assad said on Monday that his government was 
determined to “reclaim every area from the terrorists, and to rebuild” the 
country. Assad spoke to the state news agency Sana during a rare public 
appearance on the streets of Daraya, a Damascus suburb that surrendered to 
government authority last month. “We call on all Syrians to turn toward 
reconciliation,” he said.

Opposition groups were reportedly meeting in various parts of Syria on Monday 
night. Ahead of the truce, most had been wary about what it would mean, arguing 
there was no way to force the Syrian regime to comply, and little incentive for 
its backers not to use a lull to press home an advantage on the battlefield.


People of Aleppo prepare for Eid festival under siege
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/11/syrian-people-of-aleppo-prepare-for-eid-under-siege>
Nevertheless, most groups are expected to cautiously endorse the pact. It 
follows the failure of three earlier agreements. One was an attempted 
ceasefire, while two others fell over at the negotiation table.


If the ceasefire does take hold, both Moscow and Washington have said they 
will open a joint command centre, which will agree on future targets.


Syrian and Russian planes have taken an immense toll on civilian 
infrastructure since the start of the Russian intervention, with hospitals, 
market places and schools regularly targeted. Opposition groups have insisted 
that Russia intended to bomb them towards the negotiation table, but claimed 
they could not sit down with Syrian officials or their backers from a weakened 
position.
 