
Under Tony Blair's Labour administration, antisocial behaviour was high on the 
agenda and so too were the expectations on social landlords to tackle it.

In a blaze of publicity we saw the creation of new tools and powers: the 
together campaign, therespect standard for housing management 
<http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/housing/landlordtoolkit> and the 
Asbo. The jury is still out on whether these have had a positive impact on 
landlords and the communities affected by antisocial behaviour (ASB), but it is 
clear that it got the housing sector focused on a problem that is regularly 
named as a high priority for tenants.

So what has happened over the last five years? Under Gordon Brown, the final 
years of the Labour government attempted to move away from media soundbites 
such as "respect" and "tackling, not tolerating". What remained was a woolly 
agenda on behaviour and standards that practitioners did not understand. Now we 
have the coalition government promising to cut bureaucracy, to make it quicker, 
easier and cheaper for landlords to take action against disruptive tenants and 
for communities to hold them to account for their failures.

Some have claimed the new ASB white paper, published in May this year, amounts 
to the same New Labour tools and powers re-announced with new names. Putting 
politics aside, there does seem to be some recognition that existing 
legislation is too complex.

The range of acts containing the powers agencies hold, and explaining who can 
apply for them, can be confusing, giving some landlords the excuse they need 
not to act. The legislation must be simplified; in serious cases the 
repossession process should be accelerated, and the criteria for mandatory 
repossession extended â€“ and not just as a kneejerk response to last year's city 
riots.

Even if the new white paper looks fine in theory, ASB feels less of a priority 
for housing providers than it did under Labour. With cuts to public services, 
the deepest recession in decades, the impact of welfare reform looming and 
waiting lists increasing amid a fully-fledged housing crisis, do landlords 
still care about tackling bad behaviour?

For landlords, the ASB agenda has not gone away. It remains a high priority 
for our tenants and will undermine the fabric of our communities and core 
business if we fail to tackle the problem. It has the power to frustrate us as 
professionals, but also reminds why we work in social housing.

As a landlord with a commitment to social responsibility, it makes sound 
business sense to invest in ASB services, and it is absolutely right that we 
continue to challenge behaviour that has a negative impact on communities. Even 
in this age of austerity, it is paramount that resources to tackle ASB are 
protected from the inevitable cuts to frontline services.

City West has taken the decision to protect this service, and the results are 
clear: since 2010, we have resolved more than 1,200 cases of antisocial 
behaviour. We have about 130 legal actions year, primarily taking out 
injunctions; evictions account for less than 5% of our enforcement action. We 
still offer a 24-hour reporting service, work closely with police and other 
agencies, and resolve the majority of cases without the need for legal recourse.

If housing associations take their foot off the pedal and attempt to direct, 
admittedly scarce, resources elsewhere, our tenants would be the first to tell 
us what they thought about it. We need to understand why tenants use ASB 
services, and why those who are less confident do not trust their landlord's 
ability to resolve their problems.

Our focus on ASB is at the core of our housing business. Delivery models might 
change, thanks to emerging government initiatives such as supporting troubled 
families, but the destabilising impact of ASB if left unchallenged, has not.

Matt Jones is assistant director of communities and neighbourhoods at City 
West Housing Trust <http://www.citywesthousingtrust.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/housing-network/2011/oct/10/join-guardian-housing-network>
 for comment, analysis and best practice in housing finance
 