
In a modest temple by the entrance to South Delhi's sprawling Tughlakabad 
slum, Shammo Khan, a counsellor with NGO Operation Asha, sits with the day's 
first patient, 16-year-old Kumar. He has been referred after being diagnosed 
with TB at a government hospital.

TB treatment is a six-month process and missing doses of medication can lead 
to the deadly Multi-Drug-Resistant TB strain. According to a 2010 World Health 
Organisation report, this is on the rise in India.

Operation Asha aims to improve patients' adherence to drug treatment 
programmes by using eDOTS, a low-cost biometric system that requires only a 
basic laptop and mobile phone. Internet access isn't necessary and the system 
is user-friendly for those with little education. It was designed in 
collaboration with Microsoft Research India and Innovators in Health – a US 
non-profit organisation.

eDOTS terminals are available at 24 locations in Delhi, such as temples and 
kiosks, ensuring patients only have to walk about 10–15 minutes to find one.

Kumar logs in, using the biometric fingerprint reader, then collects his 
medication and thanks Shammo before leaving for school. Details of the day's 
visits are sent via SMS to an online server and are then downloaded at 
Operation Asha's HQ.

Shammo is alerted by SMS if a patient misses an appointment. Since its 
inception in 2010, the system has seen a less than 1% default rate and has 
served more than 3,000 patients.

"Some patients are reluctant to take the medication because it can have 
uncomfortable side-effects, or stop taking the medicine once they begin to feel 
better," says Sandeep Ahuja, CEO of Operation Asha. "A counsellor then visits 
their home within 72 hours and warns them of the dangers of defaulting. Once 
they know, they're usually so scared they wouldn't dream of missing another 
appointment."SC
 