
Ahmad Jamal for the Royal Festival Hall 


In his inspired book The Rest Is Noise, New Yorker critic Alex Ross remarked 
on the appeal of bebop for the post-second world war generation of classical 
composers "looking for a way out of Schoenberg’s maze". Steve Reich’s was 
devoted to both The Rite of Spring and the cymbal beat of  Kenny Clarke, Terry 
Riley had plenty of jazz-piano skills and La Monte Young bebop-sax ones – and 
Ross noted Reich’s amazement at hearing John Coltrane improvise more complex 
structures with his quartet in a nightclub than the embryonic minimalist had 
been discussing all day in an earnest Juilliard composition class. In the same 
context, Ross also wrote: "Jazz was intuitive, intimate, collaborative; it was 
serious in thought but playful in execution." And in that phrase, he could as 
easily have been talking aboutAhmad Jamal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/01/ahmad-jamal-discover-mozart-in-you>
, the 83-year-old pianist from Pittsburgh who appears with his trio at theRoyal 
Festival Hall on Monday 27 January 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/ahmad-jamal-79540>.    


Jamal never made music as radically innovative as Coltrane or the minimalist 
composers (some of his sterner critics in the 1950s dismissed his elegant 
playing as lounge music), but as a meticulously self-taught
 virtuoso, he’s always taken the balance of seriousness and play for granted. 
The son of a Pittsburgh steelworker who learned piano with the aid of a devoted 
aunt who fed him tough scores throughout his childhood, Jamal could play 
Liszt’s Eroica etudes when he was 11, and has always maintained that learning a 
big multi-idiomatic repertoire is a pretty good way of maxing your spontaneous 
choices as an improviser. Moreover, Jamal had patience, which many hyperactive 
1950s bebop musicians didn’t (in another killer phrase, Alex Ross described the 
high-energy outpourings of early bop as like "electric strings of notes lashed
around like downed power lines on a wet pavement"), was content to let events 
glimmer and recede, hit and run, offer a sly hint of an idea just to see what 
the other players make of it, and then bring back the tune
just when the audience is starting to wonder if it’s wandered into a private 
conversation. Miles Davis, a boxing fan, famously loved Jamal’s touch and sense 
of ensemble dynamics, and once discussed his timing and feints in terms of 
movement in the ring. "After you’ve learned to play your instrument the right 
way," Davis said in his autobiography, "you can turn around and play it the way 
you want to. But you’ve got to first
 learn how to be cool and let whatever happens – both in music and boxing – 
happen. Dizzy (Gillespie) and Bird (Charlie Parker) taught it to me in music, 
so did (Thelonious) Monk, and so didAhmad Jamal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ahmad-jamal> … Jamal still does all that 
with effortlessly genial skill – here’s an example from Paris in 2012, with his 
fine current band on Poinciana, the chart-hit that changed his life back in 
1958.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSiARr9JhLEo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSiARr9JhLEo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSiARr9JhLEo&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SiARr9JhLEo> 
Colin Towns

 "I only bring the maps," the composer Colin Towns <http://www.colintowns.com/>
 told me in 2006. "I don’t make the music." At the time, it seemed an 
implausibly laid-back outlook for the kind of projects Towns was engaged in 
then – hefty big band reworkings of Frank Zappa’s byzantine classics, 
large-scale arrangements for singer Norma Winstone, orchestral suites for piano 
soloists. But Towns was still observing Miles Davis’s advice – absorb 
everything possible about the music you want to make (a personal fusion of 
Stravinsky, rock and postbop in his case) and then you can let what happens 
happen, in the certainty the right players will find the ways in and out.   

Towns began his career as a keyboard player for the hard rock band  Gillan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tKADCTDwHo> in the 1970s, whiling away 
road-life by studying classical orchestral scores in the back of the van. By 
the mid-80s he was on his way
to becoming a successful film, theatre and TV composer, which he still is. But 
his parallel life is as a jazz composer and bandleader, with a big reputation 
in Europe for his work with the NDR and HR big bands in
Hamburg and Frankfurt, Sweden’s Bohuslän Big Band and the Orchestra Jazz della 
Sardegna. Since 2010 he has also returned to the road as keyboardist and 
composer with Blue Touch Paper, an Anglo-German sextet including including 
Polar Bear saxophonist Mark Lockheart and acclaimed young guitarist Chris 
Montague, which tours the UK from 24 February 
<http://www.bluetouchpaper.com/tour-dates/>. The band’s second album, Drawing 
Breath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/17/colin-towns-blue-touch-paper-review>
, was a cracker with barely a slack moment in 12 tracks, but here’s the Colin 
Towns his admirers might be more familiar with– steering the NDR Big Band 
through his own inimitable kind of Beatles tribute in 2010.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFsvAkMIgXyE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFsvAkMIgXyE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFsvAkMIgXyE&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FsvAkMIgXyE> 
Jim Hall and Ronny Jordan


RIP Jim Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/12/jim-hall>, the 
great jazz guitarist and mentor to Bill Frisell, Pat Metheny and many others 
died in December, and the London-raised jazz/hip-hop guitar hitmakerRonny 
Jordan has followed him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/22/ronny-jordan> within weeks. It’s 
a double loss that has saddened not just guitar fans, but listeners to all 
kinds of contemporary music, from deviously ingenious avant-bop in Hall’s case, 
to dynamic dancefloor grooves in Jordan’s. They were very different artists, 
but they both knew all about a jazz guitar tradition reaching back seven 
decades or more, and the depth of that understanding was always audible – 
despite the frequent introspection of Hall’s work, or the radio-friendly 
pop-orientation of Jordan’s. APBS TV show hosted by pianist Ramsey Lewis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ql0_Iu--RyY> and featuring Hall and Pat Metheny 
traces the arc of jazz-guitar development but as a tribute to the life of an 
artist who helped turn 21st century dancefloors on to jazz and who died much 
too young, here’s Ronny Jordan in 2009 – on Miles Davis’s So What, the 1992 
chart-hit remake that made the modest Harlesden prodigy famous.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr0KOzrMUt10&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr0KOzrMUt10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr0KOzrMUt10&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0KOzrMUt10> 
Billy Cobham at Ronnie Scott's 


When the burgeoning jazz-rock fusion audience first caught the sound of 
Panama-born drummer Billy Cobham in the 1970s, there was often disbelief that 
just one player could be doing it all. Cobham’s playing was a torrent of 
tom-tom rolls, showers of cymbal sound and thundering backbeats that even the 
loudest guitarists couldn’t overwhelm, and he brought a rapturous excitement to 
every band he worked in. Cobham, a founder-member of John McLaughlin’s famous 
Mahavishnu Orchestra, went on to be one of the most revered and copied drummers 
in the world – but despite his power, he has always been a selfless ensemble 
player, with a dynamic subtlety that goes back to the jazz roots from which his 
technique grew. In his later years, Cobham has regularly explored fresh blends 
of jazz, Latin and rock music, developed percussion electronics, and kept the 
quality of composition in his groups consistently high. Hecomes to Ronnie 
Scott’s <http://www.ronniescotts.co.uk/scheduledaily/2014/February/3> for a 
week from 3 February with a quartet featuring guitarist Dean Brown, British 
keyboardist (and frequent John McLaughlin sideman) Gary Husband, and bassist 
Ric Fierabracci. To the undoubted delight of Cobham’s long-time fans, the main 
agenda will be the 40th anniversary of his pioneering fusion album Spectrum, 
which the band will play in full.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXhFgQTSOkeY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXhFgQTSOkeY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXhFgQTSOkeY&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XhFgQTSOkeY> 
Also in February

A promising month also beckons for many other variations on the meaning of 
jazz – from the flinty avantisms of ruggedly original American pianist Matthew 
Shipp, to the lyrical, folk-musical jazz of Israeli bass virtuoso Avishai 
Cohen, and the virtuosic postbop of expat New York bassist, bandleader, 
conservatoire bass prof, promoter and label boss Michael Janisch, celebrating 
his tenth year as a Londoner. Shipp plays a three-night residency at London’s 
Cafe Oto <http://cafeoto.co.uk/matthew-shipp-three-day-residency.shtm> from 
19-21 February, with local guests including improv saxophonists John Butcher 
and Paul Dunmall, synthesiser player Thomas Lehn, bassist John Edwards and 
drummer Mark Sanders. Avishai Cohen isdue to release a new jazz/classical 
strings album entitled Almah <http://avishaicohen.com/category/news/>, and he 
plays Ronnie Scott’s from 10-13 February 
<http://www.ronniescotts.co.uk/scheduledaily/2014/February/10>with his current 
jazz trio featuring pianist Nitai Hershkovits and drummer Daniel Dor. And
Michael Janisch <http://www.michaeljanisch.com/>, a real mover and shaker on 
the British scene who has engineered many new Anglo/US collaborations since his 
relocation here,plays the 606 Club in west London <http://www.606club.co.uk/> 
on 5 February with a fiery sextet including saxophonist Paul Booth, 
vibraphonist Jim Hart and guitarist Phil Robson. Here’s Janisch with Hart and 
drummer Dave Smith, playing on the bassist’s own Whirlwind Records Festival 
last year.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTdRbU_YOw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTdRbU_YOw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTdRbU_YOw&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WWxCRDnMFj8&list=PL569F7D1D2BA72E1C>  