
One of the many pleasures of Tomas Alfredson's Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142611/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy> is 
its willingness to linger, though never simply for the sake of lingering; every 
frame has narrative purpose. As he already showed inLet the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125671/let-the-right-one-in>, Alfredson 
is a master of what, by today's commercial standards, are long takes. In both 
films,Dino Jonsäter <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2692726/>'s cutting is 
exemplary, but it's part of the package, not punching you in the face. Unlike 
too much of Hollywood's output nowadays, Alfredson's are not films that have 
been made in the editing suite.

It's only recently that I've become a fan of the long take, almost entirely as 
a reaction to the vogue for jitterbug editing that has taken all the fun out of 
the action genre – effective when done purposefully byPaul Greengrass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paulgreengrass>, but maddening in Conan the 
Barbarian <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143159/conan-the-barbarian> 
by Marcus Nispel, a director who can't even film a fight between Rose McGowan 
and Rachel Nichols properly.

When I made my first short film last year, I found that the less planning I'd 
done prior to shooting a sequence, the more I would later be obliged to chop it 
up to make it work. Filming a long take obviously takes more work: you have to 
rehearse actors, co-ordinate timing and plan camera movements. In short, you 
have to know what you're doing and – perhaps more importantly – why you're 
doing it, which is perhaps why so many directors can't be bothered.

As the rhythm of commercial movies has speeded up, long takes have 
increasingly become associated with slow art movies, and for many years tended 
to bring out the worst in me. During a shot of townsfolk tramping down the 
street in Béla Tarr'sWerckmeister Harmonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/84861/werckmeister.harmonies> (a film 
famously composed of only 37 shots) I nodded off, had a little dream and woke 
up again – only to find the townsfolk still tramping. Bruno Dumont'sL'humanité 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85103/humanite> opens with a widescreen 
shot of a horizon, bare but for a couple of trees; a man appears on the extreme 
left, and you realise with a sinking feeling the camera is going to stick with 
him till he's toiled all the way over to the right. I started giggling before 
he was even halfway across.

But rewatching Omar Sharif's slow approach on camel through the desert in 
Lawrence of Arabia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQA_ldX0VI0>, I'm struck now 
by David Lean's timidity – how much more involving it would have been if he 
hadn't cut that long shot up into bite-sized pieces, and instead had let it 
play out in real time. No such restraint from Gaspar Noé, who inIrreversible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/92830/irreversible> refuses to cut away 
from Albert Dupontel smashing a man's face in with a fire extinguisher, or from 
Monica Bellucci being raped in a pedestrian tunnel, a take that goes on for so 
long the viewer passes through shock into boredom and then annoyance – always a 
risk with ultra-long takes, though, judging by the rest of Noé's oeuvre, it 
could be precisely the reaction he was setting out to provoke.

I daresay we're now so accustomed to machine-gun editing that the "subliminal" 
shock image of the demon face in The Exorcist doesn't seem seem so subliminal 
any more. But it's in horror movies that I really enjoy seeing long takes, 
especially the sort of dread-inducing camerawork of John Carpenter or Kiyoshi 
Kurosawa. Long takes make the viewer an active participant rather than passive 
sponge, encouraged to scour the frame, or worry about what might intrude into 
it. Like Smiley's spies, you're constantly scrutinising facial expressions, or 
on the lookout for movement that shouldn't be there.

Flurries of violent cutting obscure rather than delineate the action; the 
effect is impressionistic, which has its uses, but is now so prevalent I 
sometimes fear that generations of filmgoers will soon be incapable of 
tolerating longer takes, the same way high-heel wearers can no longer walk in 
flat shoes because their tendons have shrunk. Maybe, as suggested by the late 
cultural theoristTheodore Roszak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/27/theodore-roszak-obituary>, 
they've become so addicted to theflicker 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flicker_(novel)> of film passing through a 
projector, the fix on its own is no longer potent enough. They need hyper-rapid 
editing as well.
 