
Using the column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/series/all-you-need-is-less> you’re reading 
now, I often advocate creating positive environmental change by taking the 
micro-view and focusing onpersonal responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/19/earth-day-five-things-to-make-a-difference-plastic-paper-towels>
 by making changes to yourbuying habits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/15/secret-to-spring-cleaning-better-mental-health>
, your energy use and yourwaste production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/13/lauren-singer-zero-trash-girl-green-eco-friendly-living>
. But you can also choose to take a wider focus by demanding industry-level 
change from big polluters and advocating bold shifts in government policy.

Both have their drawbacks: the former can seem insignificant; the latter, 
insurmountable. But there is a middle ground: grassroots organization, where 
individuals come together to address the unique environmental challenges faced 
by their own communities, neighborhoods and social groups.

Organizations like these marry the power of individual agency with the 
strength found in numbers, to remarkable effect. Loud enough to be heard, small 
enough to be responsive; put plainly, these groups get things done.
We all need a little inspiration sometimes, in between feeling ineffective or 
outmatched, but it can be hard to find among the doom and gloom of climate 
news. I’ve rounded up a brief profile of three groups to provide a glimpse at 
the good that’s being done out there.

Earth Day checklist: five simple things you can do to make a difference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/19/earth-day-five-things-to-make-a-difference-plastic-paper-towels>
Binners’ Project <http://www.binnersproject.org/about-us1.html>

What they do: The Binners’ Project seeks to support and reduce the stigma of 
individuals who work as binners, picking through city garbage cans and 
residential waste bins to salvage bottles, cans and containers for recycling – 
an overlooked and often marginalized but vital part of the zero-waste 
initiative. Based in Vancouver and Montreal, the Binners’ Project works to 
legitimize binners, destigmatize the work they do and recognize the thousands 
of pounds of waste they help divert from landfills.

Their results: By providing easily identifiable shirts, nametags and carts, 
the project has changed bottle picking from an activity tinted with shame to a 
proudly activist endeavour. Additionally, in an effort to draw attention to the 
issue of non-recyclable waste, the Binners’ Project began the annual Coffee Cup 
Revolution. Each year, for one day, binners receive 5 cents for each coffee cup 
returned to organizers. At the 2015 event, more than 31,000 cups were collected 
and diverted from landfills in just a few hours.
How you can get involved: In Vancouver or Montreal, head to their site to 
receive a binner’s hook you can install in your back lane, or to schedule 
regular pickups of recyclables. If you live in an area without a Binners’ 
Project, you could consider saying a simple “thank you” to the next binner you 
see.


Greening Forward <http://greeningforward.org/>

What they do: Founded in 2008 by a then 12-year-old Charles Orgbon III, 
Greening Forward is now the largest youth-driven environmental organization in 
the United States. Providing grants, planting trees, spearheading recycling 
initiatives, diverting over 200 tons of waste from landfills and, above all, 
engaging today’s youth in environmental issues, this organization is poised to 
become a powerful agent for change.


Their results: Through initiatives such as their Earth Savers club, which 
offers support, resources and financial assistance to partners the world over, 
Greening Forward allows young people to participate in a process often left to 
adults. By connecting teens with resources and equipping them with leadership 
skills, Greening Forward is building the next generation of educated 
environmentalists. Perhaps most importantly, it’s an organization made up of 
young people who give a damn – anyone who’s ever complained about the apathy 
generation should sit up and take notice.

How you can also make a change: Head to their website to join Greening 
Forward, donate or apply for a grant, or consider attending their International 
Young Environmentalists Youth Summit on 13-14 May in New York. Detailshere 
<http://greeningforward.org/iyeys>. 


Women’s Environmental Network <http://www.wen.org.uk/>

What they do: Founded in 1988, WEN explicitly recognizes the unique role women 
can take in the environmental process, acknowledges the disproportionate ways 
climate change can affect women and empowers women to campaign for positive 
change. WEN capitalizes on the fact that women are statistically more likely 
than men to change consumer behavior due to environmental concerns and to be 
involved in grassroots action to tackle climate change, and also addresses 
issues (such as waste from menstrual products) often ignored by mainstream 
enviro groups.


Their results: Currently zeroing in on the issue of food production, WEN has 
built 15 community food gardens and offers free training courses on growing 
organic food. These initiatives not only increase access to fresh food in 
low-income areas, but facilitate connection, support and community between 
participants.

How you can also make a change: Chapters of WEN have sprouted up all over the 
globe – a quick internet search will find one in your area. Join to get 
involved in local initiatives, or spearhead a few of your own.

These are three organizations of literally thousands and they prove that 
change is possible, at any level and on any scale you wish to create it. If 
you’ve ever doubted that we’re capable of great things, you’re simply not 
looking hard enough.

 