



The rise of contract and casual work means a shorter working week and 
universal basic income should become serious policy options, the Green 
Institute says.

The institute <https://www.greeninstitute.org.au/>’s report Can Less Work be 
More Fair 
<https://www.greeninstitute.org.au/sites/default/files/Less_Work_More_Fair_WEB_BM.pdf>
? said the loss of permanent full-time jobs in areas as diverse as cleaning 
services and academia was making work highly precarious and increasing the 
divide between those who were overworked and those who were underemployed.

Ontario pilot project puts universal basic income to the test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/universal-basic-income-ontario-poverty-pilot-project-canada>
Tim Hollo, the Green Institute’s executive director, said he hoped the paper 
expanded the acceptable boundary of conversation for left-of-centre politics, 
as the Institute of Public Affairs and Sky’s Andrew Bolt did for free-market 
and right-wing politics.

He said the Green Institute “unambiguously” supported reducing working hours 
with no reduction in working conditions by exploiting technology to share work 
more evenly and reduce inequality.

“The Keynesian ideal of a 15-hour working week used to be uncontroversially 
positive. It should be again,” the paper says. “We need to reclaim the idea 
that, while work is important, while we should all contribute our abilities, 
ideas and skills, a prosperous society should not force the majority of its 
people to work immensely long hours in order to scrape by.”

The institute said it remained agnostic on whether universal basic income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/basic-income-for-all-a-500-year-old-idea-whose-time-has-come>
 (UBI) – which would provide every resident with a regular and unconditional 
subsistence wage – would be appropriate in Australia.

“However, we believe a conversation on the idea, in the context of the need to 
grapple with the inevitability of less and less paid work in an ever more 
unstable world, is vital to our politics,” he said.

The paper’s contributors include left-of-centre economists and academics Jon 
Altman, Eva Cox, Elise Klein, Greg Marston, Godfrey Moase, Clare Ozich, Frank 
Stilwell, Louise Tarrant and Chris Twomey.

Klein, from the University of Melbourne, wrote that the idea of a universal 
basic income stretched back to Thomas More’s Utopia in 1516, and was carried by 
thinkers such as Thomas Paine, John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell.

Swiss voters reject proposal to give basic income to every adult and child
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/05/swiss-vote-give-basic-income-every-adult-child-marxist-dream>
Ben Spies-Butcher, from Macquarie University, said it could be part of a 
broader drive for social change, even though working for more affordable 
housing and better provision of universal health and education might be more 
important.

Frank Stilwell, emeritus professor from the political economy department at 
Sydney University, argued UBI would need to be examined in greater detail 
before being considered for introduction in Australia.

Hollo wrote: “We hope that this paper can contribute in its own small way to 
an open, honest conversation in our politics, media and society about how to 
make a future with less paid work a more fair, more connected, more caring 
future.”

The Green Institute is the Greens’ equivalent of the Liberal party’s Menzies 
Research Centre and Labor’s Chifley Institute. It receives federal funding, but 
its work is published independently of the Greens party hierarchy.

According to the 2016-17 budget, the Green Institute received $84,000 in 
funding this year 
<https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/2016-17-pbs-full.pdf?v=1>, 
rising to $92,000 by 2019-20.

By comparison, the Menzies Research Centre and Chifley Research Centre each 
received $228,000 in 2016-17.
 