
Next week, iceandfire <http://iceandfire.co.uk/> theatre company launch 
Everyone Has the Right 
<http://iceandfire.co.uk/participation/everyonehastheright/>, a call for new 
plays about human rights, in partnership with Amnesty International. As their 
patron I should declare an interest, but nonetheless the scheme raises valuable 
questions about how or why politicised theatre on civil liberties should be 
dramatised. After all, the universal declaration of human rights, our secular 
10 commandments, is a body of abstract principles â€“ and abstract principles 
surely make bad plays?

From a dramatist's point of view oppression is, while very real and very 
challenging, predictable and unrelieved; there's little room for comic relief 
or redemption in the torture taking place right now in some jail in Upper 
Egypt, the fate of a journalist shot in the head on a Moscow stairwell, or the 
dead at a wedding party in Afghanistan. For playwrights, there is little 
opportunity for wit, irony and playfulness but plenty more to create something 
clunkily worthy and didactic. Using drama to raise awareness or to inspire 
social change can only really work if playwrights deliver their polemic through 
a well-crafted story.

So which plays offer useful precedents? An obvious place to start is with 
Harold Pinter <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/pinter>, who explicitly 
engaged with human rights abuses 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2008/dec/29/pinter-theatre> in 
short, sharp shockers such asOne for the Road  
<http://www.haroldpinter.org/plays/plays_onefortheroad01.shtml>and Mountain 
Language <http://www.haroldpinter.org/plays/title_language.shtml>. But hands-on 
oppression tends to result in scenes that are a one-way street. Nicolas, the 
torturer in One for the Road, for example, is granted ample and leisurely space 
to practise his whimsical rants in front of his largely silent victims without 
much recourse. Mountain Language too, only comes alive in the nasty bawdy 
interplay between the Officer and the Sergeant.

But such snapshots make the audience mere witnesses to despair rather than 
allowing them to become morally implicated in the action. Instead, I'd 
recommend entrants to the scheme to look at two plays from two morally murky 
contexts of oppression: 1970s Northern Ireland and South Africa under apartheid.

Brian Friel's rarely revived play The Freedom of the City 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2005/dec/06/theatre> from 1973 takes an 
ironic, angry look at the fate of three civil rights marchers in Derry, caught 
up in an accidental occupation of the city hall; its characters are wayward and 
complex, their motives confused, but their shared state of oppression is never 
in question. On paper they are victims, after all, but equally they are cast as 
terrorists. Their ironic tenure in the townhall, is set against the obtuse 
comments of a whitewash public tribunal into their deaths. In short, while 
always political, Friel keeps the audience in the frame.

Likewise, Athol Fugard <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0297538/>'s Statements 
After an Arrest Under the Immorality Act from 1972, refuses to turn oppression 
into a spectator sport. At is centre is the relationship between a white female 
librarian and a "coloured" man, which founders as they internalise the 
oppression they inhabit. As in Amnesty's work, individuals are indissolubly at 
the centre; but what makes Fugard's play troubling long after the law it tilted 
at is revoked, is its understanding of how power gets beneath the skin.

For me, great plays, whether about human rights or not, ask disquietingly 
difficult moral questions. After all, civil liberties are not only something we 
fear to lose, they are also imperilled daily by the economic and military 
actions of "our" regimes. Telling stories that weigh their worth and count the 
cost of their loss is what good theatre always does.
 