


Afghan women are at risk of being excluded from peace talks with Taliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> insurgents, leaving many fearful 
that, 13 years after a US-led force ousted the extremists from power, the men 
who banned them from schools and work could once again rein in their rights, 
Oxfam has warned.

In a new report 
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/behind-closed-doors-the-risk-of-denying-women-a-voice-in-determining-afghanista-335875>
 published ahead of theLondon Conference on Afghanistan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/london-conference-on-afghanistan-2014>
, the aid agency has urged the international community and thenewly-elected 
president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/afghan-president-ashraf-ghani-inaugurated>
, not to sacrifice women’s rights in future peace talks with the insurgents, 
who denied women basic freedoms while in power between 1996 and 2001.

With Afghanistan preparing for life after the majority of foreign troops 
withdraw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/26/uk-troops-camp-bastion-afghan-forces-13-years-helmand>
, Ghani takes over at a critical juncture. The Taliban are gaining ground, 
there is a crippling budget crisis, and there are fears that international 
donors may turn away, endangering the fragile, hard-won gains made over the 
past decade.


“The international community used women’s rights to help justify its presence 
in Afghanistan. Having brought about some improvements and invested more than 
$100bn[£638bn] in aid, it would be a tragedy if progress was reversed,” said 
John Watt, Oxfam’s country director forAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. “As donors rush to the exit, 
Afghans should not have to worry that the world will forget promises made to 
Afghan women and allow women’s rights to be negotiated away.”

Activists have urged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/21/afghanistan-womens-rights-britain-urged-support-london-conference>
 the Afghan and British governments to defend women’s rights strongly at the 
London conference on December 3-4, warning that any failure to do so could have 
potentially disastrous consequences.


Oxfam’s deputy head of humanitarian policy and campaigns, Shaheen Chughtai 
<http://blogs.oxfam.org/en/user/profile/shaheen-chughtai>, said the 
international community needed to identify progressive, positive “agents for 
change” in Afghanistan and support them. “We are still near the beginning of 
this journey,” he said. “It is achievable, we see every day living examples of 
what can be achieved … We also see that unless that effort is sustained, not 
for months or years but for decades, those gains can be rolled back.”

Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam> observed that women had been 
consistently excluded from peace talks since 2005, suggesting that unless this 
discrimination was reversed, peace would be unsustainable. The aid agency 
tracked 23 known peace talks involving the Taliban, the Afghan government and 
the international community. It found that during talks between the 
international community and the Taliban, there were no women present. During 
talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban, women were only present 
during two rounds of talks.

“It’s the international community’s conduct around the peace process that is 
causing some of the greatest concerns among Afghans,” said Chughtai. “If the 
right people aren’t in the room, if they aren’t properly consulted and 
involved, those fears of what will happen to their country become very real.”


When the Taliban were in power, girls were not allowed to go to school, women 
were banned from leaving their homes without a male chaperone, not allowed to 
work and obliged to wear the head-to-toe-covering burqa.


Oxfam noted that many gains had been made since then: of the 8.3 million 
students in school, nearly 40% are girls, women’s access to healthcare has 
improved dramatically and, between 2001 and 2012, women’s life expectancy 
increased from 56 to 62 years. But already, conservative political forces are 
trying to roll back some gains, while extremists are increasingly targeting 
women in the public eye.

Human Rights Watch documented a string of attacks  
<http://www.hrw.org/world-report/2014/country-chapters/afghanistan>against 
high-profile women in 2013, including theshooting of lawmaker Rooh Gul 
<http://www.afghanistantimes.af/news_details.php?id=3681&&cid=1> in Ghazni 
province. Just this month, Shukria Barakzai, an outspoken lawmaker and ally of 
Ghani, wastargeted by a suicide bomber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/16/kabul-bombing-targets-female-mp>
. She was slightly injured and three civilians were killed. There have also 
been attacks against female police officers.

The Oxfam report said that entrenched cultural practices – such as honour 
killings andbaad (the exchange of women to end family conflicts) – continued to 
violate women’s rights. The 2009Elimination of Violence Against Women Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/11/afghan-women-suffer-abuse-un> 
has come under threat, with some lawmakers saying it violates sharia law, while 
quotas for women’s representation in provincial councils have been cut.


The “meaningful” participation of women should be a precondition for talks 
with the Taliban, Oxfam said. It urged the Afghan government to commit to 
upholding the protection of women’s rights enshrined in the constitution.

Stories from Afghanistan show just how high the stakes are for women, and 
there are already signs of rights being eroded, said David Haines, Afghanistan 
country director for the aid groupMercy Corps 
<http://www.mercycorps.org.uk/afghanistan>. Through its Invest 
<http://www.mercycorps.org.uk/tags/invest> programme in Helmand province, Mercy 
Corps has trained about 22,000 people, including 6,500 women, over the past 
three and a half years. Some women learned tailoring and dressmaking while 
others studied for pre-university examinations.

Haines said that – in a deeply conservative society where more than 90% of 
women are illiterate – the vocational training was the only chance many women 
had to interact with people outside their homes. “We established that [the 
training course] was a safe haven, and since then it’s been massively 
oversubscribed. It increased women’s economic value within the family unit.”

Traditionally, less than 20 women from Helmand would go for university 
education. However, about 80% of the 1,500 women who did the pre-university 
exam training with Mercy Corps went on to tertiary education. Haines said this 
was “a sea change”, but added that these gains are already being rolled back by 
conflict and an economic slowdown linked to the troops’ withdrawal.

“Very few families in Helmand are going to let the young women in their 
families go to universities or to start careers in the civil service … because 
there is a massive increased risk of violence … The natural inclination in a 
conservative family is to draw people in,” Haines said. “There is a real danger 
that the psychological breakthrough that women can contribute economically is 
under threat.”
 