
Along with Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail>, the 
bosses of brewer SABMiller and telecoms firm TalkTalk will face the anger of 
shareholders over boardroom pay this week.

Britain's leading companies have already witnessed a number of shareholder 
revolts at their annual meetings this summer, including ahat-trick of 
rebellions against City grandee Sir John Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/16/sir-john-peace-hat-trick-shareholder-revolts>
, although heads have not rolled this yearm â€“ the "shareholder spring" of 2012 
led to the departure of several chief executives, including the bosses of the 
pharmaceutical firm AstraZeneca and Britain's largest insurer, Aviva.

SABMiller <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> will have to defend 
pay plans for its chief executive, Alan Clark at Wednesday's annual meeting. 
Shareholder advisory group Pirc (Pensions & Investment Research Consultants) 
advised investors to oppose the drinks group's remuneration policy. It argued 
that the maximum potential payout for Clark was "highly excessive" as it was 
far above the acceptable limit of 200% of his salary.

"The ratio of CEO pay compared to average employee pay is extreme at 138:1," 
Pirc noted. It also criticised the absence of non-financial parameters to 
assess executives' long-term performance in their share schemes as contrary to 
best practice.

Also on Wednesday, TalkTalk will come under fire for its governance and 
executive pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/20/talktalk-pay-battle-investors-looms-agm>
. Pirc called on the broadband and telecoms group's shareholders to vote 
against both the remuneration report and future pay policy. It said rewards for 
executive directors looked excessive, with the company's boss, Dido Harding, 
receiving variable pay equal to 1,255% of her base salary last year. That 
included a bonus and long-term incentive award granted in 2010, 40% of which 
vested the same year.

The investor group asked shareholders to vote against the re-election of 
TalkTalk's chairman, Sir Charles Dunstone, saying he is not considered 
independent because he is the firm's controlling shareholder with 30.79% of the 
shares. There are additional concerns over his dual tenure, as he also chairs 
Carphone Warehouse, a FTSE 350 company.

TalkTalk <https://www.theguardian.com/business/talk-talk-telecom> will issue a 
trading statement to coincide with its annual meeting. Analysts at Berenberg 
Bank have questioned the group's 4% revenue growth target.
 