
I have always loved travelling back in time on the wings of a really good book.

My interest in history started with Clive King’s Stig of the Dump 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stig-of-the-dump.html>. I grew up in Kent, so 
the Downs and the chalk pits, the beech woods and the standing stones that 
feature in the novel were very familiar to me. I spent my childhood desperately 
hoping to bump into Stig, and to meet the rest of his tribe.

Rhian Ivory’s top 10 books set in the past and the present
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/12/rhian-ivorys-top-10-books-set-in-the-past-and-the-present>
Then there were the other wonderful time-slip books – Charlotte Sometimes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlotte-sometimes.html> (Penelope Farmer), 
A Traveller in Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308415/> (Alison 
Uttley),The Children of Green Knowe 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/children-of-green-knowe.html> (Lucy Boston). 
I particularly lovedTom’s Midnight Garden 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275026/> (Philippa 
Pearce). There was something so poignantly sad about the contrast between the 
Victorian and the modern day settings. The house: divided into flats. The 
glorious walled garden turned into a backyard for dustbins, and a housing 
estate.

Tanya Landman: It was a horrible period in US history and I really wanted to 
be honest about it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/22/tanya-landman-carnegie-medal-2015-winner-buffalo-soldier-interview>
I adored Penelope Lively’s books where the past leaked into the present – to 
hugely comic effect inThe Ghost of Thomas Kempe 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ghost-of-thomas-kempe-4.html> but more eerily 
in Astercote and The House in Norham Gardens. The terrifyingly magical The 
Whispering Knights was set in Oxfordshire but also featured a chalky landscape 
and ancient stones.

Damian Dibben's top 10 time travel books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/may/22/top-10-time-travel-books-damian-dibben>
There were classics that gave a me a taste of how people had live in bygone 
eras - Five Children and It, The Secret Garden, Kidnapped. As a teenager I fell 
truly, madly, deeply in love with Mr Darcy in Pride and Prejudice. Jane 
Austen’s world had a romance and an appeal that my humdrum present totally 
lacked. It had frocks. Horses. Carriages. Balls.

Growing up, the past seemed to me to be a place where adventures could happen. 
In comparison, the modern world was so restricted. We had rules. Regulations. 
Timetables. We were constantly supervised.

 Nowadays, as a novelist, the past appeals to me because it offers so many 
possibilities.

Every writer who creates a child protagonist faces the same problem: how to 
get rid of the parents. Essentially, your character needs to be alone because 
otherwise – faced with danger – they would turn to the nearest responsible 
adult for help and the grown up would sort out the problem. That’s wonderful in 
real life, but would make for a very short story.

Tanya Landman's top tips for writing historical fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/apr/08/tanya-landman-top-tips-writing-historical-fiction>
So parents need to be killed off, or sent away, or put out of reach. But if 
your setting is the modern day UK , that still leaves you with all the other 
support networks that are (in theory at any rate) there to protect the 
vulnerable. There are teachers, social workers, emergency services. Your 
protagonist would only have to dial 999 and help would be on its way. I have 
tied myself in knots with some books, having to invent places with no phone 
signal, or mobiles whose battery is about to die, just so my characters can be 
put in mortal peril. You don’t have this problem if you set your story in a 
place where mobile phones don’t exist.

Hell and High Water by Tanya Landman review – strong characters, important 
themes, terrific writing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/16/hell-and-high-water-tanya-landman-review-teen-fiction>
It could be a dystopian future. But – for now at any rate - I like to go back 
to the dangerous past, where there were no rules, no safety nets and where 
anything can – and will – happen.

 * Hell and High Water is available at the Guardian bookshop. 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/396449/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Ftanya-landman-why-i-write-historical-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c944f3871a64e429b7f8a84e707127deeaaee17%2F0_0_1524_2339%2F1524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tanya%20Landman%3A%20why%20I%20write%20historical%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Ftanya-landman-why-i-write-historical-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tanya%20Landman%3A%20why%20I%20write%20historical%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Ftanya-landman-why-i-write-historical-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c944f3871a64e429b7f8a84e707127deeaaee17%2F0_0_1524_2339%2F1524.jpg> 