
Louise Tickle is right to highlight the immorality of using targets for 
adoption (Children should not be adopted to meet municipal targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/breaking-up-families-councils-child-adoptions>
, 13 December). As the removal of a child from its parents is the gravest of 
actions, often with traumatic and lifelong consequences, the context demands 
further interrogation. First, given the complex risk factors that impact upon 
parenting, including poverty, housing, drug and alcohol problems and abusive 
relationships, how is it possible to disentangle these and assume they are 
static and resistant to change? Second, what are the implications for providing 
families with early help, given the current funding restrictions on support 
services? Third, what has been the impact of the long-term demonisation of 
social workers in child abuse cases – is it easier to remove a child than take 
the risks associated with rehabilitation?

How can it be right to have targets for breaking up families? | Louise Tickle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/breaking-up-families-councils-child-adoptions>
The increasing use of targets in children’s services merely gives credibility 
to both rationing and the stratification of services, adoption being seen as 
the gold standard, followed by foster care, and then, as a last resort, 
children’s homes, ignoring key differences in the age at which young people 
enter care and the challenges they present. Finally, and most disturbing of 
all, the legitimisation of targets represents a paradigm shift from social 
workers independently assessing and meeting the needs of some of the most 
vulnerable children and families in society, to budget managers, easing the way 
for “outsourcing” and privatisation.
Mike Stein
Emeritus professor, University of York

• Like Louise Tickle, I am determined that all children in care are provided 
with the best possible environment in which to develop and reach their full 
potential. On many occasions the most appropriate and successful way of 
achieving that is by placing them with adoptive parents.

However, at Ofsted we have never based our judgment of any local authority 
children’s services on whether or not they have met their own numerical targets 
for placing children in adoptive care. Our evaluation of adoption services 
focuses on the long-term circumstances of all children who are looked after, 
and the effectiveness of local authorities in ensuring the best option – such 
as long-term fostering, special guardianship, or return to their birth parents 
– is secured for each child. What matters most is that children’s individual 
needs remain at the heart of local authority decision-making.

Looked-after children deserve more stability | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/looked-after-children-deserve-more-stability>
The most effective local authorities find suitable families as quickly as 
possible for children whose best interests lie with an adoptive family. We want 
social workers to be creative, innovative and committed to find a loving, 
permanent home for the children in their care.
Eleanor Schooling
Ofsted director for social care

• Louise Tickle is right to point out that children these days being adopted 
could be the future victims of injustice by being “swiftly and forcibly adopted 
through our family courts” due to quotas being operated by some councils. As a 
retired children’s guardian, I wonder whether the courts should be requiring 
each local authority whose plan it is for adoption of a child to state their 
council’s adoption quota and how this particular child’s adoption will enable 
them to meet their quota. The judge can then decide with all the available 
evidence before him/her as to whether this quota could be influencing the plan 
for this particular child.
Sue Cameron
Newcastle upon Tyne

• Louise Tickle says that the decision to place a child for adoption must be 
focused solely on what is the right outcome for that child. Vulnerable children 
have to be protected from abuse, violence or neglect, so what is the 
alternative to rapid adoption? Fewer than 1% of all children in England are in 
care but theymake up over half (52%) of children in secure training centres and 
almost two-fifths (38%) of children in young offender institutions 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Bromley%20Briefings/summer%202016%20briefing.pdf>
. Over two-thirds (68%) of under-18s are reconvicted within a year of release. 
More adoptions, done faster, provide a far better outcome for children and for 
society.
Martyn Thomas
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 