
In a mixed day for company results, Tate and Lyle is taking the wooden spoon.

The sweetener specialist had some sour news for shareholders, cutting its 
estimate for the full year below City expectations.

The news sent its shares tumbling 136.5p or 17.5% to 650p, making it the 
biggest faller in a downbeat FTSE 100.

Tate said it expected annual profits to be in line with the previous year's 
total of £329m, below analyst forecasts of £340m. As it headed into its final 
quarter, it said third quarter profit was below its expectations. The company, 
which supplies sweeteners and other ingredients to food and drink makers, 
blamed weak sales in developed markets and a drop in sucralose prices. Darren 
Shirley at Shore Capital said:
 Tate & Lyle has worked in recent years to improve visibility and build 
control over it profits stream through investment in its speciality food 
ingredients [SFI] infrastructure. However, today's statements confirms to us 
that despite such investment, large elements of the bulk ingredients (and it 
appears) Sucralose profit streams remain out of the companies control, whilst 
volume momentum from SFI still remains modest. We retain our hold stance today, 
though expect weakness in the share price.

Tate is not the only company suffering from a disappointing update. A day 
after two people were arrested in connection withRolls-Royce's dealings in 
Asia, the company has said sharp cuts in defence spending in the US and Europe 
would mean no profit growth in 2014. As a result, its shares have dropped 141p 
to £10.89 or nearly 12%.

On the other side of the coin, Amec has added 58p to £11.50 and Imperial 
Tobacco is up 112p at £23.37 after well received updates.

But the Tate and Rolls falls have helped push the overall market into the red. 
TheFTSE 100 has fallen 34.44 points to 6635.75, with investors across the globe 
seeing a pause for breath after recent rises.
 