
It must be hoped that France's Am√©lie Mauresmo puts up a much better fight 
when she defends her Wimbledon title later this year. She certainly displayed 
precious little resolve during her 6-4, 6-3 fourth-round defeat here yesterday 
by the 19-year-old Czech Lucie Safarova who, prior to this year'sAustralian Open
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, had won only one match at 
this level and is ranked outside the top 50. Mauresmo led 4-1 in the opening 
set but, thereafter, all her old failings resurfaced, and a soft sigh swept 
around the Rod Laver arena moments after Safarova's celebrations.

It took Mauresmo 31 slam attempts before she won her first major here a year 
ago, and even then it was somewhat tarnished by the default of Belgium's 
Justine Henin-Hardenne in the final. No matter, the French woman went on to win 
in London. The admirers of her fluid attacking play and athleticism were 
delighted, and hoped the nerves that had so often made a mockery of her talent 
were finally banished. It was, it seems, too much to expect, although Mauresmo 
admitted to not feeling good about her game from the moment she arrived in 
Australia this year.

Clearly she was disappointed, and scurried off court with the briefest 
acknowledgement of the sympathetic applause, but it was a disappointment 
tempered by the exploits of last year. At least now when she loses in this way 
the longstanding label of "most talented woman never to have won a slam" no 
longer applies.

Safarova, the girlfriend of Tomas Berdych, is one of a seemingly never- ending 
multitude of Russian and eastern European youngsters pouring into the game, 
with no sign of any abatement. One name to stand out amid the sea of -ovas and 
-vics yesterday was that of Shahar Peer, the 19-year-old Israeli who, like 
Safarova, reached her first slam quarter- final with an excellent 6-4, 6-2 win 
over Svetlana Kuznetsova, the Russian third seed and former US Open champion.

Peer, who in 2005 began mandatory military training, entered the top 20 last 
year and has a vociferous band of supporters here. "It means so much to me. 
They were here at 10am when I was warming up and they have been cheering me on 
in every match. I know it's going crazy back home. They showed the match live 
in Israel. Now it will get even crazier."

The more so should she beat Serena Williams who, despite her obvious lack of 
physical conditioning, worked a 6-3, 6-2 win over Serbia's Jelena Jankovic, who 
had reached the final of the Sydney tournament prior to the Open and was a US 
Open semi-finalist last year. She would not admit to being intimidated by the 
seven-times slam champion, now ranked 81st, but Jankovic played straight into 
her hands, often putting the ball into the American's hitting zone. Dumb, so 
dumb.
 