
An influential taxi company boss has invoked the fate of the former federal MP 
Wyatt Roy as a measure of the political risk of backing Uber, after the
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> government 
moved to legalise it.

Neill Ford, the managing director of Queensland’s largest taxi company, Yellow 
Cabs, claimed an industry campaign against Roy over his public support of Uber 
was the key factor in his upset loss in theseat of Longman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/11/election-2016-wyatt-roy-malcolm-turnbull-queensland>
 in the July election.

Ford, who had no inkling of the government’s decision to legalise Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/queensland-to-legalise-uber-within-weeks-under-sweeping-transport-reforms>
 before media reports on Thursday, said there would be initial “outrage from 
about 4,000 licence holders who are not going to be forgiving the government 
very easily for stealing the business they sold them”.

Queensland to legalise Uber within weeks under 'sweeping' transport reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/11/queensland-to-legalise-uber-within-weeks-under-sweeping-transport-reforms>
The value of taxi licences in Queensland had plunged in the past two years 
from more than $500,000 to as little as $180,000, he said.

“Angry families, angry drivers, there’s probably 20,000 people you’re going to 
affect and if you’re a politician that’s not good,” Ford said. “I think there’s 
a politician called Wyatt Roy who just lost his seat because of the taxi 
industry.

“He came out supporting Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> and 
they rallied, started handing out pamphlets and he lost his seat.

“So I don’t know, if you’re a politician, do you create that much hatred?”

The state transport minister, Stirling Hinchliffe, said changes to legalise 
competitors to taxis from September would “drive competition, deliver cheaper 
fares and pave the way for more transport options for Queenslanders”.

“These new reforms unveiled today are about fairness and will ensure the 
future sustainability of the personalised transport industry while encouraging 
more innovation which will benefit our economy,” he said.

Hinchcliffe announced a $100m transition package for the taxi industry, which 
includes “one-off” payments of $40,000 for taxi licence holders.

They would have access to a $26m “hardship fund” and the taxi industry would 
have up to $4.3m in fees waived.

Sam Bool, the general manager of Uber Queensland, said the government was 
“supporting the choice of more than half a million Uber riders and 5,500 driver 
partners already benefiting from ridesharing in Queensland”.

“We will continue working closely with the Queensland government on this 
important reform package and trust we’ll see a sensible bipartisan approach as 
it progresses through the parliament,” Bool said.

The dark side of Uber: why the sharing economy needs tougher rules | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/apr/18/uber-airbnb-sharing-economy-tougher-rules-australia>
Ford said, despite the initial wave of taxi licence holder outrage, it would 
“take more than Uber to disrupt the taxi industry”, which he said would adapt 
to make best use of “the new laws that government hands out”.


The difference would be that operators of marked taxis “would not pay the 
licence holder any money to operate, it would simply operate on a ride share 
licence”, he said.

“If you said tomorrow you could do ride share legally for $100 a year, why 
would a person lease a $300,000 licence?” he said.

“Once the government brings out laws on ride share, it won’t be just Uber 
around, it’ll be every company you can ever think of.”

The government was “throwing away money for consolidated revenue” it had 
created by licensing the original growth of the tax industry.
 