
When Apple announced its plans to offer customers a three-month trial of its 
Apple Music streaming service, Taylor Swift kicked off. The free trial meant no 
royalties for artists, and Tay-Taywrote an open letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/21/taylor-swift-criticises-shocking-disappointing-apple-music>
 describing the terms as “shocking” and “disappointing” – and revealed she’d be 
withholding her music from the platform. Her tens of millions of fans magnified 
her protest and the tech giant made arapid and uncharacteristic U-turn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/22/apple-music-royalties-free-trial-taylor-swift>
.


Now Swift and other music artists are publicly taking on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/02/music-industry-battle-against-youtube>
, calling for better protections against copyright infringement and better pay 
for artists. But this time she’s unlikely to win.

Swift joined up with 180 other artists, including Lionel Richie, Paul 
McCartney, Lady Gaga, Christina Aguilera, Billy Joel and Elton John, topublish 
an open letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/02/music-industry-battle-against-youtube>
 protesting about the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). The US copyright 
law, they argued, has “allowed major tech companies to grow and generate huge 
profits by creating ease of use for consumers to carry almost every recorded 
song in history in their pocket via a smartphone” while “songwriters’ and 
artists’ earnings continue to diminish”.

The high-profile complaint, which was timed to add weight to negotiations 
between record labels andGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
over music licensing, makes sense on the surface.

“They feel they are being short-changed,” explains Mark Mulligan, managing 
director of MIDiA Research, whichpublished a report on Tuesday into the 
economics of YouTube 
<https://www.midiaresearch.com/downloads/state-of-the-youtube-music-economy-growing-tensions-as-worldviews-collide/>
. “YouTube streams have grown massively while revenues have grown very little.”

Taylor Swift's label boss reveals more details of Apple Music negotiations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/15/taylor-swift-apple-music-negotiations-scott-borchetta>
YouTube’s payments to rights-holders and artists were $740m in 2015, an 
increase of just 11% from 2014 despite total views for music videos growing 
132%. In that time effective per-stream rates fell from $0.0020 to $0.0010.

On Spotify, artists get paid a small amount per stream. So if Spotify grows, 
so does revenue for record labels. Artists get paid bySpotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> even when the music streaming 
service makes a loss. It’s no wonder record labels feel they are owed more 
money.

However, YouTube’s model is advertising-based, which means no guaranteed 
income for labels and much more complex market mechanics in place.

Google is extremely unlikely to emulate Spotify, which paid a massive 84% of 
its total revenues back to the music industry 
<http://www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/spotify-must-watch-its-spending-to-earn-music-biz-sympathy/>
 in 2015. “What Taylor Swift and co are pushing for is to get YouTube to become 
a completely unsustainable business,” says Mulligan.

‘YouTube takes advantage of the dysfunctional copyright act’

Then there’s the issue of the DMCA. Record labels and artists are particularly 
peeved about the act’s “safe harbor” guidelines, which state that YouTube can’t 
be held liable for the copyright infringement of its users – fans who upload 
videos using unlicensed music. This creates a major headache for record labels 
who end up policingYouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> for 
infringing videos that are posted more quickly than they can issue take-down 
notices.

“YouTube takes advantage of the dysfunctional DMCA to do less about piracy 
than it could and pay unfairly low royalty rates. It doesn’t have to be like 
this,” says Cary Sherman, CEO of the Recording Industry Association of America.

However, MIDiA’s research claims the impact of Safe Harbor is very small, with 
just 2% of music video views coming from unofficial user-generated uploads. 
Three-quarters of all music video views are official, the vast majority through
Vevo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/vevo>, a joint venture between Google 
and the music industry.

“If Spotify says we won’t pay you, record labels can just turn off the tap of 
content. If YouTube has disputed claims the company can continue to have this 
really big body of music. That’s ultimately power and control,” says Mulligan.

As for the ad revenue drop, this is partly a reflection of the broader 
advertising economy and partly related to the fact that more views are coming 
from emerging markets, where advertisers pay lower rates.

If YouTube has disputed claims the company can continue to have this really 
big body of music
Mark Mulligan, analyst 
However, the biggest issue is the fact that YouTube doesn’t put video ads in 
every single clip. It places spots before or during content based on the amount 
of time a user spends on the platform, so someone looking at five short music 
videos might only see one ad spot. Yet YouTube vloggers likeZoella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zoe-sugg> and PewDiePie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/08/youtube-pewdiepie-annual-earnings-responds-haters>
 typically post longer videos of 10-20 minutes, meaning that they end up with 
ads against almost all of their content.

This explains why although music videos account for 30% of total views on 
YouTube, they only represent 12% of the time spent on the platform and 9% of ad 
revenue.

Could the music labels move Vevo to Facebook?

“That’s not YouTube short changing the record industry or artists – that’s 
just how the model works. It’s about how many ad breaks you get per episode of 
Game of Thrones,” explains Mulligan.

The music industry needs to adopt YouTuber best practices, posting more 
regularly and engaging directly with fans. If they simply post three-minute 
song videos ever few months they cannot expect to prosper in the YouTube 
economy, says the report.

“As savvy a business woman as Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> is, I suspect incredibly 
strongly that she isn’t aware of a lot of these complexities,” Mulligan says.

Despite its relatively weak negotiating position, the music industry does have 
a wild card. It could move Vevo – which accounts for 57% of all music views on 
YouTube – to another platform.

“Let’s say the record label and YouTube dialogue went south. Vevo could move to
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>. If they did that, 
the vast majority of music videos on YouTube will disappear,” says Mulligan. 
“This would leave YouTube with a big gaping hole.”

“It’s a nuclear option but it’s one that will hurt for a couple of years.”
 