
There were quotes from Shakespeare and phantom gift-wrapped editions of 
Beatrix Potter. Belgian surrealism was briefly invoked. Treachery was on 
people’s lips. There were mutterings of suicidal tendencies. The backstabbing 
and brinkmanship knew no bounds.


A day and a night at the theatre? In a manner of speaking. But this was the 
latest fiasco in what passes for EU summits these days where 28 grownups, all 
with countries to run and very demanding day jobs, converge in Brussels, stay 
up all night, forgo meals or ruin their digestion, and spend their time 
huddling in corridors plotting and crafting deals that then fall apart.

Cameron will put ‘heart and soul’ into staying in EU after sealing deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/david-cameron-deal-european-leaders-paves-way-june-referendum>
By 10.30 on Friday evening Europe’s leaders finalised a deal that, barring a 
referendum thumbs-down, looks likely to helpDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> keep Britain in the EU.

The 15 hours that preceded this were the day of the “English meal” that never 
was – so named to mark the fact that the saga of polite but deep discord all 
revolved around David Cameron’s need to go home clutching 16 pages of dense 
text that would be proclaimed as one of Britain’s greatest ever victories in 
Europe. The sheaf of paper would fire the starting pistol in the race to a 
referendum, probably in June, to stay in or quit the EU.


“It was all unnecessarily difficult,” said one of the main negotiators. “There 
was a lot of irritation.”

The cynical view was we were indeed witnessing a meticulously choreographed 
piece of theatre staged to create the impression that Cameron might emerge 
bruised and bloodied but triumphant and more than half way to having the 
referendum in the bag.

But there was also a more depressing possibility – that this was not theatre 
at all, that the leaders of 28 countries meant to be partners in the “European 
project” really were spending all night long genuinely fighting over child 
benefits worth about £35m to the British, savings probably exceeded by the 
costs of running the new system.

When the summit kicked off at teatime on Friday, the word from Donald Tusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/31/donald-tusk-european-council-president-poland>
, chief fixer presiding over the session, was that he would labour through the 
night in a set of “bilaterals” with Cameron and four other leaders who each 
represented specific neuralgic points in the proposed deal.

 They would all then meet at 9am Fridayfor an “English breakfast” to seal the 
deal. There was no breakfast. Instead brunch was listed for 11. That came and 
went, supplanted by “English lunch” at half past one. That repast, too, never 
happened. The deadline shifted to 4pm with no mention of food as the “sherpas” 
preparing these meetings and advising their leaders just munched apples instead 
in the press bar. And Team Cameron chewed on Haribos. The afternoon deadline 
lapsed with Tusk’s spokesman tweeting that Cameron’s rendezvous with destiny 
was now set for “dinner, tbc”.

The biggest question for continental journalists was whether this meant a 
French or Italian dinner around 8pm or 9pm, or whether, with luck, the leaders 
hoped to do an “English teatime” around 6pm.

EU talks: how an English breakfast became an English dinner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/eu-talks-english-breakfast-became-english-dinner>
Faces dropped. It was to be 8pm. At the earliest. It was after 9pm when they 
got to the aperitifs, followed by artichoke, goat’s cheese, then fillet of veal 
with tarragon. And the realisation dawned that the leaders could be so 
determined to have that full English breakfast that they would stagger through 
the night again into Saturday morning.

While the meals were missed, Tusk and Cameron laboured on through a set of 
bilaterals held in a small unprepossessing room on the fifth floor of the 
Justus Lipsius building where Tusk has his office and where summits take place. 
It is a functional, sparsely furnished, room which Tusk, thepresident of the 
European council 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/President_of_the_European_Council>, uses to bang 
heads together, cobble together compromises and cut deals.

But through the night and all of Friday the agreements eluded them. Cameron’s 
interlocutors wereFrançois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/15/pm-hollande-eu-reforms-uk-eurozone>
, president of France, and the prime ministersCharles Michel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/10/belgium-coalition-government-charles-michel-flemish-separatist-n-va>
 (Belgium),Bohuslav Sobotka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/czech-politicians-angry-after-president-suggests-removing-pm-with-a-kalashnikov>
 (Czech Republic) andBeata Szydło 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/25/szydo-beata-szydo-polands-putative-pm-emerges-from-obscurity>
 (Poland).

The French leader embodied the eurozone’s struggle to find accommodation with 
the UK over financial regulation. The Belgian head represented opposition to 
the British prime minister’s campaign against the EU’s guiding motto of 
“ever-closer union”. The east Europeans were the toughest customers for Cameron 
because their citizens would lose out from the welfare and child benefit curbs 
the British government needs to demonstrate that is doing something to try to 
lessen EU immigration to the UK.

The British side let it be known that Cameron sought to woo the federalist 
Michel by presenting him with a French edition of the works of Beatrix Potter 
for a newborn daughter. In fact, the books were gifted a fortnight ago during 
the international Syria conference in London.

Enda Kenny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/15/enda-kenny-thanks-ireland-bailout-exit>
, the taoiseach and Cameron’s biggest champion at the summit, took to quoting 
Macbeth along the lines of if this had to be done, best to get it done quickly. 
Macbeth, of course, was talking of murder, a point perhaps lost on most of 
Kenny’s audience.

Sticking together? The issues that still need to be solved in Brussels talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/sticking-together-the-issues-that-still-need-to-be-solved-in-brussels-talks>
In any case, there was no chance of getting it done quickly. And Cameron 
repeatedly stressed that he had all the time in the world to strike the right 
deal. He could wait till the end of next year, the deadline for his referendum, 
if need be.

“He’s a very good negotiator,” said a sherpa from one of the EU’s big founding 
countries. “And compared to the rest of them Cameron’s in a very strong 
position at home.”

There were two fundamental problems with a summit that veered back and forth 
between breakthrough and breakdown before going Cameron’s way. The subject 
matter – extremely technical issues of financial regulation, juridical 
conundrums, and social security systems – was too complex for national leaders 
to grapple with and sort. It needed to be resolved by teams of government 
experts in lengthy negotiation before being put before government heads.

The second problem was much more worrying. Europe’s leaders no longer trust 
one another. It is difficult to recall a summit in recent years which has not 
been poisoned by mistrust, conflict and grievance.

 Last July they also went through the night for 17 hours with Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/17/merkel-eu-uk-germany-national-interest-cameron-justified>
, Germany’s chancellor, andAlexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/19/sticking-together-the-issues-that-still-need-to-be-solved-in-brussels-talks>
, prime minister of Greece – eyeball-to-eyeball in a confrontation that nearly 
saw Greece kicked out of the euro. A month earlier, as the immigration crisis 
started, the leaders took to shouting across the room at one another until 
three in the morning.

 In the early hours of Friday, Merkel, who kept her distance from the British 
question, said: “We are always partners in Europe.” It sounded as if she was at 
a different summit.
EU negotiations: where the key leaders stand 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/cameron-eu/giv-27167m8ZNdJSxRghX/> 