
I did always wonder how Techmeme's <http://www.techmeme.com> links were 
determined; turns out they have been automated up until now, which perhaps 
explains an over-reliance on TechCrunch over other news sites and some 
frequent, glaring omissions on big stories and interesting news.

Founder Gabe Rivera has announced he's is taking on a human editor 
<http://news.techmeme.com/081203/automated> to Techmeme from now on, and that's 
on top of the algorithm that determines the most important news stories by 
analysing which stories are being linked to the most.

"Humans have always edited Techmeme of course, just implicitly," he explains. 
"For instance, when a blogger links to a story, the headline might move higher 
on Techmeme. What's different now is that an additional human editor will carry 
out changes explicitly to directly improve the mix of headlines on Techmeme. 
Though the implicit edits conveyed via algorithm outnumber the explicit edits 
perhaps by 1000 to 1 or more, the impact of the human editor is nonetheless 
pronounced.

"What will that effect be? The news will just get faster and more interesting. 
Obsolete stories will be eliminated sooner while breaking stories will be 
expedited."

TechCrunch founder Mike Arrington thinks a human editor might "destroy the 
objective nature of TechMeme 
<http://www.techcrunch.com/2008/12/03/techmeme-gives-up-on-fully-automated-news/>
" - but I think we all know that's not true. The combination of algorithms and 
human editing invariably produces the most useful, balanced results on news 
sites.

"The experience of introducing direct editing has been a revelation even for 
us, despite the fact that we planned it," Rivera continued. "Interacting 
directly with an automated news engine makes it clear that the human+algorithm 
combo can curate news far more effectively that the individual human or 
algorithmic parts. It really feels like the age of the news cyborg has arrived."

Beet.TV has an interview with Rivera from last year where he talks a bit about 
the service:


â€¢ Also in link news: the New York Time <http://www.nytimes.com/>s has added a '
Times Extra' beta that puts automatic links under key stories on its homepage. 
You'll have to enable the 'Times Extra' view on the homepage and even then it 
will automatically switch you back after a day. I don't know why either.

Mashable <http://mashable.com/2008/12/04/nytimes-news-aggregator/> calls it 
right: "The look is confusing; there's simply too much going on". Supplementary 
links have to be in the right context, and I think a homepage really needs to 
deliver the top line of the big stories before trying to deliver the next step 
of suggesting alternative versions of that story.

In the NYT Technology <http://www.nytimes.com/pages/technology/index.html#> 
section, theBlogrunner <http://nytimes.blogrunner.com/> tools has been superb 
at providing a snapshot of industry news but I remain unconvinced that the 
homepage is quite the right place for this. Great that the NYT is continuing to 
trial all these features though.
 