
Verizon-owned prominent technology site TechCrunch  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/techcrunch>has become the latest victim of 
the OurMine hacking group.


OurMine Security appeared to gain publishing access to the site, which uses 
the popular content management system Wordpress, and posted its now infamous 
message.

A post on the site under the byline of Seattle-based writer Devin Coldewey 
said: “Hello Guys, don’t worry we are just testing techcrunch security, we 
didn’t change any passwords, please contact us.”

The post was then promoted as a ticker, the top banner in red and a the main 
story on TechCrunch’s front page.

The OurMine posting appeared at around 12.20pm BST (7.20am ET) but was removed 
within two hours. It was still showing in Google’s indexand cache 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:https://techcrunch.com/2016/07/26/ourmine-team-important-message/>
 at the time of writing.

The attack on the technology site is latest in a number of high-profile 
compromises by OurMine, which included the social media accounts of Twitter 
chief executiveJack Dorsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/twitter-ceo-jack-dorsey-account-hacked-ourmine-security>
, Facebook CEOMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/06/mark-zuckerberg-hacked-on-twitter-and-pinterest>
 and Google bossSundar Pichai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/28/sundar-pichai-hacked-ourmine-group-bitly>
.

OurMine also claimed responsibility last week for a DDoS attack on Pokémon 
Go’s servers.

The TechCrunch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/techcrunch> attack appears 
to have leveraged a contributor’s account, rather than a hack on the site’s 
Wordpress system. In previous attacks, OurMine has used weaker linked accounts 
to post to services such as Twitter, rather than taking over the user’s social 
media accounts directly.

The attacks underscore the inherent flaws in linked systems: your accounts, or 
in this case site, is only as resilient as your weakest link. Security experts 
recommend the use of two-step verification systems to help prevent accounts 
being compromised. It is unknown whether TechCrunch writer accounts required 
two-step verification for access to the site’s Wordpress backend.

TechCrunch, which is owned by AOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol>
, and in turn by Verizon, did not respond to request for comment.

 * Oculus CEO is latest tech boss hacked in embarrassing account takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/oculus-ceo-is-latest-tech-boss-hacked-in-embarrassing-account-takeover>
From Tumblr to Katie Couric, here’s everything Verizon just bought from Yahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/tumblr-katie-couric-verizon-yahoo> 