
How many highlights of 2013 can you remember? The Guardian's Technology team 
think 128 is a pretty good number, so we've picked the highs, lows and huhs of 
the entire year and distilled them into a handy list form.

It only took us three very intense weeks of negotiation and some minor 
fisticuffs, but we've managed to plot out everything we think 2013 will be 
remembered for, and we'll be publishing them across eight lists every day until 
1 January.

Airbnb

Fast becoming the default way to travel, Airbnb opened up a whole new holiday 
market for international hipsters – with only a small amount of controversy 
about encouraging sub-letters to escape tax. Also notorious for being the 
startup model every aspiring entrepreneurs wants to aim for: "We're like Airbnb 
for the [insert name of industry here]".

• Three million people stayed in Airbnb-booked accommodation in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jun/05/airbnb-leweb-london-joe-gebbia>

Amazon Prime Air

When Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> announced that it 
was planning to deliver packages via drone by 2018, the press went wild. Even 
the airtime it was given for the announcement – a 15 minute slot on CBS's 60 
Minutes – would cost over $3m if bought as advertising. So it's not surprising 
they pre-announced it. The question is: will they be able to live up to their 
promise? The answer, probably, is no.

• Video: Drone helicopter delivery to your door in 30 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2013/dec/02/amazon-prime-air-drone-delivery-service-video>

Andy Rubin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F23%2F1387760168056%2F2949002340_0e516bba00_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tech%20128%3A%20From%20Airbnb%20to%20crowdfunding%2C%20the%20year%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tech%20128%3A%20From%20Airbnb%20to%20crowdfunding%2C%20the%20year%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F23%2F1387760168056%2F2949002340_0e516bba00_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Google's Andy Rubin is now leading the company's robotics projects. 
Photograph: Joi Ito/flickr <http://www.flickr.com/photos/joi/2949002340/> 
Rubin made his name as the head of Google's Android division, but in March 
2013 he stepped down from the role, having built the company up into the mobile 
behemoth it is today. His new job, quietly gathering steam over the year, is 
leading Google's robotics initiative. Over 2013,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> acquired eight robotics 
companies, and Rubin says the company has a "10-year vision" for where the 
project will take it.

• In April Google's chief executive Larry Page nearly let slip that Rubin was 
starting on 'a new chapter' in robotics... 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2013/apr/22/google-rubin-project-hint-page>

Ask.fm

The Q&A site was little known outside teen circles at the start of the year, 
but faced intense scrutiny over its user policies after a spate of teenage 
suicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/aug/19/ask-fm-cyberbully-hannah-smith-death>
 linked the site to cyberbullying. 

• Ask.fm pledged new safety features in response, including new moderators to 
be recruited by January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/aug/19/ask-fm-cyberbully-hannah-smith-death>

Beyoncé
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F23%2F1387760412233%2Fe3377f3a-9a0c-4b3b-8d3c-bd1493155f90-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tech%20128%3A%20From%20Airbnb%20to%20crowdfunding%2C%20the%20year%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tech%20128%3A%20From%20Airbnb%20to%20crowdfunding%2C%20the%20year%20in%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2013%2Fdec%2F23%2Ftech-128-from-airbnb-to-crowdfunding-the-year-in-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F23%2F1387760412233%2Fe3377f3a-9a0c-4b3b-8d3c-bd1493155f90-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beyonce took the music world by surprise by releasing her new album on iTunes. 
Photograph: Robin Harper/Invision/AP 
When Queen Bey dropped her new self-titled album with no advance publicity, 
the internet went wild. Obviously not every artist can expect a surprise 
release to have quite the same effect; one particularly cruel joke went, 
"Beyoncé is so unoriginal, the other members of Destiny's Child release albums 
no-one knows about all the time."

But there's no doubt that she single-handedly made the case that buying music 
isn't dead yet, when in just three days her iTunes-exclusive album sold 829,000 
copies worldwide.

• 'I didn't want to release my music in the way I've done it. I'm bored with 
that," Beyonce said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/16/beyonce-itunes-album-sales-figures>

Big data

The term "big data" might have been overcooked by the corporates and 
marketeers, but it's still a powerful trend. Whether big business or the 
intelligence agencies, there has never been more usefulness, more value or more 
awareness about the data trails our digital lives create. Even the CIA's own 
website states it loud and clear: "Big Data is a Big Deal at the CIA."

• What exactly is a data scientist, and what do they do? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/accenture-partner-zone/2013/dec/13/what-should-you-expect-from-a-data-scientist>

Binge-watching TV

The rise of streaming websites has created a new legal way of watching TV: 
watching entire series in one go. Netflix accelerated this new trend, famously 
releasing original series such as House of Cards and Orange is the New Black, 
in one go.Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> recently studied 
viewers that watched an entire series in one month and found that 50% of them 
finished an entire season within a week.

• I just binged on ten hours of TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/emma-brockes-blog/2013/aug/05/binge-viewing-tv-drama>

Bitcoin

At the beginning of 2013, one bitcoin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> could be bought for $13. At 
its peak in November, that same bitcoin could have been sold for nearly a 
hundred times that, $1,242. That astonishing increase in value isn't the whole 
reason why the decentralised crypto-currency has made headlines across the 
world, but it doesn't hurt.

A bitcoin has no physical counterpart. Instead, just like a £5-note is 
technically a "promise to pay the bearer the sum of five pounds", a bitcoin is 
a digitally signed public contract asserting that one user is giving another 
bitcoins. That lets the currency operate without any central authority 
certifying transactions, which gave it credibility in the techno-libertarian 
circles it arose from.

Over the course of this year, bitcoin has been used to buy drugs on the Silk 
Road and evade currency controls in Cyprus and China. It has gone to space, and 
filled shipping containers in Hong Kong. One early adopter bought a house with 
bitcoin he'd paid $27 for, while another lost a hard-drive with over £4m worth 
of it on. And at the end of it all, it's on a downward streak that might just 
kill it any way.

• Nine other alternative currencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/28/bitcoin-alternatives-future-currency-investments>

Blackberry

The phone once beloved of the email-addicted and workaholics – including 
President Obama -couldn't stem the decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/05/why-blackberry-failed> 
as it failed to compete with touchscreen rivals.Blackberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blackberry>'s much hyped Z10 flopped, 
costing the company $935m. The end of the fixed keyboard era is upon us. 

• Why Blackberry failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/05/why-blackberry-failed>

Bloom.fm

Reportedly upping the pressure on Spotify, the music app Bloom.fm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jan/16/bloom-fm-app-review-iphone>
 has exploited the demand for streamed music and Pandora's failure to launch in 
the UK. Undercutting Spotify by charging just £1 per month for ad-free streamed 
music, Bloom.fm is rapidly building its userbase. One to watch.

• Bloom.fm review - intriguing and different  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jan/16/bloom-fm-app-review-iphone>

Burberry
 Burberry at London Fashion Week 2013. Photograph: Ian Gavan/Getty Images 
Under the direction of Christopher Bailey, the British label led a new wave of 
tech-savvy fashionistas who finally showed the confidence and skill to make 
technology work for them. From London's fashion startups cluster and the 
Decoded fashion tech events to 3D printed clothes, Apple's iPhone 5SBurberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> deal and Instagramming on 
the front row, tech is set to be a wardrobe staple.

• Fashion was 'scared of digital', said Topshop former marketing head Justin 
Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/16/london-fashion-week-technology-justin-cooke>

Chelsea Manning

In August the whistleblower was sentenced to 35 years for passing 700,000 
military documents to Wikileaks. A hero to many for her courage in speaking 
out, her sentence was condemned by many civil rights groups including Ben Wizner
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison-wikileaks-sentence>
, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's Speech, Privacy & Technology 
Project.

"This is a sad day for Bradley Manning, but it's also a sad day for all 
Americans who depend on brave whistleblowers and a free press for a fully 
informed public debate," he said. 

"When a soldier who shared information with the press and public is punished 
far more harshly than others who tortured prisoners and killed civilians, 
something is seriously wrong with our justice system ... it will deprive the 
public of critical information that is necessary for democratic accountability."

• A row broke out at Wikipedia over whether to label the page as Chelsea or 
Bradley Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/24/chelsea-manning-name-row-wikipedia-editors-banned-from-trans-pages>

Citymapper

It's like a navigation app – only far, far better. Citymapper's evangelical 
fans rave about its features, which include live status information for public 
transport, bike routes and jet pack travel times, just for amusement. Only for 
London and New York, for now – but world domination is only a matter of time. 

• Citymapper first popped up at Seedcamp in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pda/2011/aug/11/startups-seedcamp>

Clash of Clans

Finland's uber-cool games company Supercell is small but took investment this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/15/supercell-funding-softbank-gungho-clash-of-clans>
 valuing it at $3bn. Whatever its secrets (recruiting the industry's best 
talent and rewarding them handsomely) the strategy worked for its standout 
game, Clash of Clans, which was the highest grossing game app of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/18/android-ios-app-revenues-research>
.

• Fun games 'can't be created on a spreadsheet', say Supercell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jul/23/clash-of-clans-supercell-freemium>

Clumsy Ninja

Previewed during the iPhone 5 launch, the game app became the most addictive 
of the year and demonstrated some astonishing physics-based movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2013/nov/28/google-glass-ban-clumsy-iphone>
 to boot.

• The best 50 apps of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/15/50-best-apps-2013-iphone-android-observer>

Crowdfunding

From smartwatches to 3D printers and indie films, crowdfunding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/crowdfunding> has cemented itself as a 
barometer of consumer appetite and interests, with Kickstarter, Indiegogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/crowdfunding> and others launching tens 
of thousands of creative, technological and humanitarian projects onto the 
world – and killing the dreams of millions more. 

• UK Kickstarter raised £22.5m in 2013 for more than 1,500 projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/04/kickstarter-crowdfunding-uk-projects-success>

The next instalment of the 2013 Tech 128 review of the year is tomorrow...
 