
High noon for Ted Cruz in Indiana

Donald Trump is on the verge of a win in Indiana tonight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/03/indiana-primary-donald-trump-republican-nominee-ted-cruz>
 that would leave him the likely Republican nominee. One recent public poll had 
the real estate mogul up 15 points over rival Ted Cruz, whowas heckled by a 
12-year-old and quizzed about his birthplace while his wife faced questions 
over whether he was a serial killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/02/ted-cruz-indiana-heckler-canada-zodiac-killer>
 yesterday. Oh, and he seemed to ignore his running mate Carly Fiorina falling 
off the stage. These indignities and others came on the last day of campaigning 
in a state he desperately needs to win in order to continue his strategy of 
denying Donald Trump the 1,237 delegates needed to secure the GOP nomination. 
Here’swhere the delegate count stands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/mar/25/us-election-2016-delegate-tracker-trump-cruz-kasich-sanders-clinton>
 for both parties. On the Democratic side Hillary Clinton isa few points ahead 
of Bernie Sanders in the polls 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/in/indiana_democratic_presidential_primary-5807.html>
. Results are expected some time after 6pm ET and we’ll have live coverage 
throughout the evening.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcarly-fiorina-falls-off-stage-ted-cruz-event-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carly%20Fiorina%20falls%20off%20stage%20during%20Ted%20Cruz%20event%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcarly-fiorina-falls-off-stage-ted-cruz-event-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carly%20Fiorina%20falls%20off%20stage%20during%20Ted%20Cruz%20event%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcarly-fiorina-falls-off-stage-ted-cruz-event-video&media=>
Carly Fiorina falls off stage during Ted Cruz event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/02/carly-fiorina-falls-off-stage-ted-cruz-event-video>
. 
White House ducks Wilmore backlash

The controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/02/larry-wilmore-n-word-obama-white-house-correspondents-dinner>
 over comedian Larry Wilmore’s use of the N-word to hail Barack Obama at the 
White House correspondent’s dinner over the weekend has yet to subside. The 
White House says the president appreciated “the spirit” of the comedian’s 
choice of words. The moment “made me feel a sense of pride – a sense of black 
pride”,writes Rebecca Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/larry-wilmore-n-word-i-felt-black-pride>
.

Sci-fi fashion at the Met Ball

Anna Wintour’s fashion gala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/may/02/met-ball-2016-red-carpet-photos-celebrity-fashion>
, whose theme wasman and machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/02/met-gala-manus-x-machina-fashion-technology>
, kicked off with dozens of celebrities turning up in sci-fi outfits. Guardian 
fashion critic Jess Cartner-Morley says Taylor Swift’s platinum-blonde hair was 
OK but the rest of her outfit – an old-school sci-fi baddie – was unconvincing. 
Wintour looked “balls-outregal”, and of Sarah Jessica Parker she asked: “You 
know in Cinderella, where the fairy godmother turns four lizards into footmen 
for the pumpkin-slash-coach? Am I right or am I right?” You can see all the red 
carpet outfitsright here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/may/02/met-ball-2016-red-carpet-photos-celebrity-fashion>
.

Bitcoin’s challenge 

The inventor of the crypto-currency may 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/craig-wright-bitcoin-founder-satoshi-nakamoto-claim>
 be Australian entrepreneur Craig Wright, we learned this week, but the 
currency itself is at the center of anideological conflict. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/03/bitcoin-tech-future-craig-wright-blockchain-transactions>
 At issue is how to develop technologies that can establish it as a coherent, 
paperless, bank-less, state-less, currency.



Fruit rant 

A Silicon Valley tech CEO has sparked a backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/mark-woodward-facebook-fruit-vendor-comments>
 for comments slamming local fruit vendors, saying he would “make their life 
miserable” and “destroy” their produce if they were stationed near his house – 
making him the latest wealthy Californian entrepreneur to publicly rail against 
low-income people.

Food producers ask for lobbying shield

Some of the largest food producers in the US have successfully petitioned  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/food-producers-congress-lobbying-foia-united-egg-producers>
Congress to propose changes that would shield their communications with boards 
overseen by the US Department of Agriculture. Among those behind the effort are 
United Egg Producers, the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association and National 
Pork Producers. Critics say they have already seen efforts to stifle 
competition.

Cutting the cord

The streaming service Hulu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/hulu-live-tv-offering-cable-netflix>
 is to add live TV to its lineup, putting it in direct competition with 
traditional pay-TV providers and digital entrants, including Netflix. 
Executives at Hulu, which is owned by a consortium of competing television 
production companies including NBC, Disney and Fox, hope to win younger 
subscribers who reject expensive traditional cable TV packages.

Soccer surprise

The English Premier League, long dominated by the teams with the deepest 
pockets, has been given anastonishing lesson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/leicester-city-champions-premier-league>
 in humility. At the start of the season, Leicester City, a little-known and 
less supported team, were at 5,000-1 odds of winning the league. But with 
giants such as Chelsea, Manchester City and Manchester United stumbling, 
Leicester have achieved anunlikely sporting victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/leicester-city-champions-premier-league>
.

Raiders and Jaguars rising

Meanwhile, in the NFL, the Oakland and Jacksonville teams have struggled to 
acquire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/03/oakland-raiders-jacksonville-jaguars-nfl-draft>
 top draft players for years. But now both are considered legitimate contenders 
for the top players becoming available. Where did it all go right?

Artistic understanding

It started as a secret handshake with his step-daughter. Now, Turner 
prize-winning British artist Martin Creed has installed agiant revolving neon 
sign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/02/martin-creed-understanding-east-river-brooklyn-new-york>
 that reads UNDERSTANDING on the waterfront in Brooklyn, New York. “It has to 
do with wars and communicating with people in a way that’s understanding, for 
lack of a better word,” Creed says.

MIA is MIA

The controversy-prone British rap artist MIA says her new album Matahdatah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/03/mia-new-album-matahdatah-claim-will-be-her-last>
 could be her last but she won’t be coming to the US to promote it. She claims 
to have US visa problems. “I am handing my last LP in to my American label this 
week,” the artist – real name Maya Arulpragasam – MIA posted on 2 May. “It’ll 
be up to them if it’s released.”

And … Endeavour discovered

Famous as the vessel that charted the coast of Australia, Captain James Cook’s 
ship Endeavour  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/02/captain-james-cook-endeavour-ship-found>
has almost certainly been located off the coast of Rhode Island where it was 
scuttled in 1778 during the revolutionary war. The ship, which Cook sailed in 
the Pacific Ocean, passed through a number of hands before being used in a 
blockade.

_______________

Please take a moment to tell us what you think 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/R3G3H2J>.
 