
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles> 2 topped the US 
box office over the weekend but with a result that is 46% lower than the 
previous film.

Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows review – halfwits in a 
halfshell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles-out-of-the-shadows-review-tmnt>
The action follow-up, starring Megan Fox and Laura Linney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/laura-linney>, made $35.3m, compared to 
the original’s $65.6m. That film went on to make a surprise $493.2m worldwide, 
a number the latest adventure will struggle to replicate.

It’s the latest sequel to underperform this summer, after X-Men: Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-apocalypse> and Alice Through the 
Looking Glass <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alice-through-the-looking-glass>
 scored lower than expected openings the weekend before. Bryan Singer’s 
superhero instalment plummeted in its second week with a 66% drop with less 
than $120m thus far. It will struggle to match the $160m total of the 
critically reviled X-Men Origins: Wolverine. Luckily for Fox, the film has been 
opening well overseas with a $400m global total to date.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftim-burton-on-alice-through-the-looking-glass-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Burton%20on%20Alice%20Through%20the%20Looking%20Glass%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftim-burton-on-alice-through-the-looking-glass-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Burton%20on%20Alice%20Through%20the%20Looking%20Glass%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftim-burton-on-alice-through-the-looking-glass-video-interview&media=>
Tim Burton on Alice Through the Looking Glass – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/may/24/tim-burton-on-alice-through-the-looking-glass-video-interview>
It’s even worse news for the Johnny Depp-starring fantasy which has made just 
$50m after two weeks of play. Alice in Wonderland made more than double that in 
its opening weekend and went on to make $1bn globally. The sequel will struggle 
to make a third of that. It’s not all bad news for Disney though, withZootopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zootopia-zootropolis> becoming the second 
film of 2016 to cross $1bn worldwide. It’s now the second highest-grossing 
original film of all time.

Elsewhere, romantic weepie Me Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/me-before-you> overperformed, bringing in 
$18.3m from a $20m budget. The film managed to combat the controversy that has 
plagued it for the past few weeks with disability groupsunhappy with its ending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/me-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied>
.

The weekend’s other new release, music satire Popstar: Never Stop Never 
Stopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/01/popstar-review-samberg-mockumentary-spinal-tap>
, was a washout, making just $4.6m, one of the worst results for a wide release 
this year.

US box office, week beginning 6 June 2016

1. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows: $35.3m - NEW

2. X-Men: Apocalypse: $22.3m. Total: $116.5m

3. Me Before You: $18.3m - NEW

4. Alice Through the Looking Glass: $10.7m. Total: $50.8m

5. The Angry Birds Movie: $9.8m. Total: $86.7m

6. Captain America: Civil War: $7.6m. Total: $388.9m

7. Neighbors 2: Serority Rising: $4.7m. Total: $48.6m

8. Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping: $4.6m - NEW

9. The Jungle Book: $4.2m. Total: $347.5m

10. The Nice Guys: $3.5m. Total: $29.1m
 