 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424859957206%2F17ad3c64-01d1-45ea-9ea5-11d991852aa6-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teen%20opinion%3A%20why%20I%20love%20World%20Book%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teen%20opinion%3A%20why%20I%20love%20World%20Book%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424859957206%2F17ad3c64-01d1-45ea-9ea5-11d991852aa6-1530x2040.jpeg>
 World Book Day display Photograph: theguardian.com 
World Book Day is now almost upon us, with schools everywhere putting the 
finishing touches to their plans of events and activities to celebrate the art 
of reading, and literature as a whole.

It is one of my favourite days of the year, not only because I am a massive 
book nerd and geek, and not only because it encourages reading and emphasises 
its importance for all people, but also because of the fun things which take 
place throughout the day that I can get involved with, the events that I help 
run, and the £1 book tokens which are made available to all students so that 
anyone, no matter who they are, is able to get their hands on a book.

This year’s World Book Day will be unique in the sense that my school has 
chosen to tie it in with the 70th anniversary of the Holocaust. As part of the 
celebrations, and to remember those who died at the hands of the Nazis, all 
students and staff have been encouraged to readDiary of a Young Girl 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-young-girl-9.html>, Anne Frank’s 
poignant account of her time in the Secret Annex where she successfully hid 
from the Nazis for a period of just over two years.

Anne Frank: 10 beautiful quotes from The Diary of a Young Girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/27/the-greatest-anne-frank-quotes-ever>
Displays regarding the Holocaust, Anne Frank and her diary have already been 
put up, and it is my hope that many people will join in and read The Diary of a 
Young Girl in order to commemorate such a tragic and historic event.

I purchased my copy only a few days ago; disgracefully, I know very few 
details about the Holocaust itself, so through World Book Day and reading Anne 
Frank’s diary I hope to become more educated about it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424860015656%2F2de946d7-d74c-4278-8372-7e5b16c2b3ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teen%20opinion%3A%20why%20I%20love%20World%20Book%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teen%20opinion%3A%20why%20I%20love%20World%20Book%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fwhy-i-love-world-book-day-holocaust-anne-frank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424860015656%2F2de946d7-d74c-4278-8372-7e5b16c2b3ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Our World Book Day displays are already up. 
Of course, regular events will also be running alongside the Holocaust 
memorial activities.

A competition for National Book Tokens, a big book swap/sale, a teachers’ 
“Shelfie” competition, fun in-lesson activities such as quizzes… It’s certainly 
looking to be a great year for World Book Day fun!

In the past, a fictional character fashion show and even a book-themed game 
show have been organised – I myself hosted a version of the game show Pointless 
on World Book Day last year, pitting the four school houses against each other 
competing for house points. Consisting of three rounds of intense questions 
regarding children’s and teen/YA literature, it was a huge success and, though 
I have not arranged to do another show this year, a version of ITV’s The Chase 
is in the planning stages for charity events later in the year. (By the way: 
yes, I do realise the startling similarities between my school and Hogwarts. We 
even have house colours and ties, and the winning house at the end of the year 
does win the House Cup…!)

What to wear on World Book Day 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/feb/16/what-to-wear-on-world-book-day-2015>
One of the most popular recurring ideas is for students and staff to dress up 
as literary characters on the day, and already costume ideas have begun flying 
around – I have my outfit all planned out, though I’m fairly sure dressing up 
as Hermione Granger for the second year runningmay be considered cheating… 

This year’s theme is “Fantasy, Dystopian and Science Fiction” – I reckon I’ll 
fit into the ‘fantasy’ character very well! In the past I have seen some 
amazing and inventive costumes, ranging from modern favourites such as Harry 
Potter and Katniss Everdeen to classic characters such as Bilbo Baggins and Tom 
Sawyer. Even some costumes inspired by the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy and 
The Wizard of Oz have made their appearance in my school, and I’m sure that 
this year even more excellent and imaginative renditions will crop up in the 
hallways.

What sorts of events is your school hosting this year, and who are you 
planning to dress up as? Email us at childrens.books@theguardian.com, or 
message us on twitter (@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/gdnchildrensbks>, 
and BritishBiblioholic directly,@thereaderrunt 
<https://twitter.com/thereaderrunt>).

And don’t forget, we are calling for you to share your best costume ideas and 
how you made them – and the best costume idea will win £50 in National Book 
Tokens! Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/feb/16/what-to-wear-on-world-book-day-2015>
.

There are lots more fundraising ideas and educational resources for UK schools 
and libraries atbookaid.org/worldbookday 
<http://www.bookaid.org/get-involved/fundraise/schools/world-book-day-2014/>. 
 