
It’s strange to think that 10 years ago today The West Wing, one of the most 
legendary and highly praised shows in recent memory, aired its final episode. 
That oddness isn’t because it makes us all feel old or because we’ve slipped 
into some crazy wormhole where time speeds up, but becauseThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing> is possibly the first 
show to never entirely go away.

The show debuted in September 1999, when there was still a Democratic 
president in office and the dotcom bubble had yet to burst. It’s crazy to think 
that the show that defined politics for many people in the 2000s actually 
straddled the world-changing events of September 11. But even more important to 
The West Wing’s legacy is how technology changed over that time. Plenty of 
people jumped on the West Wing bandwagon after it won its first Emmy, surging 
the audience from about 9 million viewers to its peak of 17 million. That jump 
was aided in part by DVD sets for TV shows, which were just coming into vogue
and definitely aren’t now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/29/dvd-industry-sales-slump-blu-ray>
.

Since the show ended, it’s become a fixture on streaming services and all 
seven seasons are currently available on Netflix, so viewers can either rewatch 
CJ Cregg doingThe Jackal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q7H_L5cYkg8> as many 
times as they’d like or experience the show for the first time. Catching up on 
the show became so popular that Joshua Molina, who played Will Bailey on 
seasons four through seven, started a podcast calledWest Wing Weekly 
<http://thewestwingweekly.com/>, where he works through the show’s 156 episodes.

Why I'll miss the West Wing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2006/jul/25/whyillmissthewestwing>
Thanks to Netflix, shows such as The West Wing and Friends are stuck in this 
strange nostalgia feedback loop, with old fans wanting to revisit a certain 
time and novices wishing they were in that time even though they missed it the 
first time around.

This is especially odd for The West Wing, which was embroiled in current 
events when it aired but also presenting the sort of government that many 
viewers wish we had when it was airing in the depths of the Bush 
administration. Jed Bartlet and his acolytes were always more progressive, more 
intelligent and much more fair than what Democrats at the time were 
experiencing in real life. Thanks to creatorAaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>, it was government as 
liberal fantasy, one where our politicians could hold positions that were 
untenable in real life.

 The world eventually caught up to The West Wing, and the show presaged many 
of the changes that we would see in just a few years time. Bartlet appointed 
the supreme court’s first Latino justice in 1999, something that Barack Obama 
did nine years later when he appointed Sonia Sotomayor. The show’s first season 
included a storyline about repealing “don’t ask, don’t tell” in 1999, which 
took 11 years for Obama to repeal. Osama bin Laden was even a suspect in 
President Bartlet’s shooting two years before he would claim responsibility for 
9/11.

There have been a host of other ongoing political issues that we first heard 
about on The West Wing: government shutdowns, the rise of filibusters, 
journalists being kidnapped, and the constant debate over the debt ceiling. 
However, there is nothing more prescient than the show’s final season where 
Matthew Santos, the country’s first president of color, assumes office. The 
character should remind viewers of Obama because he wasactually based on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/21/barackobama.uselections2008> the 
then little-known senator from Illinois.

That’s why The West Wing has really never gone away, because it is as much 
about the world we live in now as it is about the world as it was then. In 
fact, it might be even more relevant today than it was 10 years ago.

And still, as our political system continues to degrade – there’s gridlock in 
Congress over so many issues, and both parties are resorting to filibusters 
even to get the most basic legislation passed – The West Wing shows us a world 
where the political system works. It reminds us of a time, not too long ago, 
when people in political office took their jobs very seriously and wanted to 
actually govern this country rather than settle scores and appeal to their 
respective bases. The most popular political dramas of our day are Scandal and 
House of Cards, ones where back-alley plotting and murderous presidents take 
center stage rather than the ideals of governing.

We’re about to enter into an election where both candidates have historically 
low favorable ratings 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/22/politics/2016-election-poll-donald-trump-hillary-clinton/>
. It’s no wonder why people want to escape with President Bartlet, who never 
did any wrong and was as noble a creature who ever entered politics. Thanks to 
technology, we can, but because of a ruptured political process, we really need 
to.
 