
AOL is to launch two new web series starring Richard Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-bacon>, Tess Daly and The Saturdays 
singer Rochelle Humes, its first original commissions outside the US.

The digital media company’s first UK commissions mark a significant expansion 
of its drive into the premium content market. The company announced plans for 
16 new series from the US earlier this year.

Daly and Humes, who both have young children, will star in Being Mum. In each 
episode they will meet a well-known personality, or a mother with a 
“remarkable” story, to explore motherhood.

“In our series, we’ll go behind the scenes with a range of incredible mothers, 
with some faces you’ll know and some you won’t, but all with amazing stories to 
tell about being a modern day mother,” said Humes.

Bacon will star in 30 Something, a series about why “getting into your 30s 
shouldn’t scare you, it’s not all doom and gloom”.

“We meet a range of extraordinary people in their 30s, people who have 
succeeded, sometimes against the odds, to create great brands, companies, 
trends, etcetera all while balancing new commitments such as being a parent,” 
said the 38-year old Bacon. “It’s an extraordinary decade of complexity and 
opportunity where people really put their stamp on the world.”

Each series, which will air on the AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> On Network, will consist of 
approximately 12 episodes of about five minutes in length.

Mark Melling, AOL’s director of video for Europe, said earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/13/twitter-google-digital-upfronts> 
that celebrities chosen to star in AOL Originals usually have a “large social 
media following”.

Bacon <https://twitter.com/richardpbacon> has 1.5 million followers, Humes  
<https://twitter.com/RochelleTheSats>1 million and Daly 
<https://twitter.com/TessDaly> 25,000.

“At AOL we are committed to creating original premium content that resonates 
with consumers and advertisers,” said Melling, who unveiled the new commissions 
in a presentation at theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Advertising Bureau’s Digital 
Upfront event in London on Thursday.

US web series launched by AOL include Nicole Richie’s #CandidlyNicole 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLygpCWyjPV1FEZe37mGIdd1vyZhA46Ffm>, a 
short-form reality series based on Richie’s Twitter posts.

Sex and the City star Sarah Jessica Parker’s city.ballet 
<http://on.aol.com/show/cityballet-517887470/episode/517995636> looks at the 
lives of New York City Ballet company members. Boardwalk Empire starSteve 
Buscemi’s original series, Park Bench 
<http://on.aol.com/video/s1-e1---bench-rivalry---park-bench-518226615>, 
features unscripted conversations with friends and New Yorkers.

“We’ve had fantastic success with our Originals series in the US with two Emmy 
nominations this year and one show picked up by VH1,” said Melling.

The two UK series are being produced in association with London-based media 
company 40 Partners.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 