
Laura McInerney is right to point out the injustices of the current A-level 
remarking arrangements, but wrong in revealing them as “marking’s dirty little 
secret”, as if they haven’t been recognised before (Education, August 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/16/a-level-marking-grades-remark-schools>
). The elephant in the room as far as all examination and testing are concerned 
is a fact that no one is really prepared to acknowledge. We have no firm, 
reliable, systematic way of assessing pupils’ understanding. The way they 
develop that understanding is fearsomely complex, often idiosyncratic and far 
from fully or even adequately understood, even after a century or more of 
psychological research. Our test and examination instruments are crude, partial 
and far from authoritative.

We have believed the myth of assessment and have failed to acknowledge the 
extent of our ignorance. At best the most we can claim is an intuitive, very 
partial and inevitably subjective form of assessment borne out of working 
closely with pupils – talking with and observing them on a day-to-day basis in 
class. That is all. That reflects the complexity of learning, the idiosyncratic 
nature of young learners and the limited extent of our knowledge. This may be 
uncomfortable, but it’s the reality. We, the government, parents and learners 
themselves need to recognise it.
Professor Colin Richards
Spark Bridge, Cumbria 

• In my day, the late 1960s and the 1970s, the university clearing system 
allocated courses and places a ridiculously short time before academic terms 
started. (“I wanted to go to Birmingham but I ended up in Crewe!”) As all fees 
were paid and grants were readily available, the system was acceptable.

Today, students – who are now paying customers – still don’t know where they 
are going to university (Clearing 2016, 18 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/clearing-courses-record-number-a-level-results-ucas-universities>
). My daughter and some friends have just returned from an Interrail trip in 
Europe. The non-British students they met were incredulous that they did not 
know what university they were going to just weeks before this major 
life-changing event. Is there anybody in the higher education world who can 
come up with a more sensible, less stressful system of placing youngsters with 
the university of their choice? How about A-levels in December, results in 
early February, then campus tours armed with knowledge. Student and university 
shake hands by the end of April at latest.
Michael Harrington
Brentford, Middlesex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 