
A controversial new rule requiring Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> abortion clinics to bury or cremate 
fetal tissue won’t go into effect Monday as planned, after a judge temporarily 
blocked the rule Thursday.

But abortion advocates warn the lawsuit has teed up a battle that could open 
up abrand-new front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/texas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit>
 in the abortion wars.

“This is Texas once again trying to decrease women’s access to abortion care,” 
said Vicki Saporta, the president of the NationalAbortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Federation, a member organization 
for independent abortion clinics. “And Texas, in recent memory, has been 
leading the way on anti-abortion restrictions.” She predicted that a wave of 
states with anti-abortion legislatures would soon follow suit. “They don’t do 
anything one at a time.”

Texas rule requiring burial or cremation of fetal tissue shames women, suit 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/texas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit>
The rules, which Texas’ health department quietly introduced this summer, 
require healthcare facilities to dispose of fetal remains from abortions and 
miscarriages through burial or cremation, with the only exceptions for 
miscarriages and abortions that take place in the home.

Whole Woman’s Health, a group of abortion clinics with several locations in 
Texas,filed suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/texas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit>
, claiming the logistics of following the new rules could force clinics to 
close or drive up the cost of the procedure.

“It imposes a funeral ritual on women,” the suit claims. “It also forces 
healthcare providers to work with an extremely limited number of third-party 
vendors for burial or scattering ashes, threatening abortion clinics’ provision 
of care and their long-term ability to remain open.”

The rule was slated to take effect on 19 December. But on Thursday, a federal 
judge temporarily blocked the rule until a hearing on the Whole Woman’sHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> lawsuit could be held in January.

Texas is not the first state to pass requirements for how abortion clinics 
deal with fetal remains. But because the state often sets the agenda for others 
seeking to curtail abortion rights, its court fight could signal that a wave of 
similar laws is coming.


Louisiana passed a similar measure which has been blocked pending the outcome 
of a lawsuit. And in March of this year, Indiana governor Mike Pence, the 
vice-president elect, signed a bill requiring individual women to seek funerary 
services for fetal tissue – regardless of whether they have had a miscarriage 
or an abortion. A federal judge blocked that law from taking effect.


Clinics typically dispose of the contents of a pregnancy through medical waste 
companies. The new rules, say Texas abortion providers, would force clinics to 
do business with funeral homes and pass on steep costs to abortion patients. 
According to oneestimate 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2016/12/02/funeral-directors-anxious-over-texas-rule-fetal-re/>
, the rules would double the cost of the procedure.

“For women who are already struggling to pay, it could be a barrier and a 
burden that they can’t overcome,” said Saporta.

Saporta also pointed out that funeral homes would have the power to prevent 
abortion clinics from offering the procedure by refusing to handle their fetal 
tissue.

Anti-abortion protesters have been known to harass companies that do business 
with clinics as a way to interrupt the clinics’ operations. As a consequence, 
many companies are reluctant to work with abortion clinics.

The recent wave of proposals to regulate clinics’ medical waste may have been 
touched off by Americans United for Life, an anti-abortion group that provides 
lawmakers around the country with legal advice and model legislation.

In 2015, it introduced a new model bill called the Unborn Infants Protection 
Act, requiring all fetal tissue from abortions to be buried or cremated. Under 
the bill, either the woman must make the arrangements herself, or she or an 
“authorized representative” must decide which method the clinics use. It 
prohibits the donation of the tissue to medical research – an endeavor that has 
produced vaccines for deadly viruses such as polio.


“The momentum for creating a culture that respects life in the law increases 
each year,” Charmaine Yoest, the group’s president at the time, said in a 
statement accompanying the draft legislation. The bill, she said, “ensures that 
mothers are given the opportunity to ensure that their deceased infants receive 
respectful treatment, and that the bodies of aborted infants are not exploited”.

AUL circulated the draft bill to state legislators late last year. At the 
time, many anti-abortion lawmakers were seeking to build on the outrage over a
series of sting videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/26/planned-parenthood-sting-videos-charges-dismissed>
 that falsely accused Planned Parenthood officials of illegally selling fetal 
tissue from abortions for profit.

One state where legislators seem to have embraced the model is Ohio. Following 
on the heels of the sting videos, the state’s attorney general accused Planned 
Parenthood of disposing of fetal remains in a general landfill – a charge 
Planned Parenthood denied.

Lawmakers responded by introducing a bill that 

requires women who have had an abortion or a miscarriage to decide whether the 
clinic or hospital uses cremation or burial to dispose of the remains. “The 
idea of respectfully treating the remains of an infant who has been aborted, I 
think, is critical,”said 
<http://wvxu.org/post/bill-would-require-burial-or-cremation-fetal-remains#stream/0>
 one of the bill’s sponsors. So far, it has failed to pass the legislature.

Bills such as these may be an attempt to exploit uneasy feelings about fetal 
tissue. Even Planned Parenthood, in the wake of the sting videos, acknowledged 
that the topic was an emotional one. While denying that Planned Parenthood 
broke the law, Cecile Richards, the group’s president,apologized 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dZUjU4e4fUI> for the clinical tone used by 
Planned Parenthood officials when discussing fetal remains.

Saporta acknowledged that some women might find it helpful to have the remains 
buried or cremated. But forcing a woman to deal with funerary options, she 
said, is cruel. “This doesn’t take into account women’s preferences, their 
wishes, their religious beliefs – it tramples on all of that,” she said.

Speaking to the Guardian earlier this year, other skeptics of the model 
legislation warned of its potential adverse impact.

“They intend to demean and shame a woman needing abortion,” said Kelly Baden, 
the policy director of the the Center for Reproductive Rights.

Elizabeth Nash, who tracks state restrictions on abortion for the Guttmacher 
Institute, a pro-abortion rights thinktank, said: “The language being used is 
all about trying to elevate the status of the fetus while questioning the 
women’s decision-making. It seems to me that the purpose of this legislation is 
to make accessing services as unpleasant as possible.”

What stands out to critics about Texas’ rule is its timing. The Texas health 
commission proposed the rule on 1 July, just days after the US supreme court 
struck down a health restriction that would have shuttered half of the state’s 
abortion clinics.

“They didn’t like the fact that they lost, and now they’re looking for new 
ways to limit women’s access to abortion care,” said Saporta.

In a fundraising email, Greg Abbott, Texas’ Republican governor, said the 
rules would “help make Texas the strongest pro-life state in the nation”.

Texas says its critics are blowing the impact of the rules out of proportion. 
The annual cost to each clinic probably won’t exceed $500, the state claims, 
because it will be offset by a reduction in medical waste disposal costs.

Will Trump cause progressives to forget about women's rights? | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/womens-rights-list-of-progressive-priorities-feminism>
But a spokesperson for the Texas Funeral Directors Association said 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2016/12/02/funeral-directors-anxious-over-texas-rule-fetal-re/>
 each burial could cost clinics and hospitals more than $1,000. (The way the 
rule is written, some believe that even remains that are cremated would have to 
then be interred.) He also worried that the rules could prove burdensome to 
funeral homes, which usually offer their services for free to parents who are 
grieving for a miscarriage and want to hold a funeral. If every miscarriage in 
the state were subject to these rules, he said, that practice could become 
unsustainable.

Saporta said she was confident that Whole Woman’s Health would prevail in 
court. TheJune supreme court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/abortion-advocates-supreme-court-victory-texas>
 that struck down several Texas restrictions held that states regulating 
abortion for health reasons had to show evidence that its regulations were 
medically necessary.

“There’s no health reason whatsoever for these requirements,” she said. “All 
the state health department wants to do is increase costs for women and make 
abortion care less accessible. It’s not even disguised as anything else.

“I think the courts will strike these laws down,” she continued. “But that 
doesn’t preclude other states from passing the same legislation, and wasting a 
lot of money and effort.”

 * This article was amended on 20 December 2016 to clarify that Charmaine 
Yoest is a former president of Americans United for Life.  