
A women’s rights group has filed a lawsuit in an attempt to block a new Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> rule that requires fetal remains to 
be cremated or buried.

Accusing the state of a politically motivated ploy to make it harder for women 
to have abortions, the Center for Reproductive Rights launched the legal action 
on Monday, one week before the regulation is set to take effect on 19 December.

The lawsuit against the Texas department of state health services (DSHS), 
filed in federal court in Austin, alleges that the regulation has no medical 
benefits, will pose practical burdens by increasing the cost of healthcare 
services and is an attempt to stigmatise abortion and heap shame on women 
seeking the procedure.

Ohio 'heartbeat' abortion bill could be test case for overturning Roe v Wade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/ohio-heartbeat-abortion-bill-test-case-roe-v-wade>
Whole Woman’s Health, an abortion provider, is the lead plaintiff in the suit. 
Itclaims 
<https://www.reproductiverights.org/sites/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/1-main.pdf>
 that the new regulation “burdens women seeking pregnancy-related medical care. 
It imposes a funeral ritual on women who have a miscarriage management 
procedure, ectopic pregnancy surgery, or an abortion.

“Further, it threatens women’s health and safety by providing no safe harbor 
for sending tissue to pathology or crime labs. It also forces healthcare 
providers to work with an extremely limited number of third-party vendors for 
burial or scattering ashes, threatening abortion clinics’ provision of care and 
their long-term ability to remain open, as well as cost increases for women 
seeking pregnancy-related medical care.”

Current Texas regulations on disposal by healthcare facilities do not 
generally distinguish between fetal remains and other kinds of human materials 
that would typically be disposed of in a sanitary landfill. The new rule 
changes that, creating a category for “fetal tissue” and ordering it be buried 
or cremated regardless of how far along the pregnancy is. Miscarriages or 
abortions that happen at home are exempt and birth or death certificates are 
not required to be issued.

The plan, strongly promoted by Texas’s Republican governor, Greg Abbott, was 
publicly announced last July, four days after thesupreme court struck down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/abortion-advocates-supreme-court-victory-texas>
 key parts of an onerous 2013 abortion law that prompted a drastic drop in the 
number of clinics in Texas. The court found that the law, which mandated that 
clinics have standards akin to surgical centres, caused an undue burden on 
women seeking an abortion and did not offer sufficient medical benefits. 
Abbott, though, has vowed to continue efforts to restrict abortion.

“I believe it is imperative to establish higher standards that reflect our 
respect for the sanctity of life. This is why Texas will require clinics and 
hospitals to bury or cremate human and fetal remains,” Abbott wrote in July in 
a fundraising email to supporters reported by the Texas Tribune. Hesaid 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2016/07/21/abbott-stakes-claim-rule-bury-or-cremate-fetal-rem/>
 the proposal would “help make Texas the strongest pro-life state in the 
nation”.

According to the DSHS, the rule will benefit public health and safety “by 
ensuring that the disposition methods specified in the rules continue to be 
limited to methods that prevent the spread of disease” and by “protecting the 
dignity of the unborn”. Texas’s Republican-dominated legislature is expected to 
formally enshrine the regulation in state law during the 2017 session, which 
starts in January.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftexas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189636f85785e7311bcaf818a913e22912dc7fde%2F0_8_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Texas%20rule%20requiring%20burial%20or%20cremation%20of%20fetal%20tissue%20shames%20women%2C%20suit%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftexas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Texas%20rule%20requiring%20burial%20or%20cremation%20of%20fetal%20tissue%20shames%20women%2C%20suit%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ftexas-fetal-remains-abortion-rights-lawsuit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189636f85785e7311bcaf818a913e22912dc7fde%2F0_8_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Texas governor Greg Abbott has said the proposal would ‘help make Texas the 
strongest pro-life state in the nation’. Photograph: Mike Stone/Reuters 
“These regulations are an insult to Texas women, the rule of law and the US 
supreme court, which declared less than six months ago that medically 
unnecessary restrictions on abortion access are unconstitutional,” Nancy 
Northup, president and CEO of the Center for Reproductive Rights, said in a 
statement. “These insidious regulations are a new low in Texas’ long history of 
denying women the respect that they deserve to make their own decision about 
their lives and their healthcare.”

The question of how to handle fetal remains became a rallying point for 
anti-abortion activists after an organisationreleased a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/25/planned-parenthood-grand-jury-indicts-anti-abortion-activists>
 in 2015 that falsely appeared to show employees at a Planned Parenthood clinic 
in Houston illegally selling fetal tissue.

Mike Pence, the Indiana governor and now vice-president elect, signed a 
restrictive abortion law in March that included a fetal remains provision 
similar to Texas’s plans. It wasstopped by a court 
<http://www.indystar.com/story/news/politics/2016/06/30/judge-grants-preliminary-injunction-indiana-abortion-law/86556662/>
 in June shortly before it was scheduled to take effect.

Another law in Louisiana is on hold because of a legal challenge.
 