
It’s 10 years since the release of Sideways, Alexander Payne’s surprise hit 
about two buddies who take a road trip through Santa Barbara wine country. And 
it’s 10 years since the fortunes of one particular varietal fell. Paul 
Giamatti’s outburst in the film –“If anybody orders merlot, I’m leaving. I am 
not drinking any fucking merlot” <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kiOuroHPxRQ> – 
saw sales drop dramatically and they remain depressed to this day. Meanwhile, 
sales of pinot noir, which gets a rhapsodic press in Sideways, shot up in 
parallel with box-office takings, and have climbed steadily ever since.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkiOuroHPxRQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkiOuroHPxRQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkiOuroHPxRQ&media=>
Now, after a decade of dryness, another film emerges in which alcohol plays a 
central role –though it’s potatoes, not grapes, that get their turn in the 
limelight.Leviathan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leviathan>, out in the UK 
this week, is a ferocious masterpiece that exposes the corruption endemic in 
contemporary Russia. And it’s absolutely pickled. Its characters glug vodka 
straight from the bottle, not the shot glass. They do so all the time – at 
business meetings, birthday picnics, even target practice. “Are you all right 
to drive?” one woman slurs at her husband as he lurches toward the door. “Of 
course,” he dribbles back. “I’m a traffic cop.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2oo7H25kirk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2oo7H25kirk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2oo7H25kirk&media=>
As Sideways <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sideways> showed, when movies 
take booze seriously, the audience is apt to put its money where its mouth is. 
So what, other than vodka, should off licences currently be stocking up on?

Champagne
 The Riot Club. Photograph: PR 
The moments before a meal aren’t usually too dramatic, so cinema tends to 
reserve bubbly for awkward toasts or dangerous displays of debauchery. Not so 
much of the former this year, but two classics of the latter. The whole opening 
reel ofWelcome to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/07/welcome-to-new-york-review-gerard-depardieu-abel-ferrara>
 is basically one bubble-fuelled bender, while the bacchanalian knees-up in The 
Riot Club sees a 10-bird roast washed down with Bolly. Cinema comforts those of 
us unable to afford fizz by showing that serious assault invariably follows 
such indulgence.

Sherry 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F31%2Fmr-turner-nightcrawler-the-overnighters-horns-video-reviews&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414753748864%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Mr%20Turner%2C%20Nightcrawler%2C%20The%20Overnighters%20and%20Horns%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F31%2Fmr-turner-nightcrawler-the-overnighters-horns-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Mr%20Turner%2C%20Nightcrawler%2C%20The%20Overnighters%20and%20Horns%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F31%2Fmr-turner-nightcrawler-the-overnighters-horns-video-reviews&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414753748864%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-014.jpg>
Timothy Spall’s grunts in Mr Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner> contain a world of emotion. 
Sometimes they mean: “I’m pleased to be home.” Sometimes they mean: “I love 
you.” Sometimes they mean: “Hopefully, this shade of cobalt will allow me to 
forge a new path and confound those critics who are so reductive about my 
vision.” Generally, though, they mean: “Keep it coming.” Turner fortifies 
himself throughout Mike Leigh’s biopic, most graphically at a dinner party in 
which he fondly collapses onEffie Ruskin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/29/ruskin-effie-marriage-inconvenience-brownell>
.

Limoncello

It’s seduction time in Paul Haggis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/06/paul-haggis-interview>’s new movie
Third Person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/11/third-person-review-toronto>. In 
a smoky bar, a sultry Romanian introduces an international businessman played 
by Adrien Brody to an erotic new tipple. Its name? Limoncello.

Cognac
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Ffury-jimi-serena-this-is-where-i-leave-you-film-video-reviews&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086622843%2FBrad-Pitt-in-Fury-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fury%2C%20Jimi%3A%20All%20is%20By%20My%20Side%2C%20Serena%20and%20This%20is%20Where%20I%20Leave%20You%3A%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Ffury-jimi-serena-this-is-where-i-leave-you-film-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fury%2C%20Jimi%3A%20All%20is%20By%20My%20Side%2C%20Serena%20and%20This%20is%20Where%20I%20Leave%20You%3A%20Guardian%20film%20show%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F24%2Ffury-jimi-serena-this-is-where-i-leave-you-film-video-reviews&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086622843%2FBrad-Pitt-in-Fury-014.jpg>
A nightcap to end all nightcaps for Brad Pitt’s tank squad in Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/24/fury-movie-tank-veteran-sherman-verdict-realistic>
. They pass round the dusty bottle, swiped from a top cellar, in anticipation 
of terrible onslaught. Drink deep, boys, Pitt urges. “We won’t be around for 
the hangover.” Cheers!

Beer
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fobvious-child-jenny-slate-romantic-comedy-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409302788847%2FJenny-Slate-and-Gillian-R-025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obvious%20Child%20star%20Jenny%20Slate%3A%20'I%20miss%20romantic%20comedies%20where%20women%20are%20complex'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fobvious-child-jenny-slate-romantic-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obvious%20Child%20star%20Jenny%20Slate%3A%20%27I%20miss%20romantic%20comedies%20where%20women%20are%20complex%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fobvious-child-jenny-slate-romantic-comedy-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409302788847%2FJenny-Slate-and-Gillian-R-025.jpg>
The basic movie shorthand for male bonding was employed this year in Bad 
Neighbours, Chef, Boyhood and a six-pack of others. Special mention to 
Interstellar, in whichMatthew McConaughey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/27/interstellar-first-look-review-matthew-mcconoughey>
 and father-in-law John Lithgow kick back with some stubbies on the front porch 
even as apocalypse approaches. And to The Homesman, which sees James Spader’s 
Great Plains hotelier refuse to serve the madwomen Tommy Lee Jones is 
escorting, though he’s happy to pour Tommy a tall one. Warning: women mustn’t 
touch the stuff. Jenny Slate gets pregnant after one night on the tiles in 
Obvious Child, while Reese Witherspoon’s ale night inWild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/28/walk-on-the-mild-side-wild-wilderness-movies>
 proves all men are predators.

Scotch
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F26%2F1393418469561%2FNon-Stop-stars-Julianne-M-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Non-Stop%20star%20Liam%20Neeson%3A%20'We%20all%20racial-profile'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Non-Stop%20star%20Liam%20Neeson%3A%20%27We%20all%20racial-profile%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F26%2F1393418469561%2FNon-Stop-stars-Julianne-M-014.jpg>
Nothing says crisis quicker than someone ordering whisky. In Calvary, it’s 
this thatBrendan Gleeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>’s 
priest turns to when he wants to fall off the wagon fast. Recovering alcoholic 
air marshall Liam Neeson has his on the rocks in Non-Stop, while Sam Rockwell 
and Keira Knightley turn up flirty and thirsty at a bar that’s about to close 
in Say When. Solution: whisky chasers.

Cocktails

Traditionally the preserve of the ensemble female comedy, this year cocktails 
have been commandeered by old codgers.Last Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/last-vegas> treated us to the sight of 
Michael Douglas supping a pint of pina colada, while Bill Murray’s benign old 
soak in St Vincent shows inner sophistication through mixers.

Liquor in disguise

A recipe for disaster. The abusive stepfather in Boyhood swigs vodka from a 
Sprite beaker before sitting down to a family supper. An angry teen fills a 
Sunny Delight bottle with wine then goes driving in Say When. Special shout-out 
to Susan Sarandon, who dabbles in deceptive drinks in two movies this year: 
first, as the sozzled nan keen on casual sex and spirits from a slushie cup in 
dud comedy Tammy; second, as a cop in The Calling who copes with the knocks by 
making all her coffees Irish.

• Leviathan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leviathan> is out in the UK on 7 
November
 