
It is fitting that a new Bretton Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/brettonwoods> is being discussed 
now. The original Bretton Woods institutions were created after the second 
world war in recognition of the fact that even developed countries can 
experience liquidity crises and that global efforts are required for economic 
development. In the throes of the current, formidable economic crisis, it is 
appropriate to consider the ways in which theinternational economic system can 
be reformed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/financetopics/financialcrisis/3187467/Financial-crisis-is-man-made-catastrophe-says-World-Bank-chief.html>
 to govern globalised financial markets and inter-linked economies.
Although there have been calls for some time for the current international 
financial institutions (IFIs) to be more representative of emerging economies, 
it took this financial crisis to underscore the extent to which the global 
economic structure has changed. Namely, the global imbalances which permitted 
the west to access cheap credit despite its low saving rates, particularly the 
US and the UK. The worst banking crisis since theGreat Depression 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Depression> strongly suggests that a global 
rules-based system is necessary to oversee financial markets and coordinate 
economic management. The issues are rather different from those of the Bretton 
Woods era, and would require further development of international economic 
institutions and laws to govern an increasingly multi-polar world economy.

A new Bretton Woods has to be accommodative of the shifting global economic 
weight toward emerging economies, but also able to act quickly to stabilise 
financial markets. This would require promulgating international economic law 
and regulations as well as reforming the current international financial 
institutions, such as theIMF <http://www.imf.org/external/index.htm>. 

The financial crisis has revealed the extent of the inter-linkages among 
markets, making it apparent that cross-border dealings require regulation. For 
instance, there should be an international clearing house for financial 
transactions and also a body to monitor cross-border capital flows. The latter 
of which could be under the auspices of an institution like theBank for 
International Settlements <http://www.bis.org/> (or BIS, which is the central 
banks' bank) with power to demand greater transparency in financial dealings in 
all major markets.

This need not be more burdensome than what national regulations already 
require, though clearly reform is needed there as well. The resultant 
multi-level system of governance could be modelled after federal regulatory 
systems such as in the US. However, regulation cannot be the entire answer, as 
active engagement by regulators will always be needed since written rules are 
unlikely to keep up with innovative markets. In a new Bretton Woods system, 
there should be regulators operating under the auspices of an international 
regulatory framework to monitor world markets.

Second, banks are indeed global or at least regional, as in Europe, so there 
should be a coordinated and efficient deposit insurance scheme up to a widely 
accepted limit so that confidence is assured and bank runs are not a 
possibility even if there are bank failures, as is the system in the US.

Third, the existing international institutions continue to have important 
roles, but need reform, including expanding their memberships to reflect the 
shift of global economic power to the east. Even before this crisis, there was 
much talk about increasing transparency and accountability in the IMF in 
particular. As a provider of liquidity when countries are in trouble, it is 
telling thatIceland 
<http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5itQzswxi7QzOQgTSZpEYHznhE3wAD93LL6DG0> and 
Pakistan 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/pakistan/3222412/China-to-bail-out-near-bankrupt-Pakistan.html>
 were reluctant to seek their assistance and turned instead to the emerging 
powers of Russia and China, respectively.

Similar reforms to strengthen the mandate of the World Bank would also be 
warranted. Fourth, a likely response to looming national recession is an 
increase in protectionist sentiment, evidenced in theSmoot-Hawley Act 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ho/time/id/17606.htm> passed in the US in the great 
depression which had the effect of slowing global trade and worsening the 
economic downturn. Any new Bretton Woods system should encompass reforms to the
World Trade Organisation <http://www.wto.org/> (WTO). The WTO helps to 
establish a rules-based system for trade and should work to ensure that trade 
is not disrupted by protectionist tendencies that can arise in times of crisis. 
Its operation in the past decade suggests that it is a fairly efficient forum 
for resolving disputes, though theDoha round 
<http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news08_e/agric_15oct08_e.htm> extending its 
coverage to more traded goods and services has stalled. Enhancing the WTO 
should be part of any new system so that rules rather than power (and politics) 
are the premise of international trade; in other words, the development of 
international economic law.

Finally, an international body or forum cannot force its mandate on sovereign 
nations, but must appeal to the mutual self-interest of countries in 
maintaining stability by, for instance, monitoring the development of the 
so-called global imbalances which led to excess liquidity and mis-priced risk. 
The onus cannot entirely be on one country, as macroeconomic forces are 
intertwined, eg if the US didn't consume so much, then China would not be such 
a significant lender.

A new set of Bretton Woods institutions that identified these economic flows 
and assessed their consequences would help policymakers coordinate responses to 
try and lean against future asset bubbles. Indeed, the next one could be in 
emerging economies as cheap currencies and trapped domestic savings fuel 
housing bubbles even as interest rate cuts to stimulate the west promote global 
liquidity searching for the next investment opportunity, which will be in Asia 
in the next couple of years. It is therefore in the interest of all countries 
to have a system of international economic law and associated institutions, and 
a new Bretton Woods would be a positive legacy of this financial crisis.
 