
Buried in the detail of the Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
Accord could be some innocuous-looking words that will have a powerful impact 
on whether it ever delivers the greenhouse gas reductions it promises.


The words could “paper over” deep divisions about whether countries ever have 
to properly report and account for the promised emission reductions that 
collectively limit global warming to thealready-dangerous 2.7 degrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/10/climate-2c-global-warming-target-fail>
.

Key to the negotiations will be a trade off between developing countries’ 
demands for financing to reduce their own emissions and adapt to locked-in 
climate change and the insistence by both rich nations like the United States 
and climate-vulnerable countries like the small island states that every 
country should be required to at least work towards the same rules for 
reporting and checking their emission reductions.

Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
Since the pledges in the Paris Accord will not be legally binding and the more 
stringent rules applied to developed countries under the Kyoto Protocol are 
almost certain to lapse in five years, the direction set for this new set of 
reporting and checking rules is important to ensure the agreement delivers what 
it promises for the climate.

Countries like India claim the existing rules under the overarching UN 
framework convention on climate change are fine.

Dr Ajay Mathur, director general of the Bureau of Energy Efficiency 
<https://beeindia.gov.in/> in Delhi, said there was “no need to spend time 
again negotiating new reporting guidelines and rules when we already have rules 
that apply to everybody and give necessary flexibility to developing countries.”

But those rules have far softer requirements for how and what developing 
countries report about their emission reductions. They do not require 
comprehensive reporting and do not force countries to detail how they are 
tracking towards the target they have pledged or to project their future 
greenhouse gas emissions. And the system for “expert review” of developing 
country reports is far less onerous than the in-country checking for developed 
nations.

Bill Hare, chief executive of Climate Analytics, said allowing the current 
system to continue was “not feasible” and would represent a “complete failure 
at the Paris talks”.

“It would mean we couldn’t check or track what developing countries are 
doing,” he said. “There would be no way of knowing what was happening.”

Transparency is a “red line” issue for countries like the United States and 
Australia. They are willing for common requirements to be phased in and for 
poor countries to get extra help to develop the systems they need to comply 
with the new rules, but are determined that the goal must be a common system.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhy-world-ready-tackle-climate-change-video-animation&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%2060-second%20guide%20to%20why%20the%20Paris%20climate%20summit%20will%20succeed%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhy-world-ready-tackle-climate-change-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%2060-second%20guide%20to%20why%20the%20Paris%20climate%20summit%20will%20succeed%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fwhy-world-ready-tackle-climate-change-video-animation&media=>
It would not include penalties or have any means to force compliance, but it 
would – eventually – provide a reasonably clear picture of what emissions 
reductions each country had achieved.

And that, in turn, would create the trust necessary for countries to increase 
the ambition of their emission reduction targets over time, to bring global 
emissions to the level that might contain warming to 2 degrees or lower.

President Obama made America’s position clear in his Paris speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/obama-calls-paris-climate-talks-an-act-defiance-wake-recent-attacks>
.

“Here in Paris, let’s agree to a strong system of transparency that gives each 
of us the confidence that all of us are meeting our commitments. And let’s make 
sure that the countries who don’t yet have the full capacity to report on their 
targets receive the support that they need,” he said.

But developing countries like India and Saudi Arabia are adamant different 
reporting rules are enshrined in the 1992 convention’s recognition of the 
principle of “differentiation” between the responsibilities placed on rich and 
poor nations.

In his speech to the conference, Indian prime minister Narendra Modi said a 
“common but differentiated” responsibility had to “remain the bedrock” of the 
agreement because anything else would be morally wrong.

The US has said it “would not support a bifurcated approach to the new 
agreement, particularly one based on groupings that may have made sense in 1992 
but that are clearly not rational or workable in the post‐2020 era”.

Nozipho Mxakato-Diseko, ambassador from South Africa and chair of the 
G77+China negotiating bloc said differentiation was “embedded ... and we should 
not have to renegotiate it here.”

Christiana Figueres: the woman tasked with saving the world from global warming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/27/christiana-figueres-the-woman-tasked-with-saving-the-world-from-global-warming>
She objected to the “narrative” on transparency rules that cast poor countries 
as “villains” and also to the idea that rich countries’ promises on finance 
would be conditional on poor countries’ acceptance of common transparency rules.

“Conditionality erodes trust ... it is not a responsible way to go,” she said.

The Paris Accord will not finalise the reporting and review rules but it will 
set a direction. Rich countries want a path to a credible, common system. The 
alternative is wording papering over the fact that the current stand-off 
remains unresolved.

According to the deputy chief executive of The Climate Institute, Erwin 
Jackson, “the danger in that outcome is that we continue the procedural battle 
we are currently seeing forever. It gives countries who want to weaken the 
process an opportunity to continue to throw spanners in the works for years to 
come.”


Richard Chatterton, head of climate policy for Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 
said differentiation was the issue that could “derail” the Paris talks.


He said the most likely outcome was the conference would find “wording” that 
“effectively sweeps differentiation under the carpet”, meaning it would be 
fought out for years to come.

 