
1) Andre Agassi

No great professional athlete truly hates their sport. That would be 
impossible. No one can fake those hours of workouts and practice. But there are 
players who love sports more than others, whose lives become the game they play 
for a living. This is about those others, the ones who were either never 
consumed by their sport or came – for a time – to despise it.

Agassi wouldn’t be the first athlete to say he had been shoved into a sport by 
an overzealous parent. Tennis is loaded with players who were shipped off to 
camps as children to be force-fed an existence of rackets and bouncing yellow 
balls. But while other tennis players hid their occasional boredom with the 
game, Agassi wore it openly. He was one of the most perplexing star athletes of 
his time. He came from Las Vegas and seemed every bit a product of his hometown 
where nothing is real.

No one seemed to know who Agassi was. He contradicted himself often in his 
career, defined early by his‘Image is Everything’ ad campaign 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WpuFEpbE0d0> for Canon cameras – a period when 
he became more about what he wore than how he played. No time was more 
disturbing thanhis denim tennis shorts phase. 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-UwxjgaKxTDo/T5vdMAVzodI/AAAAAAAAACY/n4R7be5yGjA/s1600/andre-agassi-wig-admission.jpg>
 Throughout his playing days Agassi portrayed himself as caring more about 
celebrity and less about actually playing tennis, then months later he would 
say he was misunderstood.

So it is hard to know how serious Agassi was in his 2009 autobiography Open 
when he wrote“I play tennis for a living though I hate tennis, hate it with a 
dark and secret passion, always have.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/29/andre-agassi-hate-tennis> Was 
this an admission? A ploy to sell books? Or the words of his co-author? With 
Agassi you never knew. Mystery surrounded him. If he really hated tennis it
didn’t show as he grew older <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xqLfan0R0b8>. 
Looks became less of his game and he became the world’s best player, at one 
point finishing his career with eight major titles and an Olympic gold medal.

Hardly the life of a man who hated tennis. 

2) Chris Kluwe

A few years ago, I visited Kluwe in Minnesota when he was still the Vikings 
punter. Early in the conversation he revealed that he didn’t like football 
much. Given his intense interest in gaming (the television in his living room 
was only for games and not connected to cable),the fact he painted figurines 
from games during downtime at Vikings practices 
<https://ablogoftheirown.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/kluwe-figurines.jpg> and 
the time spent with his bandTripping Icarus 
<https://www.facebook.com/trippingicarus>, his lack of excitement for football 
was understandable.

Kluwe grew up playing soccer as the genius son of a doctor and a scientist. 
Years later, his mother Sandy would sigh when talking about her boy who picked 
football and say:“He could have found a cure for cancer ... and he’s not.” 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/nfl/news?slug=lc-carpenter_chris_kluwe_punter_guitarist_twitter_101111>
 Football was almost an accident. His high school team needed a kicker and he 
could kick. It wasn’t his fault he wound up being good at it.

Perhaps the best Kluwe story came from his wife Isabel, who was a freshman 
working in UCLA’s football office when Kluwe committed to the school as a high 
school senior. She took a liking to Kluwe and sat next to him and his father 
when they came to Bruins games that season before he came to college. But when 
the games started, Kluwe would pull out a book and read, leaving his father and 
Isabel to talk and watch the game that UCLA’s football recruit showed little 
interest in seeing.

Though Kluwe had several good seasons punting for the Vikings, where he played 
for eight years, he became more famous for the things he did away from football 
– namely his vocal support of gay marriage. The Vikings did not seem to like 
having an activist punter and cut him in 2013. A few months later he retired 
from football, probably one of the few ex-NFL players who did not anguish over 
giving up the game.

3) Joe DiMaggio

The only baseball player who might surpass DiMaggio’s prominence in American 
culture is Babe Ruth. No one elsemarried this actress 
<http://www.arts-stew.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/Marilyn-Monroe-and-Joe-DiMaggio-on-their-wedding-day-January-14-1954-.jpg>
, inspiredthis song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kjdzKJZ816c> or this song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yIHe6j_G50> or sold this. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RY70W4WGh78> His 56-game hitting streak in 
1941 may never be topped. Neither might his significance as the graceful 
Yankees center fielder who made the hardest plays look simple. Yet he never 
seemed to play with passion. He was an aloof star, praised in history for never 
showing much emotion … perhaps because he never felt great joy as a baseball 
player.

But Richard Ben Cramer’s 2001 biography of DiMaggio: The Hero’s Life described 
a young man in San Francisco who was not motivated to play baseball, watching 
instead as the other boys played in local parks.“It was a means of making 
money, he didn’t think of it as anything other than that,” 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/11/30/367269367/happy-birthday-to-joltin-joe-who-didnt-even-like-baseball>
 Jerome Charyn, the author of Joe DiMaggio: The Long Vigil told NPR in 2014.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b93b0a068f64fe3c1ef7c700be27d52547d3425%2F0_16_3000_1798%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Athletes%20who%20hated%20sports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Athletes%20who%20hated%20sports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b93b0a068f64fe3c1ef7c700be27d52547d3425%2F0_16_3000_1798%2F3000.jpg>
 Joe DiMaggio knew there’s more to life than baseball. Photograph: AP 
DiMaggio wouldn’t be alone, especially today. Many baseball players have come 
slowly to the sport or admit they are not fans of it. Florida Marlins second 
baseman Dee Gordon grew up the son of a big league pitcher, Tom Gordon and yet 
he still didn’t like baseball as a child saying:“There were no girls at 
baseball games (in high school), why should I play baseball?” 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/video/dee-gordon-never-wanted-to-play-baseball> 
Recently Washington Nationals infielder Anthony Rendoncalled baseball “boring.” 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/baseball-player-baseball-is-long-and-boring>

DiMaggio never appeared bored with baseball. but he didn’t seemed enamored 
either. His detachment was part of his appeal but it made him complicated too. 
He died in 1999, a man consumed with money and his image, demanding later in 
life to be called “Baseball’s Greatest Living Player” at all public functions.

4) Elena Delle Donne

Today Delle Donne is one of the top players in the WNBA. Efficiency statistics 
sayone of the best seasons 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2015/08/heres-a-reminder-that-elena-delle-donne-is-having-one-of-the-best-seasons-in-pro-basketball-history>
 a professional player in the US – male or female – has ever had. Given the 
ease with which she plays, using her 6ft 5in height to power over smaller 
players while also being accurate shooting outside, it’s easy to forget she 
once quit the game, refusing to pick up a ball for months.

This came after high school, after three years of recruiting battles that 
drained her of her passion for playing. When she showed up to the University of 
Connecticut for her freshman year, she saw the amount of time she would have to 
commit to basketball and felt … nothing. She missed her family in Delaware, 
especially her sister who has cerebral palsy.“I blamed basketball for taking me 
away from home,” 
<http://blogs.courant.com/uconn_womens_basketball/2009/10/a-new-start-for-elena-delle-do.html>
 she said in 2009. “I hated the sport. Every time I played basketball I felt 
sick to my stomach. I didn’t realize that feeling was having to leave my family 
– having to leave my sister who can’t even communicate with me when I’m gone.”

After two days at UConn she returned home, enrolled at the University of 
Delaware where she played volleyball. A year later, she went back to basketball 
and found she could love it again. Now she is three seasons into a professional 
career with the WNBA’s Chicago Sky where she has grow into of the league’s most 
dominant players.

5) Benoit Assou-Ekotto
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e972d1b1ee6a9b49bb0ea0ddcf0697a30c4aa89%2F70_0_2559_3833%2F2559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Athletes%20who%20hated%20sports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20Athletes%20who%20hated%20sports&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-who-hated-sports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e972d1b1ee6a9b49bb0ea0ddcf0697a30c4aa89%2F70_0_2559_3833%2F2559.jpg>
 Benoit Assou-Ekotto is over it. Photograph: Tony O'Brien/Action Images 
The possessor of some of the finest hair in sports, the left back from France 
who played internationally for Cameroon always seemed tormented in his 
near-decade with Tottenham Hotspur. He spoke often of his honesty which was 
usually blunt and dramatic, but he was also interesting and thoughtful.

He seemed to find the Premier League to be a vain place and sometimes 
expressed his boredom with playing in England, despite the fact he was well 
compensated to do so.“I don’t say I hate football but it’s not my passion,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/01/benoit-assou-ekotto-tottenham-hotspur>
 he confessed in 2010. He said he played for the money. Some would say he was 
simply being one of the most honest athletes around, but it’s hard to watch 
Assou-Ekotto play and believe he is passionless about the sport.

6) Anthony Perkins

Perkins, of course, was never an athlete but an actor most famous for playing 
Norman Bates in Psycho. Still Perkins once famously played an athlete in the 
1957 story about baseball player Jimmy Piersall called Fear Strikes Out. 
Perkins, it turns out, hated baseball and hated sports in general. This was a 
challenge because the movie called for him to actually play baseball. The fact 
he looks and acts like a ballplayer in the movie is part of what sets it apart 
from countless other sports movies whose action looks forced and awkward.

“Tony wasn’t an athlete, he couldn’t throw a ball,” 
<http://www.tcm.com/this-month/article/118146%7C0/Fear-Strikes-Out.html> his 
co-star Karl Malden later said. The film crew brought in a baseball player, 
Tommy Holmes, to teach Perkins to throw. Part of the problem, Malden told 
Turner Classic Movies that Perkins was left-handed and was trying to play a 
ballplayer who threw right. Eventually, Perkins learned to throw and his 
portrayal of Piersall, who had a nervous breakdown as a player, was outstanding.

Meaning sometimes a hatred of sports, just like fear, strikes out. 
 