
Arnold Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer> wasn’t 
particularly happy with his short game. There were only a couple of days to go 
before the start of the 30th Masters Tournament, and he was already struggling 
to make his wedges and putter talk on glacial greens which were only going to 
get faster once the Augusta greenkeeper took one last wheel around the place on 
his mower.

Masters 2016: the five Ps that can win the Green Jacket at Augusta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/06/masters-2016-five-ps-green-jacket-augusta-national-golf>
So shortly after breakfast on Tuesday morning, Palmer set off in his personal 
twin-engine jet to Chattanooga, a couple of hundred miles away. He collected a 
new pitching wedge and a couple of putters, made some alterations to the wedge 
he was already using, and was back at Augusta National in time for coffee at 
elevenses. The most expensive club repair of all time? Probably. But certainly 
the most stylish. You have got to love Arnie.

The gentle whimsy of Palmer’s 500mph groove-tweaking jaunt was, sad to say, 
not the sole aviation story that required reporting on the eve of the Masters. 
Tragedy struck the defending champion Jack Nicklaus hours before he was due to 
tee off, when he was told four close friends from his home town of Columbus, 
Ohio, including childhood playing partner Bob Barton, had been killed in a 
plane crash en route to Augusta. “I’m heart sick,” whispered a crestfallen 
Nicklaus. “Bob and I grew up together. We started playing golf together. I’ve 
lost a great friend.” Still, the show had to go on, and he made an earnest 
promise: “This tragedy has made me much more determined in what I hope to do 
this week.”

As ever at Augusta, the stars of yesteryear were in attendance. Here’s the 
legendary Guardian writer Pat Ward-Thomas, with a contemporaneous roll call of 
“the old masters whose golf down the generations has given the occasion its 
stature … the imperishable spirit of Bob Jones has overcome his grievous 
affliction and he is in his cottage across the way by the last green … the 
ageless Gene Sarazen … Craig Wood, so youthful looking and handsome that it is 
hard to believe he tied for the Open at St Andrews more than 30 years ago … the 
great Byron Nelson who this afternoon was presented with a replica of the Ryder 
Cup by his team … Jimmy Demaret, Cary Middlecoff, Sam Snead and Ben Hogan, the 
mightiest of all, the shots pure as the light still gleaming from his clubs. 
His presence is no sentimental gesture.”

Ward-Thomas had that damn straight. “I am not here for sentimental reasons,” 
confirmed the 53-year-old, nine-time major winning, two-time Augusta-taming 
Iceman. “I am here to win.”

Also raging against the dying of the light, albeit in a more gentle form, were 
the 1908 US Open champion Fred McLeod and Jock Hutchinson, winner of the Open 
Championship in 1921, the first American to do so, albeit a naturalised one, 
born and raised in St Andrews. (Amazingly, that Open win was very nearly not 
Hutchinson’s most notable feat that year. During his march to the Championship, 
he came breathtakingly close to recording two hole in ones in a row, having 
aced the 8th before hitting his drive at the short par-four 9th to a couple of 
inches. But we digress.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f9cecc73c0ddd2de11d2f706553454350b4830%2F296_585_1868_1868%2F1868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f9cecc73c0ddd2de11d2f706553454350b4830%2F296_585_1868_1868%2F1868.jpg>
 Jack Nicklaus presents the green jacket to himself after winning the 
tournament twice in a row. Photograph: Augusta National/Getty Images 
McLeod and Hutchinson, octogenarians both, creamed ceremonial opening drives 
down Tea Olive, then played the front nine for stakes of a beer a hole.

With the 1966 Masters under way, the grieving but steel-willed Nicklaus took 
early control.

He had been woefully out of form, having failed to win a tournament in six 
months. (And they say Jordan Spieth has problems.) “He’s not playing at all 
well at the moment,” the pre-tournament favourite Gary Player told the 
Observer. But Nicklaus shook it all off to start nervelessly. A fine 
four-under-par opening card of 68 meant he was the only player in the 
103-strong field to shoot a sub-70 round, on a day of unpredictable and strong 
winds. At one point Billy Casper took a small pinch out of the Augusta fairway 
and tossed it into the sky to test the breeze, only for the entire handful to 
fly back into his startled face. “I ate some grass out there today,” he 
laughed, in good spirits after shooting a 71 that put him joint second 
alongside Don January, Mike Souchak and the amateur Charles Coe. Palmer, whose 
trip to Chattanooga looked to have been in vain, his wedge still playing up, 
shot 74. As did Player.

As, indeed, did Hogan, who had been one under through 13, only to falter with 
bogeys at 14, 16 and 17.

Nicklaus had by this point shot seven successive sub-par rounds at Augusta. 
But he couldn’t make it eight. He faded dramatically on Friday, shooting a 
four-over-par 76 while copping – though studiously ignoring – constant abuse 
from Arnie’s highly partial Army, a semi-regular feature of major tournaments 
back then. Jack’s putter was stone cold: he took five three-putts, and missed 
seven times from inside five feet. “I can’t remember the last time I putted so 
horribly,” he sighed. The 76 was his worst round at Augusta since he shot the 
same score on his very first attempt as a 19-year-old amateur in the 1959 
Masters. Ominously for the field, his spirit remained unbroken. “Outside of 
that putting, I played pretty darn good. But you have to play a bad round here 
sometime, and I had mine.”

Palmer, his short game for a while much improved – perhaps that 500mph 
round-trip wasn’t such a bad idea after all – reached the turn in 32. But he 
made three bogeys on the back nine and had to settle for a slightly 
disappointing 70. “That’s been my trouble lately,” he cried. “I’ve been playing 
one good nine and one bad nine.” Hogan by contrast was the model of 
consistency, hitting all but one green in regulation for a smooth and steady 
71. So after 36 holes, the 1951 and 1953 winner Hogan was two off the lead; the 
reigning champ Nicklaus was one off it, alongside the 1958, 1960, 1962 and 1964 
victor Palmer. Some leaderboard, huh.

But at the very top at the halfway mark were a couple of slightly less stellar 
individuals: Paul Harney of Massachusetts, who shot a second-round 68 despite 
five and six at the par-four 10th and 11th; and Peter Butler of Birmingham, who 
birdied 12 to move into red figures for the tournament, then stayed there, 
coming home with a steady run of pars. At one under for the tournament, Butler 
and Harney were the only men in the field below par.

The final day’s play, like much of what had gone before, would not be of the 
highest quality. But it sure was exciting

The British, sadly, wouldn’t get a handle on the Masters for another couple of 
decades at least. On day three Butler made an awful balls of the two shortest 
par fours on the course. At the 3rd, he left his approach short, duffed a chip, 
and three putted for a double-bogey six.

Another double at 7, and he was out in 40. Back in 39, his bid was all over. 
Harney too let himself down, bogeying four holes in a row – 9, 10, 11 and 12 – 
and ended with a 76.

Butler would finish the tournament in a tie for 13th, and is now best 
remembered for a couple of top-10 finishes in the Open during the 1970s, plus 
the first-ever hole in one at a Ryder Cup in 1973. Harney ended the week tied 
for eighth, his third of four top-10 Masters finishes in the 1960s. High 
quality work, but even high quality isn’t enough of a guarantee around Augusta.

The third round was unspectacular. Nicklaus led the way for most of it, but 
bogeyed 17 and 18 to sign for a 72. Palmer went round in 74, having thinned a 
three-wood into Rae’s Creek at 13.

Hogan – who went round with Arnie, commanding the majority of the day’s 
gallery – went one better with a 73. (Arnie later admitted to easing off the 
gas when driving in Hogan’s meticulous presence. “I was just trying to keep the 
ball in the fairway and keep from being embarrassed,” he respectfully 
explained.) By the end of the day, Nicklaus was tying for the lead at level par 
for the tournament with Tommy Jacobs, who had shot an impressive but unexciting 
70. January was one behind, with Palmer, Hogan and Gay Brewer a further shot 
back. It was on!

The final day’s play, like much of what had gone before, would not be of the 
highest quality.

But it sure was exciting. Nicklaus went out last with Hogan (whose energy ran 
out, the old boy finishing with a disappointing 77). The Golden Bear initially 
looked like losing an ongoing tussle with a recalcitrant hook over the early 
part of his round, dropping shots at 1, 4 and 7.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4ed03e2420ceead394fbc0252039301e41e067a%2F482_147_1535_1535%2F1535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4ed03e2420ceead394fbc0252039301e41e067a%2F482_147_1535_1535%2F1535.jpg>
 Jack Nicklaus watches his ball drop into the hole for a birdie on the 6th 
green during the 1966 Masters play-off. Photograph: AP 
Those bogeys were offset by birdies at 2 and 8, but he made the turn in 37 
strokes, by which point he was trailing Palmer, who with birdies at 7 and 8 had 
gone out in 34, and the new leader Brewer, who alongside his playing partner 
Arnie had taken only 33 strokes over the front nine.

Palmer couldn’t keep it going on the way home. He took three putts from short 
distance on the par-three 12th, birdied the par-five 13th, but handed the shot 
straight back again at 14 and failed to repair the damage on the long 15th. 
Pushing hard, he drove into trouble at the last and bogeyed. A 72. His recent 
sequence of winning the Masters every other year, started in 1958, had come to 
an end.

Nicklaus looked to be out of it after a bogey at 10, but birdies at 14 and 15 
hauled him back into the picture. The other overnight leader, Jacobs, had 
dropped shots at 8 and 10, but bounced back with birdies at 13 and 15. Brewer, 
meanwhile, parred his way from 10 through to 17. He would reach the clubhouse 
first. At one point he had enjoyed a three-shot lead over Nicklaus and Jacobs 
but, standing on the 18th tee, was now only one stroke ahead of the pair at one 
under.

It still could have – probably should have – been enough. Brewer creamed his 
drive down the middle of 18. Faced with a simple nine-iron approach, he took a 
flier to the back of the green, and couldn’t get down in two from 60 feet. A 
bogey at the last. His 70 brought him to level par, alongside Nicklaus and 
Jacobs, still out on the course.

Jacobs made a routine par on 17, then pushed his drive at 18 into trees. The 
ball ricocheted back out onto the fairway, a lucky break. But he was left with 
a mammoth 220 yards to the green. And here comes the shot of the week: a 
whipped four-wood to 20 feet under the most extreme pressure. Two solid putts 
later for par, and he had tied with Brewer. Jacobs was in a play-off – unless 
Nicklaus, the last contender still out there, could magic up a birdie.

Nicklaus should have come up with the goods. On 16, he gave himself a makeable 
12-footer, but didn’t threaten the cup. Then on 17, he eased a glorious 
nine-iron to three feet, but by his own admission, years later, misread the 
break and made a poor stroke, the ultimate double whammy. His putter had let 
him down yet again. So golf being golf, he very nearly drained a 40-footer on 
the last for birdie and outright victory. But his ball drifted off to the left 
at the very last turn. “The best putt I ever hit that didn’t go in the hole,” 
he later reckoned.The Masters <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/masters> would 
go to a three-way play-off.

Jacobs, who had hung around without ever getting into a position to go for the 
win, seemed happy enough. But neither Nicklaus nor Brewer were quite so 
relaxed. In the moment, Nicklaus had yet to come to terms with his putting 
error on 17. “I hit a good putt,” he lied to the press, but mainly to himself. 
“The break isn’t there.” Brewer meantime was straight to the point: “I’m 
depressed.”

Brewer would be thoroughly miserable after the Monday 18-hole play-off. He 
shot a six-over 78, out of contention pretty much from the get-go. Jacobs kept 
pace with Nicklaus until he approached the turn, before dropping shots at 9, 10 
and 12. Nicklaus dropped shots at 9 and 12 too, but picked one up at 11 after 
tickling in a 25-foot downhiller. (He had reconfigured his putting mechanism 
the previous evening after watching footage of himself on television. To 
celebrate his solving of a problem that had bugged him all week, he went home 
and ate three and a half tenderloins.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fd671e46adfe70074ef54e1b6f040f98f22f8aa%2F0_243_3360_2056%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20the%201966%20Masters%20%7C%20Scott%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fforgotten-story-1966-masters-scott-murray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fd671e46adfe70074ef54e1b6f040f98f22f8aa%2F0_243_3360_2056%2F3360.jpg>
 Jack Nicklaus and his Caddie Willie Peterson show their delight after a putt 
at the 1966 Masters. Photograph: Augusta National/Getty Images 
That birdie on 11 was the momentum shifter. Jack was two clear of Jacobs, and 
from that position matched his closest rival shot for shot over the closing 
holes. In doing so, he became the first man to win back-to-back Green Jackets. 
He draped his new one over his shoulders himself.

A slight air of anticlimax, then, though the members of the Augusta gallery 
were excitable enough. On CBS Television, the commentator Jack Whitaker 
referred to the patrons circling the 18th green with a word Clifford Roberts, 
the notoriously stern Augusta National chairman, didn’t particularly like. 
“Here comes the mob!” trilled Whitaker, as the gallery made its jaunty way up 
the last fairway for the denouement. Whitaker then compounded his error by 
failing to mention that Nicklaus would be awarded the Green Jacket on the 
practice green, even though CBS would not be covering the ceremony, as Walter 
Cronkite was waiting to read the news. A piqued Roberts encouraged CBS to 
replace Whitaker for the following year’s event, though the broadcaster was 
eventually allowed back to work the Masters beat in 1972.

There would be a quicker reprieve for Brewer, though. Having passed up a 
glorious chance to win the Masters, the poor man had been roundly written off 
as a player who could never possibly bounce back from such a bitter 
disappointment.Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> being golf, the 
very next year Brewer birdied 13, 14 and 15 on Sunday to claim the coveted 
Green Jacket, a stroke ahead of the former PGA champion Bobby Nichols. “I may 
be the happiest man in history,” smiled an emotionally spent Brewer when asked 
to sum up his very popular victory. “I’m choking up!”

As for Nicklaus, chasing three in a row? He shot a second-day 79 and became 
the first defending champion to miss the cut. Nobody’s perfect.
 