
The textiles industry is revolting. It causes 10% of the planet’s carbon 
footprint, while the dyeing and treatment of textiles is responsible for 17% of 
all industrial water pollution. Cotton uses 3% of global water, and the damage 
from cotton farming is $83bn. This eco cost is partially offset by longevity: a 
bath sheet should be in service for 10 years. I’m serious. So I was distressed 
to hear that 4,000 Wimbledon towels had been nicked as souvenirs by players. I 
make an appeal to Djokovic, Williams, Murray et al: please keep them towels in 
service.

Every time you make a purchasing decision, you’re also making a production 
decision, so when you come to replace towels and bed linen, go for organic. 
Currently, just 1% of the world’s cotton is organic. Let’s get that higher. 
Growing organic cotton is a far more responsible use of farmable land and fresh 
water, than conventional. TheTextile Exchange <http://textileexchange.org/> 
surveyed 82,000 hectares of land in 2014 and found reduced global-warming 
potential, lower soil erosion, less water use and less energy demand from 
organic, as opposed to conventional, cotton growers.

A good project can lead to change for farming communities. The Chetna Organic 
<http://www.chetnaorganic.org.in/> coalition in India unites 20 brands 
collaborating with 7,000 organic and Fairtrade cotton farmers (it started with 
200). The fruits of these looms are available atethicalshop.org 
<http://ethicalshop.org/> in the UK. There’s a good range of organic bed and 
bath linens certified byGots <http://www.global-standard.org/> (global organic 
textile standard) atgreenfibres.co.uk <http://www.greenfibres.com/>.

I can get emotional about cotton towels (so can US brand Boll & Branch 
<https://www.bollandbranch.com/>, whose blog features polemics such as “the 
truth about thread counts”). This is because conventional cotton represents the 
worst of globalisation, but organic cotton could be transformative, connecting 
us to the farmers of Burkina Faso or Gujurat and making a huge difference in 
their lives. Not many everyday products offer that promise.

The big picture: The Commonality of Strangers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1604701bcbfbd29be7a03440ba0357f4232efc43%2F0_0_1134_756%2F1134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20cotton%20towels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20cotton%20towels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1604701bcbfbd29be7a03440ba0357f4232efc43%2F0_0_1134_756%2F1134.jpg>
 We are the world: from The Commonality of Strangers. Photograph: Mahtab Hussain
Two years ago, photographer Mahtab Hussain set out to capture the experiences 
of migrants to Britain. He walked through Nottingham and got to know and take 
pictures of immigrants from Algeria, Ghana, Iraq, Malawi, Sudan and Europe. He 
documented his sitters’ histories, aspirations in the UK and the stories of how 
their lives had changed. The day after Britons voted to leave the EU, the 
exhibition of this work,The Commonality of Strangers 
<http://www.mahtabhussain.com/work/the-commonality-of-strangers/>, opened in 
Favara, Sicily (until November). It’s extremely topical…

Well dressed: Toms + Charlize Theron’s Africa Outreach Project
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2003e93e5d00322d404d1ffc9c84c45664d7a0ae%2F0_596_2400_2223%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20cotton%20towels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20cotton%20towels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-cotton-towels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2003e93e5d00322d404d1ffc9c84c45664d7a0ae%2F0_596_2400_2223%2F2400.jpg>
 Good step forward: with the One for One system, you give when you buy. 
Photograph: Hagop Kalaidjian/BFA 
Toms, the socially conscious alpargata shoe brand 
<http://www.toms.co.uk/?&gclid=CLGT_ba6_80CFWcq0wod9W4Jww> beloved of hipsters, 
is now 10. It pioneered a famousOne for One business model 
<http://www.toms.co.uk/improving-lives>: you buy shoes, and a pair of shoes is 
donated to kids in a developing country to protect them from picking up 
parasites and disease. Critics claim that it stifles local footwear industries 
where donations are made. But over the last decade Toms has sold millions of 
pairs, and therefore donated millions of pairs. It is one of few sustainable 
fashion brands that has made that enviable journey from ‘worthy’ to ‘wanted’ 
(many of those who buy them just like the shoes).

And in honour of being 10, Toms brings us a special collection developed with 
actor and activist Charlize Theron. For every pair of shoes or backpack (a 
first for them) sold, €5 goes toTheron’s great Africa Outreach Project 
<http://charlizeafricaoutreach.org/our-story/>, which funds HIV prevention in 
Africa. Shoes from £26, and backpack from £60,toms.co.uk <http://www.toms.co.uk>
. Also visitcharlizeafricaoutreach.org <http://charlizeafricaoutreach.org/>.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 