
I’m a big fan of using seasonal cues as prompts for good behavior. However 
much you may loathe it, Valentines’s Day reminds us to take a moment to 
appreciate the ones we love, and Mother’s Day to shower some affection on the 
wonderful women who gave birth to us.

And, although it’s not officially recognized as a holiday, I’ve long been fond 
of using the arrival of spring as a gentle reminder to de-clutter our homes and 
rethink the patterns of consumption that invited the clutter there in the first 
place.

The practice of spring cleaning isn’t a new one, with historians suggesting 
that like many of today’s traditions, it may have religious origins. Jews 
meticulously cleaned their houses before Passover, while early Christians 
traditionally made a clean sweep of things in between Palm Sunday and Easter 
Sunday. The desire to scrub our homes within an inch of their lives as soon as 
the weather warms up also reflects more practical concerns, too. When homes 
were heated with coal, lit by oil lamps, and sealed shut against cold winter 
winds, spring marked the opportunity to open doors and windows, air everything 
out and wash a house of months worth of built-up smoke and soot.

These days, fewer and fewer of us participate in organized religions and our 
homes are now heated with electricity and lit with LED bulbs, but the tradition 
of spring cleaning is still alive and well.72%  
<http://www.cleaninginstitute.org/spring_cleaning_survey_reveals_consumers_dirty_little_secrets/>
of Americans still participate in some form of rigorous spring cleaning 
alongside a little less thanhalf 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2602450/Grubby-Britain-Were-abandoned-traditional-spring-clean-one-ten-homes-mother-law-visits-says-new-survey.html>
 of Britons, and research indicates that these annual fits of cleanliness have 
a markedly positive effect.

How to green your home: make your own cleaning spray for every task
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
Our physical surroundings have an incredible impact on how we feel, especially 
for women. In onestudy 
<https://undecidedthebook.files.wordpress.com/2012/07/saxbe-repetti-pspb-2010.pdf>
, women who described their homes as being messy or disorderly displayed 
flatter diurnal slopes of cortisol, an indicator associated with depression and 
poor coping skills. These women also displayed greater increases in depressed 
mood throughout the day, greater fatigue in the evening and experienced a more 
difficult transition from work to home.

The state of our homes may disproportionately affect women, but we all feel 
the effects of a cluttered home; itlimits 
<https://unclutterer.com/2011/03/29/scientists-find-physical-clutter-negatively-affects-your-ability-to-focus-process-information/>
 the ability of the brain to process information, and it takes a drastic toll 
on our mental and physical health. Spring cleaning doesn’t just look good, it
feels good.

Spring cleaning often involves scrubbing, wiping, and washing windows (feel 
free towhip up these DIY recipes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
 for a fantastic all-purpose spray and a simple window cleaner) but many of the 
benefits conferred by spring cleaning are due to organizing our possessions; 
think tackling the overflowing garage or the crammed basement storage rooms.

Before you run out and equip yourself with eighteen new storage systems, 
however, rethinkwhat you’re storing and why. Too little storage isn’t the 
problem, too much stuff is! Instead of thinking about where to put your twelve 
winter hats or your three thermal blankets, consider why you have them in the 
first place.

I find it really helpful to keep the practice of decluttering going year-round 
by always having a bag at the bottom of my closet to collect outdated or 
ill-fitting clothing to consign or donate, and a box in my laundry room for 
toys and household items we no longer need. The truth, however, is that the 
effects of your spring cleaning efforts won’t last and these systems will never 
work – not for long, anyway – if you don’t also confront the reasons you 
accumulate your possessions in the first place.

In the developed world, very few of our purchases have anything to do with 
what we need. We buy most things based on how we think they will make us feel.
Advertisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/03/advertising-overconsumption-psychology>
 push the idea that a new pair of shoes, new lipstick or a new car will make us 
feel better, and we eagerly buy into it.

We continue buying things to make us feel good but the overwhelming 
accumulation of these items in our homes is precisely what ends up making us 
feel stressed, depressed and overwhelmed. Then, after a winter spent cooped up 
with all of our stuff and all of our negative feelings about it, we try to fix 
the situation by purchasing more things to contain and organize the first batch 
of things.

This spring, listen to the research rather than the advertisers. Clean your 
house, sell or donate what you don’t need, and, most importantly, rethink 
future purchases. Be conscious about why you shop and what feelings you are 
trying to create or distract yourself from by buying.

Combat that itch, that feeling-driven desire by asking a few logical 
questions: Do Ineed this? Where will I put it? How will I maintain it? Can I 
afford it? How will I dispose of it when it no longer serves a purpose in my 
life?

Think of it as spring cleaning for the mind, body, and soul.
 