
With all the current noise about Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/07/dickens-200th-birthday-celebrated>
, it would be easy to miss the fact that another Victorian is casting his 
shadow over today's literary landscape. Anthony Trollope'sThe Way We Live Now 
remains the supreme example of the state of the nation novel, a sprawling tour 
de force with a huge cast of characters and a labyrinthine plot. The shifting 
viewpoints, keen engagement with contemporary themes, and use of London as a 
microcosm: this is the model upon which a number of important recent novels 
have drawn.

With our robber-baron bankers, our financial panics, our privileged political 
elite and our disenfranchised migrant workers, it can feel as if we are living 
through a new Victorian era; certainly the narrative mode that Trollope 
established inThe Way We Live Now has seen a renaissance in recent years, and 
specifically in a certain breed of sweeping, often sentimental London-based 
novel. While one can find traces of Trollope's ensemble approach to the capital 
in earlier books – Zadie Smith'sWhite Teeth and Iain Sinclair's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview14>
Downriver spring to mind – it has taken the boom-and-bust noughties to restore 
this particular novel to the forefront of our cultural consciousness.

Trollope returned to England from Australia in 1872 and, disgusted by the 
unscrupulousness and greed he found in that particular period of
irrational exuberance (one of whose features was easily secured mortgages), he 
wrote a satire attacking the shady financiers and those who kowtowed to them. 
The action turns around the banker Augustus Melmotte and some dodgy stock-price 
manipulation, the society dame-turned-trashy novelist Lady Carbury, the 
wide-eyed farm girl Ruby Ruggles, the upright young engineer Paul Montague, and 
a host of other characters who, over the course of more than 800 pages, fight 
and scheme and fall in love. In the end, the reader's sympathies are so firmly 
knitted into the narrative that it is something of a wrench to look up from the 
book and find that these are not our friends, but made-up characters.

London novels have never gone away, of course, from Maureen Duffy's 
<http://www.maureenduffy.co.uk/> excellent Capital (1975) to Ian McEwan's more 
recentSaturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jan/30/fiction.bookerprize2005>. But as 
the credit crunch hit, with London at its heart, it became clear thatfew 
writers had engaged successfully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/11/fiction.comment> with the 
financial and economic stories that filled the front pages of our newspapers. 
And it has turned out to be Trollope who provided the best model for marrying 
the seemingly irreconcilable worlds that make up a global metropolis like 
London.

Foremost among the neo-Trollopians are Amanda Craig (Hearts and Minds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/16/amanda-craig-hearts-and-minds>), 
Sebastian Faulks (A Week in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/23/week-in-december-faulks>), 
Justin Cartwright (Other People's Money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/12/other-peoples-money-cartwright-review>
) and now John Lanchester with his forthcoming Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/jan/29/observer-profile-john-lanchester>
. The similarity in subject matter and formal approach of these four novels is 
uncanny. Each uses a cast of characters drawn from across the social spectrum; 
each has a racy thriller-ish subplot that hurries the narrative along; each is 
fascinated with property and money; each takes an essentially tribal approach 
to London, showing the isolation of the urban condition, and yet counteracts 
this structurally by using the intersection and (often romantic) coming 
together of the various strands to give London life a comforting coherence. 
These novels are beacons against the alienating multiplicity of city life.

Writers of state of the nation books face two big perils: the temptation to 
stray into cliche and the flatness that can come from an eagerness to depict 
the average life. These novels work well because they are linked by a 
profoundly optimistic vision of humanity: not only does everyone have a tale to 
tell, but many are full of love and hope. Craig's novel is perhaps the most 
obviously sentimental, although she tells her story with such a fine touch that 
it never descends into mawkishness. Her immigrant characters – the Ukrainian 
Anna and the Zimbabwean Job – are presented with the kind of sympathy evident 
in two other London immigrant novels of recent times, Rose Tremain'sThe Road 
Home and Chris Cleave's The Other Hand.

Picking up on Trollope's withering critique of financial shenanigans, 
Cartwright, Faulks and Lanchester all write convincingly about the obscure but 
compelling world of high finance. Faulks's hedge fund villain John Veals is a 
brilliantly bad, Melmotte-like insider; Cartwright (like Robert Harris in last 
autumn'sThe Fear Index 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/17/robert-harris-fear-index-review>
) looks at how old-fashioned bankers floundered in an era of bafflingly complex 
derivatives and fast money; while Lanchester's Roger Yount, between lusting 
after his children's nanny and despairing over a "mere" £30,000 bonus, is a 
character many would have thought impossible – a banker who arouses our 
sympathy.

It could be argued that there is nothing innovative or formally exciting about 
these books. The state of the nation novel is necessarily traditional; 
avant-garde difficulty would jar with its democratic aim of giving voice to a 
broad mix of characters. And some will object to its Londoncentricity – perhaps 
more controversial now than in Trollope's time. But London today is such a 
powerful, dominant place that it is hard to imagine these kinds of stories 
being set elsewhere. No other location provides the kind of panorama of modern 
Britain that our capital city does. And so, perhaps, the state of the nation 
novel must also be the state of the city novel. Trollope, I think, would be 
proud.

Alex Preston's new novel, The Revelations 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571277582>
, is published by Faber
 