
According to analyst firm Forrester Research, smartphone owners spend 85% of 
their time on those devices using apps, but 84% of that time is spentusing just 
five apps 
<http://techcrunch.com/2015/06/22/consumers-spend-85-of-time-on-smartphones-in-apps-but-only-5-apps-see-heavy-use/#.d2ru8a:5bJy>
 that weren’t already preloaded on their devices.

That’s why it’s so tough for new apps to become WhatsApp or Candy Crush-sized 
hits: even if their developers can persuade people to download them, getting 
them to use them regularly is another challenge entirely.

Still, plenty are trying, and 2015 saw some inventive ideas launch on the App 
Store. Here’s our roundup of 25 best brand-new iOS apps from the year. If 
Android is your platform of choice, there is a separate year-end list for that
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/25/best-android-apps-2015-live-streaming-video>
. Meanwhile, if you’re looking for the best iOS games of 2015,read this roundup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/24/best-iphone-ipad-games-2015-her-story>
.

What have we missed though? The comments section is open for your 
recommendations foriOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios> apps that 
were new (or even just new to you) in 2015.

25. Star Walk 2 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/star-walk-2-guide-to-night/id892279069?mt=8>

Some apps’ main benefit is that they help you spend more time not looking at a 
screen, and Star Walk 2 is one of them. Aimed at amateur stargazers, it helps 
you identify stars, constellations, planets and comets in the skies above, with 
3D models of notable nebulae and a night-time mode to cut screen-light to a 
minimum.

24. Grayout <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/grayout/id1023152763?mt=8>

Strictly speaking, Grayout is a game, but I’m filing it under “interactive 
fiction”. However you classify it, this is marvellous: a prequel to the same 
developer’s thought-provoking censorship game Blackbar. Set in a hospital, it 
sees you negotiating “post-traumatic aphasia” to find your way through the 
story.

23. Moodnotes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/moodnotes-thought-journal/id1019230398?mt=8>

Mindfulness was much in the news this year, with Moodnotes one of the apps 
hoping to capitalise. It’s a digital moods journal that gets you to track how 
you feel, while suggesting some tips for avoiding “thinking traps” that could 
plunge you into a gloom. Its design ensured the process was never a chore.

22. Layout from Instagram 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/layout-from-instagram/id967351793?mt=8>

It’s a fair question to wonder why this is a separate app and not simply a 
feature within Instagram, but that doesn’t stop Layout being a slick and 
accessible photo-collage tool. Choose your shots, arrange them in a multi-image 
frame, and then share or save them – the latter handy for sharing on 
non-Facebook social networks.

21. Vessel 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/vessel-early-access-to-your/id943718088?mt=8>

Who would pay to watch YouTubers’ videos, given that they’re all available for 
free on YouTube? Vessel was a well-designed attempt to find out, offering new 
content from a range of online video stars before it hitYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>. Its mixture of music, 
vlogging and comedy for £2.29 a month had plenty of appeal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4506f4f43cbd1eaeff4b47da72c4a3e64b27753d%2F0_0_1023_626%2F1023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4506f4f43cbd1eaeff4b47da72c4a3e64b27753d%2F0_0_1023_626%2F1023.jpg>
 Vessel 
20. MyHeart Counts 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/myheart-counts/id972189947?mt=8>

Apple’s ambitions with its HealthKit initiative are some of the most 
interesting things about iOS right now, including its partnerships with medical 
researchers. Stanford University’s MyHeart Counts app – which crossed from the 
US to the UK in 2015 – was a good example: putting your heart data to good use.

19. Electricomics 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/electricomics/id1025920561?mt=8>

iPad-only Electricomics was the latest attempt to rethink comics and graphic 
novels for touchscreen devices. Complete with comics from Alan Moore, Garth 
Ennis, Leah Moore and John Reppion, and Peter Hogan, it showed how careful 
(rather than show-offy) use of interactivity really could add to the medium.

18. Arcadia by Iain Pears 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/arcadia-by-iain-pears/id1003843523?mt=8>

More interactive fiction with a novel written by author Iain Pears 
specifically for this medium. Its branching storyline traced 10 characters’ 
intersecting tales, and while its almost tubemap-like interface was very 
clever, the quality of the writing ensured this always felt like a novel, 
rather than a digital gimmick.

17. Office Lens <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/office-lens/id975925059?mt=8>

If you’ve ever found yourself taking a photo of a scribbled-on whiteboard for 
later use, Office Lens is well worth a look. As good for scanning in documents 
as for turning business cards and receipts into digital notes for safe 
archiving, it’s become one of the most useful work-related apps since its 
launch in April.

16. Pacemaker 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pacemaker-create-your-mix./id593873080?mt=8>

In 2014, Pacemaker was a slick DJing app for iPad that tapped Spotify for its 
music. In 2015, though, it became something even more interesting: aniPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> app with its own 
artificial-intelligence helper (called Mållgan) that will construct mixes for 
you – complete with the ability for you to tweak them at will.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f995929db1ba92cf55af97a77933eb629e913a0%2F0_0_1929_979%2F1929.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f995929db1ba92cf55af97a77933eb629e913a0%2F0_0_1929_979%2F1929.jpg>
 Pacemaker 
15. WifiMapper 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/wifimapper-free-wifi-maps/id935258365?mt=8>

For frequent travellers who often find themselves hunting down internet access 
that won’t shred their mobile bill, WifiMapper is invaluable. It provides a map 
of Wi-Fi hotspots (both free and paid) with data on how decent their 
connections are, and the locations they’re at.

14. Apple News <http://www.apple.com/uk/news/>

There are lots of questions around what Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> News becoming a gatekeeper to 
news means for publishers, but judged strictly as an app, it made a strong 
start. It pulls in news from a wide range of sources, displays them neatly, and 
in just a few months has shown a decent ability to tune its feed to your 
preferences.

13. YouTube Gaming 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/youtube-gaming/id1009116743?mt=8>

Alongside music and children’s videos, games has become one of YouTube’s three 
main pillars of content. Accordingly, this year it got its own standalone app, 
providing quick access to the latest Let’s Play videos, reviews, developer 
uploads and – an area of increasing focus for YouTube – Twitch-esque live 
streams.

12. Camera51 <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/camera51/id975525752?mt=8>

Already a hit on Android, Camera51 has been just as impressive on iOS as an 
alternative to the built-in camera software. Its emphasis is on helping you 
with your framing and composition, whether you’re snapping objects, landscapes 
or people (selfies included, this being 2015).

11. MixRadio Music 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/mixradio-music/id940125626?mt=8>

MixRadio was once Nokia’s music-streaming service, before being sold to 
Microsoft, and then sold again to Japanese social network Line. Under its new 
owner, it came to iOS for the first time with a polished personal-radio app. 
Tap in a few artists to whip up a channel, or dig deep into its impressive 
collection of themed playlists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37183270cdee3ea1dda9010df3f7256f93048ddc%2F0_0_1932_854%2F1932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37183270cdee3ea1dda9010df3f7256f93048ddc%2F0_0_1932_854%2F1932.jpg>
 MixRadio Music 
10. Apple Music <http://www.apple.com/uk/music/>

What to say about Apple Music that hasn’t already been said at length – not 
leastin our in-depth review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/30/is-apple-music-worth-paying-for>
? The Spotify rival wasn’t as bad as its harsher critics claimed, nor was it as 
groundbreaking as its creators suggested. But excellent playlists, a 
very-listenable live radio station and a smart recommendation engine made a 
decent enough start.

9. Inbox by Gmail 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/inbox-by-gmail-new-email-app/id905060486?mt=8>

For those of us who swear by Mailbox, 2015 ended with the disappointing news 
that Dropbox is canning that email app. For Gmail users, Inbox may be the 
answer in 2016. Having learned from Mailbox’s user interface, it adds in 
features like bundling similar messages together, and separating out reminders 
from emails.

8. Google Calendar 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/google-calendar/id909319292?mt=8>

The problem with inventive calendar apps is that they’re often likely to get 
bought and shut down by a bigger fish:as Sunrise did this year 
<http://mashable.com/2015/10/28/microsoft-outlook-sunrise/#2PolJNZS.OqN>. At 
least that won’t happen with Google Calendar, but the app had plenty to 
recommend it as an alternative to the default iOS calendar, with a simple 
interface and handy reminders.

7. Vrse <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/vrse-virtual-reality/id959327054?mt=8>

If you’re interested in how virtual reality (VR) can be about more than 
gaming, Vrse is well worth a homescreen slot on your iPhone. It provides access 
to the growing number of short VR films being produced by interactive filmmaker 
Chris Milk’s Vrse startup – from Syrian refugees to U2 music videos.

6. Eve by Glow 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/eve-by-glow-sex-life-period/id1002275138?mt=8>

Apple thankfully remembered that women have needs beyond discovering music 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/20/jimmy-iovine-apple-beats-apologises-women-need-help-to-find-music>
, andadded period-tracking to its Health app 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/apples-health-data-app-gets-period-tracking-10307363.html>
. But Eve (formerly called Ruby) is worth a look as an alternative for tracking 
everything from periods and stress to sex, with a wider community to tap for 
advice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5246a4ccc3a24a74f26415b0d6ba7ba2a0becc%2F0_0_1983_943%2F1983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5246a4ccc3a24a74f26415b0d6ba7ba2a0becc%2F0_0_1983_943%2F1983.jpg>
 Eve by Glow 
5. Detour <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/detour/id886455839?mt=8>

A fine daytime complement to Star Walk 2’s night-time stargazing, Detour is an 
app for on-foot wanderers. It offers a selection of audio tours, starting with 
San Francisco but now with London, Paris, Berlin and Barcelona among other 
cities. From Backstage Westminster to Radical Clerkenwell, it could shed new 
light on London for Londoners, not just tourists.

4. Dubsmash <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/dubsmash/id918820076?mt=8>

Strictly speaking this was released right at the end of 2014, but it was in 
2015 that lip-sync app Dubsmash became a bona-fide mobile craze – leapfrogging 
tech early-adopters to go straight to the mainstream. Which is why your friends 
and family members were regularly sliding in to your social feeds mouthing 
along to music hits or movie dialogue.

3. Google Photos 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/google-photos-store-search/id962194608?mt=8>


The re-energised Flickr remains a force to be reckoned with when it comes to 
storing and sharing mobile photography, butGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Photos provided some stiff 
competition this year. It’s easy to use, offers unlimited storage for 
standard-resolution shots, and has some helpful editing and sharing tools built 
in.

2. Enlight <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/enlight/id930026670?mt=8>

One of 2015’s most impressive apps in both its iPhone and iPad incarnations, 
Enlight was the latest attempt to improve photo-editing on mobile devices. At 
its basic level, it’s really easy to use, but the more you explore its creative 
features, the better your resulting shots will be.

1. Periscope <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/periscope/id972909677?mt=8>

Live-streaming video often doesn’t make sense ... until some live video turns 
up that does – from breaking news events to celebrities chatting to fans. 
Acquired by Twitter before its launch in March on iOS then May on Android, 
Periscope is quietly becoming a very interesting addition to the media: as our 
piece onhow Bild reporter Paul Ronzheimer used it to cover the Syrian refugees 
story 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/media/2015/sep/13/periscope-app-syrian-refugees-bild?CMP=twt_gu>
 showed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbe85bad5fcc85082c5201e5499fb52d407841e0%2F0_0_1931_927%2F1931.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20iPhone%20and%20iPad%20apps%20of%202015%20%E2%80%93%20Apple%20unveils%20Spotify%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fbest-iphone-ipad-apps-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbe85bad5fcc85082c5201e5499fb52d407841e0%2F0_0_1931_927%2F1931.jpg>
 Periscope 
• The best apps of 2014 for Android, iPhone and iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/25/the-best-apps-of-2014-android-iphone-ipad>

 