
Lovers of French cinema have plenty to look forward to. At the Cannes film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> we were treated 
to an intensely French spectacle, certain to be released in British cinemas 
very soon:Jeune Et Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/16/cannes-2013-jeune-et-jolie-review>
, or Young And Beautiful, by François Ozon, the story of a young woman's sexual 
awakening. Perhaps only French cinema could get away with this trope, but the 
performance by newcomerMarine Vacth <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm4297691/> 
is tremendous, and the cameo byCharlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling> is enjoyably bizarre.

Marion Cotillard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/marion-cotillard> is one of 
the best actors in the world; her face conveys emotions and thoughts with 
miraculous clarity and sympathy. This year, she is starring inThe Immigrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146662/immigrant> , the new film from 
American auteur James Gray, which is sure to be a draw for all those who love 
this great French performer. Another actor who is emerging as one of France's 
biggest stars isBérénice Béjo <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0067367/>, who was in 
Cannes withLe Passé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/17/cannes-2013-the-past-review> (The 
Past), a brilliant film by Iranian director Asghar Farhadi; this, too, is 
certain to arrive in the UK before long. She plays Marie, a woman who works in 
a Paris pharmacy, harassed and hassled by life and by her romantic situation. 
Marie is trying to finalise her divorce from an Iranian husband, who has 
arrived in Paris to sort out the paperwork, while at the same time embarking on 
a relationship with a man who has emotional burdens of his own. Béjo's 
performance is a marvel. UK cinemagoers may know her as the silent movie star in
The Artist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142801/artist>. Now she 
confirms her talents as a grown-up, intelligent presence on the screen. France 
and the French will be a potent force in cinemas this year.
 