
Great books take us where we haven't been, illuminate dark corners and leave 
our own familiar world subtly changed, as if its axis has been marginally 
tilted. But despite literature's fervour to explore the far reaches of human 
experience, disability is for the most part disregarded, or at best pushed to 
the margins. Disabled protagonists are few and far between.

In my latest book, Mouse and the Cossacks, Mouse is a young girl who hasn't 
spoken for four years. She is an elective mute. She is also the narrator of the 
novel, through whose eyes and ears ("My ears work fine, it's just my voice that 
doesn't work") we come to understand not only her world but that of the 
perplexing old man whose farmhouse she and her mother are renting, and her 
young neighbour who has a learning disability. Of my previous novels,Someone to 
Watch Over Me <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/aug/12/fiction.features2>,
Do White Whales Sing at the Edge of the World? 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/books-nice-and-grim-1267926.html>
 andNoah, Noah 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books-friends-in-the-north-1115931.html>
 all feature characters with a learning disability, andThe Visiting Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/08/visiting-angel-paul-wilson-review>
 is based in part on my experience of working forthe Richmond Fellowship 
<http://www.richmondfellowship.org.uk/> in mental health therapeutic 
communities.

1. To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099549482>

Although the three children, Scout, Jem and Dill, are increasingly upset by 
the community's prejudice towards Tom Robinson, the black man being defended by 
Scout's father against an unjust accusation of rape, they themselves exhibit a 
similar prejudice towards their neighbour, Boo Radley, a man with a learning 
disability. Hidden away behind his front door, Boo Radley exerts a powerful 
hold over the children's imaginations until his own brief and dignified 
appearance centre-stage towards the end of the novel.

2. Of Mice and Men by John Steinbeck 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241952481>

In migrant farmworkers George and Lennie, Steinbeck creates a touching but 
ill-fated friendship between two very different men clinging to their piece of 
the American dream. Although Lennie serves largely as a metaphor for the death 
of innocence in a hardened, Depression-era America, he also sheds light on the 
way that learning disability can be exploited unless it is nurtured and feared 
because it is "different".

3. The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099475019>

The first 60-page section of Faulkner's landmark novel are presented through 
the eyes of Benji Compson, a man with a profound learning disability. In a 
shift away from the realist fiction of Dickens and Hardy, this is a 
spectacularly brave attempt to see the world through the eyes of someone whose 
disability brought such shame on the family that when his condition became 
apparent he was stripped of his original Christian name so as not to dishonour 
the uncle he was originally named after.

4. Moby-Dick by Herman Melville 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780142437247>

There's an ongoing debate in disability politics over to what extent 
disability should be seen as a deficit or as a difference. Melville's classic 
sticks rigidly to the former view, but creates a memorable tale of would-be 
revenge sought by the one-legged Captain Ahab against his nemesis, the whale.

5. The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time by Mark Haddon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849920414>

Haddon's is a remarkable act of ventriloquism. Illuminating the difference 
that is an autistic mind, he allows us to do what Scout's father, Atticus, 
encourages his children to do in To Kill a Mockingbird â€“ to walk around for a 
while in another person's shoes to see the world as they see it.

6. The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099572954>

The Secret Garden made a great impression on me when I read it as a child. 
Published in 1911, its central character, Mary Lennox, befriends Colin, a boy 
who uses a wheelchair and, never venturing outside, is in every sense an 
"invalid". With the help of young Dickon, they bring back to life not only 
Colin but the "secret garden" once loved by Colin's mother.

7. The First Man by Albert Camus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141185231>

Serving as a bridge between my fiction and non-fiction choices is the 
autobiographical novel of Camus' childhood spent in an impoverished district of 
Algiers, the draft of which was found in the wreckage of the car crash in which 
he died. Camus' illiterate and deaf mother, who worked as a cleaning woman, 
features prominently in the novel, as does his deep attachment to her. The 
football-loving Camus and his friends stage their games in the grounds of the 
Home for Disabled Veterans. Camus, who remained loyal to the poor, the sick, 
the deformed and dispossessed, remarked that, "Poverty prevented me from 
judging that all was well under the sun and in history".

8. The Giant's House by Elizabeth McCracken

If other people suddenly discovered they could fly, would my flightlessness 
make me disabled? Disability, as opposed to impairment, is so often a social 
construct and it's this that can make it so isolating. In McCracken's book, 
James Carlson Sweatt grows to be over eight feet tall, and the way his height 
both is and isn't a disability creates a luminous offbeat story of love between 
him and unassuming librarian Peggy Cort.

9. A Son of the Circus by John Irving 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do>

Irving isn't shy of writing about physical difference (Owen Meany, Patrick 
Wallingford, Billy, the bisexual narrator of In One Person). In A Son of the 
Circus, he explores the challenges ofachondroplasia 
<http://www.achondroplasia.co.uk/>, circus life and poverty in a beautiful hymn 
of Dickensian intricacy which opens boldly with the line, "Usually, the dwarfs 
kept bringing him back"' but never descends into either voyeurism or pathos.

10. Far From the Tree by Andrew Solomon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701176112>

Published earlier this year after 10 years of research, Solomon's mammoth tome 
offers stunning insights into what it is to raise children who are different to 
yourself. With chapters on Down's Syndrome, deafness, disability, autism, 
dwarfism and schizophrenia, built around hundreds of interviews with parents, 
it is humane and deeply moving.
 