
The body of Giulio Regeni was discovered in a ditch in Cairo on 2 February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/italian-student-found-dead-egypt-giulio-regeni-torture>
, showing evidence of torture and of a slow, horrific death. Giulio was 
studying for a PhD at the University of Cambridge, and wascarrying out research 
<http://ilmanifesto.info/in-egypt-second-life-for-independent-trade-unions/> on 
the formation of independent trade unions in post-Mubarak Egypt. There is 
little doubt that his work would have been extremely important in his field, 
and he had a career ahead of him as an important scholar of the region.

Giulio, originally from Fiumicello in north-east Italy, had a strong 
international background and outlook. As a teenager, he won a scholarship that 
allowed him to spend two formative years studying at theUnited World College 
<http://www.uwc-usa.org/> in New Mexico. He was especially passionate about 
Egypt. Before beginning his doctoral research, he spent time in Cairo working 
for the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (Unido 
<http://www.unido.org/en/unido-united-nations-industrial-development-organization.html>
). At the age of 28, he stood out with his big hopes and dreams, and he was 
committed to pursuing a career that would allow him to make an impact on the 
world, which is a poorer place for his passing.

Those of us who worked and spent time with him are grieving – but above all, 
we are furious about the manner of his death. Giulio’s case also has much 
broader implications for higher education in the UK and beyond.

British universities have long fostered an outward-looking, international 
perspective. This has been evident in the consistent strength ofarea studies 
<http://www.ukcasa.ac.uk/> since the middle of the 20th century. The fact that 
academics from British universities have produced cutting-edge research on so 
many areas of the world is an important factor in the impact and esteem that 
the higher education system there enjoys.

Italian student Giulio Regeni found dead in Cairo 'with signs of torture'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/italian-student-found-dead-egypt-giulio-regeni-torture>
In order to carry out this research, generations of scholars have conducted 
fieldwork in other countries, often with authoritarian political systems or 
social unrest making them dangerous places to study. I carried out such 
research in Peru in the 1990s, working there while the country was ruled by the 
authoritarian government ofAlberto Fujimori 
<http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1889946,00.html>.

Alongside this research tradition, universities are becoming increasingly 
international 
<https://www.britishcouncil.org/voices-magazine/why-universities-want-to-internationalise-what-stops-them>
 in their outlook and makeup. Large numbers of international students attend 
the classes, and their presence is crucial for making campuses more vibrant and 
diverse.

Giulio’s murder is a clear and direct challenge to this culture, and it 
demands a response. If our scholars – especially our social scientists – are to 
continue producing research with an international perspective, they will need 
to carry out international fieldwork. By its nature, this will sometimes 
involve work on challenging issues in volatile, unstable countries.

Universities clearly have a duty of care to their students and staff. This is 
generally exercised through ethics committees, whose work means that much 
greater care is taken than in the past to ensure that risks are managed 
appropriately. However, there is the danger that overzealous risk management 
could affect researchers’ ability to carry out their work, making some 
important and high-impact research simply impossible.

We cannot protect against all risks, but no scholar should face the risk of 
extrajudicial violence. If universities are to remain internationally focused 
and outward-looking, we must exercise our duty of care towards our students and 
colleagues when they are working in other countries.

But there are limits to what academic institutions can do on their own. It is 
vital that governments raise cases such as Giulio’s, and push strongly for full 
investigations and for those responsible to be held to account.

The Italian and Egyptian authorities have announced a joint investigation 
<http://www.euronews.com/2016/02/04/italy-egypt-to-jointly-investigate-death-of-tortured-student-giulio-regeni/>
 into what happened to Giulio, but the British government also has a 
responsibility to make representations to this effect. That would send the 
message that any abuse by authorities of students and researchers from British 
universities will not be tolerated. A petition will be circulated to this 
effect, and Giulio’s friends and colleagues will be campaigning on the issue in 
the days and weeks ahead.

Giulio Regeni’s murder is a direct challenge to the academic freedom that is a 
pillar of our higher education system. He is onlyone of many scholars 
<http://mesana.org/committees/academic-freedom/intervention/letters-egypt.html#Egypt20160204>
 who have been arbitrarily detained, and often abused, in Egypt. As a scholarly 
community and as a society, we have a duty to strike to protect them and their 
colleagues who study in dangerous places the world over.

• This article was originally published on The Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/the-murder-of-my-friend-giulio-regeni-is-an-attack-on-academic-freedom-54264>
 