
Book reviews tend to make news only if they are particularly savage or concern 
a hotly anticipated book. So Hitler, by Volker Ullrich – the umpteenth 
biography of the dictator, translated from the German and published in America 
this month – would seem an unlikely candidate. Last week, however, Michiko 
Kakutani, the New York Times’ chief book critic,did something extraordinary 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/books/hitler-ascent-volker-ullrich.html?_r=0>
: without ever making it explicit, she wrote an entire review about something, 
or rather someone, else.

From the opening paragraph – in which Kakutani cites an eminent magazine 
editor in 1930 describing Hitler as a “half-insane rascal”, a “pathetic 
dunderhead”, a “nowhere fool” and a “big mouth” – one can start to guess the 
direction she’s looking in.

But that is only the beginning. What happens next is, by the standards of the 
genteel world of book reviewing, a breach of protocol so wild it has been 
pinballing around social media ever since. Kakutani dispenses with a 
conventional review and instead, as if we have reached a point in history when 
fine sentences are a luxury we can no longer afford, strips Ullrich’s research 
down to nine, acutely angled bullet points.

Denial review – Rachel Weisz makes heavy weather of Holocaust courtroom drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/denial-review-rachel-weisz-holocaust-david-irving-toronto-film-festival>
For example, “Hitler was often described as an egomaniac who ‘only loved 
himself’ – a narcissist with a taste for self-dramatisation and what Mr Ullrich 
calls a ‘characteristic fondness for superlatives’.” Or, “Hitler was known, 
among colleagues, for a ‘bottomless mendacity’.” Or, “Hitler virtually wrote 
the modern playbook on demagoguery, arguing in Mein Kampf that propaganda must 
appeal to the emotions – not the reasoning powers – of the crowd.” As the 
review proceeds, it becomes increasingly clear she has a current nominee for 
president in mind.

The climax comes two-thirds of the way into the review, when Kakutani extracts 
from Ullrich’s book the fact that, because serious politicians in Germany 
considered Hitler a buffoon and a lightweight, dismissing him as “a celebrity, 
a repellent but fascinating ‘evening’s entertainment’”, they did not see the 
imminent danger. Had they taken him more seriously, she writes, in what is all 
the more powerful for remaining an inference, “his ascent might have been 
derailed”.

In denial: who cares?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd747398f5d519af64b19cf0e29ad93b95ad609%2F1122_0_3275_1966%2F3275.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reviewer%20who%20tried%20to%20trump%20all%20Hitler%20comparisons%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reviewer%20who%20tried%20to%20trump%20all%20Hitler%20comparisons%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd747398f5d519af64b19cf0e29ad93b95ad609%2F1122_0_3275_1966%2F3275.jpg>
 Timothy Spall as David Irving in Denial. 
The film Denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/denial-review-rachel-weisz-holocaust-david-irving-toronto-film-festival>
, which chroniclesDavid Irving’s libel suit against Deborah Lipstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/11/irving.uk> for accusing him of 
denying the Holocaust (and also, one suspects, for hurting his feelings by 
calling him an amateur historian), opened in the US this week and reminded 
Americans of Britain’s shocking libel laws. “In America, you can write anything 
and no one can do anything about it,” said a neighbour of mine after seeing the 
film, something she part-admired as per the first amendment, and 
part-disapproved of in the case of Holocaust denial.

It is often forgotten that it was Irving himself who brought the action. But 
either way, we agreed: better to expose silly ideas to ridicule than ban them 
and dignify the threat. “Put out your book and see how nobody cares,” I said, 
to which she pointed out an irredeemable flaw: “But people do care.”

King of the critics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb064037714a164ff0f35c5c95d2e153efc43b5b5%2F0_119_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reviewer%20who%20tried%20to%20trump%20all%20Hitler%20comparisons%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reviewer%20who%20tried%20to%20trump%20all%20Hitler%20comparisons%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Freviewer-trump-hitler-new-york-times-michiko-akutani%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb064037714a164ff0f35c5c95d2e153efc43b5b5%2F0_119_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Emma Cline. Photograph: Neil Krug 
Another New York Times review this week broke the rule of thumb that a famous 
novelist reviewing a younger or less famous novelist should be gentle wherever 
possible. (I remember John Updike taking a particularly avuncular approach
towards Jonathan Safran Foer in the New Yorker a decade ago 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2005/03/14/mixed-messages>.)

Stephen King, during the course of his review of Emma Donoghue’s new book 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/books/review/stephen-king-emma-donoghue-the-wonder.html>
, The Wonder, took a surprising swipe at first-time novelist and wunderkind of 
the hour Emma Cline, whose book The Girls dominated bestseller lists this 
summer and was described by King as being written in “tiresome hey-look-at-me 
prose”. Oo-er!

Compared with Cline, he wrote, Donoghue’s writing was as “sturdy and 
serviceable as a good pair ofbrogans 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brogan_(shoes)>”, which – he must’ve been having 
a bad week – didn’t sound altogether encouraging, either.
 