
It’s hard to imagine running out of loo roll, never mind the rare minerals 
that power our economy and appliances. But depletion looms as we speed through 
the Earth’s resources and climate change alters the rules.

We’re reaching, or have surpassed, the peak availability of copper, lithium 
(essential for the electric vehicle revolution), phosphate, anchovies, 
artisanal coffee and even chocolate. Cause yourself peak anxiety and read 
Richard Heinburg’sPeak Everything 
<http://richardheinberg.com/bookshelf/peak-everything>: Waking Up to the 
Century of Declines.

You may feel lithium and copper shortages are not your problem. They might be 
soon. Take phosphorus: All agricultural systems depend on it. . Yet demand 
could outstrip supply in 30-60 years.Copper 
<http://www.visualcapitalist.com/the-looming-copper-supply-crunch/> is 
essential to electronics, everything in your house and medical technology 
(including MRIs). And we’re facing a 10m tonne supply deficit by 2028.

Here’s your strategy. 1) Be a smarter consumer. Remember that 20-40% of 
British-grown crops don’t even make it into stores thanks to overproduction and 
aesthetic appearance. Smart consumers seek out production gluts andglean ugly, 
rejected fruit and veg <http://feedbackglobal.org/gleaning-network-eu-2/> 
destined for the dump.

2) Be a better consumer: 500m small-scale farmers produce 80% of the world’s 
food by value but research shows a farmer shortage is looming. They won’t 
continue to produce our coffee and cocoa if they can’t make a fair living. 
Buying from the producer-centric Fairtrade system is imperative to securing 
future supply. Trydivinechocolate.com <http://www.divinechocolate.com/uk/>.

3) Be a real consumer. As campaigner Orsola de Castro (blogging at 
fashionrevolution.org <http://fashionrevolution.org/>) points out, the word 
“consumer” means to use up a material, not squander resources on hardly used 
items and shovel them prematurely into landfill.

The big picture: the Hyperion project, New Delhi

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bbace7a46f372b3ef6a091077d2110cf8fb3c5b%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20running%20out%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20running%20out%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bbace7a46f372b3ef6a091077d2110cf8fb3c5b%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Wooden tops: an aerial view of the state-of-the-art tower blocks in New Delhi. 
Photograph: Vincent Callebaut/Solent News 
Inspired by Hyperion, the world’s tallest tree, architectural practice Vincent 
Callebaut has drawn up a spellbinding, utopian plan for six wooden tower blocks 
in New Delhi that will include 1,000 homes, offices, gyms and restaurants. A 
sustainable, productive garden will wrap around each 36-storey-high tower. This 
ecosystem project will unite high-density living with small-scale farming and 
actually create energy.

Well dressed: ShareWear

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fecb99c289b8c17b503c4bf3183b284f1ee86a4%2F0_1160_4912_3444%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20running%20out%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20running%20out%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Feco-guide-to-running-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fecb99c289b8c17b503c4bf3183b284f1ee86a4%2F0_1160_4912_3444%2F4912.jpg>
 After you: there’s no need to buy clothes and shoes when you can share. 
Photograph: Duo Blau 
You literally cannot buy these items from some of Sweden’s hottest fashion 
brands, including Filippa K, Hope, House of Dagmar, Nikolaj d’Étoiles, Uniforms 
for the Dedicated, Weekday and Whyred. You can only “share them forward”. 
Because rather than ready-to-wear, this collection is ready-to-share. Here’s 
how it works: the collection is uploaded to Instagram, and the first user to 
comment on the photo of an item is eligible to borrow it for one week. (You can 
also contribute to the ShareWear collection with your own pieces, sharing 
pictures of your own clothes using the hashtag#sharewear <http://sharewear.se/>
). All pieces are then available in the digital showroom atsharewear.se 
<http://sharewear.se/>. You can see where an item is and when it will be 
available to borrow again. A refreshing, disruptive take on fashion that messes 
with the idea of ownership. Share it.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 