
This week, hundreds of young companies and artists head to the Edinburgh fringe
 <https://www.edfringe.com/>, full of excitement and hope. Many will be 
graduate companies emerging from the cocoon of college with their first piece 
of work; some will be returning for a second or third time, hoping that against 
the odds andin spite of spiralling costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/04/the-cost-of-staging-an-edinburgh-fringe-show-artists-open-their-account-books>
 this will be the year that puts them on the radar and helps them make those 
all-important industry contacts.

For the fringe in August is where the industry comes looking for new talent. A 
substantial number of theatres across the UK will have teams scouring the 
fringe looking for what they hope will be the next big thing. I know of one who 
will have at least 30 people coming and going over the festival’s duration.

Edinburgh festival 2016: what to see and where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jun/08/edinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go>
British theatre is obsessed with the young and emerging talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/aug/03/theatre-older-playwrights-careers>
, and in Edinburgh that obsession is magnified. Everyone is looking for the 
companies or artists they hadn’t heard of who they can put into artist 
development schemes, joining the hordes of young artists they put in the 
schemes after the last Edinburgh and the one before that.At its best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
, artist development is terrific, providing opportunities and genuine benefits 
for early-career artists; at it’s worst, it can belike butterfly collecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/18/damien-hirst-butterflies-weirdly-uplifting>
, and just as cruel.

That’s because too many artist-development schemes are not designed to support 
ambition and scale and so they don’t help artists develop sustainable careers 
in the industry. It means that theatres are always on the hunt for new talent 
rather than investing in older or more established artists looking to make more 
ambitious work. It comes down to economics: young artists are cheap, and often 
pretty pliable, grateful for any scraps thrown their way.

But for these young artists to become artists or companies who still have a 
career 10 or 20 years hence and who can support families and work on a far 
bigger scale requires real investment. With young artists you might be able to 
get three or four – or more – individuals or companies in development for the 
price of one company trying to create bigger, bolder work. It means companies 
and individuals are still emerging well into their 30s. Or they find themselves 
and their work increasingly ignored in favour of the next big thing.

Earlier this year at All Tomorrow’s Theatre 
<https://www.cptheatre.co.uk/production/all-tomorrows-theatre/>, an event 
organised by Battersea Arts Centre and Camden People’s Theatre, the performance 
and film-makerPaula Varjack <http://www.paulavarjack.com/> spoke eloquently of 
being suspended in an emergent state for years, after she took her first steps 
in the industry. Where, she asked, were the schemes open to those who had 
already had some support but needed more to upscale?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fthe-perils-of-being-theatres-next-big-thing-artist-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f332dbd5ecdb1ee1ac98398a3107419585ba01a%2F0_206_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20perils%20of%20being%20theatre's%20next%20big%20thing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fthe-perils-of-being-theatres-next-big-thing-artist-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20perils%20of%20being%20theatre%27s%20next%20big%20thing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fthe-perils-of-being-theatres-next-big-thing-artist-development%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f332dbd5ecdb1ee1ac98398a3107419585ba01a%2F0_206_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 Hoofing it in Edinburgh. Photograph: Andrew Pickett 
She likened the environment to a medieval village where virginity is prized 
and everyone is looking for the blood on the sheet hung out after the marriage 
night. If you’ve already received some development you are almost marked out as 
having been tarnished. This obsession with the new extends to work made under 
development schemes, which often fails to ever find a slot in a theatre’s 
programme – something that playwrights have long been familiar with, since the 
rise of play development schemes in the late 1990s. These have led to a 
situation where it is possible to eke out a poverty-stricken living as an 
unproduced butconstantly in-development playwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2006/oct/30/frompagetostage>. 

Something similar is happening with the development of non-script based work, 
in which you can keep receiving tiny amounts of money for making a new piece, 
but seldom actually get a show programmed for a run in that theatre’s spaces. 
As Varjack pointed out: “As soon as you’ve made the baby, somebody from the 
venue is asking you when you are going to make the next one, which makes me 
want to ask, ‘Don’t you even want to hold this one?’”

Of course, not all theatres and venues behave like this. Many are acutely 
conscious of the bottleneck at the start of the profession and have been 
thinking hard about what is the best way to offer support, when every year 
universities and colleges dispatch more graduates after pocketing their money 
for three years, saying: “Goodbye, you are now an artist.” It is as much up to 
these academic institutions to be honest about what their courses really 
deliver and to be responsible in ensuring their graduates have the knowledge to 
survive in the real world as it is for theatres to help those young 
theatre-makers who show talent.

The poet Adrienne Rich once spoke eloquently 
<https://www.brainpickings.org/2014/05/21/claiming-an-education-adrienne-rich-1977-commencement/>
 about education not being something passively received but actively claimed, 
and it seems to me that is the same with artist development. Too often it is 
something that is done to artists by theatres, rather than something in which 
they are actively involved.

New writing is a risk but it's one theatres must take
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jul/05/theatre-diversity-new-plays-london-writers-week>
All artist-development schemes beg the question why the theatre doesn’t just 
give the money to the artists and let them develop their work in the way that 
is best for them. But whileArts Council England is moving towards 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/arts-council-england-funding-changes-lauded-by-theatre-industry/>
 understanding the importance of funding individual artists, artist development 
is likely to be with us for a long time to come. AsAnnabel Turpin of ARC in 
Stockton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jun/06/audiences-creative-process-collaboration-producing>
 has observed, one solution for theatres and venues would be to support fewer 
artists but offer them more money. But as she is fully aware, that means some 
talent will be overlooked, and it means that the gate-keeping around who does 
and who doesn’t access a career in the theatre industry is increased.

I really don’t know what the solution is, but it’s a pressing problem and one 
that is likely to get worse if recession beckons and government finances lead 
to more cuts to arts funding. For those heading to Edinburgh this year with 
such optimism, hoping this will be the year when they get picked up for 
development, it’s wise to be careful about exactly what you wish for. An 
opportunity is only a real opportunity if it offers genuine support and the 
chance to develop as an artist over time and sustain a career.
 