
You don’t take the 4,352 kilometre Indian Pacific Railway journey to get from 
Sydney to Perth (or vice versa). It’s a train you take to discover southern 
Australia – a vast place of contradictions: hostile and welcoming; at times 
bucolic, then barren.

The three-day train journey is already a hugely popular tourist trip among 
“grey nomads” in Australia, but the operator, Great Southern Rail, is now set 
on attracting a wider range of clientele, with spruced-up carriages and 
renovated lounges, additional off-train excursions along the route and a new 
food and wine menu on board that showcases the best of Australian cuisine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0a7ac794bf600925cfe1885558bfce805f4283%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0a7ac794bf600925cfe1885558bfce805f4283%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
 At Rawlinna Station, Australia’s biggest sheep farm, we hop off the train for 
an outback barbecue dinner under the many stars of the Nullarbor plain. 
Photograph: Josie Withers/Great Southern Railway 
The food and wine is sourced from some of the greatest produce and wine 
regions in Australia: the Hunter valley in New South Wales; the Barossa and 
Adelaide Hills in South Australia; and Margaret River in Western Australia. No 
surprise perhaps then that the journey was widely praised in 2015; its plaudits 
included being named by Gourmet Traveller as one of the “top 100 Australian 
culinary experiences”, by Condé Nast Traveler as among the world’s best train 
food, by Britain’s Daily Telegraph as one of the“world’s tastiest rail journeys”
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/journeysbyrail/11622757/Gourmet-trains-the-worlds-tastiest-rail-journeys.html>
 and in Good Food’s“30 Australian food adventures you must have” 
<http://www.goodfood.com.au/good-food/food-travel/the-30-australian-food-adventures-you-must-have-20150401-1matma.html>
.

The Indian Pacific leaves Sydney every Wednesday afternoon and arrives in 
Perth on Saturday lunchtime throughout 2016-17. I arrive at Sydney’s Central 
station not really knowing what to expect, excited by romantic notions of train 
travel but also a little bit scared to be stuck on one train for three nights 
and four days – will I be bored?

On arrival, I’m shown to my private “gold class” cabin. It is compact but 
smart. A big window with adjustable blinds fills one side. A bench seat will 
later become my bed. The bed is surprisingly comfortable and the linen is 
five-star hotel quality. I’ve had worse bathrooms in three-star hotels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426d48a811033426786bdd26af1599b314433636%2F0_0_2362_1384%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426d48a811033426786bdd26af1599b314433636%2F0_0_2362_1384%2F2362.jpg>
 A platinum double cabin on the Indian Pacific. Photograph: Lightly Salted/Liam 
West/Great Southern Rail 
My amazing host – who looks after me for the full four days – offers to bring 
me a hot drink and I accept, although there is a well-stocked kitchenette just 
down the corridor that all gold-class guests can access at any time. Food and 
drink is all-inclusive in gold and platinum classes and I intend to make the 
most of it. As soon as the train starts moving, I head to the lounge for 
welcome drinks.

The lounges (there are several among the 30 carriages) are full train-carriage 
size and include a staffed bar area, plush couches and tables, as well as a 
bookshelf and games corner. Sparkling and still wine, beer and spirits are 
served to guests on request all day long. It’s easy to make friends in the 
lounges and the delightful Australian bubbly sets the scene for the terrific 
opening-night wine masterclass with thewine critic Jeremy Oliver.  
<https://www.jeremyoliver.com/>

The masterclass is informal but informative. We try chardonnay from the Hunter 
valley Adelaide Hills and Margaret River, before moving on to shiraz from the 
same regions. Then we move into the Queen Adelaide restaurant – a classic 
railway dining car with four-seater leather booths separated by cut-glass 
partitions and set, always, with white linen – for a seven-course “showcase 
dinner”.

Before I got on the train, I thought the cost was high (gold class starts at 
$2,529 a person and platinum class is $4,359 a person from Sydney to Perth), 
but it’s not even the end of the first night and I can already see the value in 
this once-in-a-lifetime holiday.

Little details – such as including a pâté from Maggie Beer’s renowned Pheasant 
Farm <https://www.maggiebeer.com.au/products/ranges/pheasant-farm>, where we’ll 
visit in an off-board excursion the next day – make the journey more than just 
a train trip with good food. I fancy myself a foodie and I feel as though I’m 
learning something. The self-saucing chocolate pudding served with mandarin 
salsa is amazing. And I will never, ever forget the taste of the 2013 
Cloudburst chardonnay from Margaret River – and since it retails for about 
$250, I don’t expect to ever drink it again.

That night the rocking of the train puts me to sleep immediately but the track 
feels bumpy as we journey through western NSW, and my sleep is disturbed on the 
first night.

The train arrives late in Broken Hill on Thursday morning and we miss our 
sunrise tour. We do, however, manage a bus trip to the Living Desert Reserve 
and Sculpture Symposium. As we drive out of town, our local driver explains the 
brush we now encounter is a regeneration area that surrounds the town on each 
side to suppress the red dust, before cheerily announcing it is full of the 
world’s deadliest snakes, including the king brown, inland taipan and tiger 
snakes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F759d3d04f33f3ca2e1670db047d0580a23468192%2F0_0_3333_5000%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F759d3d04f33f3ca2e1670db047d0580a23468192%2F0_0_3333_5000%2F3333.jpg>
 Self-saucing chocolate pudding with mandarin salsa is dessert in the first 
night’s showcase dinner. Photograph: Josie Withers/Great Southern Railway 
“If you get bitten by one of them you’ll be dead in an hour without medical 
treatment,” comes an announcement over the bus PA.


Broken Hill is beautiful country, though, alive with kangaroos. The red earth 
of Australia’s interior is a magnificent sight and, back on the train, I soak 
up the view. Gnarled gum trees stud the expansive desert. The horizon is broken 
by a tree line. We see plenty of emus as we eat our hot breakfast. (I have 
poached eggs with Harris Smokehouse salmon) in the Queen Adelaide restaurant. 
Galahs greet us in flocks and there are plenty of sheep to keep us company. The 
dark green scrub and red earth go on and on, but it has been raining so we also 
spot some puddles and the odd stream.

After a post-lunch nap, I awake to find the world almost verdant. Sheep watch 
lazily as the train meanders past (it averages 85km/hour, which seems 
ridiculously slow until you’re on it and appreciate the pace). The speed allows 
us to appreciate the Australian landscape in a way that’s impossible by any 
other mode of transport. There are smooth green slopes and tree-covered hills 
on the horizon. Grey clouds bring the promise of rain.

A neat station goes by – a home with a windmill, a wide veranda, sheds, water 
tanks and what appears to be a long, tree-lined drive. There is a llama among 
the sheep, and wattle trees line the railway’s edge.

This is anything but boring.

The gums eventually give way to oak trees, the yellow paddocks of canola pop 
up more frequently among the rich green of young wheat and barley crops. It is 
misty by the time I get to lunch, which today takes place in the lounge – 
transformed into a dining car with long tables (still set with crisp white 
linen). I choose the yabby and blue swimmer crab meat in lemon myrtle-infused 
soup (again, amazing).

In a rare quiet moment, I choose to sit in the lounge car to watch the world 
go by. This car is often full from mid-morning till after dinner. I notice 
glasses of bubbly being poured before lunchtime, and why not? The corner of the 
car stocked with books and boardgames is studiously ignored as lifelong 
friendships are made all around me. But for a moment, I am antisocial enough to 
just stare out the window.

We journey past fertile green fields and into the Adelaide plains, which would 
be desert if it were not irrigated. Italian migrant families have made a 
fortune planting olive trees in the plains, and tomatoes and nuts still bring 
the region great wealth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27fd410f549fd3f9fe0660369a81fc9a06266ba7%2F0_0_5000_3333%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27fd410f549fd3f9fe0660369a81fc9a06266ba7%2F0_0_5000_3333%2F5000.jpg>
 In a rare quiet moment, I choose to sit in the lounge car to watch the world 
go by. Photograph: Josie Withers/Great Southern Railway 
At Two Wells we hop off the train and on to a bus to Maggie Beer’s Pheasant 
Farm, where we enjoy a walking tour with Elli Beer who then accompanies us to 
the Apex bakery.

It’s here we begin to understand that the secret to the Barossa’s success has 
a lot to do with the collegiate relationship between the region’s producers. 
Marco Cirillo comes along to the bakery to greet the train’s guests and brings 
with him a grenache and shiraz from his estate for us to try. The wine is 
accompanied with fresh baked salt loaf and pretzels, using a recipe that came 
with the Salesians who settled the area in the 1800s. The Apex recipe isn’t 
likely to change any time soon; owner Corey Fechner vows to stay true to the 
recipe his grandfather worked to when he started at the bakery back in 1926 as 
a 12-year-old.

Fechner also vows to keep alive the tradition of the Friday open lunch. If you 
have an open mind, you’re welcome to bring a bottle of wine and $5, crowd 
around the 90-year-old Scotch oven, and share a few stories while the owners 
bung some meat in the burner and bake bread fresh for the taking.

We peel ourselves away from the fire and get back on the bus to Seppeltsfield, 
which has the oldest continual port collection in the world. With an unbroken 
lineage dating from 1878, a new attraction to the cellars is the offer of a 
tour culminating in a tasting of your birth-year vintage (included for platinum 
class ticketholders). As an added extra, you may opt to try the 100-year-old 
vintage.

This 100-year-old vintage is thick and dark. If you come from a port-loving 
family, as I do, you’ll be leaving with an order form for the anniversary 
specials. What better birthday gift than a bottle of port from the year your 
loved one was born?


If it weren’t for that superb 1977 glass of port and a sip from 1915, dinner 
at Hentley Farm would be hard to beat as the standout experience of the trip. 
The chef takes the time to explain each course, talking us through the locally 
grown and seasonal produce he’s used to create the menu. He uses as much 
produce from the farm as possible, and we taste mushrooms he’s grown, as well 
as wild garlic and oranges from his parent’s property.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d43e146b5c003115ccf3071531ec84bf39228b9%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d43e146b5c003115ccf3071531ec84bf39228b9%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
 Chef de partie Joe Cobiac on board in the Queen Adelaide restaurant car. 
Photograph: Josie Withers/Great Southern Railway 
After the huge meal and more glasses of wine than it’s polite to report, I 
can’t wait to get back on the train and into my lovely bed. Sleep comes easily 
and the rocking and bumps of the track that had disturbed me on the first night 
now only bring comfort, depth and many pleasant dreams.

I awake on Friday to find we’re finally in the middle of nowhere. We pass a 
town called Pimba and between there and Cook (population four) I spot some 
sheep and a lonely magpie. The vast scrubland leads to a distant mountain and 
the red desert is back again.

If you’re the type who likes looking out windows, this is the trip for you. On 
the brief downtime between meals and on- and off-board activities, my planned 
reading is constantly interrupted by the changing scenery outside.

I can’t believe we’re still in South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> at mid-morning – I 
know, of course, that Australia is a huge, mostly unpopulated country. But here 
I see it, right in front of my eyes and its sheer vastness is extraordinary.

The beguiling landscape may not be home to much but it gives you the 
impression that’s how it should be. The mangy trees that line the railway 
corridor seem to be saying, much like the people who live here, “We’re alone 
out here and that’s just the way we like it.”


We stop off in Cook, which exists solely to service the railway. It once had a 
school and a hospital but now the sound of crickets is all that comes from the 
abandoned buildings. I know why the four people still live here, and I don’t 
blame them for it, although I can’t help but wonder if the solitude would drive 
me crazy.

From here, the railway line is straight – the longest stretch of straight 
railway in the world, actually – and the land is flat. The Nullarbor plain 
lives up to its legend of unimaginable flatness. The horizon is almost a 
fairytale and I’m glad I’m back on the train when an urge to just walk into it 
overwhelms me. Is there anything more beautiful than that red dirt?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd942db1f97121998f44fb3f270081a3d96b0a5%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd942db1f97121998f44fb3f270081a3d96b0a5%2F0_335_4998_2998%2F4998.jpg>
 Is there anything more beautiful than that red dirt? Photograph: Josie 
Withers/Great Southern Railway 
Lunch after Cook is impressive, with a Western Australian marron and truffle 
starter making me very excited about the food to come on the coast. The jewfish 
is succulent, which I feel is an achievement considering the limitations of 
train kitchens.

On Saturday morning, the world has changed again. Trees have returned, I see a 
lake, paddocks of wheat and vibrant purple shrubs. The window frame is now 
coloured in blue and white and green and yellow; flocks of birds fill the 
frame. There are fields of green as crops grow again and the red earth has been 
replaced with a sandy yellow soil.


A masterclass by the Aboriginal chef Mark Olive in the lounge car seems an 
appropriate culmination of the lesson in Australia I’ve undertaken on this 
trip. He introduces us to the native herbs, spices and fruits of this island 
continent and then we taste them with kangaroo, emu, crocodile and barramundi. 
We wrap smoked emu around tart quandongs and dip thinly sliced kangaroo in a 
warm pepper berry sauce. The crocodile is great with muntry berries and the 
barramundi is better than I’ve ever tasted with a sprinkling of lemon myrtle. 
In fact, lemon myrtle is now becoming hugely popular with chefs around the 
country – it was the infusion of it in the yabby bisque that transformed an 
otherwise good soup into a superb and memorable dish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F931f9315d0ab877508346639d1a57bc3922a057b%2F0_278_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Indian%20Pacific%20from%20Sydney%20to%20Perth%3A%20a%20trip%20to%20Australia%20through%20the%20middle%20of%20nowhere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fthe-indian-pacific-from-sydney-to-perth-a-trip-to-australia-through-the-middle-of-nowhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F931f9315d0ab877508346639d1a57bc3922a057b%2F0_278_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A platinum cabin on the Indian Pacific. Photograph: Great Southern Rail 
My fellow guests and I are more subdued on Saturday after three days of eating 
and drinking, and perhaps it’s just as well because the scenery of the Avon 
valley is worth taking the time to ponder. Rolling hills are cut by valleys as 
the Avon river chases the train all the way to the Swan river in Perth. I’m 
ready to reach it and also sad to be saying goodbye to my brief little home on 
the Indian Pacific Railway.

I arrive feeling full and happy and with a deep love and respect for this 
great southern land.

2016-17 prices (for Indian Pacific Sydney to Perth)

 * Gold class starts at $2,529 a person

 * Platinum class is $4,359 a person 
 * Advance purchase discounts available (20%) for bookings made at least six 
months before travel 
 * In 2016-17, the Indian Pacific departs Sydney every Wednesday 
 * All standard Indian Pacific trips (SYD-PER) throughout 2016 and 2017 
include excursions in Broken Hill and the Barossa valley (Maggie Beer, 
Seppeltsfield included). This is for all platinum and gold class guests 
Guardian Australia was a guest of Great Southern Rail
 