
Althea Efunshile is a woman of enormous experience. She has been deputy chief 
executive of Arts Council England; she has worked in government; she has run a 
local education authority. An obvious choice for the board of Channel 4: that 
was the view of the chair of Ofcom, Dame Patricia Hodgson, who interviewed her 
in July for the role, and the chairman and chief executive of Channel 4, who 
both supported her appointment.

Ofcom duly put her name forward to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport 
for sign-off, usually a formality. Last Monday, however, Efunshile was informed
that the government had vetoed her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/05/black-woman-althea-efunshile-channel-4-rejected-ex-arts-council>
. It is particularly striking that the other four names presented to the 
secretary of state, Karen Bradley, and accepted on to Channel 4’s board, were 
those of white men. Ms Efunshile was told that DCMS believed she did not meet 
the requirements specified in the job advert. DCMS officials have yet to say 
precisely how. The broadcaster specifically conceived to represent minorities, 
then, currently hasan all-white board of 10 men and three women 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/corporate/about/channel-4-board>.

Tin-eared at best, this decision by Ms Bradley sits uneasily with the 
government’s stated desire to improve the diversity of boardrooms so that their 
composition better reflects Britain as a whole. That is the very message of the
green paper on corporate governance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573438/beis-16-56-corporate-governance-reform-green-paper-final.pdf>
 that was published by the business department on 29 November, the day after Ms 
Efunshile heard of DCMS’s decision. The government has also been a busy 
commissioner of reports on diversity in boardrooms and among executives in FTSE 
companies. TheHampton-Alexander review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/rallying-call-for-female-boost-in-business-and-the-boardroom>
 on gender balance and theParker review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/the-ethnic-diversity-of-uk-boards-launch-of-the-parker-review>
 into ethnic diversity have both urged action not just on grounds of social 
justice but also for hard-headed business reasons, since a greater depth of 
perspective and experience means better decision-making.

Let us give DCMS the benefit of the doubt and call the decision to block the 
sole black woman brought to its attention an act of unconscious bias. 
Good-hearted, apparently punctilious people show bias without realising it and 
may well be taken back or affronted if anyone suggests they have acted 
unfairly. One might think of the presenter on the BBC’s Today programme this 
week who addressed a female interviewee by her first name only, while according 
her fellow guest, a man, his academic title and surname. Such acts can be quite 
subtle uses of language (differently loaded scales of praise – “hard-working” 
women as opposed to “inspirational” men, for example), decisions about what 
qualifications are required for a post, or assessments of behaviour. They are 
particularly noticeable through the manner in which job appointments are often 
made in the image of the appointers: white male boards lead to white male 
executives, without any particular malice afoot, through the unspoken and often 
unwitting impulse that safety lies in familiarity, and that the best candidate 
is the one most like the incumbent.

Nothing can rule out bias entirely, but there are steps 
<https://hbr.org/2015/04/3-ways-to-make-less-biased-decisions> that can, and 
should, be taken: not least a ruthlessly self-questioning attitude when making 
appointments, mistrusting the gut and appraising CVs blind of gender and race. 
The fact that well-meaning people make biased decisions does not excuse them. 
Ms Efunshile should be swiftly confirmed as a board member of Channel 4. The 
broadcaster – and all of us – will be the loser if she is not.
 