
It is hard to overestimate the value of trees. They are carbon sinks that keep 
us alive. They suck up pollution and soak up water. For more ways in which 
trees rock, theTrees and Design Action Group <http://www.tdag.org.uk/> has a 
list in its report,No Trees No Future 
<http://www.tdag.org.uk/uploads/4/2/8/0/4280686/no_trees_no_future.pdf> – an 
apocalyptic title that highlights their importance.

Yet, although we may profess to love trees, the UK is one of the least-wooded 
countries in Europe. Woodland covers just 12% of the land. What’s good about 
trees is that you can always plant more, but we are not too hot at that, 
either. The planting of broadland species (as opposed to mineral-leaching 
fast-growing conifers) has halved over the last six years.

In the past decade 100 ancient UK woodlands have been sacrificed to 
development and agriculture.The Woodland Trust 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/> says we need to double our planting rate 
over the next 50 years. Stand by then for a new Charter for UK Trees, led by 
the Trust in coalition with campaigners and tree specialists. They hope that 
the new document will encourage us to pay more attention to trees. Technically 
the proposed charter is an update, it’s just that it hasn’t been updated since 
1217.

Compare this with the French version, considered out of date after 10 years, 
and it can’t be a coincidence that French woodland cover is around 30%.

While some species might be threatened by disease, the biggest threat to most 
trees is us. Large urban trees are particularly under siege. Too many have been 
felled by councils and developers, and they can take years to replace (the 
charitytreesforcities.org <http://www.treesforcities.org/> helps with this).

Ultimately, if we want more trees we can’t leave it to chance. The next major 
free planting event 
<https://www.nationalforest.org/sponsor/plantatree/plantingevents.php> at the 
National Forest takes place in Ratby, Leicestershire, 19 March. See you there.

The big picture: dying days of the ivory trade

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fcf3b823cdd72921e94ce27d9dd29d89d4caebe%2F0_301_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20planting%20more%20trees%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20planting%20more%20trees%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fcf3b823cdd72921e94ce27d9dd29d89d4caebe%2F0_301_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Carving out a profit: Chinese artists work on ivory sculptures in the Beijing 
Ivory Carving Factory. Photograph: How Hwee Young/EPA 
Is the writing finally on the wall for the legal ivory trade? Hopes are high 
after Hong Kong announced it will join China in phasing it out. You may wonder 
why the trade still exists, after decades of campaigning to end the poaching of 
elephants. How Hwee Young’s images from the Beijing Ivory Carving Factory shed 
some light showing that ivory carving is alive and well, revived by the 
controversial sales of confiscated stocks.

Well dressed: slow fashion with organic credentials

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbf4e0dc417ab82ab212e63fbf08a61206548e70%2F0_0_2126_2835%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20planting%20more%20trees%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20planting%20more%20trees%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Feco-guide-to-planting-more-trees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbf4e0dc417ab82ab212e63fbf08a61206548e70%2F0_0_2126_2835%2F2126.jpg>
April dress,£118, shop.riyka.com. Photograph: Bernhard Deckert 
At east London label Riyka it’s a matter of pride that you’ll see the same 
fabrics being used season after season. This is slow fashion, and designer 
Rebecca Johnson and husband Vedran Kulic are adamant about reworking precious 
fabrics into different styles. Consequently they put a lot of effort into 
finding the right fabrics in the first place. Their autumn/winter collection is 
inspired by the Russian artist Malevich and the stand-out item is this April 
dress. It’s constructed from two Indian fabrics – an organic cotton canvas 
(from a certified mill) and an organic green velvet, plus a small amount of 
scrap leather, salvaged from manufacturers nearby. They have also teamed up 
with fellow ethical brand Goodone to put everything together at a fair-wage 
production unit in Bulgaria. Classic Riyka, in short: fun, playful, wearable 
and defiantly ethical.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 