
We know how the French Revolution begins, in proclamations and riots and the 
storming of the Bastille, how it develops into murderous terror, and ends with 
the rise of Napoleon; or perhaps, years later, on the battlefield of Waterloo. 
How the later restoration of the Bourbons (who, asTalleyrand 
<http://www.talleyrand.be/> famously put it, learned nothing and forgot 
nothing) simply led to the Revolution of 1848, which led to Napoleon III and 
history repeating itself as farce. At least that's what we know if we take our 
history from novels!

There is – for me at least – something haunting about historical novels that 
deal with points where we say the world altered its course. My own novel, The 
Last Banquet, opens in the early 1700s with Jean-Marie d'Aumout sitting beside 
a dung heap in the ruins of his father's chateau eating beetles, and ends after 
endless feasts, in the shadow of the Terror. In between it takes in Voltaire 
and de Sade, European and American politics and Jean-Marie's obsession, food.

The novels below, given in date order, because anything else effectively 
announces this chalk is batter than that cheese, deal with the changing of the 
world, why it changed, how it changed, and what came after.

1. Les Liaisons Dangereuses by Pierre Choderlos de Laclos 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780415577533>

Morality tale, shocking exposé of aristocratic corruption or tragic love 
story? De Laclos' scandalous 1782 novel featuring Vicomte de Valmont, the 
Marquise de Merteuil and perversity at war with innocence exposed to an avid 
French public the squalor and malice of court life (and may or may not have 
helped bring the revolution closer). In 1985 Christopher Hampton reworked it as 
play and it's been the basis for several films.

2. A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199536238>

"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times …" One of the most famous 
historical novels ever written, and, with 200m copies sold, probably the most 
successful, Dickens's dour 1859 novel unfolds the story of dissolute English 
barrister Sydney Carton and honest French aristocrat Charles Darnay, 
doppelgängers, whose fates become fatally linked. Les Mis without the songs 
(Les Mis is the 1832 Paris Rebellion or it would be on this list.)

3. The Scarlet Pimpernel by Baroness Emma Orczy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340894989>

Sir Percy Blakeney has a secret from his estranged French wife Marguerite and 
the rest of high society. He's a handkerchief-waving wealthy fop to those who 
don't know him; to the very few who do he's the steely-eyed leader of a group 
of English aristocrats dedicated to saving their French counterparts from the 
dreaded guillotine. Orczy's 1905 bestseller was followed by other Pimpernel 
titles, none quite so wonderfully ridiculous, overheated or successful as the 
original.

4. The Duel by Joseph Conrad 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781935554516>

"To the surprise and admiration of their fellows, two officers, like insane 
artists trying to gild refined gold or paint the lily, pursued a private 
contest through the years of universal carnage …" Based on a real series of 
duels fought with swords, rapiers and sabres over the course of 19 years 
beginning in 1794, Conrad's 1908 novella brilliantly mirrors the absurd rise 
and fall of Napoleon. Ridley Scott's 1977 film is almost as good.

5. Scaramouche by Rafael Sabatini 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099529859>

The existential potboiler is a pretty niche genre, but Sabatini nails it 
perfectly with this 1921 historical novel. Andre-Louis Moreau is a 
swashbuckling young lawyer who becomes a revolutionary to avenge a friend's 
murder, using his dead friend's words to whip up the crowd, and promptly finds 
himself on the run. The novel's opening line, "He was born with a gift of 
laughter and a sense that the world was mad," is carved on Sabatini's grave.

6. The Glass Blowers by Daphne du Maurier 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844080656>

Most novels of the French Revolution take place at the centre, in Paris or 
Versailles. Du Maurier's heartfelt 1963 reworking of her family history 
concentrates on the War in the Vendée, the brutal royalist counter-revolution 
that raged in the mid 1790s. Told through the eyes of Sophie Busson, the 
daughter of a master craftsman, it deals with a family excitedly swept up in 
revolution and the heartache of trying to rebuild life afterwards.

7. Napoleon Symphony by Anthony Burgess 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846689161>

Bad breath and genius … Structured around Beethoven's Eroica 
<http://www.beethovenseroica.com/>, which the composer originally dedicated to 
Napoleon, believing him to embody the virtues of the French Revolution, 
Burgess's "misunderstood" 1974 novel in four parts covering Napoleon's early 
victories, rise to first consul and coronation, empire and fall is obviously an 
experiment. In what is never quite explained.

8. A Place of Greater Safety by Hilary Mantel 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007250554>

If you're planning to write the definitive French revolutionary novel then 
grabbing Georges Danton, Camille Desmoulins and Maximilien Robespierre as 
characters is a good place to start. Mantel's 1992 work introduces them as 
newly-arrived provincials and uses the originals' own words as dialogue. 
Although not as great as her later work, the brilliance is already there.

9. Our Lady of the Potatoes by Duncan Sprott 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/874823.Our_Lady_Of_The_Potatoes>

If Boucher hadn't painted Irish immigrant Marie-Louise O'Murphy naked on a bed 
when she was fourteen it's unlikely she'd be even a footnote to history. Duncan 
Sprott's elegant 1995 novel brings the young Irish girl and the tawdry glamour 
Versailles to life, outlines her rise to Louis XV's mistress and takes her and 
us through the last days of court life and into revolution.

10. Pure by Andrew Miller 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444724288>

This 2011 novel folds the corruption of the ancien régime into the corruption 
of Les Innocents Cemetery in Paris.Andrew Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-miller> has his hero, Breton engineer 
Jean-Baptiste Baratte, clear the rancid graves as a metaphor for what will have 
to be cleared when the revolution comes; brilliantly making the political 
personal for his characters.
 