
The music and technology industries worship the sparkle of the new. If 
something is described as “new” or “the new [insert name of existing format or 
platform here]”, there is the conveyance of a commendable sense of modernity; a 
feeling of momentum propelling us all forward. New is good. New is utopian. New 
also, sadly, takes a long time to make its presence felt or make a difference.

Alongside this is the idea of the “answer to”, which always presumes that a 
question has been asked when more often than not it hasn’t.Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> is “the answer to iOS”, Twitter
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> is “the answer to Facebook” 
andSnapchat <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> is “the answer to 
Twitter”. It’s a longstanding Silicon Valley trick that is repeatedly used to 
raise seed funding and Series A investment; present your new product as the 
thing that solves a nonexistent problem inherent in something else, using that 
something else as a form of shorthand to define your own product against. Hence 
nonsense like “[name of new company] is the Uber of Pinterest” sloshing around 
countless investment PowerPoints.

Inevitably, then, the arrival of both Spotify’s two new shows – AM/PM 
<https://play.spotify.com/artist/0eJgmI4OxH9RKFfDVaqXN5?play=true&utm_source=open.spotify.com&utm_medium=open>
 (wherein an artist talks you through their morning and evening playlists) and
Secret Genius 
<https://play.spotify.com/user/spotify_in_residence/playlist/6ER66p0TFhsWAQap3NVzc5?play=true&utm_source=open.spotify.com&utm_medium=open>
 (individuals who have shaped huge hits but may not be household names) – and 
the relaunch ofRed Bull Music Academy’s RBMA Radio  <https://www.rbmaradio.com/>
(now streaming 24/7 from six continents) have both been described by others as 
their “answer” toBeats 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/04/breaking-good-guardian-beats-1-radio-new-music>
, Apple’s online radio brand.

Spotify got the comparison as Apple Music has managed to get to 15 million 
subscribers 
<http://www.musicweek.com/digital/read/apple-music-hits-15m-subscribers/065052> 
in a year (it’s taken Spotify eight years to get to 30 million) and finally 
faces a genuine challenger snapping at its heels so it has to do something 
about it. RBMA Radio got it because its radio-style programming runs around the 
clock and is global in its foundations and outlook.

That would all be fine except all the rumours surrounding Beats 1’s audience 
suggest that even Apple, the most successful corporation in the world and one 
of the most powerful brands in music, is still struggling to make Beats 1 work 
at any meaningful scale. Even with huge and credible names likeElton John 
<http://www.eltonjohn.com/a-guide-to-elton-johns-rocket-hour-on-beats-1-radio/>
, St Vincent, Drake, Stormzy andMike D of the Beastie Boys fronting shows on 
Beats 1 <http://pitchfork.com/news/66784-beastie-boys-mike-d-gets-beats-1-show/>
, it hasn’t quite nailed that elusive music technology goal – traction.

Rob Fitzpatrick of Spotify’s Original Content team 
<https://news.spotify.com/us/author/robfitzpatrickblog/> says of AM/PM, “It’s 
not a reaction to anything. I am looking for ways to make interesting, original 
content. Putting people together with music and telling stories around that. 
It’s a hosted show. [Sarcastically] No one has invented that idea in the last 
100 years! You could just as easily draw parallels between it andMurray the K  
<http://www.murraythek.com/>if you wanted.”

Many Ameri 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/lists/50-most-important-people-in-edm-20140317/many-ameri-and-torsten-schmidt-red-bull-music-academy-founders-19691231>
, co-founder of Red Bull Music Academy, says what they are now doing is, if 
anything, a reaction to a macro shift in audience consumption and expectations 
rather than looking like the slayer of “old” radio. “Looking at where music is 
at now, everything is available at your fingertips,” he says. “Everything you 
want to find, you will find on the internet. We were wondering where you could 
find the music you didn’t know you were looking for. We wanted RBMA Radio to 
become that trusted source where you can go to in order to find music that is 
new to you but not necessarily brand new.”

What RBMA Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio>, AM/PM and Secret 
Genius all have in common with traditional radio, however, is a focus on the 
personal to deliver the contextual. In an age of impersonal playlists, 
streaming music services need to learn the tricks of what makes radio 
attractive without actually trying to photocopy a radio station. Here a human 
voice, rather than a snappy playlist title, tells you not only what you are 
listening to but also why you are listening to it.

Beats 1, of course, lured Zane Lowe away from BBC Radio 1 to front the station 
at launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/16/zane-lowe-apple-bbc-london-radio1-la>
 while George Ergoutodis, formerly head of music at Radio 1,is now working at 
Spotify in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/15/bbc-radio-1-spotify-uk-george-ergatoudis>
. That inevitably fuels the idea that these companies are “the new radio”, but 
that’s the wrong way to look at them. They are taking some of the tricks and 
expertise of radio and applying them in new contexts. It’s a bit like saying 
iPhones are the new Ordnance Survey maps; yes, that is one part of what they 
do, but not the totality.

“That’s because they are people who really know about music and who really 
know about connecting with audiences,” says Fitzpatrick on the migration of 
radio executives into the streaming world. “I am just awashed-up old hack 
<https://twitter.com/rob_fitzpatrick?lang=en> [he was a music journalist] and 
there is no part of me that thinks I am taking on radio. I just want to make 
programmes with interesting people telling you interesting things.”

Ameri also agrees that digital music needs a human voice to guide the listener 
through the tens of millions of tracks that are available to everyone 
instantly. “There is real beauty in being able to follow a story arc and have 
the person who created the music explain why they are doing it and putting it 
together as a show,” he suggests. “We have five different people who are 
anchors on the radio. Each of them has a weekly show and a different angle to 
look at music. One is interested in new electronic music, one is looking more 
at bass music, another person is more into noise and so on.”

In the US, Pandora <http://www.pandora.com/> and SiriusXM 
<http://www.siriusxm.com/getstartednow?IgnitionOne=SI_622348404_88885743493_1&utm_source=sem_Google&utm_medium=sem_g&utm_campaign=sem_Google_Search_Brand_Alpha_Main&utm_term=sem_Exact%20Match_siriusxm>
 can arguably lay the claim to being “the new radio”, in part because the US 
has not had the idea of national radio in the way most European countries have 
had since the early 1900s. But even that is only capturing a whisper of what is 
happening and how streaming is driving the music industry and the music 
audience forward. Streaming can learn from radio, but it shouldn’t 
automatically follow that streaming has to be neo-radio.

“Is streaming the new radio?” is, frankly, the wrong question to be asking 
here as it collapses under the presumption that radio is the final word and 
everything else must exist in its shadow forever, adhering totally to its 
archetypes and mores. “Does streaming even want to be the new radio?” is 
probably a more realistic question. And the answer to that is, emphatically, 
no. Not if it wants to have a future of its own.
 