
January

Sleater-Kinney: No Cities to Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/15/sleater-kinney-no-cities-to-love-review>
A return to form for the reunited riot grrrl pioneers, filled to capacity with 
their signature crunching guitars and breathless, animated vocals.

Björk: Vulnicura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/22/bjork-vulnicura-review-breakup-album>
Imagine the crushing blow of a devastating heartbreak. Add jittery electronic 
beats, Björk’s powerful voice and a string section, and you’ve just about got a 
sense of the latest album from Iceland’s reigning queen of experimental pop.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMWHpoJT3qK4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMWHpoJT3qK4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMWHpoJT3qK4&media=>
 Music video for Lionsong by Björk 
Mark Ronson: Uptown Special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/15/mark-ronson-uptown-special-review>
This funk-inspired album sticks with Ronson’s tried-and-tested slick 
production, and features guest appearances by Stevie Wonder and authorMichael 
Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/09/mark-ronson-michael-chabon-album-uptown-special>
.

Natalie Prass: Natalie Prass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/25/natalie-prass-album-review-debut-gem-heartbreak>
Lushly orchestrated and elegantly arranged pop, steeped in Americana and 
soulful nostalgia.

Dan Mangan + Blacksmith: Club Meds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/dan-mangan-blacksmith-club-meds-review>
Experimental rock from the Canadian singer-songwriter and his matching bearded 
band.

Belle and Sebastian: Girls in Peacetime Want to Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/15/belle-and-sebastian-girls-in-peacetime-review>
Once considered shorthand for anything twee and indie, Belle and Sebastian 
throw disco flourishes and dry humour into this ninth studio album.

Panda Bear: Panda Bear Meets the Grim Reaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/08/panda-bear-meets-grim-reaper-review>
More of the playful, psychedelia-inspired and experimental music we’ve come to 
expect from the Animal Collective band member’s solo project.

February

Bob Dylan: Shadows in the Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/29/bob-dylan-shadows-in-the-night-review>
Dylan tries his hand at a series of Sinatra-affiliated old standards from the 
great American songbook – unexpected, but lovely.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOxy_hy22CA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOxy_hy22CA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOxy_hy22CA&media=>
 Music video for The Night We Called It a Day by Bob Dylan 
Jessica Pratt: On Your Own Love Again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/29/jessica-pratt-on-your-own-again-review>
Delicate, folksy songs from the LA-based singer-songwriter, on her second 
album.

Father John Misty: I Love You, Honeybear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/05/father-john-misty-i-love-you-honeybear-review>
Navel-gazing yet potent songwriting from former Fleet Foxes drummer Joshua 
Tillman, under his Misty moniker.

Viet Cong: Viet Cong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/29/viet-cong-viet-cong-review>
Guitar squalls and pounding drums abound on this debut full-length release 
from the Canadian post-punk band.

Susanne Sundfør: Ten Love Songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/12/susanne-sundfor-ten-love-songs-review>
A collection of beautifully crafted songs, in that trusted tradition of 
emotive and euphoric Scandinavian pop.

Drake: If You’re Reading This, It’s Too Late 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/13/drake-if-youre-reading-this-its-too-late-review-surprise-album-release>
Self-reflection mingles with bravado on this bass-heavy surprise release from 
the Canadian rapper.

Nikki Lane: All or Nothin’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/05/nikki-lane-all-or-nothin-review>
Lane huskily addresses heartbreak and lust on lap steel guitar-heavy songs.

March

Sufjan Stevens: Carrie & Lowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/sufjan-stevens-carrie-and-lowell-review>
A crushingly personal collection of acoustic guitar-led songs tackling 
Stevens’s childhood and the death of his mother.

Fantasma: Free Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/12/fantasma-free-love-review>
An ebullient release from the South African band, spanning kwaito, Zulu folk 
and electronic music.

Courtney Barnett: Sometimes I Sit and Think, and Sometimes I Just Sit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/courtney-barnett-sometimes-i-sit-and-think-and-sometimes-i-just-sit-album-review>
Barnett can turn the most seemingly mundane topics – house-hunting, insomnia 
or swimming in a public pool – into scuzzy, indie-pop demonstrations of lyrical 
prowess.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fcourtney-barnett-pedestrian-at-best-live-session-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424864455687%2Fcrop_KP_103758_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Courtney%20Barnett%20performs%20Pedestrian%20at%20Best%20live%20in%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fcourtney-barnett-pedestrian-at-best-live-session-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Courtney%20Barnett%20performs%20Pedestrian%20at%20Best%20live%20in%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fcourtney-barnett-pedestrian-at-best-live-session-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424864455687%2Fcrop_KP_103758_640x360.jpeg>
 Courtney Barnett performs Pedestrian at Best live in a Guardian music session 
Marina and the Diamonds: Froot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/15/marina-and-the-diamonds-froot-review-steeped-in-introspection>
Tight electropop steeped in introspection from the Welsh singer-songwriter, on 
this third album.

Matthew E White: Fresh Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/05/matthew-e-white-fresh-blood-review>
The Spacebomb record label and studio founder mines soul sensibilities on this 
beautifully produced second album.

Pops Staples: Don’t Lose This 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/05/pops-staples-dont-lose-this-review>
The blues master’s last set of recordings, released years after his death and 
featuring his daughter Mavis on backing vocal duties.

Marc Almond: The Velvet Trail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/05/marc-almond-the-velvet-trail-review>
Big-chorus pop from the former Soft Cell frontman, still comfortably making 
music in his own right.

Kendrick Lamar: To Pimp a Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/kendrick-lamar-to-pimp-a-butterfly-review>
A dense and powerful album, spanning jazz, funk and neo-soul influences while 
tackling both personal and social politics.

April

Nadine Shah: Fast Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/09/nadine-shah-fast-food-review>
A passionate and intense album, marked by Shah’s distinctive, resonant alto 
voice and piercing electric guitar riffs.

Earl Sweatshirt: I Don’t Like Shit, I Don’t Go Outside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/earl-sweatshirt-i-dont-like-shit-i-dont-go-outside-review>
Moody and introspective rap verses over jittery, self-produced beats on the 
Odd Future crew member’s latest.

East India Youth: Culture of Volume 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/02/east-india-youth-culture-of-violence-review>
A bold and expansive exploration of the limits of experimental pop with a 
synth-driven edge.

Blur: The Magic Whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/22/blur-the-magic-whip-album-review>
After 12 years away, the Britpop four-piece return for this unexpected release 
that turns some loose jam sessions in Hong Kong into a joyful reunion.

Wire: Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/09/wire-wire-album-review>
It took 14 albums for the post-punk pioneers to opt for an eponymous release, 
and Wire – poppy and self-assured – doesn’t disappoint.

Young Fathers: White Men Are Black Men Too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/02/young-fathers-white-men-are-black-men-too-review>
A defiantly pop-driven release from the experimental, Mercury prize-winning 
Scottish trio.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fyoung-fathers-shame-live-session-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F7%2F1428403377393%2Fcrop_KP_163212_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Fathers%20perform%20Shame%20live%20in%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fyoung-fathers-shame-live-session-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Fathers%20perform%20Shame%20live%20in%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F08%2Fyoung-fathers-shame-live-session-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F7%2F1428403377393%2Fcrop_KP_163212_640x360.jpeg>
 Young Fathers perform the single Shame live in a Guardian music session 
Stealing Sheep: Not Real 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/09/stealing-sheep-not-real-review>
Moving away from their so-called pagan-pop debut, the Liverpudlian trio sweep 
into sparkling, synth-laden artpop territory.

Bop English: Constant Bop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/bop-english-constant-bop-review>
The White Denim frontman chucks a mix of sonic influences at the wall on this 
eclectic debut.

Listen to a selection of songs from the best albums released between January 
and April, using the Spotify player below:

May

Unknown Mortal Orchestra: Multi-Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/21/unknown-mortal-orchestra-multi-love-review>
A polyamorous relationship’s disintegration provides the source material for 
this eclectic album, which mashes together elements of psychedelia and classic 
soul.

Holly Herndon: Platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/14/holly-herndon-platform-review>
Herndon explores the emotional capacity of the laptop as an instrument. That 
might sound ridiculous and pretentious, but the results make for challenging, 
textured and heavily cerebral electronic music.

Mbongwana Star: From Kinshasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/14/mbongwana-star-from-kinshasa-review>
The Congolese band defy world music stereotypes on this debut, made with 
Dublin-born DJ and producer Liam Farrell.

Róisín Murphy: Hairless Toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/07/roisin-murphy-hairless-toys-review>
The electronic music producer and former Moloko frontwoman adds another 
feather to her genre-spanning cap, this time with disco, house and an 
unexpected country flourish.

Django Django: Born Under Saturn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/30/django-django-born-under-saturn-review>
A warm, psychedelic offering from the London-based four-piece, picking up 
where their critically adored2012 debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/26/django-django-django-django-review>
 left off.

Torres: Sprinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/17/torres-sprinter-review-astonishing-unsettling>
Mackenzie Scott goes for a full-on dissection of her upbringing and 
coming-of-age journey on this PJ Harvey soundalike album of 90s-style guitar 
fuzz.

Hot Chip: Why Make Sense? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/17/hot-chip-why-make-sense-review-hip-hop-funk-beauty>
Catchy, funk-driven electropop from the band who’ve made house-inspired 
dancefloor fillers their MO.

June

Miguel: Wildheart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/25/miguel-wildheart-review-alexis-petridis>
The R&B singer-songwriter maintains his outsider status on this third album of 
funk-psychedelia, loverman innuendo and his signature and choruses.

The Orb: Moonbuilding 2703 AD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/18/the-orb-moonbuilding-2703-ad-review>
Four songs of slow-burning ambient house fill the duo’s 13th album with the 
warmth and dynamism that first set their career off more than 20 years ago.

A$AP Rocky: At. Long. Last. A$AP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/asap-rocky-at-long-last-asap-review>
Harlem’s “pretty motherfucker” returns to his tuned-down, Houston rap-inspired 
roots, opting for psychedelic guitars, sticky and slow melodies and references 
to a life centred on love, sex and drugs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyEG2VTHS9yg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyEG2VTHS9yg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyEG2VTHS9yg&media=>
 Watch A$AP Rocky’s L$D – video 
Jenny Hval: Apocalypse, Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/04/jenny-hval-apocalypse-girl-review-provocative-compelling-art-pop>
A synth-driven, alt-pop exploration of gender and sexuality – which the 
Norwegian singer-songwriter has dubbed “soft dick rock”.

Gengahr: A Dream Outside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/11/gengahr-a-dream-outside-review>
Pop melodies abound over the indie four-piece’s scuzzy guitars on this 
commanding debut.

Jamie xx: In Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/24/jamie-xx-in-colour-review-larging-it-for-introverts>
Part nostalgia trip, part club-culture anthropology project, this album 
obsesses over the past while showing off Jamie’s cutting-edge production skills.

Zhala: Zhala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/04/zhala-zhala-review-a-kaleidoscopic-burst-of-danceable-electropop>
Zhala, signed to Robyn’s label, Konichiwa Records, combines her Kurdish 
heritage and Scandinavian pop chops on an effervescent album of 
dancefloor-primed electropop.

Wolf Alice: My Love Is Cool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/18/wolf-alice-my-love-is-cool-review>
The London four-piece sweep 1990s and noughties alt-rock influences into this 
fervent, shouty and exuberant debut offering.

July

Tame Impala: Currents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/16/tame-impala-currents-review-kevin-parker>
Kevin Parker’s third studio album kicks his signature pysch-rock into 
synth-driven gear, sounding poppier than ever before.

Ghostface Killah: Adrian Young  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/02/ghostface-killah-adrian-younge-presents-twelve-reasons-to-die-ii-review>
Presents Twelve Reasons to Die II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/02/ghostface-killah-adrian-younge-presents-twelve-reasons-to-die-ii-review>
A gangster’s tale, adapted from a comic book, anchors this second 
collaborative effort between Wu-Tang Clan’s Ghostface and film score composer 
Adrian Younge.

Omar Souleyman: Bahdeni Nami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/23/omar-souleyman-bahdeni-nami-review>
The prolific Syrian wedding singer releases a second studio album. This time 
Four Tet, Gilles Peterson and duo Modeselektor produce his latest collection of 
hyperactive Middle Eastern folk over electronic beats.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJlu1XyPexn8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJlu1XyPexn8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJlu1XyPexn8&media=>
 Music video for Bahdeni Nami by Omar Souleyman 
Wilco: Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/17/wilco-star-wars-first-listen-review-an-absolute-blast>
A surprise release from Jeff Tweedy’s indie band, combining glam-rock and pop 
with splashes of psychedelia.

Sleaford Mods: Key Markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/sleaford-mods-key-markets-review-spleen-venting-and-barmily-brilliant>
On this latest studio album the Nottingham duo still sound on-brand and angry, 
spitting Jason Williamson’s caustic lyrics over Andrew Fearn’s minimal 
basslines and synthesised beats.

Four Tet: Morning/Evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/four-tet-kieran-hebden-morning-evening-album-review>
A beautifully textured album built around Bollywood soundtrack samples and 
released by Four Tet’s Kieran Hebden a week early – to honour the summer 
solstice, of course.

Ahmad Jamal: Live in Marciac 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/09/ahmad-jamal-live-in-marciac-2014-review>
In August 2014 the jazz piano octogenarian played a sparkling and dynamic live 
set at a festival in France, the results of which can be heard on this album.

Ezra Furman: Perpetual Motion People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/02/ezra-furman-perpetual-motion-people-review>
Though he’s made his name as a striking live act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/22/why-ezra-furman-is-the-most-compelling-live-act-you-can-see-right-now>
, Furman throws a potent energy into this personal album of cathartic 
rock’n’roll.

August

Mac DeMarco: Another One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/06/mac-de-marco-another-one-review>
The singer-songwriter pours lilting guitars over this indiepop mini-album, 
singing about love and relationships in his signature, scratchy falsetto.

Chelsea Wolfe: Abyss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/aug/21/chelsea-wolfe-abyss-album-video-review>
Wolfe makes the most of her crippling sleep paralysis, using it as the 
inspiration for this fifth drone-pop album’s metal-inspired guitars and hazy 
vocals.

Destroyer: Poison Season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/20/destroyer-poison-season-review>
Dan Bejar channels both Springsteen and Lou Reed on this skilfully written 
follow-up to 2011’s Kaputt.

Beach House: Depression Cherry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/27/beach-house-depression-cherry-review-the-same-dreampop-but-different>
There’s more lush, gauzy indie on offer from the Baltimore dreampop duo on 
this warm and textured body of work.


Royal Headache: High 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/20/royal-headache-high-review>
This album of crashing garage-rock almost led to the Australian punk band’s 
split – but thankfully they stuck together and saw it through.

Motörhead: Bad Magic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/27/motorhead-bad-magic-review-indecently-thrilling-and-vital>
For all frontman Lemmy’s health problems, the metal veterans continue to bash 
out their brand of raucous and swaggering rock with the gusto of musicians 30 
years their junior.

Listen to a selection of songs from some of the best albums released from May 
to August, using the player below:

September

Lana Del Rey: Honeymoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/20/lana-del-rey-honeymoon-review>
She’s shaken off the guitar-heavy sound of Dan Auerbach’s production on 2014’s 
Ultraviolence and retreated back into the soft cocoon of strings and breathy 
melancholy that made fans love her in the first place.

The Libertines: Anthems for Doomed Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/the-libertines-anthems-for-doomed-youth-a-reputation-restored>
The “boys in the band” are back, sounding as though they’ve recorded songs in 
a professional studio with a full-time engineer for a change. Kudos to Jake 
Gosling for that extra buff of polish.

Empress Of: Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/17/empress-of-me-review>
Lorely Rodriguez bares her innermost thoughts – reacting to street harassment, 
sleeping in fear with a machete beneath her pillow in Mexico – on this tightly 
produced album of synth-driven R&B. It’s a step above the usual hipster R&B 
fare, honest.

Julia Holter: Have You in My Wilderness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/julia-holter-have-you-in-my-wilderness-review>
Holter’s stunning fourth album pulls together influences from experimental 
pop, baroque pop and sprawling orchestral arrangements.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOERixQR-hxY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOERixQR-hxY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOERixQR-hxY&media=>
 Music video for Julia Holter’s Sea Calls Me Home 
Low: Ones and Sixes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/low-ones-and-sixes-review>
Eleven LPs into their 21-year career, Low have made a beautiful album of tight 
and minimal indie.

Sexwitch: Sexwitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/sexwitch-sexwitch-review>
Natasha Khan of Bat for Lashes explores a treasure trove of mostly Middle 
Eastern recordings, repurposing them into psychedelic wig-outs with the help of 
band Toy and producer Dan Carey.

New Order: Music Complete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/new-order-music-complete-review>
After a lineup rejig – goodbye to bassist Peter Hook, hello again to 
keyboardist Gillian Gilbert – the band sound primed and ready for the 
dancefloor, armed with guest spots from Iggy Pop, Brandon Flowers and La Roux.

October

Kurt Vile: b’lieve i’m goin down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/01/kurt-vile-blieve-im-goin-down-review>
The Pennsylvania-born singer-songwriter channels Lauren Canyon on an album 
filled with plucked guitar melodies that wriggle into your mind and make 
themselves at home.

Protomartyr: The Agent Intellect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/01/protomartyr-the-agent-intellect-review-postpunk>
These Detroit post-punkers have poured the misery of their city’s decline and 
a few more personal musings into a cathartic third album.

Deerhunter: Fading Frontier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/15/deerhunter-fading-frontier-review>
Bradford Cox somehow turns the aftermath of a broken jaw and pelvis – the 
result of being hit by a car in 2014 – into this decidedly upbeat, gentle 
guitar-pop album.

Jean-Michel Jarre: Electronica 1 – The Time Machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/15/jean-michel-jarre-electronica-1-the-time-machine-review>
Jarre crams a glut of collaborators – including Laurie Anderson, concert 
pianist Lang Lang and DJ Boys Noize – on to an explosive 16-track album that 
reminds us of his frontrunner status in electronic music.

Joanna Newsom: Divers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/22/joanna-newsom-divers-review-deeply-idiosyncratic-straightforwardly-striking>
Love or hate her cooing voice, Newsom continues to display a practically 
peerless approach to sumptuous songwriting. And she sounds more self-assured 
than ever, on this fourth album.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc&media=>
 Joanna Newsom’s Sapokanikan music video 
Pure Bathing Culture: Pray for Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/22/pure-bathing-culture-pray-for-rain-review>
The Portland-based duo’s second album deals in a most intoxicating type of 
indiepop, pairing dark lyrics with sparkly hooks and melodies.

John Grant: Grey Tickles, Black Pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/01/john-grant-grey-tickles-black-pressure-review>
Grant follows up the incredible Pale Green Ghosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/07/john-grant-pale-green-review> 
with an album that confronts his status living with HIV and slow amble into 
middle age with the brand of black humour that’s become his calling card.

November

Jamie Woon: Making Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/jamie-woon-making-time-review-excellent-soul-styled-second-album>
The Brit School graduate, formerly lumped in with the “post-dubstep” crowd, 
goes for full-on soul with thissatin-smooth second album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/30/jamie-woon-bbc-sound-of-2016-making-time>
.

Anna von Hausswolff: The Miraculous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/15/anna-von-hausswolff-the-miraculous-review-impossibly-intense>
Ringing organ chords, howled vocals and nods to drone-folk and metal 
reverberate through the Swedish singer-songwriter’s dark and emotive third 
album.

King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard: Paper Mâché Dream Balloon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/19/king-gizzard-and-the-lizard-wizard-paper-mache-dream-balloon-review-mellow-defuzzed-psychedelia>
The Aussie seven-piece have prettied up their brand of psychedelia, shifting 
to brushed acoustic guitar lines and joyous hooks on this 1960s-era 
flower-power pop.

Nadia Reid: Listen to Formation, Look for the Signs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/29/nadia-reid-listen-formation-look-for-signs-review-extraordinarily-assured-singer-songwriter>
Gruff electric guitar tousles with New Zealander Reid’s smokily sung folk, on 
this debut centred on incisive lyrics and supple, undulating melodies.

Arca: Mutant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/19/arca-mutant-review-distressing-and-transcendental-sonic-experiments>
Disconcerting electronic music that jolts you about and evades the standard 
structures of pop: it’s FKA twigs and Björk collaboratorAlejandro Ghersi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/31/arca-bjork-kanye-west>’s second 
album this year.

Tinariwen: Live in Paris, Oukis N’Asuf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/22/tinariwen-live-in-paris-album-review-oukis-nasuf-n-asuf-wedge-records-lalla-badi-tinde-azawad>
The Tuareg desert blues band shine in a live setting, as demonstrated by this 
album recorded in Paris in December 2014, featuring guest appearances by 
Tamashek singer Lalla Badi.

Floating Points: Elaenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/floating-points-elaenia-review>
You may know Sam Shephard as a late-night DJ, but here he fuses jazz, ambient 
electronica and cocoon-like warm synths on a beautiful slow-burner of an album.

Listen to a selection of songs from the best albums released from September to 
November using the Spotify player below:
 