
The global food system is bracing for big changes. Around the world, resources 
are straining to deal with a host of troublesome long-range trends, including 
climate change, population growth, deforestation, and the loss of biodiversity. 
At the same time, highly populated nations like China and India have begun 
eating more meat and dairy, further accelerating agriculture’s climate impact. 
In 2013, for example, more than half of the pork eaten worldwide was consumed 
in China.

But it’s not all bad news. More and more restaurants are working to help 
diners eat sustainably. And, thanks to lifecycle analysis, which examines 
resource use and greenhouse gas pollution from field to plate, pinpointing 
climate-friendly, or “low-carbon” foods is getting easier.

Determining whether a food is low-carbon requires looking at both the 
resources used to produce it and the gases emitted in the process. For example, 
as we’ve known for decades, plant-based dishes require far less energy than 
those made with meat, dairy and eggs, as the animals raised to produce the 
latter require months if not years of feed. Grazing animals also release 
methane gas, another greenhouse gas (GHG).

But that basic rule is only a starting point, and several other factors also 
impact a food’s carbon footprint. For example, conventional fertilizer is made 
with natural gas, resulting in the release ofnitrous oxide 
<http://epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/gases/n2o.html>, an especially 
potent GHG; organic food, on the other hand, is lessenvironmentally damaging 
<http://www.fao.org/organicag/oa-specialfeatures/oa-climatechange/en/>. Organic 
farmers also build rich soils, which absorb more carbon, and they also tend to 
use other resources and energy more wisely than conventional producers.

The type of transport used to carry a food to market, as well as the miles that
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_miles> it must travel, are also important. 
Ounce for ounce, food that travels by plane or truck requires much more fuel 
and leads to the release of more GHG emissions than food that travels by boat 
or rail.

In 2010, the Environmental Working Group ranked 20 common foods 
<http://www.ewg.org/meateatersguide/eat-smart/> according to the greenhouse 
gases (GHG) emitted in their production, and found that beef, lamb, and cheese 
are the most carbon-intensive. And while severaloft-cited studies 
<http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a0701e/a0701e00.HTM> point to today’s livestock 
production as a major GHG culprit, some scientists are also consideringthe way 
that animals are raised, and their impact on the eco-systems. Some have even 
argued that grazing may in fact help soil absorb carbon.

Another factor is the type of meat. While it takes three pounds of grain to 
cause a pig to gain a pound of weight, it takes only two pounds to do the same 
for a chicken. By comparison, it takes seven for a cow. More grain translates 
to more GHGs, which translates to a bigger environmental impact.

In other words, eating low on the carbon spectrum is a complicated business. 
With that in mind, here is a handful of climate-friendly recipes from 
eco-conscious restaurants around the world.

Zucchini, French beans and new potato salad 

The Duke of Cambridge <http://www.dukeorganic.co.uk/>, London, England

Not only does the Duke of Cambridge use mainly local and organic ingredients 
in all its dishes, but it is also the United Kingdom’s only gastropub with a 
Soil Association certification, which means that it’s beenthird-party certified 
<http://www.soilassociation.org/certification> to “assure consumers they are 
buying genuinely organic products that can be fully traceable back to the farm.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406307093839%2Fd57a80eb-7df2-4b18-8f45-161185e261ee-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20low-carbon%20diet%3A%20eat%20well%20without%20gobbling%20up%20resources&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20low-carbon%20diet%3A%20eat%20well%20without%20gobbling%20up%20resources&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406307093839%2Fd57a80eb-7df2-4b18-8f45-161185e261ee-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Duke of Cambridge’s zucchini salad is almost entirely sourced from local, 
sustainable farms. Photograph: The Duke of Cambridge 
According to Rachel Ring, the Duke’s General Manager, this salad is made using 
all-organic produce <http://www.organiclea.org.uk/> from nearby farms 
<http://www.growingcommunities.org/>. It’s also efficient in the kitchen. “This 
recipe only uses one large saucepan,” Ring says. “We love the idea of recycling 
the hot water, and using the least amount of equipment possible. We think this 
makes perfect sense — it uses less power and means there’s less mess to wash!”

1 cup of French green beans 

1 cup snow peas 

½ cup summer squash 

1 cup zucchini

1 cup new season potatoes 

1 handful (30 grams) mint 

1 bunch spring onions 

1 bunch flat leaf parsley 

4 eggs

¼ cup of butter

1 lemon, juiced

2 tablespoons cider vinegar 

Maldon salt

Freshly ground black peppercorn

1. Snip the ends off the beans and snow peas and cut them half. Cut the 
zucchini and squash lengthwise in ¼ inch thick slices (or thinner, if possible).

2. Wash and boil the new potatoes. When cooked (check with a pointy knife), 
drain and let them cool down in a colander. Do not use cold water as it can 
make them soggy. When cool enough to handle, cut the potatoes in ½ inch thick 
slices.

3. Chop the mint and parsley roughly with a sharp knife. Wash the spring 
onions, then cut into thin slices. Keep the chopped herbs to one side for use 
later.

4. Bring a large pan of water to the boil. In a wok, melt the butter with a 
little salt and pepper. Drop the French beans in the boiling water. After 
boiling them for two minutes add the snow peas, zucchini, and potatoes. Bring 
back to a boil and cook for an additional minute.

5. Drain the vegetables using a small handheld colander or a chef tool called 
a spider. Let the vegetables steam for half a minute to remove the excess of 
water. Keep the water in the pan. Add the vinegar to the boiling water and 
poach your eggs (Ring advises cooking them for two and a half minutes).

6. Warm up the butter and combine all the cooked vegetable in the butter, then 
season to taste. Add the chopped herbs and lemon juice, toss all the 
ingredients together.

7. Remove the eggs from the water. Lay on a clean dry cloth to remove the 
excess water.

8. Divide the vegetables on four plates or a large serving platter, place the 
eggs on the top, and pour the remaining sauce on the top.

Serves four

Fire-roasted poblano chilies filled with corn, quinoa, and goat cheese

Greens <http://www.greensrestaurant.com/> Restaurant, San Francisco, California
 Fire roasted poblano chilies from San Francisco’s Greens restaurant. 
Photograph: Greens 
A vegetarian restaurant, Greens was founded by the San Francisco Zen Center 
and cookbook author Deborah Madison. Executive chef Annie Somerville’s 
seasonal, farm-to-table dishes may not sound unique in a city where most 
high-end food is now somewhere on the farm-to-table spectrum, but was – and 
remains – a pioneer in her field.

Like many of Somerville’s dishes, this one provides a complete protein without 
meat. “No livestock was raised in order to create our dishes,” she says, adding 
that she’s “proud to pursue forward-thinking environmental practices aligned 
with preserving the earth’s fine resources.”

1 teaspoon Chipotle Puree

½ cup quinoa

½ cup water

Salt 

6 poblano chilies, about 1 1/2 pounds

½ tablespoon olive or vegetable oil

¼ large yellow onion, diced, about ½ cup 

2 ears of corn, shaved, about 2 cups kernels

1 or 2 jalapeno chilies, seeded and diced

¼ cup coarsely chopped cilantro

1 teaspoon chopped fresh oregano or marjoram

1 teaspoon chopped fresh sage

¼ cup toasted pumpkin seeds

2 ounces mild goat cheese, crumbled, about 1/3 cup

Oil for the baking dish

1. Make the Chipotle Puree. Greens uses canned chipotle chilies packed in 
adobo, a spicy sauce made from chilies, tomatoes, and vinegar. Puree a whole 
can at a time in a small food processor or blender.

2. Rinse quinoa three times in cold water to remove the outer coating. Drain. 
Bring the water to a boil in a small pot; add a pinch of salt and the quinoa. 
Cover, lower the heat, and cook over low heat about 15 minutes, until tender. 
Set aside to cool.

3. Grill the chilies directly over an open flame, using metal tongs to turn 
them until the skins are blistered and charred. Transfer to a bowl and cover. 
Peel the chilies, carefully removing the skin around the stems. Make a 
lengthwise slit in each chili and remove the seeds. Set aside.


4. Preheat the oven to 375º F

5. Heat the olive oil in a sauté pan and add the onions and a pinch of salt. 
Sauté over medium heat until the onions begin to soften. Add the corn, 
jalapenos, and ¼ cup water to keep the corn mixture from sticking to the pan. 
Cook over low heat until the corn is tender. Transfer to a bowl and set aside.

6. Lightly oil a baking dish. Toss the quinoa with the corn mixture and season 
with the chipotle puree, herbs, pumpkin seeds, cheese, and ¼ teaspoon salt. 
Stuff each chili with about 3/4 cup filling, depending on their size, being 
careful to keep the stems in place. The stuffed chilies should be firm, but not 
overly full. Place them seam side up in the dish, cover and bake until the 
filling is heated through and the chilies are puffed, 25 to 30 minutes. Serve 
immediately with fire-roasted salsa.

Serves six

Banana flower salad

Heaven Restaurant & Inn <http://www.heavenrwanda.com/>, Kigali, Rwanda
 While it may be carbon intensive for American cooks, this banana flower salad 
is highly sustainable when it’s served at Rwanda’s Heaven restaurant. 
Photograph: Heaven restaurant 
In addition to serving high-end food made from hyper-local ingredients, Heaven 
also runs a highly successful job training program in a nation that is still 
recovering from genocide. Co-owners Josh and Alissa Ruxin are known for 
utilizing local artisans at every level, sourcing everything from furniture to 
ingredients from local farms. Once per month, Alissa even hosts Rwanda’s first 
farmers’ market.

While this salad isn’t very low-carbon for anyone who doesn’t live in range of 
banana flowers, it’s a good recipe to have it in your pocket the next time 
you’re in a place where this delicacy flourishes. Co-owner Alissa Ruxin says 
that the flowers themselves “are harvested from our back yard banana tree, as 
is the cilantro which we grow in our onsite organic garden.”


Banana flowers

Lemon or lime

Chili pepper

Toasted peanuts

Mango

Tree tomato

Mint

Cilantro

Honey

Fish sauce

Olive oil

Rice wine vinegar

1. Peel the purple layers from the banana flower until only tender yellow 
inner petals remain. Prepare a bath of acidulated water – water with a lot of 
lemon or lime juice. Cut the banana flowers in half lengthwise, then slice them 
thinly, putting the chopped flower into the water bath immediately to prevent 
oxidation. Let the chopped banana flowers soak in the bath for at least 15 
minutes to leech out the astringency.

2. Prepare the dressing by mixing a little honey, a few dashes of fish sauce, 
citron juice, a little rice wine vinegar, salt and olive oil. Remove the seeds 
from a pilli pilli (African Bird’s Eye chili) and thinly slice it, then add it 
to the dressing.

3. To finish the salad, drain the soaked banana flower, then mix with toasted 
peanuts, diced mango, mint, cilantro and dress it. Garnish the plate with 
tamarilllo (or tree tomato) coulis (the seeds and inner part of the tamarillo, 
pureed).

Serves 2 

Mushroom ceviche 

Saqra <http://saqra.pe/>, Lima, Peru
 Served at Saqra, this mushroom ceviche is sourced from local ingredients - 
and takes some pressure off Peru’s overstressed fisheries. Photograph: /Saqra 
When Joaquin de la Piedra opened Saqra – whose name comes from the quechua 
word for “little devil” – he wanted to create a venue where the food was 
playful, yet reflected his respect for environmental stewardship. To this 
point, De La Piedra serves traditional Peruvian dishes alongside their 
plant-based counterparts.

For his take on traditional ceviche, the chef wanted to offer a vegan 
alternative in a place where, he says, “80-85% of the fish caught goes to 
making fishmeal and fish oil, and the rest is very expensive.” Saqra’s 
vegetables come from local farms, and the mushroom are grown using what De La 
Piedra calls “agricultural sub products” that would otherwise go to waste, such 
as corn and quinoa stalks. “The earth left after harvesting is very rich: it 
enriches the soil for other uses,” he says.

2 cups mushrooms (sliced to approximately 1 cm thick)

½ cup lime juice

1 ounces lemon juice

¼ cup red onion, julienned

I cob of fresh Corn, shucked 

¼ cup tomatillo, sliced
 White vinegar 

¾ cup olive oil

Small bunch parsley, chopped finely

Salt

Black Pepper

1 leaf of lettuce, to garnish

Chili

Cilantro to taste

Marinate the mushrooms with vinegar, olive oil, tomatillo, parsley, salt and 
pepper as long as several hours in advance.

When ready to serve, combine mushrooms with remaining lemon juice, lime juice, 
and cilantro. Serve beside lettuce and corn and top with red onions.

Serves two.

Dick’s classic burgers 

Dick’s Kitchen <http://www.dkportland.com/>, Portland, Oregon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406309284394%2F73ab1a1d-39fd-421e-9356-45208a215c14-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20low-carbon%20diet%3A%20eat%20well%20without%20gobbling%20up%20resources&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20low-carbon%20diet%3A%20eat%20well%20without%20gobbling%20up%20resources&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2014%2Fjul%2F28%2Feat-well-nutrition-grass-fed-local-recipes-fisheries-resources-carbon-soil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F25%2F1406309284394%2F73ab1a1d-39fd-421e-9356-45208a215c14-2060x1236.jpeg>
 At Dick’s Kitchen, in Portland, Oregon, burgers are made with locally-sourced, 
grass-fed beef. Photograph: Dick’s Kitchen 
Grazing animals remain a controversial part of the food system. While beef and 
lamb rank near the top of some lists of carbon intensive foods, managed grazing 
is now seen to be a key solution to building soil that absorbs carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere.

Dick’s Kitchen sources its meat from a single producer, Carmen Ranch 
<http://www.carmanranch.com/> in Wallowa, Oregon. There, rancher Cory Carman, 
who calls herself a “grass farmer,” uses animals to manage her pastures.

When Richard Satnick, owner of Dick’s, opened a 100% grass-fed burger 
restaurant, he was mainly interested in the food for its nutrition value. But 
this relatively rare form of the meat has also opened up a new way of thinking 
about food as the product of an ecosystem. Now, he says, his goal is to “make 
grass-fed beef a viable entity in the marketplace.”

“With managed grazing,” he says, “we can reverse the effects of hundreds of 
years of intensive, destructive agriculture on the land, and restore tall-grass 
prairies, which are carbon sinks.”

1 pound 100% grass-fed beef (combine multiple cuts, at least 20% fat)

Salt and pepper to taste

1 teaspoon of an herb/spice mix including chili pepper, garlic powder, cayenne 
pepper, oregano, black pepper, mustard powder, and paprika.

1 potato sourdough roll

Onion aoli

Optional toppings include butter lettuce, tomato, red onion, pickles

1. Make the onion aoli. Combine good quality 1 cup mayonnaise, sea salt, and 
half cup onions that have been sliced and roasted until they are thoroughly 
cooked to soft and have begun to caramelize.

1. Blend the meat (At Dick’s Kitchen they use a buffalo chopper), Do not 
overwork. Chopping the meat rather than a grinding it keeps cooler so it 
retains moisture, therefore making a juicer burger.

2. After three 1/3 pound patties are formed, dust lightly with the herbs. Salt 
while cooking

3. Cook in a pan or over a cast iron pan to retain the fat (do not grill)
 4. Top with vegetables and serve on a sourdough roll. But keep it simple! 
Toppings make an ordinary burger interesting, but a good burger doesn’t need 
much else.

Serves 3


Twilight Greenaway is a writer and editor who focuses on food and 
sustainability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional/sustainability>. She is 
managing editor ofCivil Eats <http://www.civileats.com>.

 The sustainable living hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-living> is funded 
by Unilever. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>. 



 