
A couple of weeks ago, Roz Ward answered her phone. “ROZ WARD MUST GO!” a man 
shouted, over and over, for two minutes.


Ward passed it on to La Trobe University’s security officers, as she has done 
with dozens of threatening emails and letters, including those containing death 
threats. Ward is a contained person but the pressure on her as the face of the
Safe Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/safe-schools> program 
to prevent bullying and support LGBTI students is relentless.

“I’m just tired of it,” she says, and she looks it.

What is Safe Schools, what is changing and what are states doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/what-is-safe-schools-what-is-changing-and-what-are-states-doing>
The focus on Ward’s Marxist politics and blunt words about gender diversity 
has become personal but the heat around this program that began in Victoria and 
spread nationally three years ago goes deeper than the 36-year old who 
co-founded Safe Schools in 2010.

The speed with which modern societies are adapting to the upending of 
conventional ideas about gender and sexual identity “may be the most important 
cultural metamorphosis of our time”,wrote Jenna Wortham in the New York Times 
Magazine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/17/magazine/when-everyone-can-be-queer-is-anyone.html>
 a few months ago.

The dating app Tinder began offering 37 gender options for users last month, 
including gender questioning, non-binary and pangender. Facebook took the same 
step a few years ago.

This year Australians have discussed a four-year-old being “socially” 
transitioned before kindergarten. 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/subscribe/news/1/index.html?sourceCode=DTWEB_WRE170_a&mode=premium&dest=http:%2F%2Fwww.dailytelegraph.com.au%2Fnews%2Fnsw%2Fpreschooler-begins-transition-aged-four-children-as-young-as-three-claiming-gender-dysphoria%2Fnews-story%2F74eb9a25d9dcd1e349a2e9f65a7c8c40&memtype=registered>

When you talk to parents it’s a question of life or death, and that’s not an 
exaggeration
Roz Ward 
This month South Australia became the first state to allow transgender people 
to alter their sex on their birth certificateswithout gender reassignment 
surgery or the need for a court approval 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/lanesainty/landmark-transgender-rights-bill-passes-in-south-australia-n?utm_term=.wkbdeBvNz#.giLWNGm9B>
 – a complete separation of biological sex and gender identity.

The Victorian parliament narrowly voted down a similar bill, with the Liberal 
MP Louise Staley opposing on feminist grounds the idea of someone needing only 
to sign a statutory declaration that they were male, female or something else 
to change their birth certificate. The idea was “postmodern mumbo jumbo”, she 
said, the ultimate example of “mansplaining” what it means to be a woman.

Heteronormativity, cisgender, gender binary, queer theory and gender fluidity 
are now mainstream ideas, or at least mainstream enough to cause a sustained 
backlash.

In Australia, Safe Schools is the target; if there is anxiety about the pace 
of change and what it means, it is most acute when it comes to children.
What is Safe Schools 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=af35474c-9b8d-405b-bb59-c84343b0a170>
Ward is synonymous with Safe Schools. The British-born academic heads the Safe 
Schools Coalition Victoria <https://sscv.org.au/>, which broke away from the 
national group in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/19/safe-schools-program-turnbull-plays-down-victorias-decision-to-go-it-alone>
 after the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, rejected substantial federal 
changes to the program, saying he would accept advice from experts, “not 
bigots”.

She understands that some of the ideas presented in Safe Schools push the 
boundaries for some, particularly older people, although she is sceptical that 
young people find concepts like gender fluidity controversial at all. She 
argues that a lot of the moral panic coming from very conservative groups is a 
front for lingering homophobia and transphobia, a resistance to accepting that 
anything but heterosexuality as fully “normal”.

She also points out that Safe Schools didn’t emerge from nowhere. Gay and 
lesbian groups, and more recently the trans community, have been determinedly 
insisting on equal treatment and respect for many years. A generation ago, few 
gay and lesbian people were open about their sexuality at school, or even 
beyond. Now the public overwhelmingly supports same-sex marriage. The anxiety 
now centres on transsexuality and gender fluidity that question what male and 
female even mean.

Governments are recognising the new realities. In 2013 it became unlawful in 
Australia to discriminate against someone based on which gender they identified 
with, regardless of whether they had undergone hormonal treatment or surgery. 
Under the national education curriculum, all schools must deal with sexuality 
and gender diversity issues in health and physical education studies.

People can debate the theory, Ward says, but it’s just theory. At heart, Safe 
Schools is about something more practical – making LGBTI kids safe and reducing 
their profound distress and social isolation. There are more than 500 schools 
nationally – government, independent and Catholic – who have voluntarily signed 
up for that support.

The reality for us as clinicians is that Safe Schools is really helpful
Dr Michelle Telfer 
“I don’t think it’s inconsistent to talk about how some of those ideas have 
come from all of the social pressure about gender but it is so intense for 
these young people,” Ward says of transgender students.

“In most of the cases when you talk to parents it’s a question of life or 
death, and that’s not an exaggeration. That’s young people saying, ‘If I can’t 
be a girl, I’d rather be dead.’”

The initiative began after La Trobe University research in 2010 
<https://sscv.org.au/images/wti3_web_sml.pdf> found that 61% of same 
sex-attracted young people (aged 14 to 21) had experienced verbal abuse and 18% 
physical abuse; 80% of the abuse happened at school.

And it sometimes is about life or death. A week ago, hundreds of people 
rallied in Brisbane after the death of 13-year old Tyrone Unsworth, who killed 
himself in October after relentless homophobic bullying.The tragedy led to 
calls for Safe Schools to be made compulsory. 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/tyrone-unsworth-protesters-call-for-safe-schools-program-in-queensland-schools/news-story/e5ec502f0f5589e33a4db3b129223b42>

Local and international studies have found that suicide attempts by LGBTI 
young people are far more common than for heterosexuals,with one finding that 
up to 50% of trans people attempted suicide at some time in their lives. 
<https://www.beyondblue.org.au/docs/default-source/default-document-library/bw0258-lgbti-mental-health-and-suicide-2013-2nd-edition.pdf?sfvrsn=2>

Studies also show that supportive schools make a big difference to the mental 
health and academic achievement of LGBTI students.

Dr Michelle Telfer, a pediatrician and the director of the Royal Children’s 
hospital gender service in Melbourne, refers all her young patients who are 
having trouble at school to the Safe Schools program and says no patient or 
parent has ever complained.

If the child is saying, ‘I’m a girl, I’m a girl, I’m a girl,’ you say ‘she’, 
and that’s all that happens
Roz Ward 
“We would be lost without Safe Schools,” she says. “What we see on an everyday 
basis is young trans children and adolescents being stigmatised, verbally and 
physically abused by peers, by the public on public transport and other people. 
We engage Safe Schools to help them be less stigmatised and to keep them safe. 
Regardless of what people think about the politics, the reality for us as 
clinicians is that Safe Schools is really helpful.”

Ward says what schools seek is usually simple. Gay and lesbian pupils can find 
school hard, particularly when coming out, but school is especially difficult 
for trans and gender-diverse children and adolescents.

“The things that we recommend schools put in place for those children are all 
purely social acts. Instead of saying ‘he’, if the child is saying, ‘I’m a 
girl, I’m a girl, I’m a girl,’ you say ‘she’, and that’s all that happens. From 
that change a child who has severe anxiety goes to having no anxiety.” It is 
entirely up to the school as to how they handle it. “We don’t teach kids, we 
train teachers.”

Those opposed to Safe Schools include rightwing conservative MPs and the 
Australian Christian Lobby (which also opposes same-sex marriage), but there 
are also a handful of gay activists and psychologists who have reservations 
about some aspects of it, too, especially its “queer theory” framework.

If there is a common theme to the criticism, it is that it goes beyond an 
anti-bullying program to promote an LGBTI “agenda”, presenting theories about 
gender and sexuality that are far from settled.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fqa-student-carter-smiths-passionate-defence-of-safe-schools-lgbti-program-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Q%26A%3A%20student%20Carter%20Smith's%20passionate%20defence%20of%20Safe%20Schools%20LGBTI%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fqa-student-carter-smiths-passionate-defence-of-safe-schools-lgbti-program-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Q%26A%3A%20student%20Carter%20Smith%27s%20passionate%20defence%20of%20Safe%20Schools%20LGBTI%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fqa-student-carter-smiths-passionate-defence-of-safe-schools-lgbti-program-video&media=>
Q&A: student Carter Smith’s passionate defence of Safe Schools LGBTI program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/mar/22/qa-student-carter-smiths-passionate-defence-of-safe-schools-lgbti-program-video>
The words thrown around are emotional and sometimes ignore what the program is 
– it began, and largely still is, a voluntary professional development program 
for teachers if a school requests it. Yet it“indoctrinates kids with a Marxist 
cultural relativism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/turnbull-orders-review-safe-schools-lgbti-program-after-pressure-from-cory-bernardi>
, according to the Liberal senator Cory Bernardi,is tantamount to a “paedophile 
grooming a child” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/george-christensen-accuses-safe-schools-advocate-of-promoting-paedophilia>
, says Liberal National party MP George Christensen, is “ideological madness”, 
according to the Australian Christian Lobby’s Lyle Shelton.

Safe Schools survives for now but its opponents are winning. The Australian 
newspaper campaigns against it, day after day, and against Ward in particular. 
She is a Marxist and perhaps unwisely falls into controversy, as whenshe was 
photographed at an anti-Trump rally last month carrying the Marxist Red Flag 
newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/state-politics/antibullying-advocate-roz-ward-harasses-bystander/news-story/213d135b14bb8d68c826acb7912a4962>
 and appearing to try to pull the cap off a Donald Trump supporter.

A principal does not have to seek permission from the P&C for any other 
professional development course
Sam Pidgeon, Queensland Teachers' Union 
State organisations that deliver the program have scrambled since the federal 
changes to make sense of them. One big reform was that a school now has to get 
permission from a parental body, such as a P&C or a school council, before it 
can even join up.

Sam Pidgeon, the vice-president of the Queensland Teachers’ Union, says 
principals are reluctant to accept the requirement. “A principal does not have 
to seek permission from the P&C for any other professional development course 
for teachers. It’s crazy, it would be unthinkable on any other issue.

“The Safe Schools brand has been badly damaged, which is a great shame because 
what it seeks to do is such absolutely positive work.”

The federal funding runs out midway through next year, and the education 
minister, Simon Birmingham, has announced it will not continue. Only Victoria 
and the Australian Capital Territory have committed to funding the program 
themselves, and even Labor states such as Queensland and South Australia – 
which support Safe Schools – so far have not committed to ongoing support. 
Colin Barnett’s Liberal government in Western Australia has announced it will 
scrap Safe Schools if it wins the election in March, with the Labor opposition 
saying it will continue to fund it.

After next year, Safe Schools is likely to be a rump program rather than a 
national one, although most states say they will have something in place to 
prevent the bullying of LGBTI students.

Ward says she has considered resigning to avoid being an ongoing distraction 
but she doesn’t believe the attacks are really about her. She never speaks to 
the Australian, which she accuses of trying to undermine her to scuttle the 
program for ideological reasons. Her employer, La Trobe University’s Australian 
research centre in sex, health and society, is supportive, she says. “People at 
work can see now that this is a concerted campaign. Their concern is that I’m 
being harassed by the Australian and their concern is for my safety and well 
being. They don’t have issues about my behaviour.


“It’s frustrating because it has been a clear attempt to distort the actual 
work that we do, and to redirect the focus on to something that they thought 
would get more traction, the fear of the red menace and the communist plot and 
reds under your bed and in your schools. Objecting to gay people being in 
schools – you can’t really say that any more.”

I am Indigenous. I am gay. Unlike Tyrone Unsworth, I survived | Dameyon Bonson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/i-am-indigenous-i-am-gay-unlike-tyrone-unsworth-i-survived>
Ward goes back to the beginning when, just before the November 2010 Victorian 
election, John Brumby’s Labor government was being criticised for opposing 
same-sex marriage, falling into line with the national party’s position at the 
time. Perhaps to boost its support among gay voters, the government announced 
an $80,000 trial of the Safe Schools program with 11 schools to start. Signing 
on were schools including the elite Methodist Ladies’ College, and government 
schools such as the selective MacRobertson Girls’ High.

Labor lost that election, but the new Liberal Ted Baillieu government stuck 
with Safe Schools and even increased its funding, with the then education 
minister, Martin Dixon, saying it was “vital we work together to tackle and 
reduce homophobia, transphobia and heterosexism within school communities”.

The Australian Christian Lobby always loathed it but there was little public 
controversy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc00a4db472acd8ca9c1ca71e1b7a17f804f12c3%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reality%20of%20Safe%20Schools%3A%20more%20a%20life-saving%20support%20than%20queer%20theory%20classroom%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reality%20of%20Safe%20Schools%3A%20more%20a%20life-saving%20support%20than%20queer%20theory%20classroom%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc00a4db472acd8ca9c1ca71e1b7a17f804f12c3%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Roz Ward: ‘We don’t teach kids, we train teachers.’ Photograph: Paul Jeffers 
for the Guardian 
At that stage, it was purely a professional development program for teachers 
and staff. Ward’s team in Victoria has trained about 12,000 teachers in how to 
make schools inclusive for LTBTI students. Often they are asked to give advice 
if a student has asked to transition genders, or are questioning their own 
sexuality or gender.

The guidance is straightforward and based on evidence: have a plan, assess 
parental and other support, create a timeline for changing pronouns and names 
if that is what the student wants, think about practical things like uniforms 
and toilets and take a “whole of school” approach to rejecting bullying of any 
kind. Ward says that in all the training she has done, only one teacher has 
walked out.

The program was considered so successful that, just before the 2013 federal 
election, Julia Gillard’s government pledged $8m to expand it to all states and 
territories, with each jurisdiction responsible for delivering it. It was Tony 
Abbott’s government that took up Labor’s pledge and launched it nationally in 
June 2014, with the then parliamentary secretary for education, Scott Ryan, 
saying: “It is is simply the right thing to do. Every student has a right to 
feel safe at school.”

The shift happened in November last year when All of Us was released. It was 
the first time the program offered resources that could be taught to students 
if teachers wanted to use them. “It was a new thing because schools had been 
asking since 2010, ‘Do you have anything to help us teach in health and PE 
LGBTI topics because there’s no decent resources?’ It wasn’t an intention of 
Safe Schools, but we thought, OK, if there’s nothing else there and we’ve 
waited five years, we’ll just produce something ourselves.”

A few months later, the Australian ran its page one story: 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/education/activists-push-taxpayerfunded-gay-manual-in-schools/news-story/4de614a88e38ab7b16601f07417c6219>
 “Eleven-year-old children are being taught about sexual orientation and 
transgender issues at school in a taxpayer-funded program written by gay 
activists.”

The language was loaded, with the main criticism coming from Wendy Francis of 
the Australian Christian Lobby who said that, while every child had the right 
not to be bullied, the program introduced LGBTI concepts too young, and 
“confuses them about their own identity”.

All of Us is an eight-part lesson plan plus short videos covering same-sex 
attraction, bisexuality, intersex and transgender designed for year 7 and 8 
students. Teachers can pick and choose parts of it to suit their own students 
or use none of it. Ward believes about 100 Victorian schools have used some 
lessons but that’s not common.

A country boy's story about coming out: self-harm, suicide and Safe Schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/a-country-boys-story-about-coming-out-self-harm-suicide-and-safe-schools>
In Queensland, for instance, the education union and True Relationships, which 
delivers the program, say they know of no school that has used the materials in 
classrooms.

Much of All of Us is about challenging stereotypes. For instance, one exercise 
sees students put into groups and shown a series of cards. They are to think 
about what might be the most and the least difficult thing if a person was 
“coming” out as gay – would it be coming out to a teacher, their best friend or 
holding hands in the school corridor?

It invites them thinking about gender stereotypes to put themselves into 
another’s shoes and to ponder about what the culture considers to be “male” and 
“female” behaviour. Pidgeon says controversy over student role-playing is 
ludicrous. “We ask kids to put themselves into the shoes of convicts being 
transported to Australia, to put themselves into shoes of Indigenous people 
when the first fleet arrived, we ask kids to do a whole range of things to 
build understanding.”

A federally commissioned review of the program, the Louden report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/turnbull-government-unveils-dramatic-changes-to-safe-schools-program>
, concluded that All of Us was “suitable, robust, age-appropriate, 
educationally sound and aligned with the Australian curriculum”. Prof Bill 
Louden, from the University of Western Australia, questioned whether a few 
minor areas were suitable for younger students, but said teachers could use 
their professional judgment to decide what was best for their own students.

The government’s subsequent changes were far more substantial than the 
report’s recommendations, including that no All of Us resource could be taught 
to students without parental consent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fturnbull-hits-back-at-shorten-over-safe-schools-comments-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turnbull%20hits%20back%20at%20Shorten%20over%20Safe%20Schools%20comments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fturnbull-hits-back-at-shorten-over-safe-schools-comments-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turnbull%20hits%20back%20at%20Shorten%20over%20Safe%20Schools%20comments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fturnbull-hits-back-at-shorten-over-safe-schools-comments-video&media=>
Turnbull hits back at Shorten over Safe Schools comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/mar/17/turnbull-hits-back-at-shorten-over-safe-schools-comments-video>
It makes Ward, and other educationalists, bristle with frustration. 
“Discussions about gender and sexual diversity are in the Australian 
curriculum, they’re in the Victorian curriculum and there is no reason why they 
should need parental consent any more than long division in maths,” she says. 
“It undermines the whole purpose of the Safe Schools coalition which is to be 
inclusive.”

The Louden report backed the program but didn’t comment on the way the lessons 
were framed, and this is where the real controversy lies. All of Us suggests 
teachers explain the difference between sex and gender this way. “Sex is about 
the body you are born with (male, female or intersex), while gender is about 
your identity, or how you feel inside … it might be expressed by how you dress 
or how you behave and for some people these things may change over time.” And: 
“Everyone has their own gender identity in relation to masculinity and 
femininity. Some identify with both, and some don’t identify with either; it’s 
up to the individual to describe what gender identity fits them best.”

It lists a series of words that can be used to describe gender, including 
trans, androgynous, genderqueer, non-binary, agender, all genders.

This touches on so-called queer theory, a now common way to view sexuality and 
gender in cultural and literary studies at universities, but far from 
uncontested. It is complex, but at heart queer theory rejects traditional ideas 
of heterosexuality and homosexuality entirely, or even any strict separation of 
male and female. To queer theorists, sexuality exists on a continuum, with 
fluid categories and shifting boundaries.

Psychologists such as Laura McNally question why Safe Schools had to go there 
– she says it is possible to question gender stereotypes and support LGBTI 
young people without embracing queer theory, which belongs in university and 
internet forums rather than classrooms.

Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick and Judith Butler showed me the transformative power of 
the word queer | Natalie Hanman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/22/judith-butler-eve-sedgwick-queer>
“It’s fantastic that teachers are getting more resources and that students can 
be supported if they ask for it. My main concern could be resolved quite easily 
if it were scaled back or simplified. The core definitions that they use around 
gender and gender identity should be withheld or described in such a way that 
they are not getting into a major social debate.”

The gay campaigner Rodney Croome has been involved in anti-bullying programs 
in Tasmanian schools and says the national debate about Safe Schools has been 
“tarnished by misinformation, anti-gay dog-whistling”. But he cautiously 
questions the queer theory included in the program. “I’ve found school programs 
that successfully challenge prejudice focus on shared, everyday experiences of 
being treated unfairly, not abstract theories which have the potential to 
divide people.”

Ward acknowledges that queer theory is “clearly a contested idea, but the 
reason why we want to talk about that is that it’s actually young people’s 
experiences, and that’s what they’re talking about and that’s how they are 
identifying”. She personally believes that something near “50% [of young 
people] would not say they were exclusively heterosexual or only attracted to 
people of the opposite gender”.

“And it’s not just a sociology theory of queer theory, it is a legal reality. 
Lots of people don’t understand it [but] if somebody says, ‘I’m gender fluid, 
I’m not a boy or a girl and I want some support at schools,’ to do anything to 
deny that could be construed as discrimination and that’s a legal question, not 
just a social theory question.”

Ward has a point about changing attitudes. It is now common for actors such as 
Ruby Rose and Kristen Stewart to describe themselves as gender fluid, gender 
neutral or bisexual, in a way that was extremely rare a generation ago.One 
large US study this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/us-survey-shows-dramatic-rise-in-acceptance-of-same-sex-relationships>
 found a dramatic increase in people reporting same-sex experiences and, 
particularly among young people, strong acceptance of same-sex relationships.

A Fusion Massive Millennial poll of 1,000 young people  
<http://fusion.net/story/42216/half-of-young-people-believe-gender-isnt-limited-to-male-and-female/>
found that half had a fluid idea of gender, believing it fell somewhere on a 
spectrum and wasn’t confined to male or female.

Among professionals working with transgender young people, the idea of gender 
being separate to sex is not in the least radical. The Royal Children’s 
hospital’s gender service defines terms in a similar way to Safe Schools: 
“‘Sex’ refers to a person’s physical appearance, determined by their 
chromosomes and hormones. In contrast, ‘gender’ refers to a person’s inner 
sense of whether they are male, female or somewhere in between.”

Dr Stephen Stathis, who runs Queensland’s first gender clinic at the Lady 
Cilento Children’s hospital, told a radio interviewer that “gender identity is 
a subjective sense that you feel about your given gender whether male or 
female”.

Over the past decade these clinics have experienced dramatic increases in 
referrals of children and adolescents questioning their gender. At the Royal 
Children’s alone, referrals have grown from just one in 2003 when the clinic 
opened to about 250 this year. The same phenomenon is happening around the 
world in developed countries.

Transgender children: ‘This is who he is – I have to respect that’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/12/transgender-children-have-to-respect-who-he-is>
Nobody quite knows why. Telfer puts it down to greater awareness of trans 
people and much greater acceptance. She and other specialists say it’s not yet 
known why some people are transgender, which is when the gender a person 
identifies with is not the same as their sex at birth.

Emerging research points to genetic factors and the first signs usually appear 
when children are very young.

It is common for children to explore and experiment with their gender, but 
only a small percentage of these children have gender dysphoria, which causes 
them severe clinically recognised distress. Nobody knows precisely how common 
transgenderism is, either. Safe Schools estimates that 4% of people are 
transgender or “gender diverse” a figure its critics say is inflated.

Telfer says the idea that somehow transgenderism is becoming trendy is 
ridiculous – most of her patients wish they were not transgender because it is 
so hard. Yet others have noticed something shifting.

Stathis said when Caitlyn Jenner, formerly Bruce, announced she was a 
transgender woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/24/bruce-jenner-kardashian-diane-sawyer-abc-interview>
 last year to enormous publicity, there was an increase in young people coming 
to his clinic. They were not diagnosed with gender dysphoria.

There “does seem to be social or psychological aspect to some of this 
particularly for some, but not all, adolescents who present late,” he told an 
interviewer.

“I am now seeing adolescents who are viewing being transgender as almost 
trendy. I’ve seen at least one patient tell me she wished to be transgender 
because she wanted to be popular.” In reality, being transgender is “a very 
hard and challenging journey”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7593926f47e07f68b34894fa1cb897ccd2876bd8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20reality%20of%20Safe%20Schools%3A%20more%20a%20life-saving%20support%20than%20queer%20theory%20classroom%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20reality%20of%20Safe%20Schools%3A%20more%20a%20life-saving%20support%20than%20queer%20theory%20classroom%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fsafe-schools-roz-ward-life-saving-support-queer-theory-classroom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7593926f47e07f68b34894fa1cb897ccd2876bd8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Roz Ward with students taking part in a Safe Schools activity. Photograph: 
Paul Jeffers for the Guardian 
Where this is relevant to Safe Schools is the advice it gives on helping 
students transition from one gender to another. The orthodox medical view now 
is to “affirm” a child’s preferred gende, but, as Telfer points out, this is 
not done casually. It is normal for children to experiment, and a liking for 
playing with trucks or dolls is not gender dysphoria. And if an adolescent 
thinks they are bisexual, or gender fluid, or asexual, or want to call 
themselves he or she or they, it need have nothing to do with doctors.

Only when a child strongly believes that their gender is not the one they were 
born with, and that disjuncture causes extreme distress, is “affirming” or 
social transitioning contemplated, such as choosing another name and using the 
preferred pronoun – and schools have a role to play. The purpose is to 
alleviate that distress, and there evidence that affirming the gender the child 
asserts does that.

This is still a relatively new area and, while they are in a minority, there 
are some psychiatrists and psychologists working in this field who are more 
reluctant to “affirm” gender transition in childhood – they prefer to watch and 
see what happens, or even to subtly encourage a child to identify with their 
birth gender, a practice trans groups say amounts to a form of conversion 
therapy. The more conventional view, and the one supported by major psychiatric 
bodies, is that the mental health and wellbeing of the young person is much 
better if their gender is affirmed.

The debate revolves around various studies that suggest that only a minority 
of young children who have gender dysphoria will still have it at puberty – 
anywhere between 2% to 39%. It is different once they reach puberty. If an 
adolescent identifies as trans, it is almost certain they will be a trans adult.

The controversy is around transitioning younger children, and the role Safe 
Schools plays it in. If the studies are right, many children will not become 
trans adults, and are likely to be gay or lesbian. Some of these studies have 
been discredited and are outdated, including children with mild gender 
dysphoria who would not be diagnosed under guidelines in place today. More 
recent research suggests a higher percentage of persistence of childhood gender 
dysphoria – Telfer says she and most clinicians believe the “vast majority” of 
young children now being diagnosed with gender dysphoria will be transgender in 
adulthood.

There is heated debate around this and it leads critics such as the lawyer 
Prof Patrick Parkinson of the University of Sydney, to argue that “the guidance 
on transitioning to another gender without expert medical and psychiatric care, 
and perhaps without parental consent, ought to disturb even those politicians 
who are ardent supporters of the Safe Schools program”.

Telfer says Parkinson ignores standard practice – no expert in the field would 
intervene if a child had some gender confusion. Only if the child or adolescent 
is “persistent, consistent and insistent” that their gender is not the one they 
were assigned at birth, and they are suffering great distress because of it, 
would transitioning be contemplated. It is purely social transitioning before 
puberty, when hormones to suppress puberty – a treatment that is reversible – 
can be offered.

You have go to weigh up the parents’ desires against that young person’s 
wellbeing
Roz Ward 
Ward also says that the criticism misrepresents what Safe Schools does. It is 
not involved in medical treatment or diagnosis and it offers only advice to 
schools as to how they could handle a trans student – the decisions are up to 
school leadership. The guidelines to schools suggest assessing support from a 
student’s family, but they do say that “it may be possible to consider a 
student a mature minor and able to make decisions without parental consent”.

In Victoria at least it is not Safe Schools policy – it has been the education 
department’s policy since last year. Ward says Safe Schools has given advice in 
94 cases of since 2010 where students sought to socially transition. Three 
students have not had their parents’ support. In this most sensitive area, the 
school’s obligation is its duty of care for the student’s safety.

“In those three cases the school becomes the one place in that young person’s 
life where they’re happy,” she says. “What the Department of Education is faced 
with is, do we just go with the parents even though we know it’s distressing 
for the young person, and the distress can manifest in self-harming behaviours 
which can happen at school, which do happen at school, and they know that if a 
school just affirmed that young person’s gender identity, uses the name they 
want to use, they’ll probably stop self-harming at school, in fact, they’ll 
enjoy school.

“You have go to weigh up the parents’ desires against that young person’s 
wellbeing while they’re at school.”

'She’s just a happy little girl now': the Safe Schools effect on students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/shes-just-a-happy-little-girl-now-the-safe-schools-effect-on-students>
Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> dysphoria is a medical 
condition, but ideas that people can be gender fluid, or gender diverse are 
cultural, and the culture is changing fast. “There’s no research that shows 
there’s any harm from feeling like you want to present as male or female and 
then deciding later on that you don’t,” says Telfer. “You would never medically 
intervene if there was any doubt. In terms of presenting at school and wearing 
clothes or hairstyle, there’s no harm in doing one thing or doing another. It’s 
important that young people can explore how they feel about themselves, without 
them being medicalised.”

The federal reforms now limit Safe School materials to secondary schools, but 
the original program included primary schools. Ward says it has assisted 
schools with about 26 primary students this year to socially transition in 
Victoria alone, and with or without Safe Schools, other states are facing 
similar challenges.

“We don’t have anything to do with a child, or a young person or their 
family’s decisions about what other things they want to engage with medically 
to get support,” says Ward. “Our concern is making sure those children stay in 
school and while they’re at school they’re happy and they’re learning and they 
get the outcomes that any other child can get.”

If I got out of the way, someone else ends up in the firing line
Roz Ward 
In primary schools, “we work with the teachers and their leadership to set up 
a supportive environment for the child based on what their needs are and their 
family wants”.

Ward is enormously frustrated by what she sees as distortions about Safe 
Schools, and the campaign against it. The silver lining, if there is one, is 
that has been enormous progress on LGBTI issues and the debate reflects that. 
It is, after all, a backlash.

“It’s a realisation that so much progress has been made and there’s almost 
panicking about it,” she says. “‘Shit, we didn’t realise it’s already being 
talked about so much in schools – it shouldn’t be.’”

“So if I got out of the way, someone else ends up in the firing line.”

• Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 
<http://www.lifeline.org.au/> 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 
<http://www.suicidecallbackservice.org.au/> 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 
<http://www.kidshelp.com.au/> 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 
<http://www.mensline.org.au/> 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 
<https://www.beyondblue.org.au/> 1300 22 4636
 