
In 2010, I wrote a column about urban planning 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2010/08/09/turning-estates-into-villages/>, in which I 
argued that new estates should be built around a common green on which children 
could safely play. This is what I said: "Most importantly, the houses face 
inwards, and no cars are allowed inside the square: the roads serve only the 
backs of the buildings. The square is overlooked by everyone, which means that 
children can run in and out of their houses unsupervised, create their own 
tribes and learn their own rules, without fear of traffic accidents or 
molesters â€¦ There's a council estate a bit like this across the road from my 
house. Whenever I pass through it on a dry day in the holidays, I see dozens of 
children playing there."

That is the place from which, on 1 October 2012, April Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/april-jones> was taken.

Until now I have not been able to write about it or speak about it. After the 
reports of the first day of Mark Bridger's trial I have been unable to read 
about it either. I've long prided myself on being able to handle more reality 
than most, but with this case I've discovered my limits. For everyone connected 
with Machynlleth, the experience has been shattering. It has shattered our 
sense of contingency, broken the boundaries of what we considered reality. In 
his novel The Sleep of Reason, about a similarly hideous case,CP Snow 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C._P._Snow> wrote of "the hallucinations of 
fact". I now know what he meant.

People often say, when something terrible bursts into their lives, "it's the 
sort of thing that happens to other people, but not to us." But this is not the 
sort of thing that happens to other people: or if it does, it's so rare that 
such events are separated by years. The details that began to emerge on the 
first day of the trial, beyond which, I admit, I know little, nag at the outer 
limits of imagination, mock as insipid our most lurid nightmares. Perhaps, 
among his many lies, Bridger's claim that heremembers almost nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/01/april-jones-trial-mark-bridger-body>
 is true. In Snow's novel a criminal psychologist maintains that "it is quite 
common to forget the act" of killing a child. Could horror of this nature 
exceed even the killer's ability to absorb the facts?

I have never come across a town in Britain that is as child-centred as 
Machynlleth. The elderly people in particular seem to regard the entire 
population of children almost as if they were their own, doting on them, 
treating them, offering to babysit and help out. This cataclysm could not have 
afflicted a more unlikely place, or a place that would feel it more keenly. The 
entire town seems to have been struck by a family tragedy. There are people on 
April's estate who look as if they've aged 10 years since October. It's as if 
the lights have gone out from their faces.

I expect that some newspapers, as they did after the Philpott case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/05/mick-philpott-welfare-to-blame>
, will seek to score points from this crime. They might argue that Bridger, 
with his history of promiscuity and reliance on benefits, represents some 
broader moral decline. But it is no surprise to discover that a child killer 
with a suite of what appear to be psychopathic characteristics was also 
feckless and chaotic. The community to which he claimed to belong is caring, 
loving, cohesive, socially engaged. There are no lessons to be learned here, 
except that there lives among us a very small number of people who are capable 
of almost anything.

As the search for poor April began, this case, as extreme events often do, 
exposed people to aspects of themselves which had previously been hidden. I 
found myself horrified by what I wanted. I did not want to see Bridger 
judicially executed. Long before he had been brought to trial and convicted, I 
wanted to see him lynched. I caught myself fantasising about having my hands 
around his throat, throttling him to death.

It was not that I hated him, or that I failed to understand that something 
terrible, in nature or nurture, must have happened to drive him to act as he 
did. It's that I wanted an end to it. I wanted the horror to be concluded, 
definitively and irredeemably, so that I could blot it out. Due process, the 
rule of law, civilisation: all are sorely tested at times like this.

That dreadful urge has now passed. As soon as it became clear that Bridger 
would be convicted, I paradoxically lost the desire to see him and his deed 
erased in that way. Mingled with the horror was a slowly developing sense of 
relief: that, through the judicial process, this would eventually be over. 
Though April is lost for ever, the awful wounds her abduction and killing have 
inflicted on Machynlleth will begin, very slowly, to heal.

Already a sense of resilience and defiance is growing in the town. People are 
slowly emerging from the carapace of shock. And from the green on the estate 
comes the most beautiful sound on earth, the sound of healing: children 
playing. Their happy voices, ringing out once more, are the best memorial that 
little girl could have.
 