
Branded as “the biggest party of the year” by the Hollywood Foreign Press 
Association, the Golden Globe Awards are traditionally viewed as the fun, 
slightly tipsy cousin of Hollywood’s awards show circuit.

That didn’t lessen the delight of the team behind the night’s biggest winner, 
The Revenant, which won a fleet of top prizes: awards for director Alejandro 
González Iñárritu, starLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, and the top award of the 
night: best dramatic motion picture.

With a three-course dinner, free-flowing champagne and famously outré hosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/jan/18/ricky-gervais-golden-globes>
, the Golden Globe Awards are a chance for the biggest stars of film and 
television to let their hair down, rip shots with Amy Schumer and take a selfie 
with Gael García Bernal – after all, it’s not like it’s the Oscars – and a 
chance for the viewing public to watch overserved celebrities embarrass 
themselves on live television.

This year’s awards were no exception, largely due to the antics of host Ricky 
Gervais, whose antics at the 68th annual Golden Globes in 2011 lead to 
über-producer and Hollywood kingmaker Harvey Weinsteinthreatening to have him 
killed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-12205469>. From the show’s 
opening monologue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/10/slugs-golden-globes-2016-ricky-gervais-host-opening-monologue-jokes>
, in which Gervais targeted Caitlyn Jenner, worst-film-ever contenderPixels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/pixels-review-just-another-adam-sandler-movie-cgi>
 and the rest of the “disgusting, pill-popping, sexually deviant scum” 
assembled in the ballroom of the Beverly Hilton Hotel, to his deliciously 
uncomfortable introduction of Mel Gibson, LaLaLand’s bête noire left 
Hollywood’s biggest stars gasping in shock, delight and outrage.

To be fair, Gervais, who predicted that his return would make him “a bigger 
target than El Chapo”, did warn them:
Ricky Gervais (@rickygervais) 
Better get dressed and offend some humourless cunts I suppose. 
pic.twitter.com/X4idHHuMMf <https://t.co/X4idHHuMMf>
 <https://twitter.com/rickygervais/status/686282147120939009> January 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rickygervais/status/686282147120939009> 
As presenter Amy Adams told Ryan Seacrest on the red carpet: “I don’t think 
[Gervais] goes away for a couple of years and comes back without something to 
say.”

Even the head of the body in charge of the awards didn’t escape a barb. “The 
Golden Globes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> doesn’t have an 
In Memoriam section to get you all depressed,” Gervais said. “Instead, we let 
the president of the Hollywood Foreign Press say a few words.”

“Thank you for your support,” deadpanned Theo Kingma, the president in 
question.

Personal scandals were a rich comedic vein, cheerfully mined. At one point, 
Gervais recalled the travails of actor Charlie Sheen, whom Gervais had targeted 
in his much-ballyhooed monologue at the 2011 Golden Globes. “Joy and 
Trainwreck,” Gervais said, introducing two nominees, which he noted were “not 
the names of Charlie Sheen’s two favorite hookers”.

He also introduced nominee Matt Damon as “the only person that Ben Affleck 
hasn’t been unfaithful to”. Damon, a longtime friend of the recently single 
Affleck, could barely keep himself together when he introduced best motion 
picture, musical or comedy nomineeThe Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-martian>.

The high point of Gervais’ hosting may have been his introduction of the 
long-dormant Mel Gibson, whosealcohol-fueled anti-Semitic tirade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/jul/31/arts.usa> in 2006 provided an 
entire awards season’s worth of fodder for the comedian. “I’m sure it’s 
embarrassing for both of us, and I blame NBC for this terrible situation,” said 
Gervais. “Mel blames – well,we know who Mel blames 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/30/us/30gibson.html?_r=0>.” Still, Gervais 
qualified: “I’d rather have a drink with him in his hotel room tonight than 
Bill Cosby.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fred-carpet-fashion-at-golden-globes-2016-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F11%2F1452502333660%2FKP_1306856_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Red%20carpet%20fashion%20at%20Golden%20Globes%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fred-carpet-fashion-at-golden-globes-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Red%20carpet%20fashion%20at%20Golden%20Globes%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fred-carpet-fashion-at-golden-globes-2016-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F11%2F1452502333660%2FKP_1306856_crop_640x480.jpg>
Red carpet fashion at Golden Globes 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/11/red-carpet-fashion-at-golden-globes-2016-video>
After introducing Gibson, Gervais made sure to ask an important question of 
the former action star: “What the fuck does ‘sugar tits’ even mean?”

Gervais was, to his credit, eminently more watchable than most of the stars 
whom the evening was ostensibly celebrating. The first presenters, actors 
Channing Tatum and Jonah Hill, kicked off the award for best supporting actress 
in a motion picture with an extended bit involving Hill dressed as the bear 
from The Revenant. Although the majority of the 22 Jump Street star’s jokes 
were silenced by network censors, the at-home audience’s annoyed confusion was 
manifest inJane Fonda’s face 
<https://twitter.com/ElginCharles/status/686357630642618369>.

After Italian composer Ennio Morricone won the Golden Globe for best original 
score for his work on The Hateful Eight – apparently named after the number of 
drinks imbibed by Quentin Tarantino – the film’s director gave a frantic, 
disjointed speech on Morricone’s behalf. “When I say favorite composer, I don’t 
mean a ‘movie composer’. That’s ghetto,” said Tarantino. “I’m talking about 
Mozart, I’m talking about Beethoven, I’m talking about Schubert. That’s who I’m 
talking about.”

Jamie Foxx, who had presented the award, returned to the stage after Tarantino 
was played off, with shaken head and a single word: “Ghetto.”

A few well-cast presenter pairings did, however, keep the portions of the 
evening not hosted by Gervais from riding off the rails.

Actors Eva Longoria and America Ferrera, in a callback to the incident when 
the official Golden Globes Twitter account mistook Ferrera for Gina Rodriguez 
when she announced the list of 2016 nominees, introduced themselves with 
reminders to viewers at home that they were not other Latina actors one might 
lazily mistake them for. “I’m Eva Longoria, not Eva Mendes,” said Longoria, to 
which Ferrera replied: “And I’m America Ferrera, not Gina Rodriguez.” Longoria 
then kept the joke going by reminding the audience that “neither of us are 
Rosario Dawson”.

Jennifer Lawrence, winner of the Golden Globe for best actress in a comedy 
film, and Amy Schumer, who told Ryan Seacrest on the red carpet that her 
“vagina itched today”, took a similar tack, humorously mocking Hollywood’s 
treatment of women.

“As women in Hollywood, people have a lot of preconceived notions about us,” 
Lawrence said.

“Yeah!” responded Schumer. “Like, they’re just like, ‘Oh, Jenny! You’re just, 
like, so pretty, and everyone likes them and wants to hang out with them, and 
they seem so fun to be around, and they should be models.’ Like ... ” she faded 
off, staring in mock anger at the audience, who were largely in stitches.

True to form, some off-the-cuff celebrity moments were more entertaining than 
the anodyne nominee introductions onstage. Leonardo DiCaprio’s response to Lady 
Gaga’s Golden Globe win, for example:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-lady-gaga-golden-globes-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F11%2F1452507477403%2FKP_1309129_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lady%20Gaga%20bumps%20into%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20at%20Golden%20Globes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-lady-gaga-golden-globes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lady%20Gaga%20bumps%20into%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20at%20Golden%20Globes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-lady-gaga-golden-globes-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F11%2F1452507477403%2FKP_1309129_crop_640x480.jpg>
As for the awards themselves, there was little indication that critics of the 
perceived lack of diversity among the nominated actors had their complaints 
heard. There were almost no non-white nominees in the film categories –Straight 
Outta Compton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/straight-outta-compton>, the 
well-received biopic about the rise and fall of hip-hop group NWA, was snubbed 
when the Golden Globe nominations were announced, and Idris Elba, a supporting 
actor nominee for Beasts of No Nation, was also passed over in favor of 
Sylvester Stallone. Denzel Washington, who won the honorary Cecil B DeMille 
Award for “outstanding contributions to the world of entertainment”, was the 
only film actor of color to take home a statuette.

A notable exception was Taraji P Henson, winner of the Golden Globe for best 
actress in a television drama. “Cookies for everyone tonight!” Henson cheered. 
“My treat.”

In closing the evening, Gervais perhaps best summed up the import of the 
Golden Globes as the unofficial kickoff of awards season – the months-long 
period when the world’s most overpaid and overprivileged people drape 
themselves in finery and soak up each others’ awesomeness - with a simple shrug.

“From myself and Mel Gibson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/melgibson>, 
shalom.”
 