
Radiohead became unlikely Bond theme favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/29/bond-theme-betting-suspended-15000-radiohead-ellie-goulding>

Who among us hasn’t fantasised about Thom Yorke curling his falsetto around an 
icy electronic beat while Daniel Craig somersaults over bullets in slow-motion, 
wearing a suit? Oh, was that just me? Apparently not, according to bookies 
William Hill – they decided on Tuesday to suspend betting on the singer of the 
next James Bond theme song, after some absolute joker placed £15,000 on 
Radiohead’s chances.

Ted Nugent is onboard with Cecil the Lion’s killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/ted-nugent-cecil-the-lion-story-is-a-lie>

The cowboy hat-toting rocker decided to step up and ally himself with the guy 
who killed Cecil the Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/31/zimbabwe-extradition-dentist-killed-cecil-the-lion>
. In Nugent’s eyes, dentist Walter Palmer did the right thing when he paid 
$50,000 to track and kill a lion in Zimbabwe after luring it beyond the safe 
confines of a national park. “The whole story is a lie,” Nugent wrote on 
Facebook. “It was a wild lion from a ‘park’ where hunting is legal & ESSENTIAL 
beyond the park borders. All animals reproduce every year & would run out of 
room/food to live w/o hunting.” Er, not sure about the science behind that one, 
Nugent, but we’ll keep an eye out for the “full piece” you’re writing about it. 
That ought to have all the facts, right?

Azealia Banks tweeted about ‘violent’ Australian crowds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/28/azealia-banks-slams-violent-australian-audiences-as-terrible-crowds-to-play-for>

Banks rapped her way through a full set at Byron Bay festival Splendour in the 
Grass. For an artist who has cut shortmore than one 
<http://www.nme.com/news/azealia-banks/73059> Australian gig in the past 
<http://www.fasterlouder.com.au/news/37105/Azealia-Banks-cuts-another-festival-set-short-at-Listen-Out-Sydney>
, after punters allegedly hurled full beer cans on stage, that’s almost a news 
story in itself. When a local radio broadcaster chose to point that out in a 
snarky tweet to Banks, she replied, calling Aussie crowds terrible, violent and 
belligerent.
AZEALIA BANKS (@AZEALIABANKS) 
@brownypaul <https://twitter.com/brownypaul> @SITG <https://twitter.com/SITG> 
because in all actuality. You guys are terrible crowds to play for. You're 
violent and belligerent and I simply
 <https://twitter.com/AZEALIABANKS/status/625668374467448835> July 27, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AZEALIABANKS/status/625668374467448835> 
Dr Dre’s new album is meant to come out this weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/dr-dre-is-about-to-drop-a-new-album-ice-cube-says>

Before any Dre fans get excited, I’m not talking about long-awaited and still 
unreleased album, Detox. Rather, Dre is meant to be putting out music inspired 
by forthcoming music biopic, Straight Outta Compton – and, according to Ice 
Cube, the album may come out on 1 August. Rolling Stonebegs to differ 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/dr-dre-to-release-new-album-as-straight-outta-compton-soundtrack-20150729>
, attributing confirmation of a later release date to “multiple sources”, but 
the point is, we’ve still not heard a new studio album from Dre in 16 years and 
that madness has to stop.

Marching protesters turned a Kendrick song into a chant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/29/activists-chant-kendrick-lamar-track-alright-police-harassment-protests>


A protest against police brutality at Cleveland State university turned 
musical, when activists started chanting the chorus hook to Kendrick Lamar’s
Alright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/kendrick-lamar-new-video-alright>
. The song, off sprawling album To Pimp a Butterfly, features lyrics about 
black people being killed at the hands of the police, and the mantra that 
through it all: “we gon’ be alright”. Fittingly, the marching protesters 
repurposed the song, reminding us all that before hip-hop went pop, it was a 
form of protest music that gave a voice to the multi-faceted struggles of 
disenfranchised black and brown men in the US.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVUC_DOhfzwQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVUC_DOhfzwQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVUC_DOhfzwQ&media=>
 Crowd chanting Kendrick Lamar’s Alright while protesting police brutality in 
Cleveland 
The Happy Birthday song isn’t under copyright after all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/28/happy-birthday-worlds-most-popular-song-not-under-copyright>

Birthday scenes in films tend to be expensive. Not because of intricate cake 
designs, but because the happy birthday song that most of us recognise was 
under copyright to a music publishing company. But no more. A newly discovered 
1927 songbook has now essentially placed the song back in the public domain – 
though the specific arrangement copyrighted by Warner Chappell will still be 
under pricey lock and key. Rejoice, makers of family-centric films. Rejoice.

Drake destroyed rapper Meek Mill, on two separate tracks

Meek Mill and Drake, two rappers who generally seemed to get along, indulged 
in a spot of classic rap beefing this week. Unlike the more violent beefs of 
days past, their disagreement revolved around Twitter (ugh, what else?). It 
started with Meek Mill claiming that Drake doesn’t write all his own lyrics, 
and ended decisively when Drake recorded andreleased two diss tracks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/29/drake-responds-meek-mill-second-diss-track>
 aimed at Meek. If Frank Ocean orchestrated both theTaylor Swift vs Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/taylor-swift-nicki-minaj-faux-feminist-tone-deaf>
 and Drake vs Meek Mill Twitter spats to distract us from the fact that he did 
not, in fact,release a new album this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/07/new-frank-ocean-album-due-in-july>
, then I applaud the effort.

Bono said we should claim the Beatles as Irish 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/music/2015/jul/30/bono-claim-beatles-irish-ellis-island-amnesty-international>

You know that feeling, when you’re giving a presentation at work and start to 
lose your way, so end up going off-book completely and rambling into the middle 
distance? Bono basically did the speech version of that on Wednesday. In a 
tribute to the 40th anniversary of John Lennon obtaining his US green card,Bono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bono> went from honouring the struggle of 
immigrants to saying we should claim all the Beatles as not only immigrants, 
but Irish.

Paul McCartney said the Beatles forgot their own songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/31/the-beatles-forgot-dozens-of-songs>

Speaking of the newly Irish band, Macca spoke about the dozens of Beatles 
songs that never saw the light of day. Before all the luxury of portable 
recording devices, he and John Lennon just had to remember the ditties before 
getting into a studio and recording them. Simpler times.

Bobbi Kristina Brown died, aged 22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/bobbi-kristina-brown-daughter-of-whitney-houston-dies-aged-22>

Whitney Houston’s daughter died, almost seven months after she was placed in 
an induced coma in January. She had been found unresponsive in her bathtub in 
Atlanta, and moved to hospice care in late June. Bobbi Kristina was Houston and 
singer Bobbi Brown’s only child.
 