
John Soane, one of Britain's greatest architects, left us his visual 
imagination not just in his buildings but in his will. When he died in 1837, a 
saddened man, he gave his remarkable museum home to the nation on the condition 
that it was kept as he left it. Sir John Soane's Museum in central London is a 
true wonder, a cabinet of architectural curiosities and, I like to think, the 
mind of Soane pickled for posterity. No, it doesn't feature this 
bricklayer-turned-Royal Academician's actual brain in some mahogany and brass 
case filled with formaldehyde; it's far more subtle than that. As you step into 
13 Lincoln's Inn Fields you know you are seeing the world through the eyes and 
labyrinthine mind of a very remarkable man. The house itself is a labyrinth and 
is as far from the classical ideal as it was possible to be when Soane began 
transforming it into a museum of his own making and image after the death of 
his wife in 1815. Soane designed many important buildings, not least the 
magnificent Regency-era Bank of England, but as this was destroyed long ago 
along with much of the architect's major work, his London home remains his 
enduring, and endearing, monument.

A friend of Turner, with whom he went fishing, Soane, like his artist chum, 
was a creature in his own chosen field as rare as a coelacanth: an English 
architect who rose to the top from the humblest beginnings. Born the son of a 
bricklayer in Berkshire, at 15 the scantily educated Soane was a hod-carrier. 
Through fortunate circumstances, he was introduced by James Peacock, a 
surveyor, to the inventive young London architect George Dance the Younger in 
1768. Three years later he was one of the first architectural pupils at the 
Royal Academy of Arts. He won the RA's Gold Medal for the design of a Triumphal 
Bridge (unbuilt) in 1776 and was soon off on the the Grand Tour (de rigueur for 
aspiring architects of his generation). He met Piranesi, whose etchings, 
particularly the grim Carceri (prisons) series shaped the haunted spirit of his 
manic-depressive imagination for the rest of his life, and four future wealthy 
clients. He became, despite his well-recorded self doubts, hugely successful.

Now, more than 150 years on from his death, the RA has mounted an impressive 
exhibition, designed by Piers Gough, of the life and work of one of its most 
famous sons. In fact, this is the first major show of Soane's work and we ought 
to wonder why. Not just because the British have been famously slow to 
recognise and celebrate architectural talent, but because Soane's idiosyncratic 
style - a maverick classicism very much of his own - went out of fashion pretty 
much as soon as he died. His star was not to ascend again until the 20s 
(championed, at first, by the artist and critic Roger Fry). It reached its new 
zenith in the mid-80s and has shined brightly in the architectural firmament 
ever since. There is another reason to wonder. Why bother with a major 
exhibition of Soane when we have Sir John's own museum?

Whatever, it's great to see Soane being championed by the RA and taken out to 
a wider audience than previously. And the catalogue for the show is quite 
superb. As for Soane, he would have expected no less; he was quite aware that 
his was a considerable talent and yet he spent much of his adult life a 
melancholy and even bitter man. Part of the reason for this is that he was 
understandably ambitious and expected as much of himself as he did of his sons 
who proved to be, so he thought, wastrels. In 1812, faced with legal action 
because of his redesign of the front of 13 Lincoln's Inn Fields, a near 
estrangement from his wife Eliza (the daughter, by the way, of a rich builder) 
and what he saw as the undermining behaviour of his sons George and John, Soane 
wrote his "Crude Hints towards a history of my house in L I Fields".

This is the record of a depressive, a man who had come from next to nothing 
who couldn't understand why life should be less perfect than art. His troubles 
were not relieved by the premature deaths of Eliza in 1815 and John junior in 
1823; and certainly not by attacks on his reputation. He blamed Eliza's sudden 
death on the vicious criticism of his work that appeared in The Champion; it 
was written by his son George.

 Perhaps his one truly happy relationship was with Fanny. No, not a diaphanous 
Regency mistress but his dog, a cockney mongrel. Dogs never lie about love and 
Soane built Fanny a handsome memorial stone ("Alas, Poor Fanny" its legend 
reads) that can be seen in the area through the windows of his home's "Monk's 
Parlour".

Soane's sadness, his essential darkness of character, is key to understanding 
not just his personality, but his architecture. He was, as historians tend to 
agree, a master of interior space rather than grand architectural statements. 
Even his finest work, the Bank of England (interiors wickedly demolished, 
1925-6) was set behind high walls that made the heart of the bank all but 
invisible. The best of his surviving designs - his museum and the Picture 
Gallery at Dulwich in south London - are modest, if not wholly self-effacing on 
the outside; as rich as Croesus inside. These are gloriously refined, deeply 
imaginative labyrinths, where the established rules of classicism are broken 
(George Dance the Younger first taught him how to do this) and spaces - 
sometimes these are more like landscapes than rooms - flow or insinuate 
themselves one into the other. This is something the masters of the Modern 
Movement learnt, but Le Corbusier and Mies van der Rohe took their cue from the 
Prairie houses of Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright was born 30 years after Soane's 
death and there is nothing to tell us whether or not he knew the plans of the 
Bank of England or 13 Lincoln's Inn Fields. But, where Wright, Mies and Le 
Corbusier flooded their free-flowing interiors with daylight, Soane controlled 
the light that filtered down into his from shallow domes, from lunettes and 
secret skylights with much the same mastery as his friend Turner did with oils. 
Soane sought what he called poetic effect in his architecture; in other words 
his interiors were representations of sensations; his buildings are dreams for 
living in, not machines. And, like dreams, most have gone.

One of Soane's closest collaborators was Joseph Michael Gandy, an architect 
based in Liverpool, who painted dreamy canvases depicting Soane's designs both 
built and unbuilt. Most of all, he showed Soane's greatest works, including the 
Bank of England, as the ruins they might be in 1,500 years' time. Most were 
wrecked long before that. Why did Soane want Gandy to immortalise his greatest 
designs in the guise of tragic ruins? Partly, perhaps, as a homage to Piranesi 
whose Carceri etchings meant so much to him, and partly because of the Gothick 
darkness that had long invaded his soul.

Successful, Soane did not die a happy death. His influence, however, has 
slowly, slowly seeped into the modern architectural consciousness. The RA 
exhibition catalogue shows recent buildings as diverse as Richard MacCormac's 
extension to St John's College, Oxford and Juan Navarro's Congress Hall in 
Salamanca that owe a heavy debt to Soane. "Soane's ability," says Margaret 
Richardson, curator of Sir John Soane's Museum, "to continue to engage the 
attention of architects working at the end of the 20th century, without 
inhibiting their powers of invention, is possibly his greatest legacy." Maybe. 
Or perhaps it's the fact - as far as this is a fact - that Soane showed us how 
an architect's mind can express itself freely through a chosen canon of 
architecture; that emotions, deep, dark and even depressive, can be represented 
in bricks, mortar and, in his case, mirrors, pendentive domes and incised 
plaster. And make us glad that he existed even though he wasn't so very sure 
sometimes himself.

Â• John Soane: Architect, Master of Space and Light is at the Royal Academy of 
Arts, London W1 (0171-300 8000) till December 3. Sir John Soane's Museum is at 
13 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2. Details: 0171-405 2107.
 