
Ideally, in these days of busy news cycles, an eco problem needs to be visible 
from space to gain traction. Algae has obliged again this summer.

At Florida’s largest freshwater lake, Okeechobee, the cyano-bacteria 
blue-green algae bloom, covering 33 miles, has been clearly captured in Nasa 
satelliteimagery 
<http://www.livescience.com/55364-algal-bloom-seen-from-space.html>.

Ecologists are fond of describing the Okeechobee as the perfect nursery for 
toxic blooms. There’s been a history of dredging, a heavy presence of nitrogen 
and phosphorus fertilisers from industrial agriculture draining into the lake, 
large quantities of water withdrawn for agricultural use (this can also be a 
factor) and warmer and wetter weather. It is hard to prove the exact causes of 
toxic algal blooms, but activists pose this formula: climate change + political 
inertia = cyanobacteria.

As the bloom dies off, algae decomposes and creates hypoxia (deficiency in 
oxygen). The less-mobile animals near the floor of the waterway are the first 
to die, but the algal choke continues through the food chain. I’ve seen 
heart-breakingfootage 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2016/07/01/man-posts-video-manatee-struggling-swim-algae-filled-water/86593340/>
 of Florida residents hosing down and feeding manatees fresh water after 
they’ve battled through the algal scum.

But the upside of algal blooms also represents a big green story. Could algae 
be a long-dreamed-of carbon-negative biofuel? If algae can be harvested and 
used as a source of power, then it represents what geo-hackers like to call a 
“twofer”: a free source of biofuel using nutrients that would otherwise require 
an energy-intensive treatment process in order to be removed.

But to farm anything at scale we like predictability, while algal blooms are 
anything but. So the rise of algae as a green fuel means the rise of algal 
farms – which use yet more water and more energy.

The big picture: learning to swim in the Baa Atoll 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb03b0dafadb20ad44282ccd8d62b982260b66f3%2F0_0_1685_1011%2F1685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20algae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20algae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb03b0dafadb20ad44282ccd8d62b982260b66f3%2F0_0_1685_1011%2F1685.jpg>
 Take the plunge: a woman from the Maldives joins in with the the Soneva Fushi 
Learn To Swim programme. Photograph: Cat Vinton 
Away from the luxury holiday resorts, many islanders in the Maldives fear the 
ocean and cannot swim. The Soneva Learn-To-Swim programme has been set up by 
ocean explorer Jon Bowermaster and the sustainable resortSoneva.com 
<http://www.soneva.com/>. Cat Vinton photographs children and their mothers 
from the island of Eydhafushi swimming for the first time. The sea here is no 
longer just for rich tourists.

Well dressed: the Geox New: Do
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4dbd64bd15d6efc4dfa2375171776af34d499b4%2F0_100_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20algae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20algae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-algae%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4dbd64bd15d6efc4dfa2375171776af34d499b4%2F0_100_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Best foot forward: the eco-friendly Geox New: Do £115,geox.com 
<http://www.geox.com/en/start#anchorBack> 
It’s no secret in fashion that sportswear is migrating into daywear. In terms 
of sustainable manufacture, this could be a good thing, especially when it 
comes to shoes. Remember the Nike boycott in the 1990s?

Big names in the athletic shoe industry have really cleaned up their act since 
then. Some front-runners have invested heavily in green manufacture (using 
fewer, lower-impact materials for greater effect). An example is 
Strobel-stitching (a way of sewing upper and lower parts of the shoe together) 
which minimises the use of toxic adhesive. This technique and other eco 
elements such as eco-certified leather are used in Geox’s New: Do, its most 
sustainable shoe yet. One in 10 Italians are shod in Geox footwear, so an 
improvement in sustainability is on
 a huge scale. Still, you might ask what took them so long.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 