
Good news! Women can make as much money as men in the film industry after all. 
More, even. They have been doing so for years. Even in those genres 
specifically aimed at a male crowd, there’s proven appetite for movies that 
feature a central female character, focus on her feelings, value her 
experience, and pay the woman who is playing her accordingly.

But outside porn 
<http://vitaminw.co/culture-society/women-earn-most-industry-except-when-men>, 
it’s a different story. The top-earning female dramatic actors take home around 
40% of the salaries of their male co-stars – about half the average in other 
professions. In Forbes magazine’s list of thebest-paid actors for 2013 
<http://www.forbes.com/pictures/mfl45egdgg/robert-downey-jr-8/>, Robert Downey 
Jr at No 1 made $10m more than the combined earnings of the top five female 
actors. The man at No 10 (Liam Neeson) banked the same as thebest-remunerated 
woman 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/dorothypomerantz/2013/07/29/angelina-jolie-tops-our-list-of-hollywoods-highest-paid-actresses/>
 (Angelina Jolie). The following year, Sandra Bullock’s back-end fee for 
Gravity bucked the trend a little, but lower down the list, the story was 
repeated.

So far, so old news. Such lack of parity is a commonplace outrage, blithely 
accepted. Until now, that is. Lately, sufficient steam seems to have built up 
in the ears of disenfranchised stars for them to protest. Barely a day now 
passes without another high-profile female actor sharing a story of double 
standards in the payroll department, or issuing a call-to-arms that getsMeryl 
Streep whooping in the aisles 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/oscars/oscars-2015-meryl-streeps-amazing-reaction-to-patricia-arquettes-speech-20150223-13mdju.html>
.

“To every woman who gave birth, to every taxpayer and citizen of this nation, 
we have fought for everybody else’s equal rights,” saidPatricia Arquette in her 
Oscar acceptance speech last February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
. “It’s our time to have wage equality once and for all and equal rights for 
women in the United States of America.” At the same event the previous year,
Cate Blanchett called out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/04/cate-blanchett-wins-best-actress-oscar>
 those in the industry “still foolishly clinging to the idea that female films 
with women at the centre are niche experiences. They are not. Audiences want to 
see them and, in fact, they earn money. The world is round, people.”

Patricia Arquette takes up equal pay – an issue that has long plagued the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/23/hollywood-takes-up-equal-pay-patricia-arquette>
Others joining the chorus include Jennifer Aniston 
<http://www.vagabomb.com/Jennifer-Lawrence-Just-Owned-Hollywoods-Equal-Pay-Debate/>
,Kim Cattrall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/24/kim-cattrall-interview>, Salma 
Hayek 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/salma-hayek-parker-posey-blast-hollywood-sexism-cannes-1201498475/>
,Emma Watson 
<http://makeitworkcampaign.org/emma-watson-just-got-country-talking-equal-pay/>,
Charlize Theron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/charlize-theron-unequal-pay> and 
Amanda Seyfried who, earlier this month,revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/13/amanda-seyfried-paid-10-percent-less-male-costar-hollywood>
 she was paid 10% of an equivalent male actor’s salary in a big-budget 
production. The same percentage as was cited by Frances McDormand 
(Oscar-winner, married to a Coen) in May,when she said she had only been paid 
her going rate just once over her whole career 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cannes-frances-mcdormand-talks-flatgate-797650>
 – for, strikingly, Transformers: Dark of the Moon.

“I’m proud that I finally got paid what I was told I was worth by the 
industry,” she said. “But that is nothing. That is a 10th of what most males my 
age, with my experience and my reputation as a film actor, make. We’ve never 
been paid commensurately and that has to change.” Last week, Emma Thompson (an 
Oscar-winning screenwriter, mind, as well as an actor) gotstuck in too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/21/emma-thompson-sexism-in-acting-industry-is-worse-than-ever>
. “What the ding-dong heck is going on if this is still something we’re talking 
about?”

So, Melissa Silverstein should really be thrilled. Eight years ago, she 
launchedWomen and Hollywood <http://blogs.indiewire.com/womenandhollywood/>, a 
site to expose and combat gender inequality in the film business. At the time, 
she says, “not a single other site wrote about these issues. Now, there’s a 
proliferation.” But the new wave does not swell her heart as anticipated. “It’s 
actually kind of boring now,” she says. “I don’t want us all to be 
regurgitating what everyone else is saying. I want us to think ahead. 
Conversation has clearly peaked, yet we see minimal-to-no movement in the 
actual numbers. It’s not about talking about it anymore; it’s about making 
action happen.”

Patricia Arquette and the Hollywood pay gap: who's to blame?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/patricia-arquette-hollywood-pay-gap-hillary-clinton>
Are Hollywood’s most powerful female stars really reciting stirring lines into 
an echo chamber? It seems possible. Statistics indeed remain static; pay hikes 
are rare and involve a bellyache. Struggling to sympathise with 
multi-millionaires who want more moolah? Remember: it’s the principle that 
counts, and sets the precedent that trickles down to the rest of the business. 
The proportion of female directors handed the reins on the highest-grossing 
films has actuallyfallen over the past 17 years 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/number-of-female-directors-falls-over-17-year-period-study-finds-1201402686/>
; only 5% of cinematographers are women and even when it comes to extras,they 
account for less than 20% 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/geena-davis-two-easy-steps-664573>. 
Beyond, too: cinema is an aspirational medium – society is shaped by our most 
visible symbols. What we see on screen is what many of us take to be the status 
quo.

How did this debate so quickly risk becoming stale, even self-defeating? Why 
might it be that the howls of protest are having so little effect? To find out, 
one first needs to identify what opened the floodgates in the first place. What 
caused so many female stars to speak with the same voice, in such a short space 
of time?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099171990%2Fc30647ca-17e5-4cbf-8d8b-8b435c57b669-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438099171990%2Fc30647ca-17e5-4cbf-8d8b-8b435c57b669-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Not all are equal: Amy Adams, Bradley Cooper, Jeremy Renner, Christian Bale & 
Jennifer Lawrence in American Hustle. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
The answer lies online. Technology turns out to be a key driver of change 
here; unlike, say, mounting mainstream feminism, which though given a fresh 
injection by the likes of Amy Poehler, may not have shifted the dial as much as 
one might imagine. The most damaging revelation contained in last year’s leaked 
Sony emails was not George Clooney’ssensitivity 
<http://www.thewrap.com/sony-leaked-emails-depict-ryan-gosling-george-clooney-leo-dicaprio-sought-after-apologetic-and-despicable/>
 over withering reviews of Monuments Men, nor Scott Rudin’sassessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/10/sony-hack-eamils-angelina-jolie-scott-rudin-amy-pascal-david-fincher>
 of Angelina Jolie’s talent levels. It was that the female stars of David O 
Russell’s American Hustle – Jennifer Lawrence and Amy Adams – were paidtwo 
percentage points less of the profits than their male counterparts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
, despite Lawrence having won an Oscar the previous year and being, for many, 
the film’s major draw. All four bagged Academy Award nominations for the 
performances, but Lawrence took home millions of dollars less than Jeremy 
Renner, who did not.

The case proved the clincher for Charlize Theron when she decided to push for 
a $10m hike – taking her on a par with Chris Hemsworth – in Snow White prequel 
The Huntsman. “I thought about the temperature out there,”she said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/charlize-theron-unequal-pay>. 
Lawrence and Adams were “just as good as any of the guys on there. Yeah, that 
pissed me off.”

Charlize Theron on unequal pay: 'We need to put our foot down'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/charlize-theron-unequal-pay> 
The fallout from the Sony hack went wider. The lid had been blown off an 
industry whose operating system is secrets and lies, in which someone’s stock 
is propped up by gloss and mirrors. Acting isn’t just confined to sound stages; 
it’s part and parcel of the haggle, too. “Hollywood has a culture of fear,” 
says Silverstein. “People don’t know budgets, they don’t know pay.”

Just raising the issue is a risky business. “Jessica Chastain and Seyfried 
were both brave and outspoken, and they both had blowback,” says Anne Thompson, 
a highly respected industry blogger who has reported on the issue for three 
decades. The people who are the problem are also those who control blacklists 
and can exact penalties. Rose McGowan’sown agents dropped her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/25/rose-mcgowan-i-was-fired-for-flagging-adam-sandler-casting-call-sexism>
 after she mocked a casting call for an Adam Sandler movie requesting women 
wear push-up bras (she has also lobbied for equal pay). Silverstein credits 
out-of-towners such as Blanchett and Emma Thompson for empowering those within 
the closed shop. It’s easier to burst a bubble if you’re standing outside it.

But just as the internet started the fire, it also stoked the flames, offering 
a soapbox from which people could express their anger. “What’s really changed 
is everyone’s got Twitter,” says Thompson. Younger women can now self-publish 
on their own terms and with the security of a fanbase who are likely to support 
their sentiments – and then amplify them.

Thompson adds that it’s important to stress that old media progress had been 
attempted; today’s spurt of activity launches off work done by the likes of 
Geena Davis – who, in 2007, set up aninstitute <http://seejane.org/> to 
myth-bust through research – and Kathryn Bigelow, not just theonly female best 
director Oscar-winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/08/kathryn-bigelow-oscars-best-director>
, but maker of a movie (Zero Dark Thirty) whose lead is a woman whose romantic 
life is irrelevant.

And though the likes of Judd (Trainwreck) Apatow and Paul (Bridesmaids) Feig 
should be applauded for showcasing realistic – and successful – portrayals of 
women, Thompson praises Thelma & Louise director Ridley Scott (“No one wanted 
to touch that movie”) and James Cameron, who stealth-fed into The Terminator 
franchise a heat-packing heroine at a time when America was uncomfortable with 
the very idea. “He understood that if a woman had a gun she either needed to be 
saving the world or saving her own children.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438097995579%2F0be94ee9-3a9c-4f38-9128-4f1fdeb09fef-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438097995579%2F0be94ee9-3a9c-4f38-9128-4f1fdeb09fef-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Susan Sarandon and Geena Davis in 1991’s Thelma & Louise. Photograph: 
MGM/Everett /Rex Features 
And yet: progress has slowed, despite these inroads. Why? Well, that takes us 
back to basic prejudice. Or, rather, to the potency and the self-perpetuating 
nature of the stories cinema has supplied for the past century. The fewer women 
seen in positions of power has a relation to the number who will come up 
through the ranks and be able to leverage change. Their work will therefore be 
valued less and their pay will be decided accordingly. Collusion in the system 
stretches right from studio CEOs to agents and actors and, finally, right down 
to us, the audience.

“We all get used to what we get used to,” says Thompson. “We’ve all 
internalised so much bullshit.” A century of mainstream conditioning that 
suggests women’s purpose is to cheerlead and prettify, to wait by the phone or 
weep into pillows, has left a lot of people unconsciously attaching less 
importance to their stories. What were once tropes become truisms. What might 
once have been authentic can become a stereotype unless questioned.

“There are so many layers of sexism that are deeply embedded in the Hollywood 
narrative that it’s difficult for people to see [women] as leaders,” says 
Silverstein. Yes, there is a Wonder Woman movie in the works, and yes, it will 
be directed by a woman. “But what does it say not just about the movie business 
but people themselves that we’re happy for the mainstream narrative of the day 
to be white men saving people?”

Doziness on our part may not be deliberate, but there is less excuse when it 
comes to those supplying the goods. Men dominate Hollywood studios – as pay 
differentials prove. The male co-president of Columbia Pictures earns almost 
$1m more than his female counterpart. Of the 17 Sony employees who earned more 
than $1m a year, leaks revealed, only one was a woman – presumably Amy Pascal, 
nowdeparted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/12/sony-pictures-chief-amy-pascal-hack-interview>
 in the wake of the email hacks. Such people, thinks Silverstein, have a vested 
interest in promoting their own kind, in both senses of the word. “America will 
not be a country dominated by white men for much longer. And so some people are 
holding on to that with every last breath by having dominance in storytelling 
which is exported around the world. Seventy-two cents of every dollar made from 
US movies is made internationally. So we’re reflecting a society that shows 
women don’t exist and neither do people of colour.” Indeed, there’s a danger 
that the conversation will be hijacked by Caucasians, parallel battles left to 
languish. Viola Davis, for instance, has been vocal on both the marginalised 
movie parts she is offered and the pitiful remittance that often accompanies 
them. She has even advocated equal-share salaries on long-running TV shows (her 
go-to medium for meaty roles). But, with some inevitability, her voice has got 
drowned out.

Be it propaganda or self-denial, such top-down policy doesn’t just keep women 
in the sidelines on screen, it means they’re sidelined behind the cameras, too. 
Colin Trevorrow and Jon Watts followed Marc Webb and Rupert Wyatt in graduating 
straight from indies to blockbusters such as Jurassic World and the rebooted 
Spider-Man. Meanwhile, says Thompson, Lisa Cholodenko picked up four Oscar 
nominations for The Kids Are All Right – leading to almost exclusively 
small-screen offers (at a time when TV was not the new cinema). “People just 
don’t have confidence in women to be up to the challenge of a big-budget movie.”

“People look for people who remind them of themselves,” says Silverstein. 
“They still see men as more competent, even if they don’t have the experience.” 
The lack of mobility is exacerbated by hangover concerns that women will chuck 
it all in to have children. An irrelevant worry on short-term projects, but it 
does help explain why many of those women who are trusted with big productions 
– Nancy Meyers (What Women Want, It’s Complicated), Jane Campion (The Piano, In 
the Cut), Phyllida Lloyd (Mamma Mia!, The Iron Lady) – tend to be older. “The 
pipeline has many leaks up and down; women just fall out at every step,” says 
Silverstein.

Male actors have been striking for their lack of support in the battle for 
equal pay, not simply silent on the issue but persistently reluctant to play 
second or third lead. Yet getting men on board is the only long-term solution. 
“The world cannot change by women just talking about unequal pay,” says 
Silverstein – a sad statement from someone whose career has involved exactly 
that. Yet in order for the debate to cross the gender divide, targeting 
people’s self-interest will likely pay greater dividends than their sense of 
justice.

If money is to be made, that’s helpful. If awards are to be won, yet better 
(the need for richer parts is one of the reasons Reese Witherspoon started her 
own production company). And if your offspring are to have equal opportunities 
– well, that’s a bit of a heart-tugger.

But isn’t it sad that economics trump ethics? Silverstein still sounds perky. 
“It’s difficult to shift fundamental thinking. I would love for people to have 
a lightbulb go off and think: ‘Oh, I’ve been sexist and I’m going to change.’ 
But people don’t work like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098178018%2F61d6ea17-45f2-4619-96a8-115b0c56f34a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20real%20Hollywood%20scandal%3A%20why%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20other%20female%20stars%20get%20ripped%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Famerican-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438098178018%2F61d6ea17-45f2-4619-96a8-115b0c56f34a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A beacon for equality campaigners: Donna Langley, CEO of Universal Pictures. 
Photograph: Michael Buckner 
And yet, in lieu of these lightbulb moments, there are none the less two 
beacons for campaigners. The first is Donna Langley, born and raised on the 
Isle of Wight and for the past six years the CEO of Universal Pictures. Under 
her leadership, the studio earlier this month became thefastest ever to make 
$3bn 
<http://www.screendaily.com/box-office/upi-sets-3bn-industry-record/5090270.article>
, in part thanks toFifty Shades of Grey 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=fiftyshadesofgrey.htm> ($570m), Pitch 
Perfect 2 <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=pitchperfect2.htm> ($282m) 
andTrainwreck <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=trainwreck15.htm> ($62m, 
after just one week of US release). Anyone who has acquired that much power 
would likely have little trouble entrusting a lot of money to another woman; 
those first two films were female-directed as well as starring – and, in the 
case of Trainwreck, Langley took a punt on a writer/star whose only film credit 
at that point wasWoman #1 in Seeking a Friend for the End of the World 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2154960/reference>.

The fact that when Trainwreck’s numbers came through the movie was widely 
reported to have“overperformed” 
<http://www.foodworldnews.com/articles/27419/20150720/box-office-news-ant-man-disappoints-trainwreck-impresses.htm>
 brings us to the second encouraging sign. Traditional tracking in Hollywood 
suffers from time lag and freighted expectations – largely, that your target 
demographic is teenage boys.

But streaming services-turned-commissioning bodies such as Netflix and Amazon 
Prime have, says Thompson, “different metrics for measuring what people are 
interested in”, meaning they appeal not just to film-makers but advertisers 
too. As both companies gain credibility in cinema – each has at least one Oscar 
contender this autumn, andJolie’s next movie will be made by Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/angelina-jolie-to-direct-pol-pot-genocide-drama-for-netflix>
 – so audiences can flag quicker what they like, and when saturation point has 
been reached.

Another victory for the internet, then. But let’s leave the last word to Rose 
McGowan – perhaps the star who has emerged from the past few months with the 
most scars. “I am not being served and I am not being heard,” she saidat the 
start of the year 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/womenandhollywood/quote-of-the-day-rose-mcgowan-20150107>
, before the movie she directed won an award at Sundance, and before her own 
agents dropped her. “When they say, ‘Oh, the box office is down’, it’s perhaps 
because we don’t need more fucking superhero movies!’ It’s time.”
 