
Wanted: a new generation of feminist super heroes to stave off ecological 
catastrophe.Setsu Shigematsu 
<http://guardianprincesses.com/staff/setsu-shigematsu/>, a California-based 
academic, has created the “Guardian Princesses <http://guardianprincesses.com/>
” – seven female Disney-style cartoon characters, which she hopes will inspire 
enthusiasm for non-violent collective eco-action in the younger generation.

There is a rich history of eco-feminism, starting from the coining of the term 
by French feminist Françoise d’Eaubonne in 1974 in her essayFeminism or Death. 
This launched a wave of women linking feminist viewpoints with earth-saving, 
which built on Rachel Carson’s work inSilent Spring 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/silent-spring-2.html>. And in Rape of the Wild
(1989), the authors take issue with “Man’s” violence against animals and earth.

Also in the 1980s came the first organised groups, likeWomanEarth. 
Womensearthalliance.org <http://www.womensearthalliance.org/> and 
wecaninternational.org <http://wecaninternational.org/>, are the modern 
incarnations: eco-feminism has become closely aligned to the climate crisis.

One of the world’s greatest environmental activists, Vandana Shiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vandana-shiva>, cut her teeth in the 
Chipko movement in India in the 1970s, against deforestation. The women wrapped 
their arms around trees while men tried to chop them down. And women in the 
developing world are likely to bear the brunt of environmental disaster. Shiva 
has referred to women as the “canaries in the coalmine”.

The new incarnation of the movement has less truck with Mother Earth ideals, 
or the hackneyed conceit of women’s “affinity” with nature. Instead, it demands 
to know why women are still often absent from the top table of environmental 
debate, shut out by the same heteronormative males we took issue with in the 
first place.

The big picture: taking a stand on rubbish

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8664dae155f8a705c8ec91f33dec5b8acbc4461%2F0_677_7087_4255%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20action%20heroines%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20action%20heroines%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8664dae155f8a705c8ec91f33dec5b8acbc4461%2F0_677_7087_4255%2F7087.jpg>
 Mellow yellow: a detail from one of Stuart Haygarth’s artworks, from the new 
bookStrand. Photograph: Stuart Haygarth 
Stuart Haygarth spent New Year’s Day 2000 combing London’s Bankside for spent 
fireworks and party poppers from the previous night. Then he worked them into a 
spectacular millennium chandelier. Since then, he has continued to turn 
‘rubbish’ into art. Brought together in a new book, Strand, his work shows the 
painfully slow degradation of oil-based products, in particular plastic toys 
and shoes.
Strand is published in April, priced £28 (artbookspublishing.co.uk 
<http://www.artbookspublishing.co.uk/>)

Well dressed: Livia Firth’s ethical collection at M&S

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F056971321762c5a45d43e103c53b6fd19695db5d%2F0_0_3104_4140%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20action%20heroines%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20action%20heroines%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-action-heroines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F056971321762c5a45d43e103c53b6fd19695db5d%2F0_0_3104_4140%2F3104.jpg>
 Livia Firth wearing a Gia top, Athena culottes and black tote bag from her 
collection for M&S. 
Ethical fashion stalwart (and long-time Ethical Awards judge) Livia Firth 
began working with Marks & Spencer last year, curating a collection of the 
retailer’s most ethical garments. This month she designs her first capsule 
collection. “The exciting thing,” she says, “has been having the chance to 
design as many sustainability features as possible into a mainstream 
collection.” The collection includes two dresses, accessories (from a 
sustainable leather supply chain in Brazil) and the Athena culottes and Gia top 
shown here, inspired by the laid-back off-duty chic of her style heroes, Jackie 
O and Grace Kelly. She stresses that the pieces are designed to last a 
lifetime, and form the basis of a truly sustainable wardrobe. When ethical 
fashion infiltrates the high street in this way, it’s a big moment. Prices 
start at £49.50.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 