
Ann Patchett <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ann-patchett> begins Bel Canto 
by sealing in her characters. In some unspecified Latin American country, 
insurgents have stormed the vice-president's mansion during a diplomatic party, 
believing that they will capture the President himself. Unfortunately for the 
guerrillas, he has stayed home to watch his favourite soap opera, and they are 
left with a miscellaneous collection of hostages from various nations. 
Surrounded by the unseen forces of the state, waiting for some final crisis, 
captors and captured while away the days that follow.

Confinement is enforced as a matter of the novel's plot, but is also a formal 
device. It is what enables the novelist to bring together characters in 
otherwise unlikely combinations and to pursue surprising relationships. A 
Japanese translator and a female terrorist slowly fall for each other during 
grammar lessons. An American diva, who was the star performer at the party, 
becomes involved with the opera-mad president of an electronics company who has 
long worshipped her from afar.

Confinement is a familiar principle of much drama. In plays, characters have 
to be brought together and kept on stage. All the parties and reunions we know 
from modern drama are ways of confining characters in each other's company. 
Such restriction is important to novelists too. How can a novelist segregate 
his or her cast from the world around so that their interactions might be 
plotted, their personalities known?

Patchett traps a small world of characters, almost all from different 
countries, speaking different languages. Most of the novel's comedy comes from 
the odd national differences between their experiences of a shared ordeal. Her 
situation is carefully contrived (and, of course, risks seeming a contrivance). 
Yet the principle of fiction is often some arranged restriction. "3 or 4 
Families in a country Village is the very thing to work on" was Jane Austen's 
advice to a would-be novelist. The mock-modesty of the suggestion contains a 
hard truth about how her own novels work. In her country villages her 
characters cannot escape each other; they are forced together.

It is no accident that what is often thought to be the first novel, Daniel 
Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, is a tale of confinement. Only hemmed in by the sea, 
driven back on his physical and spiritual resources, can Crusoe come to know 
himself, and know God's will. The two great works of the next pioneer of 
18th-century fiction, Samuel Richardson, are also stories of confinement. The 
heroines of Pamela and Clarissa spend much of their time impris oned, 
scribbling the endless letters that form their narratives.

Readers will be able to think of all the ways in which great novelists have 
confined their characters, whether in villages or prisons, on ships or on 
islands (Joseph Conrad specialised in both of the last two of these). It is 
also an arrangement much used in popular fiction. Gothic novels began by 
locking their heroines in ancient buildings, setting their imaginations 
feverishly to work with every creak and whisper. The device became something 
like art in the work of Poe or in Stoker's Dracula, and is alive and well in 
horror fiction to this day.

Think, too, of whodunnits and thrillers. For the former, there is the country 
house, the cruise boat on the Nile, or - from Wilkie Collins onwards - whatever 
can limit and specify a collection of suspects. For the latter, there are 
trains and ships and planes. When I was a boy, my favourite was Alistair 
MacLean, who specialised in groups of desperate men cut off in Arctic outposts 
(Ice Station Zebra, Bear Island ) with a traitor or two among them.

Patchett's novel, however, uses the convention to deny all thrills. Some 
political plot is going on, but the reader is hardly allowed to know more of 
this than the captives. The siege is more like a weird idyll, in which time is 
to be filled by talking, dreaming, playing and, for a lucky few, romancing. The 
novel is interested in what happens to people when the once urgent-seeming 
plots of their lives are suspended. What then animates them? What do they 
actually care about? You can only find out by keeping them captive.

Â· John Mullan is senior lecturer in English at University College London. Have 
your say about Bel Canto on the Guardian talkboards atbooktalk.theguardian.com 
<http://booktalk.theguardian.com> or write to The Review Book Club, Review, The 
Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER.
 