
26 February 1928: Ariel Sharon is born at Kfar Malal, 15 miles north-east of 
Tel Aviv, a moshav (collective settlement) in central Palestine. His parents, 
Samuel and Vera Scheinerman, had arrived six years earlier from Russia

1948: Becomes commander in Israeli army from its inception, participating in 
the war of independence

1953: Prime minister David Ben-Gurion chooses 24-year-old Sharon to head new 
elite commando squad called Unit 101

October 1953: Sharon's commandos attack Qibya in Jordan and kill 69 residents, 
including women and children. Many historians feel the raid contributed to the 
Suez crisis three years later

1956: Brigade led by Sharon captures strategic Mitla Pass during Suez war. 
Later criticised for disobeying orders and recklessly endangering soldiers' 
lives during operation

June 1967: Major-General Sharon retakes Mitla Pass and Abu Agheila during 
six-day war

1970-71: Crushes dissent in occupied Gaza by relocating 160,000 refugees, 
killing 100 Palestine Liberation Organisation suspects, and arresting another 
700

October 1973: Called back to active duty for Yom Kippur war. Claims he turned 
tide of war by crossing the Suez canal, trapping the Egyptian 3rd army and 
winning the largest tank battle since Kursk in 1943. Relieved of duty in 
February 1974

December 1973: Becomes Knesset member for capitalist Liberal party

1975: Appointed security adviser to Labour prime minister Yitzhak Rabin

1977: Forms Shlomtzion political party, which wins two seats in 1977 
elections. Merges party with Likud, and becomes minister of agriculture

1981: Appointed minister of defence after narrow Likud win in elections, and 
starts planning to alter regional map

June 1982: Launches Operation Peace for Galilee, later known as the first 
Lebanon war

February 1983: Resigns as minister of defence and forbidden from holding post 
again after being found personally responsible for deaths of 800 and 3,500 
Palestinians respectively in Sabra and Shatila refugee camps in Beirut. The 
killings led to some labelling Sharon as 'the butcher of Beirut'

1983: Appointed minister without portfolio. Remains in successive governments, 
holding a variety of posts

October 1998: As newly appointed foreign minister, astounds acolytes by 
signing the Wye River agreement, which granted Palestinians control over 
another 13% of the West Bank

May 1999: Netanyahu loses national elections. Sharon assumes party leadership 
and becomes head of opposition

September 2000: Visits Jerusalem's Temple Mount with "message of peace" and 
1,000 armed police, prompting Palestinian uprising

February 2001: Comfortably defeats Labour incumbent Ehud Barak in Israel's 
last direct prime ministerial elections

2002: Suicide bombings prompt Sharon to reoccupy Palestinian cities

January 2003: Likud party wins a resounding victory in elections for the 
Knesset, and Sharon is returned as prime minister

April 2003: America releases "roadmap to peace", which Sharon accepts, despite 
some objections. He commitsIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to 
withdraw from West Bank cities and release more Palestinian prisoners

February 2004: Sharon says Israel will pull out troops from Gaza and evacuate 
all 22 settlements in the strip, but Likud party members reject plan in May

February 2005: Speaking alongside Mahmoud Abbas at summit, declares truce in 
four-intifada

August 2005: Dismantles all Jewish settlements in Gaza amid fierce protests. 
Decision dismays Israeli right, who feel he has betrayed the Greater Land of 
Israel cause.

November 2005: Resigns from Likud and dissolves parliament to create new 
centrist party from scratch called Kadima ("forward" in Hebrew)

18 December 2005: Rushed to hospital after suffering stroke. Discharged after 
two days with surgery to repair a small hole in his heart scheduled for early 
January

4 January 2006: Suffers another stroke and collapses in bathroom. Operated on 
for seven hours at Hadassah hospital on edge of Jerusalem, but never regains 
consciousness

March 2006: Kadima – with Ehud Olmert as leader – sweeps aside Labour and 
Likud in elections

14 April 2006: Declared "permanently incapacitated", having been in a coma for 
100 days. Olmert confirmed as prime minister

January 2013: Doctors say "significant" brain activity detected during tests 
on Sharon's brain, but chances of him regaining consciousness still near zero

2 January 2014: Sharon's doctors report that he has suffered multiple organ 
failure and is clinging to life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/02/ariel-sharon-critical-condition-doctor>

11 January 2014: Sharon dies at Sheba Medical Centre, the long-term care 
facility near Tel Aviv where he has lain since May 2006
 