
Andrew Haigh, director of 45 Years: 'You don’t need to share everything with 
your partner'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/andrew-haigh-45-years-interview> 
One of the enormous and incidental pleasures of Andrew Haigh’s superlative 
drama 45 Years is the way it presents us with two superb actors absorbed in the 
kind of roles and script that don’t come along too often. Older actors usually 
get to play supporting parts which are sketchily or condescendingly conceived, 
in movies which are of varying quality, to say the least. This movie was 
different. It putCharlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlotte-rampling> and Tom Courtenay centre 
stage and gave them the career-opportunity of a lifetime. They took it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=45%20Years%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=45%20Years%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2F45-years-video-review&media=>
 Watch a video review 
Rampling got the chance to play a role that had nothing to with menacing or 
decadent sensuality; Courtenay played someone who wasn’t diffident or wet. They 
are both quietly electrifying. They are Kate and Geoff Mercer, a retired 
childless couple living in the charming if somewhat featureless Norfolk 
landscape, in a village just outside Norwich. Kate is a former headteacher with 
a natural calm air of authority which still commands respect thereabouts and 
Geoff used to be manager at a local engineering company: he seems of a lower 
social class and lacks her effortless poise and self-control.

In fact, he can still get a bit lairy with a drink inside him. This very 
mismatch has something romantic about it, especially as they are preparing to 
celebrate their 45th wedding anniversary. Yet that faintly arbitrary number — 
45 — is due to the fact that an earlier party had been cancelled, and something 
appears to be subtly wrong. The uneasy calm of their relationship is destroyed 
when Geoff gets a letter out of the blue saying that the body of his old 
girlfriend, who was killed in a walking holiday in Switzerland, has now been 
discovered in the ice and snow, perfectly preserved. The past comes rushing 
back to overwhelm the present.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20'A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual'-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20%27A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual%27-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The cast and director interviewed 
The best films of 2015: Guardian readers' choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/the-best-films-of-2015-guardian-readers-choice>
Piece by piece, brick by brick, the edifice of their relationship begins to 
collapse — and so do their lives and their sense of themselves. The film 
terrifyingly shows how as time goes by, we can build our identities on a lie, 
or at least on a delusion, and these identities become teeteringly unsafe 
towers liable to collapse if they are suddenly examined or challenged too 
closely. Perhaps there is something dangerous in the very act of an anniversary 
party itself: the sudden, unwonted focus on the marriage — why did we get 
married, anyway? — and the appearance of dozens of old friends and faces with 
disturbing associations with the past.

At the end, Kate appears to be in torment, but Haigh’s final, disquieting shot 
suggests that, in Shakespeare’s phrase, there’s no art to find the mind’s 
construction in the face. Look around you — at Kate and Geoff’s anniversary 
party, or in the office, or at home, or in the street. Everyone looks happy, or 
calm at any rate. But perhaps every single one of these faces is concealing a 
terrible, painful secret, like Kate and Geoff.45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years> is a fiercely disturbing film.
 