
I recently bought a set of top-of-the-range reusables. For coffee I got a 
KeepCup (keepcup.com <http://www.keepcup.com/>), which fits neatly under any 
coffee machine, ensuring baristas don’t hate you during the morning rush. For 
water, famously available for free from a tap, I bought a Jerry Bottle (
jerrybottle.com <http://jerrybottle.com/>) and to add bubbles, a SodaStream (
sodastream.co.uk <http://www.sodastream.co.uk/>) – each carbonator displaces 40 
bottles.

For every reusable receptacle you bring into your life, you save about 100 
disposable versions. Plus, I’ve made new friends. When I bring my KeepCup to 
the coffee stand people want to know where I got it. Single-use packaging is so 
normalised – the average UK household gets through 500 plastic bottles a year – 
that it turns out you have to re-make the case for reusables quite often.

So here’s mine: 15 to 51 trillion particles of plastic 
<https://www.wageningenur.nl/en/newsarticle/How-much-microplastic-floats-around-in-the-plastic-soup-.htm>
 now float on the surface of oceans globally. But this represents just 1% of 
the plastic waste estimated to flow into oceans from land per year. Almost all 
of the plastic created still exists and global annual plastic production keeps 
rising: from 1.7 MMT (million metric tonnes) in 1950 to 311 MMT in 2014.

When US scientists examined 192 countries with coastlines they found that the 
annual volume of plastic going into oceans was equivalent to pouring in five 
grocery bags full for every foot of coastline in the world. Countries with high 
personal waste generation rates – like ours – are the worst offenders. Then add 
the escaped stock when making bottles and bags, dubbed “mermaid’s tears”. 
Billions are added to this plastic soup every year.

The #oneless 
<https://www.zsl.org/conservation/habitats/marine-and-freshwater/one-less> 
campaign aims to rid London of single-use plastic bottles by 2017. This sounds 
ambitious. But ask yourself how much plastic you’d be happy to see floating in 
the ocean.

The big picture: on the waterfront
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87422f7bab281507224349e92c001e18e5c0518a%2F0_322_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20reusables&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20reusables&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87422f7bab281507224349e92c001e18e5c0518a%2F0_322_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Water woman: Lizzie Carr travelled the waterways of England on a paddle board, 
logging plastic waste. Photograph: David Powell 
Environmentalist and blogger Lizzie Carr is Britain’s most down-to-earth 
adventurer. She insists on her journeys being low carbon and local. She has 
just completed the length of England via waterways on a stand-up paddle board. 
Over 400 miles paddling through locks and aqueducts she also logged plastic 
waste. Her inventory included 1,662 plastic bottles, 851 plastic bags and 3 
chairs (lizzieoutside.co.uk <http://www.lizzieoutside.co.uk/>).

Well dressed: knitting with a clean conscience
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a560445da6548932d86aed15ba25454d57cc43f%2F0_211_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20reusables&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20reusables&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Feco-guide-to-reusables%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a560445da6548932d86aed15ba25454d57cc43f%2F0_211_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 Calvin top, knitted with Billie Jean yarn made from denim factory waste 
Clean knitting: it’s a thing. A close relative of clean eating – where you 
prepare only recognisable ingredients at home (thereby minimising processed 
food in your diet) – knitting clean involves the same ethical scrutiny of 
provenance of materials. So it’s out with chemical- and water-intensive 
synthetic yarns.

Wool and the Gang <https://www.woolandthegang.com/> already lead the way with 
knit-your-own ready-to-wear kits, but their latest eco yarn, called Billie 
Jean, is made from denim factory waste, decreasing the amount that ends up in 
landfill. It is 100% upcycled, sustainable and free of chemicals and dye. And 
it is available in two colours: ‘raw’ or ‘dirty denim’.

Knit the Calvin sleeveless top (pictured, above) in Billie Jean yarn and you 
will save 6,000 litres of water – the equivalent of 100 showers.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 