
When Monty Don recently put his wellington boot into self-sufficiency, writing 
inGardeners’ World magazine that living off the land was a “non-starter”, I was 
surprised. I didn’t believe anybody actually followed John Seymour’s 1976
Complete Guide to Self-Sufficiency to the letter any more. That’s the type of 
all-consuming, no-consuming living off the land that leads – in Monty’s eyes – 
to failure, bad breath and possibly malnutrition.

But if the good life is still your dream, diggersanddreamers.org.uk lists UK 
communities that are looking for members. These communities are outstanding 
examples of permaculture – sustainable, self-sufficient agricultural ecosystems 
– and provide inspiration for those of us who don’t subscribe to the hard 
labour of the full downshift but do fancy trying “self-provisioning”, usually 
defined as growing part of your diet yourself.

But smart self-provisioning goes further than diet. Stitchedup.coop and Sewing 
Café Lancaster are two examples of fashion activism combined with reskilling 
that are helping to re-establish a make do and mend culture.

At the newly refurbished Museum of English Rural Life in Reading, curator Guy 
Baxter notes that a surge of interest in growing food has been accompanied by 
increased appetite for heritage craft. The museum houses the lathe of renowned 
woodturner George Lailey. Their books are inspiring too. I’m hoping theScything 
Handbook will see a Poldark-inspired uplift in Christmas sales.

Critics may say this is fiddling, stitching, sycthing and pickling while Rome 
burns but I think the new self-provisioners represent a significant shift for 
sustainable living, achievable and desirable to huge numbers of people.

The big picture: cutlery for eating insects
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7394d9ff5d39c71db2f3547d45ba1fd39483cdd1%2F1005_295_2121_1273%2F2121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20self-provisioning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20self-provisioning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7394d9ff5d39c71db2f3547d45ba1fd39483cdd1%2F1005_295_2121_1273%2F2121.jpg>
 So tempting: Bugbug cutlery will help you tackle your creepy crawlies. 
We’ve heard a lot about how eating insects in the future will sustainably fill 
the ‘protein gap’ and our stomachs, too - but precious little about how we’ll 
actually eat the insects. Until now. Middlesex University graduate Wataru 
Kobayashi has won the Institute of Making ‘Cutlery Design Challenge’ with 
Bugbug, his set of futuristic pointed claws – so much handier than a knife and 
fork. Tuck in.

Well dressed: ethical underwear
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a3d3a79726a152ddb42f1b173ed79da0a52c3b%2F0_54_4016_2409%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20self-provisioning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20self-provisioning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-self-provisioning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a3d3a79726a152ddb42f1b173ed79da0a52c3b%2F0_54_4016_2409%2F4016.jpg>
 Perfect pyjamas from AmaElla. Photograph: Simon Wisbey/Make 
I try really hard not to bring you ethical fashion brands that are still being 
crowd funded – honestly, I want you to be able get hold of the product right 
now – but then I came across the perfect pyjama set from AmaElla (pictured) 
combining ethically sourced fabrics and European production with the prettiest 
design. The bra and knickers are lovely too. My resolve evaporated. Follow the 
link at amaella.com to preorder, and help fund the brand at theupeffect.com. 
The pyjama set is £115 and you won’t get it before March 2017 but I’m hoping 
you’re a fan of delayed gratification. Alternatively you can support Ama Ella 
for just £1 and get a cheatsheet on how to start an ethical fashion business. 
It’s worth having: the founders, Lara San Gil and Julie Kervadec, are star 
students of the Centre for Social Innovation at Cambridge Judge Business School.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 