
The wilderness nuts of old headed off on Nordic skis in sagging woollen 
leggings and handknitted sweaters. Modern wilderness wear is different. It’s 
high performance, engineered to aid air flow around the body.

Some of this is clever design, but a lot is down to PFCs – perfluorinated 
chemicals. They repel grease and, crucially, water. It was a downer when we 
found out last year that fragments of plastic polymers from our clothes, 
especially active wear, end up as microplastic pollution in rivers and oceans.

It’s a headache when greener chemistry turns out not to be so green. Since a 
2012 report,“Chemistry for Any Weather 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/Blogs/makingwaves/chemistry-for-any-weather/blog/47680/>
”, Greenpeace has pursued the outdoor-wear industry as a major contributor to 
pollution. The charity says that since the marketing of outdoor wear leans 
heavily on pristine snow-capped mountains, its manufacturing should not 
endanger them.

Greenpeace’s latest testing of outdoor products was not encouraging. Eleven 
out of 40 contained persistent levels of these toxins. In only four items were 
no PFCs detected.

Paramo-clothing.com <http://www.paramo-clothing.com/en-gb/> is the first 
outdoor brand to completely eliminate PFCs. Most other brands refuse to give up 
on PFCs entirely, transitioning to short-chain versions, considered less likely 
to hang around in the environment. Or at least they were until recently. 
Researchers have found evidence of these “greener” PFCs in trout in remote 
lakes of Canada.

Do we seek out textiles derived from pineapple enzymes? Should we only wear 
natural fibres in undyed colours? There’s no perfect solution (yet), but keep 
up to date atdetox-outdoor.org <http://detox-outdoor.org/>. It seems a safe bet 
that if you’re an outdoorsy sort you’re also a big fan of nature – so give it 
some thought.

The bigger picture: after Fukushima

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0a3114940081a0f183a8427866b7d2968ba1ebe%2F0_0_4186_3315%2F4186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20wear%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20wear%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0a3114940081a0f183a8427866b7d2968ba1ebe%2F0_0_4186_3315%2F4186.jpg>
 Aftermath: the Sanpei family at their new farm in Fukushima. Photograph: 
Kosuke Okahara 
Five years on from the Fukushima nuclear disaster, award-winning Japanese 
photographer Kosuke Okahara’s new work, collected in his bookFukushima Fragments
 <http://kosukeokahara.com/?pid=book_detail&id=19>, shows what remains of the 
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, and what happened to those left behind. His 
subjects include dairy farmers Mr and Mrs Sanpei (pictured), scratching a 
living and fearful for the future, and the mothers who are unable to shake off 
the shadow of a nuclear explosion.

Well dressed: vital companion to ethical shopping

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff04cb0220fde58941d3347227bd316f226cf1b7a%2F0_0_1801_2700%2F1801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20wear%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20wear%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Feco-guide-to-outdoor-wear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff04cb0220fde58941d3347227bd316f226cf1b7a%2F0_0_1801_2700%2F1801.jpg>
 Magnifeco: a mix of the practical and the philosophical. 
Building on the idea that knowledge is power, when it comes to sustainable 
style I’ve become very fond of shopping withMagnifeco, Your Head-to-Toe Guide 
to Ethical Fashion and Non-Toxic Beauty by US author Kate Black. It’s good on 
what’s going wrong in our wardrobes and bathroom cabinets, but the weight of 
the book focuses on how to be a better fashion and beauty consumer. This means 
a mix of the practical – such as how to spot good-quality vintage – and the 
philosophical, with a brave defence of ethical price points. Beauty is 
definitely not skin deep in this book: one chapter covers the economics of 
perfume, for example – and Black’s not scared of covering subjects like eco 
feminine care. Overall, it will help you reframe the way you shop and 
ultimately ensure that you get more ethical bang for your buck.

Magnifeco costs £13.78 in paperback, or £10.79 on Kindle via Amazon

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 