
Charli XCX
Sucker, 21 Oct

Last year obscure Hertfordshire singer Charli XCX released a record, True 
Romance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hN9VGd26Gfo>. This 90s pop confection 
had torn tights, a sulky attitude and high regard for Quentin Tarantino. It 
became hip across the Atlantic, even as XCX’s hit for Icona Pop, I Love It, was 
going global. Fast-forward, and Charli XCX is sharing massive US No 1 hits with 
Iggy Azalea (the super-catchy Fancy) – and getting songs onThe Fault in Our 
Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
 soundtrack (the pugnaciously soppy Boom Clap). And her forthcoming third album 
is one of the hottest records currently being sequenced. She recently scrapped 
an entire snotty punk record, and an early listen to this reveals a fair few 
tunes-by-numbers that belie the heavyweight producers (StarGate). But even 
these have bags of personality – not least because of XCX’s rabble-rousing 
voice, often just a shade away from hysteria. Another heavyweight, Vampire 
Weekend’s Rostam Batmanglij, gives I Need Your Love a girl-group feel. Happily, 
the punky bent survives on autobiographical tracks such as London Queen.


She says: “I don’t just want to make generic music that’s not recognisable as 
something that’s come from my brain.”Kitty Empire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225155064%2F070c3c22-73ef-4151-9b34-321a6285ae75-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225155064%2F070c3c22-73ef-4151-9b34-321a6285ae75-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alt-J: ‘There are people who were really into us when we started but don’t 
think we’re cool any more.’ Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Alt-J 
This Is All Yours, 22 Sept

“Thanks for not making us get jobs,” said the four members of Alt-J, 
addressing their parents on winning the Mercury prize in November 2012 with 
their extraordinarily charmed debut,An Awesome Wave. Since then, the business 
of being in a successful band has probably come to seem more like real work.
Founder member Gwil Sainsbury quit Alt-J suddenly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jan/14/alt-j-bland-band-anonymous-member>
 in January, shortly before recording on the second album began; this month 
singer Gus Unger-Hamilton spoke about the difficulty of being a once-fresh band 
who, via widespread TV licensing of their material, had become “part of the 
establishment”. (“There are people who were really into us when we started but 
don’t think we’re cool any more.”) Despite their stumbles, Alt-J return next 
month with a strong sophomore record,This is All Yours, on which the familiar 
dreamy, half-murmured indie meanderings ofAn Awesome Wave are interwoven with 
some unexpected pop jags, a Miley Cyrus sample (on summer singleHunger of the 
Pine <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dCCXq9QB-dQ>) and the phrase “Gee whizz!” 
(in pop jauntLeft Hand Free <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRWUoDpo2fo>) 
among them.

They say: “It’s quite a funny feeling, being on top of the world, because at 
what point are you going to topple off?”Tom Lamont
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225367084%2F3ef105ed-44a7-4212-be3b-50b299c8e30f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225367084%2F3ef105ed-44a7-4212-be3b-50b299c8e30f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Adele: expect eye-watering sales. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
Adele
25 (rumoured title), date TBC

In 2008 Adele released her first album, 19, to polite reviews and nice-enough 
sales. A Mercury nomination and a Grammy for best new artist made it a very 
successful release all round. The Londoner settled in to life as a well-liked 
British pop star of the upper-middle tier… Then came 2010’s21, a 
multi-million-selling record breaker. Adele’s response to mega-fame has been to 
retreat, for the most part, to her home in Chiswick where she has been quietly 
raising a young son with partner Simon Knoecki. Nothing has been formally 
confirmed, let alone previewed, but industry expectations are that Adele’s 
third record will be released before Christmas, and titled25. What else to 
expect? Thatfamous smoky vocal 
<http://www.muzu.tv/adele/skyfall-lyrics-music-video/1565983/>, 
London-inflected and adorable; punchy Paul Epworth production; eye-watering 
sales. Otherwise, it’s anyone’s guess.

She says: “Bye bye 25, see you again later in the year,” the singer tweeted in 
May, on the eve of her 26th birthday, a message widely read as a first 
announcement of her new record.TL
 Aphex Twin: ‘Syro is the “most accessible” of the several albums he’s been 
working on.’ 
Aphex Twin 
Syro, 22 Sept

What would have been perverse about Aphex Twin’s first album release in nearly 
13 years is if he’d announced it in a conventional fashion. Early hints ofSyro 
came in the form of agreen blimp floating over east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/18/aphex-twin-teases-return-symbol-london-new-york>
, Aphex symbols stencilled around New York and somecryptic mutterings on the 
dark web 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/56341-aphex-twin-announces-new-album-syro-via-the-deep-web/>
. Now the maverick electronic producer’s sixth studio album has a release date, 
an amusinglygarbled press release 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1700377/warp-details-aphex-twins-syro-in-an-offbeat-press-release/news/>
 and song titles that are gnomic in the extreme – tracks such as 4 bit 9d 
api+e+6 [126.26] suggest this won’t be an easy-listening affair with designs on 
the charts. The tricksterish artist (real name Richard D James)tormented fans 
in 2011 <http://elpais.com/diario/2011/06/17/cultura/1308261603_850215.html> by 
claiming he had 10 or 11 completed albums that he hadn’t bothered to release. 
Now that he’s finally deigning to let us hear one, it will be intriguing to 
find out if James’s music still sounds as alien andahead-of-the-curve 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YCSrMEsaNAM> as it did in the 90s. 


He says: Syro is the “most accessible” of the several albums he’s been working 
on, according to a forthcoming interview with James on Pitchfork.Killian Fox
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225865498%2F3d804022-1bd9-4cc2-85ee-435df989e244-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409225865498%2F3d804022-1bd9-4cc2-85ee-435df989e244-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jessie Ware: ‘The topic, again, is love and its discontents.’ Photograph: Rii 
Schroer/Rex 
Jessie Ware
Tough Love, 6 Oct

Having reintroduced a glacial glide to pop with her 2012 debut album, Devotion
, Brixton’s Jessie Ware doesn’t mess with the formula for her second effort,
Tough Love. One song is called Champagne Kisses: enough said. The bpms are 
languid to the point of horizontal. Her restrained vocals are in your ear, 
either way up high, as on the single,Tough Love 
<http://jessieware.com/videos/tough-love/>, or cooing further down her 
register. The topic, again, is love and its discontents – Ware recently married 
and wanted to exorcise the ghosts of previous relationships. What’s new is the 
playfulness – kissy noises on Champagne Kisses and what sounds like a broken 
“Caribbean lounge” synth on Keep on Lying – and the additional firepower. As 
well as returnee producers Julio Bashmore, Kid Harpoon and James Ford, Ware has 
been working with hitmaker Benny Blanco and Two Inch Punch under their new 
moniker, BenZel. They, in turn, roped Ed Sheeran in to co-write Say You Love 
Me, a sop-fest with a gospel choir.

She says: “I feel more confident and I think that shows on the record.” KE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409226122681%2Fde8b3961-57f6-4951-9b98-3826a92885d7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409226122681%2Fde8b3961-57f6-4951-9b98-3826a92885d7-1020x612.jpeg>
 Dave Gilmour of Pink Floyd: the band’s new album started life in 1993-4 as a 
side project to their last album, The Division Bell. Photograph: Yui Mok/Empics 
Pink Floyd
The Endless River, date TBC

News of Pink Floyd’s first studio album for 20 years came via Twitter from 
David Gilmour’s wife, Polly Samson 
<https://twitter.com/pollysamson/status/485411029573439488>. The Endless River, 
produced by Gilmour with Phil Manzanera, Youth and recording engineer Andy 
Jackson, started life in 1993-4 as a side project to the band’s last album,The 
Division Bell. It’s said to be a largely instrumental, ambient affair, though 
session vocalist Durga McBroom-Hudson piped up on social media recently to 
reveal that she had been in the studio with Gilmour last December and that 
there would be lead vocals on at least one track.


Purists might argue that without Roger Waters the album can’t be a proper 
Floyd outing. On the other hand, the band turned 50 this year, and bar a few 
live appearances he hasn’t been on the scene for the last three decades. If 
you’re a fan, you’re going to have to hear it. What’s more, this will be the 
last release to feature Pink Floyd’s late keyboard player Rick Wright; it is, 
as Samson put it, his swansong.

They say: Not very much. Their PR people were keen to assert that what this 
album isnot is the much-mooted Big Spliff project, which dates from the same 
period, but insiders say otherwise…Molloy Woodcraft
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234606515%2Fc7166c3b-22c4-4e65-927b-7befd049c995-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234606515%2Fc7166c3b-22c4-4e65-927b-7befd049c995-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Leonard Cohen: his new album is to be released the day after his 80th birthday.
Leonard Cohen
Popular Problems, 22 Sept

News of Leonard Cohen’s 13th studio album first percolated through from an 
unorthodox source – his Finnish fan site co-ordinator, Jarkko Arjatsalo – on 
the occasion of a recent fan convention in Ireland. Cohen’s biographer, Sylvie 
Simmons, later agreed on Twitter thatPopular Problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/11/leonard-cohen-rumoured-to-release-new-album-next-month>
, the follow-up to 2012’sOld Ideas, would be released on 22 September, the day 
after Cohen’s 80th birthday. Now the record company has got up to speed. There 
is an official tracklisting of nine songs, all of them previously unreleased. 
Those pre-ordering now get an instant download of the excellentAlmost Like the 
Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/aug/19/first-listen-leonard-cohen-almost-like-the-blues-popular-problems>
, a sombre lyric full of suffering set to a classy shimmy.

Many of the songs announced will be familiar to Cohen obsessives, who had 
their own list of around 12 likely unreleased tracks, heard on Cohen’s extended 
world tour. Finally,Born in Chains <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8f37lh9LqRs>
 makes it to disc, as does My Oh My, last heard at a soundcheck in 2010.

He says: It “sets a new tone and speed of hope and despair, grief and joy”. KE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234742896%2Fb4ec6ef4-3b8f-47f3-bf6c-eba00370e502-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234742896%2Fb4ec6ef4-3b8f-47f3-bf6c-eba00370e502-2060x1236.jpeg>
 SBTRKT: ‘fractured versions of US rap, R&B, even post-punk.’ 
SBTRKT
Wonder Where We Land, 22 Sept

SBTRKT’s 2011 debut straddled dubstep and killer pop songs, spawning the single
Wildfire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A-LEiOzXHWM> and its opinion-splitting
Drake remix <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIluOj-yoeI>. This follow-up has 
been largely recorded on Osea Island, off the Essex coast, a mostly 
inaccessible place perfect for a modest producer (Londoner Aaron Jerome), who 
prefers to let a series of featured guests do his fronting. This time, they 
include Ezra from Vampire Weekend, Ferg from the A$AP Mob, Atlantan upcomer 
Raury, alongside regular colleagues Sampha and Jessie Ware.


The sound on Wonder Where We Land veers away from the UK bass scene towards 
fractured versions of US rap, R&B, even post-punk, matching highly produced 
electronics with live drums and grand piano. There’s no equivalent of Wildfire 
for straight-up pop clout, but plenty of complex, grown-up synths instead.

He says: “The first album was about stripping things to the basics. With this 
one I wanted to make a more immersive record that fills your headspace.”Theo 
Leanse
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234855602%2Fa9a32fbb-ff20-44d1-b31e-36605539c324-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234855602%2Fa9a32fbb-ff20-44d1-b31e-36605539c324-1020x612.jpeg>
 Nicki Minaj: back to her hip-hop roots. Photograph: Jeff Vespa/WireImage 
Nicki Minaj
The Pinkprint, date TBC

Its street date is still a closely-guarded mystery. But the signs are that 
Minaj album-time is nigh. Last month there was the gluteus maximising single 
Anaconda, whoserecently-unveiled video 
<http://flavorwire.com/473285/a-guide-to-all-the-gratuitous-product-placement-in-nicki-minajs-anaconda-video>
 seems designed to set tongues wagging and products placed. Spoofs of the 
single’s cover art have gone viral, most notably one by Miley Cyrus, who 
superimposed her own Hannah Montana head on Minaj’s body, accompanied by the 
legend “Hannah Conda”. Beefs are good PR, so there was an exchange of veiled,
quasi‑disses with Iggy Azealea 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/55777-nicki-minaj-clarifies-bet-awards-speech-dissing-iggy-azalea/>
 on the occasion of the BET Awards. Minaj is on better terms with Jessie J and 
Ariana Grande, as seen on their three‑way,Bang Bang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YswhUHH6Ufc>. There’s rather a lot of 
finished-looking artwork out there for this hip-hop (as opposed to pop) album 
whose title plays on Jay Z’s landmark classic,The Blueprint.

She says: “The tracks on Pink Print are back to my hip-hop roots.” KE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409303829645%2Ff1a459d3-43e8-4e96-ae54-b0e1f3252962-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20most%20anticipated%20albums%20this%20autumn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2F10-most-anticipated-albums-this-autumn-adele-nicki-minaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409303829645%2Ff1a459d3-43e8-4e96-ae54-b0e1f3252962-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Flying Lotus: ‘hugely entertaining’. 
Flying Lotus
You’re Dead!, 6 Oct

One of the most exciting producers in hip-hop, Flying Lotus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/flying-lotus> (aka Steven Ellison) always 
attracts interesting collaborators – Thom Yorke sang on his last two records. 
Even so, what’s eyecatching about his fifth album is the major-league 
guestlist: Herbie Hancock, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar.


It may appear that Ellison is making a stab at the mainstream but closer 
inspection reveals the contrary. A jazz workout opens proceedings, setting the 
pace for a rollercoaster ride through hip-hop at its most freeform.

And then there’s the preoccupation with death. “Can you feel the walls are 
closing in?” goes Descent into Madness. For all the morbidity,You’re Dead!  
<http://warp.net/records/flying-lotus>is hugely entertaining. The clue’s in the 
exclamation mark. “It’s a celebration of the next experience,” says Ellison. 
“It’s not, ‘Hey you’re dead.’ It’s, ‘Hey you’re dead!’”

He says: “I just thought to myself, ‘I’d rather put something out that’s 
unique than try to do something that’s been done before.’”KF
 