
Shaking hands is the most basic of human contact. It’s how we start to get to 
know each other, the gateway to friendship, or to disdain. When you’re out on 
the campaign trail,like I have been in South Thanet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/14/nigel-farage-pub-landlord-al-murray>
, you have to get this right; these split-second moments can make all the 
difference between trust and loathing – a vote or oblivion. A handshake tells 
you everything you need to know about someone, and possibly stuff you don’t. 
Get it right, or go home.

Pub Landlord Al Murray on his election strategy: ‘I could drink Nigel Farage 
and William Hague under the table’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/18/pub-landlord-al-murray-election-strategy-drink-nigel-farage-william-hague-under-the-table>
 * It may seem obvious but make sure your palms aren’t sweaty. Or moist. Or 
damp in any way. However, if you talc your hands too heavily to stave off 
dampness it might be taken as an invitation to wrestle, so tread carefully.

 * Eye contact is key. Look someone in the eye, hold their gaze, but don’t 
stare them down. Be relaxed. Or act relaxed. Not by whistling or any of that, 
but maybe put your other hand in your pocket and give off the relaxed signals. 
If you can’t make it, fake it. If you can’t fake it, take beta blockers.

 * When wanting to become firm friends with someone take the elbow, and shake 
slightly more slowly than you would normally. It’s all about assurance, trust, 
manliness.

 * Go all the way – nothing worse than someone offering you fingers to shake 
and not a hand. Squeeze firmly but not too much, not too little. Too much and 
some men take that as a suggestion that they are being alpha male-ed. Too soft 
and they’ll think you’re the gamma male submitting, like when a dog shows you 
his tummy. You are not here to show anyone your tummy.

 * Two shakes minimum. Any more and it becomes the over-stayed welcome 
handshake that goes on and on: ugh. Besides, every extra second spent shaking 
one hand is time that could be spent on another. Never ever pump. No one likes 
pumpers. Maintain eye contact, but do blink. Not blinking is odd. Blinking too 
much is a seizure.

 * Post-handshake – if you need to clean yourself up after meeting a 
particularly sloppy shaker, be discreet. Wipe down. Maybe have an assistant 
ready with hand gel. And never fist bump. It’s an American gesture. We are not 
the 51st State. Yet.

Let’s Re-Great Britain by Al Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/al-murray>, Pub Landlord, Penguin £8.99

 