
As world leaders meet in London to confront the biggest humanitarian crisis 
since the end of the second world war, perhaps the answer we need – and the 
bold plan we want – can be found 70 years in the past. For only an initiative 
as ambitious as the postwarMarshall plan 
<http://marshallfoundation.org/marshall/the-marshall-plan/history-marshall-plan/>
 can address the chaos of 12 million Syrians displaced from their homes.

The need to think in large scale is undeniable. Yesterday, the King of Jordan 
mourned that his country was at a “boiling point” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-35462698> – unable to offer 
refugees jobs, or even schooling for their children. And Care International 
reported that, in desperation, up to half of the 1 million refugees who have 
already fled from Syria to Jordanwere considering a second exodus 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/jordan/12137166/Half-a-million-Syrians-in-Jordan-considering-heading-to-Europe-as-country-faces-refugee-crisis.html>
 – to Europe.

A tectonic shift in migration patterns is already under way. Until the summer 
of 2015, men accounted for three out of every four who risked the perilous sea 
crossing into Europe. But according tonew figures from Unicef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/un-one-third-refugees-sailing-europe-children>
, women and children today account for the majority of all refugees arriving in 
Greece.

The exodus through the eastern Mediterranean and western Balkans into Europe 
now includes entire families who have lost hope that they can ever make their 
future in their home region. For them the risks of a dangerous voyage to Europe 
are preferable to their fate holed up in camps, hovels and shacks in Lebanon, 
Turkey or Jordan.

Syrian refugees: world leaders aim to raise $9bn to reduce plight of millions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/syrian-refugees-world-leaders-to-raise-9bn-to-reduce-plight-of-millions>
In many refugee communities, child marriage rates have doubled as parents 
decide their girls are safer married off than on the streets. Europol estimates 
that already10,000 children have gone missing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/30/fears-for-missing-child-refugees>
, victims of this century’s most common form of slavery: trafficking.

And child labour is rising. A recent Save the Children report found that 47% 
of refugee households in Jordan rely, at least in part, on putting boys and 
girls to work 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwijguSy09vKAhUDuBoKHWTnCEEQFggfMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.unicef.es%2Fsites%2Fwww.unicef.es%2Ffiles%2Fchild-labour-final.pdf&usg=AFQjCNF0H0rzAzuCubG6q8dYi2lo1cVucg&sig2=QFmQUK2XiJt5zi8JYIxm2w&bvm=bv.113034660,d.d2s>
 to make ends meet. Even after up to five years of exile, the majority of 
refugee boys and girls are still out of school. And all this amid the endemic 
hunger, biting poverty and untreated disease that afflict the mass of displaced 
persons.

It is not just because this is the biggest humanitarian disaster since 1945 
that we need a bold plan: it is because people everywhere have lost confidence 
in our capacity to deliver any solutions.

Confronted with this, history offers us a compelling analogue. Out of the 
ashes of postwar Europe, amid mass migration and destruction, came the Marshall 
plan, a model for enlightened self-interest. Two per cent of the resources of 
the world’s richest country were mobilised for the benefit of Europe’s poorest 
in an unprecedented outpouring of humanitarian generosity funding 
reconstruction.

To encourage peace, to make sure children are safe and not fodder for 
extremists, to slow the flow of refugees to Europe, and to prevent the 
emergence of a permanently scarred lost generation of young people, we must 
offer a grand vision equal to the challenge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fgordon-brown-syrian-refugee-crisis-marshall-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad94ff291eb96cdeea5de42db7e4aee6cadbac35%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Syrian%20refugee%20crisis%20calls%20for%20a%20new%20Marshall%20plan%20%7C%20Gordon%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fgordon-brown-syrian-refugee-crisis-marshall-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Syrian%20refugee%20crisis%20calls%20for%20a%20new%20Marshall%20plan%20%7C%20Gordon%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fgordon-brown-syrian-refugee-crisis-marshall-plan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad94ff291eb96cdeea5de42db7e4aee6cadbac35%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
 Syrian children in the Qab Elias Syrian refugee camp in the eastern Lebanon. 
Photograph: Wael Hamzeh/EPA 
First, any plan must ensure Europe finally does what our values command: treat 
humanely those refugees who are now here, with a planned and orderly 
resettlement across the continent. Second, while we reach for that elusive 
peace, we must guarantee the regular flow of food, shelter and healthcare for 
those cut off at the centre of the conflict. And third, despite the panic 
surrounding levels of migration into Europe, 14 in every 15 of Syria’s 
displaced persons are still in the region.

If we fail to rise to the challenge of providing for families close to their 
homes, countless more will soon take the long-term decision to start a new life 
in a different continent. But if we want families to stay in the region, we 
must give them a reason to hold on, and we must recognise that families need 
more than food and shelter: the children need education and the adults jobs.

Fortunately, a breakthrough in an otherwise troubled Lebanon has shown the way 
forward and should be the inspiration for a Middle East plan. Under what is 
called thedouble shift system <http://www.unhcr.org/530b65326.html> 200,000 
Syrian children are being educated every afternoon and evening in the very same 
classrooms that local Lebanese children occupy in the morning. The success of 
the Lebanese experiment proves it is possible to offer education to 1 million 
additional refugee children in 2016 – and to every one of them in 2017. If we 
can raisethe £6bn at today’s London conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/syrian-refugees-world-leaders-to-raise-9bn-to-reduce-plight-of-millions>
, I believe we can reach agreement at theWorld Humanitarian Summit in May 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/whs_about> on a long-term global 
humanitarian fund to offer schooling in every emergency.

Europe’s refugee story has hardly begun | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/europes-refugee-story-has-hardly-begun-greece>
Universal schooling is but the first step towards a comprehensive plan for the 
region. Economic zones should be created in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey as part 
of a job-creation initiative that will help both refugees and locals. Oil 
revenues should fund a major cross-region infrastructure programme along the 
lines proposed by an Arab consortium led byMajid Jafir of Crescent Oil 
<http://www.crescentpetroleum.com/html/majid-jafar.html>. A welter of 
smaller-scale initiatives should be brought together and expanded under the 
umbrella of a new, locally financed Middle East Development Bank – as proposed 
by the former prime minister of Qatar – and charged with the reconstruction of 
the region.

Today 47% of the region’s 18- to 25-year-olds are unemployed or underemployed. 
This reality must yield to a new one. The burgeoning youth population of the
Middle East and North Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast>, 
200 million in all, should have what is in shortest supply: hope. Either we 
mobilise our power and resources in the cause of opportunity in the region, or 
there will be mounting chaos there and at Europe’s points of entry as refugees 
clamber over walls, and sadly each other, in search of a future.

We know the face of failure. From South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of 
the Congo to the Afghan-Pakistani border, pinprick policy solutions have led to 
ever-lengthening conflicts and aborted attempts at reconstruction. But in 
enacting the postwar Marshall plan, and more recently in fighting the global 
recession, delivering African debt relief and addressing climate change, the 
world has shown itself capable of uniting in great, transformative acts of 
statesmanship. These achievements prove that compassion and competence need not 
be at odds. We now urgently need an injection of both.
 