
‘Grass-fed” is the new organic. It appeared on Whole Foods 
<http://www.wholefoodsmarket.com/>’ new trend list, with “heirloom ingredients” 
and “ancient grains”. US sales of grass-fed labelled milk, eggs, yogurt, 
butter, cheese and even protein powders are soaring.

The attraction is that livestock are reared outside, deriving most of their 
diet from grass. This is in contrast to the North American system where cows 
are grain-fed in a Cafo (concentrated animal feeding operation), with scant 
access to pasture.

Studies suggest grass-fed milk contains far more omega-3 (desirable), and far 
less omega-6 (undesirable) than industrially raised cow-juice. It can also help 
ensure livestock products are free of GMOs, as most conventional feed contains 
GM ingredients. Plus, animals reared outside are given fewer antibiotics.

This new label could bring ethical benefits, too. Peter Melchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/petermelchett> of the Soil Association 
<https://www.soilassociation.org/> tells me: “It is wonderful that there is 
growing awareness of the lives farm animals lead. Anything which encourages 
grass-fed meat and dairy is a major plus.”

The Pasture Fed Livestock Association <http://www.pastureforlife.org/> in the 
UK advocates outdoor animal rearing, as does the Soil Association. But given 
our winters, most UK farmers have to supplement “buffer crops”, and few push 
for 100% grass-fed.

Nearly all British beef is grass-fed (we have few intensive Cafo-type 
systems). Dairy is a different story. More grass-fed products would represent a 
buffer – for cows, customers and small farmers – against the rise of 
“mega-sheds”, which Compassion in WorldFarming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming> campaigns against as cows do 
not get to frolic in pastures.

I phoned Whole Foods’ flagship UK store to check. They do have heritage 
peppermint, but no grass-fed yogurt. “Have you tried organic?” they asked.

The big picture: protecting our meadows
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd779dd9f2d04dba1ce6ce39e3ad3db7a56cfa728%2F0_0_2272_1704%2Fmaster%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grass-fed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grass-fed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd779dd9f2d04dba1ce6ce39e3ad3db7a56cfa728%2F0_0_2272_1704%2Fmaster%2F2272.jpg>
 The bee orchid is the poster flower against the decline of meadows and 
wildflowers in the UK. Photograph: Tim Wilkins 
The bee orchid (photographed here by Tim Wilkins) is one of nature’s great 
mimics, tricking its main pollinator – the bee – into believing it is a female 
bee. It can grow on scrub, waste ground or verges. Now it’s the poster flower 
for plantlife.org.uk’s Meadow Maker Awards and the fightback against the 
decline of meadows and wildflowers in the UK. Since the 1930s we have lost 97% 
of these vital habitats.

Well dressed: the Building Bloqs fashion lab

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3fa188f11ac0515a81ef527e66e9a6ef7035e8a%2F0_534_7016_4210%2F7016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grass-fed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grass-fed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-grass-fed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3fa188f11ac0515a81ef527e66e9a6ef7035e8a%2F0_534_7016_4210%2F7016.jpg>
Building Bloqs <http://buildingbloqs.com> is currently at 4 Anthony Way, London 
N18. 
The ambitions of emerging designers can be thwarted by a lack of affordable 
facilities. Last year the Trampery fashion lab in east London was lost to a 
400% rent hike.

This makes Building Bloqs’s new textile studio in Enfield even more critical. 
For a £40 joining fee and a £26 per day rate, graduate and freelance designers 
will be able to make use of pattern-cutting tables, straight-stitch sewing 
machines and overlockers galore. Pictured (right) is how the space will look in 
2017.

Alis Le May is spearheading the fashion and textiles part of the equation. 
‘The plan is that the studio will be part of a movement to bring back some of 
Britain’s lost textile industry, and help to provide employment to makers who 
wouldn’t be able to afford these kind of facilities themselves,’ she says.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 