
At 70 years old, Michael Haneke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke> is now a double Palme 
D'Or-winner at Cannes and has moved appreciably ahead of those controversial 
figures, such as Lars von Trier and Gaspar Noé, with whom he was once 
bracketed. His work, while not really softening in any way, now has a more 
human and personal resonance and his latest film, Amour, is an accessible story 
of great simplicity.

As well as everything else, it has been another example of his extraordinary 
formal technique, like that of the musician he hoped as a young man to be. He 
has cast two legends of the French cinema, Jean-Louis Trintignant and 
Emmanuelle Riva, as Georges and Anne, an octogenarian couple, former music 
teachers, living in happy, companionable retirement. But one day Anne suffers a 
stroke, perhaps brought on by anxiety due to an attempted break-in at their 
flat; she declines into dementia, and we follow Georges's increasingly 
unbearable task of caring for his wife in their apartment – having promised her 
he would never put her in a home.

Reading on mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/nov/16/amour-video-review>

In a recent interview with the BFI's Geoff Andrew, Haneke revealed that the 
flat in the movie was based on his parents' apartment in Vienna and that he had 
considered the bleak title The Music Stops – each piece of music in the film is 
in fact interrupted. Perhaps that is what the end of all our lives will feel 
like: something switched off before its time and not allowed to reach a vaguely 
imagined, satisfying "end".

The power and intelligence of this film really is a marvel; it is superbly 
acted and directed, with the edge of cold steel that audiences have come to 
expect from Haneke but with something else: a tenderness, gentleness and 
compassion.
 