
In 2004, just before local elections, the British National Party aired a party 
political broadcast featuring a Sikh man talking of the hardships his family 
faced during partition. He recounted how his family were killed by Muslims and 
said they were not to be trusted. Mr Singh made another appearance lateron BNPtv
 <http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=5313967073906592014>, where he talked 
of his experience at length.

The BNP's strategy wasn't merely a shot in the dark. It was based on earlier 
dealings <https://www.theguardian.com/racism/Story/0,,624352,00.html> with 
extremist Sikhs who were openly willing to form alliances with the BNP against 
Muslims. "Divide and rule", the mantra that British forces used so effectively 
in India, had been transplanted to modern Britain.

In many ways, this is not surprising. While the 60th anniversary of Indian and 
Pakistani independence has brought us a dearth of programming where people 
re-visit the respective countries or talk of their experiences, less light is 
shed on how the carnage of partition still impacts Britain's South Asian Hindu, 
Sikh and Muslim communities. It is impossible to provide a good overview in a 
short-ish blog, so I will focus here on one key element: the role of women.

In patriarchal and feudal societies, women are almost always seen as the 
bearers of culture and "honour". Traditional, conservative South Asian culture 
fetishises women to such an extent that, while the official line says they are 
held in high esteem and regard, in actual fact, they are treated simply as 
vessels of that honour, and their lives are forced to be structured around 
preserving that. They are not allowed to do anything that compromises those 
ideals, while men have much freer reign without the same burden.

Partition exposed this deeply ingrained misogny in the most brutal fashion. 
When Muslim, Hindu and Sikh men wanted to take revenge for their peers being 
killed by the other, they deliberately went out searching for women of other 
religions to rape and kidnap. When villages were confronted with angry baying 
mobs, the women were told to commit suicide by jumping in the well for their 
own benefit rather than fall in the clutches of the other (this is told and 
handled amazingly in the filmKhamosh Pani <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0357283/>
 - Silent Waters).

It intensified bigotry on all sides, and this was frequently expressed in a 
battle by besmirching women's honour.

Second- and third-generation Britons have largely moved on from those times. 
Tensions do flare up sometimes when discussing history (especially on 
discussion forums or evenWikipedia <http://www.pickledpolitics.com/archives/395>
). But the growth of a pan-South Asian subculture in Britain over the 90s 
(largely driven by music and a secular media) ensured that young Indians, 
Pakistanis and Bangladeshis were constantly rubbing up against each other, 
striking up friendships and forging relationships in ways their parents would 
not have. At university, undercover inter-religious relationships are rife.

But brown folk are unfortunately easily manipulated by bigots. The rallying 
cry that "your women are under attack" is used even today as a surefire way to 
get hotheads riled up. During the anti-Muslim pogroms of 2002 in the Indian 
state of Gujarat, men were recorded by human rights group as deliberatelyraping 
<http://www.atimes.com/ind-pak/DD19Df04.html> or sexually mutilating 
<http://www.expressindia.com/fullstory.php?newsid=17823> women with the aim to 
destroy their honour. The situation isn't any better in Bangladesh,Pakistan 
<http://www.pickledpolitics.com/archives/243> or neighbouring Afghanistan.

Closer to home, the Hindu Forum of Britain recently alleged in several 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/news/article.html?in_article_id=38548&in_page_id=34> 
newspaperarticles 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in_article_id=437871&in_page_id=1770>
 that Hindu and Sikh women were being forcibly converted to Islam without 
producing a single case the police could investigate. The Midlands-based Sikh 
Awareness Society has been accused of making similar claims.

Similarly, there are cited cases of Muslim girls being forced to cover up with 
a hijab or niqab by their parents, usually with the view that men would 
otherwise prey on them. I agree with Yasmin Alibhai-Brownwhen she said 
<http://comment.independent.co.uk/columnists_a_l/yasmin_alibhai_brown/article1822224.ece>
, "The niqab expunges the female Muslim presence from the landscape and hands 
the world over to men. It rejects human commonalities and even the membership 
of society itself."

Of course, brown folk are not alone in this misogny. When sexual predators of 
Asian origin molest white girls, then the same narrative surfaces inthe media 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/crime/article2237940.ece> and with 
racists <http://www.bnp.org.uk/news_detail.php?newsId=1658> - without any 
comparison with white men engaged in similar crimes.

These are the same old battles between prejudiced people, played out by 
manipulating and coercing women.

Sixty years on, there are instances where I feel people have learnt their 
lesson and moved on. But those willing to stoke up prejudices for their own 
political purposes are never far from the surface.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 