
I've just been rereading The Stranger's Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330483247/the-strangers-child>
 byAlan Hollinghurst <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst>, 
longlisted last week for the Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/jul/26/man-booker-prize-2011-in-pictures>
. The first world war lies at the centre of the book, although it remains 
offstage as the narrative sweeps through the last century. But is this actually 
a work of historical fiction? Where exactly is the history in this novel?

Of course, fiction deals necessarily and almost invariably with history. But 
much of the power of good fiction seems to depend on the repression of history 
in its usual sense. In the works ofJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/09/janeausten>, for example, the 
Napoleonic wars, which raged during the major phase of her writing career, 
occur out of view, evidenced mainly by the presence of so many handsome rakes 
in tight trousers and red jackets. Some of the most contentious issues of the 
day – such as the slave trade, abolished in the UK by the British parliament in 
1807 – find only the slightest footing in her novels. In recent years,critical 
attention in this regard has focused on Mansfield Park 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mansfield_Park#Controversy_over_slavery>. Its 
owner, Sir Thomas Bertram, also happens to own an estate in the West Indies 
that was presumably worked by slaves. The heroine of the novel, Fanny Price, 
brings up the subject with her uncle, and notes that "there was ... a dead 
silence" in the room following her mention of this uncomfortable subject. There 
are passing references to the slave trade inEmma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780007350780/emma> and 
Persuasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781857150728/persuasion> 
as well. But the issues, so resonant at the time, remain peripheral.

Yet peripheral concerns are not without their special energies. They feed and 
fuel the narratives in subtle ways. These are stories that, in their obsession 
with class and money, can't help but tangle with the illicit sources of wealth. 
The great country houses of Britain were built with resources siphoned from the 
colonies, and the use of slaves was central to the accumulation of capital, as 
Edward Said notes inCulture and Imperialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780099967507/culture-and-imperialism>
.

In this context, I often recall the use of the first world war in Virginia 
Woolf'sTo the Lighthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9781853260919/to-the-lighthouse>
. This first major global conflict happens in the margins of the pivotal 
central section, aptly titled "Time Passes". Ten years elapse, and much happens 
– including the war, which kills Andrew Ramsey. There is unravelling on many 
levels. Time unmakes everything, especially this holiday house on the Isle of 
Skye. Yet the power of the war, and its destructive force, is almost unbearably 
enhanced by its marginalisation.

If, as TS Eliot said, history has "many cunning passages" 
<http://www.searchquotes.com/quotation/After_such_knowledge,_what_forgiveness%3F_Think_now_History_has_many_cunning_passages,_contrived_corri/17093/>
, Hollinghurst's novel embodies history itself. The past becomes a great house 
with endless rooms and hallways, with the writer following the occupants of 
this house over nearly a century, keeping the main event – the death of the 
Georgian poet Cecil Valance, an aristocrat who was due to inherit a great 
Victorian pile, Corley Court – at the centre of our consciousness. What did or 
didn't happen on a weekend visit to a Cambridge friend's suburban pad in the 
summer of 1913, how people later recall these events, and what an obtuse 
biographer ultimately makes of the traces left behind, provide Hollinghurst 
with a massively suggestive narrative, one full of false clues and tantalising 
tidbits. As a result, The Stranger's Child becomes many things: a satire on the 
way literary reputations are made; a pastiche of the country house novel; a 
family chronicle that skips around with devastating effect from decade to 
decade, as time passes and occludes, as memory gets to work – creating what 
passes for fact, erasing what may have happened.

History is always elusive, difficult to apprehend or embody, but it's the 
stuff of fiction, and it's often better to circle around it, to evade it, to 
allow it to do its work offstage. Hollinghurst understands this very well.
 