
Is there anything more disgusting than a fatberg? These gargantuan mounds of 
debris block the intestines of civilisation (ie sewers). Fatberg season used to 
peak on Christmas Day, when people poured turkey fat down the drains in a mass 
festive clog. Now they’re an all-year hazard, thanks to the inexorable rise of 
the wet wipe.

There are wet wipes for every conceivable bathroom occasion: deodorising 
under-arms, removing eye make-up and, perhaps the biggest seller, toilet wipes. 
Apparently swathes of the population no longer find paper bearable. They’re 
hooked on single-use wipes that combine synthetic cellulosic fibre with plastic 
fibres, marketed as “flushable”.

The industry tests for flushability are the Volkswagen emission tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
 of the bathroom cabinet – failing to recreate the real- world scenario. 
Scientists, water companies and conservationists are pretty clear that wet 
wipes do not degrade during a flush.

At least the fatbergs are visible. The Marine Conservation Society 
<https://www.mcsuk.org/> has seen a 400% increase in wet wipes found along our 
coastline over the past decade. As they fragment, they will release microscopic 
fragments of plastic. These join an estimated86 tonnes of microplastics 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/news-parliament-2015/microplastics-report-published-16-17/>
 released into the environment every year in the UK from facial exfoliants 
alone.

There are “eco” wet wipes, such as Yes To wipes (£3.99 from Boots), which 
claim to be compostable. However, I’d use these sparingly, as you don’t want to 
overload a normal compost bin.

Personal-care giants have recently said that they will stop marketing wipes as 
“flushable”. They should have done this earlier, before the environment bore 
the true cost of their products. To my mind, they’ve been as slippery as the 
wipes they flog to us.

The big picture: the art of saving the seas
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-wet-wipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd623a569ccdea0f681c164388ce19b87b89018e8%2F0_344_1535_921%2F1535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20wet%20wipes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-wet-wipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20wet%20wipes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-wet-wipes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd623a569ccdea0f681c164388ce19b87b89018e8%2F0_344_1535_921%2F1535.jpg>
 Big blue: art created from plastic pollution. Photograph: Shelia Rogers 
Working with plastic recovered from a Texas beach, artist Shelia Rogers tells 
the global tale of the oceanic flotsam that is choking our seas in her large 
and colourful pieces. ‘The heart of my work is environmental advocacy, exposing 
the real and devastating effects of plastic pollution on the world’s oceans,’ 
she says. You can help by buying one of her prints. Profits go to Parley for 
the Oceans (lumas.co.uk <http://lumas.co.uk>).

Well dressed: empower dressing
 Fashion activism: Birdsong spice scarf. 
Welcome to fashion activism with a difference. Birdsong was founded in 2014 as 
a marketplace collective for ethical fashion, showcasing garments and jewellery 
that fund women’s projects and support female makers. It sources exclusively 
from women’s charities and organisations, from groups in Malawi to seamstresses 
on Brick Lane. Now Birdsong has launched its first own-brand collection 
including jeans and jackets made from 100% reclaimed textiles, organic 
hand-painted T-shirts and hand-knitted jumpers. Everything is made by women’s 
groups across London, working with almost 500 makers on the margins of society, 
including women recovering from addictions, survivors of human trafficking and 
those most affected by funding cuts to other programmes. This is empowerment 
dressing.
Spice scarf £34 birdsong.london <http://birdsong.london>

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 