
I’ve chosen these books because they go some way towards delivering a more 
comprehensive picture of rural Wales than is often presented. They are jigsaw 
pieces in a map.

Wales’s physical landscape changes dramatically region by region. The Beacons 
differ from Snowdonia differ from the Cambrian Mountains differ from the 
Preselis. There are isolated hill farms, wealthy border farms, small patchwork 
farms – all within relatively close distance. But the individuality of each 
place and the characters who live in them is strong. Landscape, then, is a 
strong if not main protagonist in the books below. But there’s a thing that 
seems to seep time and again into those landscapes: myth. Myth that sticks in 
the treads of boots and gets walked all through these stories …

1. The Owl Service by Alan Garner <http://www.theowlservice.co.uk/>

“Wherever you go you can think of that noise, and you know what you hear in 
your head is in the valley at the same moment. It never stops. It never has 
stopped since it began.”

I first read The Owl Service when I was a child. At the time it wasn’t the 
setting that struck me - I was used to that. I was also used to the feeling of 
some ancient, or more accurately “always present” otherness in that setting: 
something Garner pitches perfectly in this extraordinary story inspired bythe 
Blodeuwedd 
<http://www.welsh-mythsandlegends.walesdirectory.co.uk/Mabinogion/Blodeuwedd.html>
 myth from theMabinogion <http://www.mabinogion.info/>. Garner’s physical 
descriptions are beautiful and accurate in their ability to unnerve or 
mesmerise, while the tension between the visiting English owners of the old 
farm and the Welsh staff who belong there highlights the tension that has long 
been and always will be between incomers and indigenous folk.

2. Martha, Jack and Shanco by Caryl Lewis (trans Gwen Davies)
 <http://www.parthianbooks.com/content/martha-jack-and-shanco>

One of the best portrayals of indigenous folk can be found in Caryl Lewis’s 
story of two brothers and a sister bound to the farm they’ve inherited by love, 
fear and secrets. The writing comes alive in its small details and 
descriptions. The English translation can’t always catch Lewis’s ear for Welsh, 
but few books deliver a more authentic picture of rural Wales. Bakelite 
switches, low doorframes, water sloshing through uneven slabs. You can scribble 
these details in a notebook on a visit, but you can only write them truly if 
you’ve grown up with them, as Lewis did.

3. Running for the Hills by Horatio Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview3>

Clare could have grown up in a very different world, had his parents not made 
a leap of faith in the 1960s and bought an isolated sheep farm “nestled” on a 
Welsh mountainside. Clare’s account grows wider than a simple retelling of the 
trials of farming into something more akin to an adventure tale. The effect of 
the landscape and setting on a young child’s mind is gently layered under a 
fair, human and honest story that many shared, give or take the finer details, 
when a considerable number of people came to rural Wales from other walks of 
life in the 1960s and 70s.

4. Wild Abandon by Joe Dunthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/29/wild-abandon-joe-dunthorne-review>

Some of those who came were farther “out there” than others (as in Tiffany 
Murray’s Diamond Star Halo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/09/diamond-star-halo-murray-review>
), and no list would be complete without them. These incomers were very 
different from the landed class of The Owl Service, or the “new money” in Niall 
Griffiths’ Sheepshagger – they were drawn by the “vibe” they felt in the 
landscape. In Dunthorne’s Wild Abandon, idealist Don (family in tow) goes about 
setting up a commune on a quiet secluded farmstead in the Welsh hills, a haven 
from the doomed world. Twenty years later, with the experiment and the farm 
physically and philosophically disintegrating around him, Don makes one last 
attempt to save things. All he needs is a massive speaker system …

5. On the Black Hill by Bruce Chatwin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/01/02/books/a-novel-of-pastoral-vision.html>

It’s a different kind of weirdness that makes a person not want to travel even 
a few miles from their home. While so much of Chatwin’s work is driven by his 
fascination with nomads and wanderers, this beautifully weighted story of 
identical twin brothers who live their lives out on the family farm seems to 
address those themes by examining their opposite. This is a story about people 
who really don’t want to go anywhere. (Or do they?) While the 20th century 
seeps in around them, Benjamin and Lewis struggle with the double-edged sword 
of inheritance in a story lonely and rich and human and hard. Every time I 
think of the events towards the ending I get goosebumps again.

6. Collected Poems 1945-1990 by RS Thomas  
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/r-s-thomas>

It could be argued that fear is the driver behind not wanting to leave a 
place, and there is a degree of that in some of RS Thomas’s work. Published to 
mark the poet’s 80th birthday, this collection is invaluable to any proper 
understanding of the Welsh rural psyche. Religion, an unnerving sense of fate, 
incurable belonging, and – where he verges on nationalism – a fear that roots 
will be torn out and thrown away.

Like Caradoc Evans, Thomas’s work often portrays an archetypal people: pitiful 
and harsh, and riddled with Christian guilt. However, there is more sad 
affection in Thomas’s work than in Evans’s. He is more epic, more haunted, and 
more saved.

7. Tree of Crows by Lewis Davies  
<http://www.literaturewales.org/writers-of-wales/i/129567/desc/davies-lewis/>

In this Ballardian myth, shot through with the ancient epic under-beat of 
Welsh myth and again laden with characters who are haunted by more than their 
eyes can see, Davies paints a near-future which harks back to Frontier times, 
medieval marketplaces and prehistoric rage. An Orwellian news bureau marshals 
the truth. A figment of the imagination tears sheep apart. A blind man hunts 
for crystals in the rock. And towering over all of it, the High Vans – the 
bleak, immovable landscape of the mountains.

8. Runt by Niall Griffiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/feb/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>

Speaking of bleak, immovable landscapes, you get the sense that when Niall 
Griffiths travelled to Wales from Liverpool as a kid his eyes went wide at the 
sight of that landscape and haven’t recovered since. Runt resembles that 
landscape in its uncompromising contrasts. Bleakness and richness; hardness and 
beauty; tragedy and revelation. It’s a lot to contain in the body of the 
story’s narrator, a 16-year-old boy who is the “unwitting repository of folk 
memory from the margins, barely educated but possessed of extraordinary 
insights”. As with Sheepshagger (another must-read rural novel) Griffiths 
invents a language for and of itself to tell this brutal, “humanfull” story of 
a backward savant child and his bereft, poetic drunken uncle.

9. Rebecca’s Daughters by Dylan Thomas 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/dylan-thomas-4/rebeccas-daughters/> 

Poetic yes, and drunk or not, one of Thomas’s ambitions was to write a 
complete film scenario “ready for shooting, which would give the ordinary 
reader an absolute visual impression of the film in words and could be 
published as a new form of literature”. This prose-screenplay gives a brilliant 
rolling picture of an important time in Welsh history: the Rebecca Riots of the 
1840s. The screenplay is rich with Thomas’s humour, wit and general buggering 
about. (“Blood all over the shop, like a choir outing.”) But there is also 
great humanity here: one of the strongest images, for me: troops marching 
through Pembroke en route to break the rioters and even the children quiet.

10. One Moonlit Night by Caradog Prichard (trans Philip Mitchell) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/11/one-moonlit-night-review> 

There’s both a quiet child, and a narrative witness akin to Thomas’s Under 
Milk Wood, in this extraordinary novel about an unnamed boy’s journey into 
grown-up-ness in an unnamed north Wales country town. First published in Welsh 
in 1961, it’s only recently available in full English translation and Philip 
Mitchell succeeds superbly in bringing Prichard’s vibrant prose to life. It’s 
strange and it’s melancholy, and again it’s about what lies (and what lies lie) 
under the surface. Perversion, insanity, domestic violence, drunkenness, 
religious cruelty; all alongside pastoral calm, choral singing and 
beautifully-baked bread. This is a tale haunted as much by normality as 
abnormality, presenting an extraordinary vision of rural Wales’s true 
complexity.

• The Dig by Cynan Jones is published in paperback by Granta Books. Buy it for 
£6.79 at the Guardian bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dig-4.html>
 