
“You lot [earth lovers] won’t be happy till there’s rose petals coming out the 
exhaust,” a car industry insider complained to me.

I’d settle for an electric vehicle. Not emission free (you have to factor in 
the source of the electricity), but a technology that can make a real dent in 
climate-change emissions. My next car needs to be an EV – and so does yours.

Analysts at Bloomberg claim that if 35% of global new car sales (41m a year) 
were EVs (as predicted by 2040) that wouldcut global oil consumption by 14% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/25/electric-cars-will-be-cheaper-than-conventional-vehicles-by-2022>
. The Committee on Climate Change states that the UK needs60% of new cars and 
vans to be electric <https://www.theccc.org.uk/2014/11/11/going-electric/> by 
2030 to meet our 2050 climate-change targets.

It’s been 20 years since Toyota kicked off the green car revolution with the 
Prius, and recentlyTop Gear featured the new Tesla. But the Model X costs 
£72,280, so it hardly screams mass transition.

Volkswagen can’t scrub the rogue particles of the diesel-emissions scandal 
from our lungs, but will try and scrub its reputation by launching 30 EV models 
by 2035 and investing in car-sharing companies.Zipcar <http://www.zipcar.com/> 
car-sharing club has just introduced 50 Volkswagen Golf GTE plug-in hybrid 
vehicles around London.

But what can be done about my range anxiety (the fear of running out of charge 
in an EV)?Ecotricity 
<https://www.ecotricity.co.uk/for-the-road/our-electric-highway> has invested 
in a network of charging points, and Tesla has its own network ofSuperchargers 
<https://www.teslamotors.com/en_GB/supercharger>. Check all charging points on 
evhighwaystatus.co.uk <https://evhighwaystatus.co.uk/> or zap-map.com 
<https://www.zap-map.com/>.

Until 2017 you can get a rebate on the cost of hybrid and electric vehicles 
<https://www.gov.uk/plug-in-car-van-grants/what-youll-get> in the UK – about 
35% off the price. I’d like to have my dream EV before humankind shifts to the 
driverless car. Significantly greener, they will soon betrialled in Greenwich, 
south London <https://gateway.commonplace.is>. That would be just my luck.

The big picture: Som Pastor (I Am a Shepherd)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75e0fe91fec30e85103519fe6cc6e8c8debfa93%2F0_676_2456_2789%2F2456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20electric%20vehicles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20electric%20vehicles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff75e0fe91fec30e85103519fe6cc6e8c8debfa93%2F0_676_2456_2789%2F2456.jpg>
 Rule the world: Miguel, who lives outside the village of Santa Eugenia in 
Mallorca, is the president of Peasant Children 
Filmmaker Borja Zausen <http://borjazausen.com/> has found a remarkable way to 
capture his subject. He’s a pioneer in zero-emission filmmaking and his latest 
work records the life of another hero. Miguel is the 11-year-old star ofSom 
Pastor (I Am a Shepherd) <http://www.pelicam.ro/en/movies/i-am-a-shepherd>. As 
the president of Peasant Children, he’s leading a pint-sized rural Mallorcan 
revolution dedicated to working the land. His devotion to his animals is 
inspiring.

Well dressed: Totem Adornments
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c572e0041d1b2ca0aac87e5252026369571af96%2F0_210_2797_2357%2F2797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20electric%20vehicles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20electric%20vehicles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Feco-guide-to-electric-vehicles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c572e0041d1b2ca0aac87e5252026369571af96%2F0_210_2797_2357%2F2797.jpg>
 Beads of change: a Totem Adornments creation 
“A seed is not just the source of life. It is the very foundation of our 
being,” says physicist and activist Vandana Shiva in the upcoming documentary
SEED: The Untold Story <https://ceseedproduction.wordpress.com/>.

In many indigenous cultures seeds aren’t just nuggets of genetic information, 
they are also sacred. Fitting for the mechanism that passes on information to 
the next generation.

Designer Paddy Dickinson (wife of Iron Maiden’s Bruce) uses this idea of 
passing on knowledge as the underlying philosophy for her company Totem 
Adornments. Dickinson donates 10% of profits from this jewellery line of 
necklaces made from recycled and sustainable silver, rose gold and Balinese 
seeds to a foundation. This fund then donates to British projects which collect 
and preserve local stories. Dickinson’s heirloom keepsakes will help keep ideas 
and experiences alive for generations to come. Browse her seed jewellery, from 
£105, attotemadornments.com <https://totemadornments.com/>.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 