
It takes courage to share the other side of aid work: the pain, the burnout, 
the tears. The feeling that you cannot cope any more, the sense of failure 
because you think everyone else is doing fine in the same circumstances.

This is the start of my “sharing journey”. My current job will be my last 
position in the international development/humanitarian sector. I am sad it has 
come to this but after 15 years of aid work, including placements in 
Afghanistan, the Americas (in volatile countries), the Middle East and Sudan, I 
feel that I may not recover from experiencing another security incident. 
Staying on would be a risk that I cannot take: for my sake, for the sake of my 
employers, for the sake of my family and friends.


There is something disturbing about a 30-year-old single person writing a will 
or a 'letter from the grave'.

It is not really surprising that burnout happens in this line of work, is it? 
We are only human and aid work exposes you to some pretty harsh realities. 
First there is the “day to day”, which becomes part of your routine but is not 
normal in any shape or form. In my case this “routine” has involved seeing 
extreme poverty in all its forms, sitting with victims of conflict in brutally 
war-torn areas and hearing their tales of suffering, seeing that minor illness 
and resulting death is not a scandal but the norm for some – part and parcel of 
what it means to be alive and human.


And then you have the security risks. There is something disturbing about a 
30-year-old single person writing a will or a “letter from the grave”, or about 
putting in place security questions in case you are kidnapped. It is exhausting 
to have to be vigilant all the time: I still have 360-degree vision wherever I 
go and get edgy when someone walks too close behind me in the streets.


In some areas, the knowledge that every day could be your last, that you or 
your friends may not come home at the end of that day, becomes a core part of 
your psyche. You do not even notice that it affects you, but of course it is 
bound to. Then there are the more drastic events: the major security incidents 
preceded by the auto-pilot mentality that you need to master in order to take 
the correct security steps in an emergency or plan an evacuation; the fear you 
feel for your colleagues when an incident happens.


Guardian research suggests mental health crisis among aid workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
All this is coupled with another side of aid work, overwhelming in a different 
way: the love and hospitality the locals often share with us visitors and the 
gratitude they express for what we can offer in terms of help. The guilt that 
we can just walk away to a safe home or on rest and recuperation (R&R) while 
they remain faced with the same realities – sometimes for their entire lives – 
is as much part of the job as the empathy you feel, the powerlessness at not 
being able to do more for them.


The pain of an evacuation, of leaving behind local colleagues, projects and 
communities you have come to know and love, burns a hole in your heart. No 
matter how much therapy you have, this pain changes your life forever. It has 
changed mine. I would not miss any of my experiences for anything in the world 
–they have made me who I am. But none of it has been easy.


There is often the attitude that you are weak if you are struggling, but this 
attitude is dangerous. Often it leads to people continuing to work in stressful 
environments when it is not healthy, adopting dangerous coping strategies 
before burning out completely, or an inability to settle back into “normal” 
life at home after completing a deployment. As it is, the latter takes 
considerable time.


Secret aid worker: sometimes I go to supermarkets to escape the loneliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/01/secret-aid-worker-humanitarian-loneliness>
Unlike others who have shared their stories on this section 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/aid-workers-stories-mental-health>
, I have been lucky in that all my employers have responded and helped me when 
I have asked for help. And I firmly believe that if those of us who know the 
other side of aid work speak up about the scars that we may bear, employers may 
get better at preventing and supporting those who might suffer or are already 
suffering burnout and PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder). They may also 
become more able to discern the tell-tale signs of burnout and reach out to 
those affected, rather than wait for us to ask for assistance.


We need to speak up about wellbeing in the aid world; we need to acknowledge 
that often it is not weakness but compassion that can lead to experiences 
affecting us so deeply. Admitting to our pain takes a lot of courage. Sometimes 
it is easy to forget that we are actually “honourably wounded”, as Marjory F 
Foyle has so aptly put it.

Nicola Rieger runs the blog Raindrops on Roses 
<http://raindropsonroses.me/travels-with-christian-aid/>.

We will be continuing to explore the issue of mental health and wellbeing in 
the aid sector this week on Global Development Professionals Network. You can 
follow the coveragehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
.Get in touch on globaldevpros@theguardian.com if you would like to comment on 
the topic.

 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the Samaritans can
be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationallycan be found 
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 