

In touch with his feminine side ... Brendon Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/brendon-burns>. Photograph: Adam Ethan Crow

Brian Logan has headed for the hills in the last days of the festival, so I'm 
taking the reins for today's final half-hour edition of the Heckle.

Joining Lucy Porter and I around the Guardian's kitchen table are Stephen K 
Amos 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/theatre/2007/08/the_heckle_09_king_of_the_cast.html>
, who has been packing them in at the Pleasance with his show More of Me, and
Carrie Quinlan 
<http://profile.myspace.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=user.viewprofile&friendID=57053822>
, who is appearing in newspaper satire show the Early Edition. Also round the 
table is the Guardian's Leo Benedictus, our comedy critic for the final week.

Together we'll be picking over the bones of the festival. We'll quiz punters 
on who gets this year's award for worst Fringe poster. We'll ask whether 
comedians really are what they eat, with contributions from Arthur Smith and
if.comedy-nominated Brendon Burns 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/edinburgh2007/story/0,,2147945,00.html>. We'll 
look at the science of comedy with Belgian theatre supremo Jos Houben, whose 
showThe Art of Laughter 
<http://www.edfringe.com/shows/detail.php?action=shows&id=4008> is as 
thought-provoking as it is funny.

What else? We'll research with Kirsten O'Brien 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/shows/edinburgh_fringe_festival_2007/k/15445/kirsten_obrien:_confessions_of_a_childrens_tv_presenter>
 and Howard Read whether it's scarier to play for kids or adults. Finally, the 
silver-tonguedrock'n'roll poet Murray Lachlan Young 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/4606658.stm> performs a special ode 
to Edinburgh to send us on our way for another year.

路 Listen to this edition of the Heckle on your computer (MP3) 
<http://download.theguardian.com/sys-audio/Arts/Culture/2007/08/24/heckle15.mp3>
 路 Subscribe free to the Heckle feedvia iTunes 
<http://phobos.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewPodcast?id=152548644&s=143444>
 路 Get the Hecklefeed URL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/podcast/0,,329467939,00.xml> 路 Puzzled by podcasts?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/podcasts/story/0,,1793369,00.html>

Find all the Heckles here. <http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/podcasts>

Find all the Edinburgh bloggers here. 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/theatre/edinburgh_2007/>
 