
A novel is a collection of anxieties held together, more or less well, more or 
less interestingly, with the chicken wire of plot. In writing my last novel, 
Oxygen, I had a radiant collection of new and long-term worries to choose among.

In the year I began the book, I was living in Dublin and suffering from 
breathing difficulties - a sense that I could not take a deep breath, could not 
fully open my lungs. I was sent to the hospital for tests. I blew into tubes. 
They x-rayed me. They put me in a capsule like an old-fashioned bubble car and 
tested me for allergies.

I didn't react. I was well. Go home, they said, and try to relax. Had I been 
overdoing it recently? I said I was trying to start a novel. That'll be it, 
they said. Half the city was trying to start a novel - a novel or a collection 
of poetry. In Dublin hospitals, breathing difficulty brought on by the birth 
pangs of creative enterprise is an acceptable and probably common diagnosis.

But I'd started novels before (and finished them) and had felt fine. I wanted 
a second opinion and found a Chinese clinic where a professor from Beijing, a 
chain-smoker without the least command of English, drilled me with little pins 
- including one between my eyes - leaving me recumbent on the couch while he 
went into the corridor to top up his nicotine levels.

The clinic was makeshift: three cubicles with thin board walls that stopped a 
foot below the ceiling. Whether I liked it or not, and I liked it, I was privy 
to the confessions of my fellow patients who, through the interpreter, told the 
professor the story of their bodies, their quest for wellness, their dark 
misgivings. It was an ideal situation for a novelist: pinned to a couch 
listening to the secrets of strangers. It became half the reason for going 
there and reminded me of something I already knew but often forgot. That 
everywhere there are possibilities.

The pins seemed to help, the pins and the tea I had to brew twice a day, a 
bog-brown infusion of such astonishing bitterness I could only swallow it by 
lining my mouth with honey.

It wasn't just me, though. There seemed to be an epidemic of breathlessness. 
Half my friends - not writers at all, but regular people, social workers, 
computer programmers, doctors for Christ's sake - carried little inhalers in 
their pockets. Oxygen levels in the cities are slipping. Oxygen bars are 
opening in fashionable malls in America. And lack of oxygen (ischemia) is what 
kills us all.

I kept drinking the tea. I wrote about people who struggled for breath. I 
think I sometimes wrote whole paragraphs without breathing, as though swimming 
the length of a pool underwater.

Then I left Dublin, that rainy, melancholy city, and moved for a time to 
Paris, because if writing is about anxiety it is also about promises you make 
to yourself at the beginning of it all. To be a writer in Paris! In Paris the 
book was lost and found again (every book has a point of crisis it must 
survive; every book has a moment when it appears impossible).

The last quarter of Oxygen was written in England. I was temporarily homeless. 
I stayed with my parents in Bath and set up a little writing space, like a 
priest's hole, at the end of the garage. I wrote among bunches of dried 
flowers, bags of golf clubs, boxes of wine. I was already overdue on the 
delivery. It was winter. There were patterns of frost on the window. One by one 
my characters arrived at their appointed places. On the last day I wrote for 
nine hours, pressed Save, sat back and breathed in from my teeth to my toes.

Two and a half years sweating over a book! Elaborate cure.

Â· Andrew Miller's Oxygen is published by Sceptre
 