
Seann Walsh: 28, London

Seann Walsh’s latest set takes inspiration from Adele, its title a reference 
to his still precocious (at least in comedy terms) age. But that’s about as 
much as the two have in common: whereas Adele is a clean-living industry 
game-player, Walsh is a ramshackle-looking party animal whose worst enemy seems 
to be himself. Unquestionably the best observational comic of his generation, 
his is a talent that does not fit easily into the digestible world of panel 
shows. But it’s surely only a matter of time before TV finds a format to suit 
his prodigious abilities. Live, he’s an absolute blast, regaling the audience 
with the seamy details of his dissolute lifestyle in a manner that’s part 
seen-it-all boozer, part innocent infant. This latest show finds him more 
settled than on previous appearances, talking about settling down and beginning 
to view the world with an attitude approaching that of an adult. But the 
bleary-eyed manchild is never far away, and is as irresistible as ever.

Blackheath Halls, SE3, Sat 20 Dec; touring to 24 Apr

Al Murray: The Pub Landlord’s Festive Saloon, Edinburgh
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418744646801%2F0b6f90e1-636e-4201-b56f-663aef7a4592-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20live%20comedy%20over%20Christmas%20and%20New%20Year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20live%20comedy%20over%20Christmas%20and%20New%20Year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418744646801%2F0b6f90e1-636e-4201-b56f-663aef7a4592-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Pub Landlord. Photograph: REX 
Al Murray’s Pub Landlord character – a beer-swilling distillation of 
unreconstructed Englishness – has had a chequered career. First, he was the 
comedy scene’s best-kept secret, a cult favourite in the mid-90s who was 
championed by Harry Hill. Then, following a Perrier award win and an underrated 
Sky sitcom, he became the unlikeliest of ITV faces, with his own late-night 
chatshow. This might have brought the Landlord fame, but it also arguably led 
to a flattening out of nuance, and an ambiguity about whether sections of the 
audience saw him less as a figure of fun, more as a spokesman for their 
prejudices. In recent years, Murray has focused more on live work, and when you 
see the Pub Landlord holding forth for an evening it’s impossible to be 
confused about the performer’s vision or unimpressed by his comic voice.

St Andrew Square, Mon 29 to New Year’s Eve

Russell Howard: Wonderbox, Manchester & Birmingham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418744705712%2Fb9d81832-db54-4f52-997b-6cad447f59d8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20live%20comedy%20over%20Christmas%20and%20New%20Year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20live%20comedy%20over%20Christmas%20and%20New%20Year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F20%2Fthe-best-live-comedy-over-christmas-and-new-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418744705712%2Fb9d81832-db54-4f52-997b-6cad447f59d8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Russell Howard. Photograph: VENNI 
It must have taken guts for Russell Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/russell-howard> to pack in Mock The Week in 
2010. Still relatively young, he chose to pass up a seemingly open-ended 
residency on one of TV’s most-watched comedy shows for the uncertainty of 
standing on his own two feet. If it was a gamble, it’s one that’s paid off in 
some style. His Good News show has been a hit, while he’s now playing some of 
the biggest rooms in the country. Howard’s success is down to the way his comic 
outlook strikes a chord with so many younger people. He’s not afraid to be 
silly and gently whimsical but he never disappears up his own arse. And his 
attitude is always sunnily optimistic, taking delight in the daft little 
details of his life. Wonderbox is more of the joyous same, mixing a smattering 
of current affairs with a ragbag of cheeky anecdotes.

Phones 4u Arena, Manchester, Sat 20; LG Arena, Birmingham, Sun 21
 