
We need to talk about Dory. As Pixar’s charming version of a tropical blue 
tang swims on to screens inFinding Dory  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/dec/10/finding-dory-blackfish-set-in-a-lab>
next month, conservationists fear a wave of inappropriate fish buying.

Finding Nemo, which triggered just such a global craze in 2003, posed less of 
a threat. Clownfish (Nemo’s ilk) are usually bred in captivity for the aquarium 
trade, but blue tangs are “harvested” from the wild for aquariums, with up to 
80% dying during capture and transportation. There is intense pressure on wild 
populations, especially around coral reefs.

The preferred method of capture remains squirting cyanide straight on to the 
coral reefs they inhabit.

'Tankbusters' are an ugly feature of home aquariums. Bought as pretty 
juveniles, these species grow large very quickly

Of 12.5m tropical fish entering the US each year, 90% are thought to be 
harvested this way. To identify “good” – essentially captive-bred – fish for 
aquariums, try the mobile appTank Watch 
<http://www.hsi.org/news/press_releases/2014/09/tank-watch-new-mobile-app-091014.html?referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/>
.

That, however, is not the end of the story. So-called “tankbusters” are an 
ugly feature of many home aquariums in the UK. Bought as pretty juveniles, 
these are species, such as pacu and pangasius, that grow large very quickly.

It’s a pet-shop myth that fish only grow to the size of their tanks. Many 
species are characterised by indeterminate growth. The result has been a fish 
that would migrate thousands of miles in the wild ending up trapped in a tank 
in which it can barely turn as its muscles atrophy.

The Big Fish Campaign <http://bigfishcampaign.org/>, promoting responsible 
fish-keeping in the hobby and aquatic trade, suggests you only buy where 
retailers have a “No big fish policy”. Anyone who found that Nemo grew beyond 
all recognition and has tried to re-home a big fish will know how difficult it 
can be.Fish Rescue and Welfare <http://fishrescueandwelfare.org/> is a rare 
charity that does this. Public aquariums around the country report that they 
are inundated with requests to rehome, but their focus is on research and 
conservation.

Scientists have watched in horror as stocks of species such as the giant 
Mekong catfish have fallen by 90% in the last 20 years (also due to the 
building of hydroelectric dams). Increasingly, their tanks will be full of 
these endangered species – leaving not much room for unwanted blue tangs.

The big picture: Tomorrow documentary
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d35f2b65daa840617ec53075128b2fb034ea838%2F0_112_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20pet%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20pet%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d35f2b65daa840617ec53075128b2fb034ea838%2F0_112_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
 Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow: in this eco documentary, six people 
explore the world in search of solutions that can save their children and 
future generations 
Rather than characters in search of an author, the Tomorrow team are 
filmmakers in search of a distributor. A Change.org petition calls for cinemas 
to screen this award-winning documentary on staving off ecological collapse, 
from urban farming in Denmark to participative democracy in India. It is 
seriously inspiring… if you can get someone to show it to you, that is. Go to
demain-lefilm.com <http://www.demain-lefilm.com/en>

Well dressed: Sundried ethical sportswear
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cc72aa1129c43dc3a5f94375a9a474ea7e574a0%2F0_610_3670_4895%2F3670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20pet%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20pet%20fish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Feco-guide-to-pet-fish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cc72aa1129c43dc3a5f94375a9a474ea7e574a0%2F0_610_3670_4895%2F3670.jpg>
 Run for your life: Breithorn bra £45, and Ruinette running tights £75, both
sundried.com <https://www.sundried.com/> 
At last, an ethical sports bra! Sundried is a new apparel brand, for men and 
women, set up and run by personal trainers in partnership with the Low Carbon 
Initiative, which supports businesses to develop technology consistent with 
limiting global warming to below 2%.

Sundried manufacturing takes place in Portugal – not China – using European 
fabrics, and the company donates a portion of proceeds toWater for Kids 
<http://www.waterforkids.org.uk/>.

Daniel Puddick, the trainer and triathlete who founded Sundried, says he 
wanted to create a sports brand his children would be proud of in 15 years’ 
time – one that is worlds away from the fast-fashion attitude pervasive in 
sportswear today.

The brand’s website says: “Up to 80% of the impact of a T-shirt occurs after 
purchase” from washing and drying. Its wash care labels encourage customers to 
“wash cool, sun dry”. To see its activewear range, go tosundried.com 
<https://www.sundried.com/>
 