
Remember Britain's political revolution? You know, the one that was a sure 
thing in the wake of theparliamentary expenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>. All that talk about the 
entire political class being discredited, no return to business as usual in 
Westminster, parliament must be remade? In case you hadn't noticed, it's dead.

If proof were needed, the beginning of the party conference season provided 
it. Parliament's survivors have clambered over the sacrificial corpses of 
colleagues who fell on their swords and are now doing very nicely, thank you. 
The political revolution is what's about to happen at the next general 
election, not a new way of doing politics. But a Tory party riding to power 
clutching some Cameronian PR slogan will be a betrayal of anything that could 
remotely have been seen as a radical renewal of democracy because one thing is 
inevitable. Their priority will be eye-wateringlypainful cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/08/taxandspending-davidcameron> 
â€“ a text straight out of an old Tory political bible, a handy legacy passed on 
by their undead.

Should we lament the demise of the revolution? Beat our breasts because we 
can't bring about domestic political change in our country when it's needed? 
The short answer is no. Not that we don't need change. The expenses system had 
to be reformed. But allowing the affair to determine what should be at the 
centre of the country's political priorities was a big mistake, a distraction. 
What on earth were we doing fixating onduck ponds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/23/mps-expenses-conservatives> 
andmoats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/12/mps-expenses-david-cameron-conservatives1>
? It's as if we got so drunk on the spectacle, gorged ourselves on the bread 
and circuses fed to us by the Telegraph and the eager media, that we mistook 
froth for substance. For a while, the scandal replaced politics. We've woken up 
with a hangover.

The entire episode was the product of a political mindset that should have 
been left behind with the passing of the 20th century: the idea that if we look 
after the affairs of our discrete national community, we are somehow isolated 
from and protected against the problems facing the world. Demands for radical 
reform of the parliamentary system and the political class's desire to bring 
politics back to normal may seem like mutually exclusive impulses. They may 
also both appear compatible with a discourse of concern for international 
problems. But in practical terms, they are two sides of the same, narrow, 
parochial agenda. They don't operate within a framework which recognises that, 
without radical change on the global level, we are all sunk.

Wittingly or not, the laser-sharp attention given to the minutiae of 
parliamentarians' expenses has helped take the heat off the denial ofclimate 
change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change>, the resistance 
to fundamental change in international fiscal controls, the opposition to 
strengthening international instruments to bring tyrants and human rights 
abusers to book. What encouraged this was the reassertion of the power of the 
state to deal with the impact of the international financial crisis. Many 
politicians may pay lip service to the need to prioritise global concerted 
action, but it doesn't take much to embolden them in their backsliding 
tendencies. It's a thankless task trying to sell a political platform to the 
publicthat admits to a degree of national powerlessness and argues that we need 
to work through international institutions the public instinctively doesn't 
like.

But retreating to an absolutist view of state sovereignty is simply out of the 
question. Politicians are betraying their commitment to serve the public 
interest it they cannot accept the challenge to reframe the political debate 
around an understanding that the principal problems we all face are global and 
can only be tackled by action at the global level. And that to achieve 
effective solutions requires fundamental reform in the architecture of global 
governance. This is where the real political challenge lies.

In some ways, the world is groping towards something new. Frameworks such as 
theG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> and the climate change summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/blog/2009/sep/22/un-general-assembly>, 
however imperfect, recognise the inadequacy of existing international 
institutions. The new drive towards curbing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and reducing existing stockpiles,spearheaded by President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/24/nuclear-weapons-un-security-council>
 at the UN security council this week, is an acknowledgement of new dangers 
represented by an increasing trend towards making the possession of nuclear 
weaponry the global military standard. The creation of theinternational 
criminal court <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Criminal_Court> in 
part stems from a growing understanding that state legitimacy must be derived 
from the upholding of human rights values.

If, at one time, all these things seemed distant, remote from the individual's 
everyday experience, those days are over. Take the G20.Daniele Archibugi 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/email/the-g20-ought-to-be-increased-to-6-billion>
 argues: "Its pronouncements could decide whether you can get a job, refinance 
a mortgage, get a loan if you are a small company and, in the poorer parts of 
the world, even put your kids to bed with a full stomach." We live in a world 
of "overlapping communities of fate 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/PublicLectures/PL_GlobalizationInternationalLawandHumanRights.pdf>
". Sovereignty is "conditional 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/dismantling-the-global-nuclear-infrastructure>
". Multilateral rules increasingly apply.

To put it starkly, we need global institutions that will both save the planet 
and connect with individuals. But progress towards this cannot come without 
accountability and democratic ownership. AsDavid Held 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Publications/PublicLectures/PL_GlobalizationInternationalLawandHumanRights.pdf>
 puts it: "We need an emphasis on multilateralism and common rules, not 
hegemony and order through dominance." There is always a trade-off between 
legitimacy and efficiency. But it is untenable that the G20 can affect us 
intimately and yet has no address, no staff, no headquarters and therefore no 
legitimacy at all. The One World Trust's2008 Global Accountability Report 
<http://www.oneworldtrust.org/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&gid=223&tmpl=component&format=raw&Itemid=55>
 says that "While there have been advances in extending principles of 
accountability to the global level ... even the highest performers have only 
basic accountability policies and systems in place."

This is where I want to see the UK's political priorities located. This is 
where I want to see British politicians getting their hands dirty, working on 
global solutions, telling us the truth about the perils that face the world and 
affect our lives directly. We need a government responsive to those already 
there: the environment NGOs, the climate change scientists, the global 
governance academics, the historians of transnational interconnectedness. 
Politicians and citizens must get the big picture, then global and local action 
can come together.

The expenses saga and the exaggerated expectations of change were just a 
sideshow. Let them pass into history. We may be left with a depressing politics 
as usual, for now. But the global challenges won't go away and won't be met by 
a temporary bout of hyperactivity or the slickest of PR slogans. Political 
leaders can't do it all, but if, in what looks increasingly like the world's 
endgame, they can't show leadership that has true breadth of vision, they're 
toast.
 