
At this week’s Inclusive Minds event, A Place at The Table 
<http://www.inclusiveminds.com/a-place-at-the-table.php>, Fen Cole, bookseller 
at Letterbox Library, selling the best and most diverse books for over 30 
years, said that if they were successful, they would not exist. I was part of 
the the event and wanted to tell you all what happened. I think it’s important.

Diverse books would just be books. Books that featured non-traditional 
families,protagonists with disabilities, or a range of sexualities; books that 
featured children that looked like the majority of the children the world over, 
would just be books.

I think a lot of people – me included - are fed up to the back teeth talking 
about diversity. We all know the arguments. Books at present are exclusive; 
children need to see the world they live in reflected in their reading matter. 
So why isn’t it happening?

Inclusive Minds  <http://www.inclusiveminds.com/>– a collective set up by Beth 
Cox and Alexandra Strick that exists to campaign and speak up for all kinds of 
diversity – organised the conference to bring key book folk together, to help 
support real commitment and look at how things had changed in the eighteen 
months since the first event.

Why writing diverse children's books is tough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/12/writing-diverse-childrens-books-tough-ross-montgomery>
Inclusive Minds have been busy, advocating, taking part in London’s Imagine 
Festival 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/imagine-childrens-festival>
, and launching a network of Young Ambassadors - individuals and parents with 
experience of marginalisation and a real and deep interest in seeing better 
representation across the board. These Young Ambassadors have spoken on BBC’s 
Newsround, Blue Peter and act as consultants, working with publishers and 
illustrators and authors to ensure authenticity.

Candy Gourlay, author, phenomenon, and keynote speaker, spoke movingly about 
her experience of growing up in the Philippines on a diet of wonderful stories, 
every one of which excluded her. Wonderful stories that meant it took years 
before she could think people who looked like her into her own stories.

Growing up I thought Filipinos weren't allowed to be in books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/10/diversity-in-childrens-books-candy-gourlay-philippines>
Steve Pryse from Pickled Pepper Books <https://pickledpepperbooks.co.uk/> 
spoke about the need for more diverse books too, and Emily Davison and Taz 
Virdee – two of Inclusive Minds’ army of Young Ambassadors – spoke passionately 
about how exclusion from stories had affected them.

Emily argued that inclusion wasn’t just beneficial for readers like her – she 
is visually impaired – but for children unaffected, to enable them to empathise 
and understand what life is like in her shoes; to unite rather than divide.

Why books need to be made more accessible for visually impaired people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/04/accessing-books-visually-impaired-blind>
Taz spoke about reminding authors and publishers that characters and books 
must take care to reflect the world in all its differences, and that
intersectionality 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/intersectionality> is the 
goal we should all be working towards.

We know that writing, illustrating and publishing as well as bookselling, 
festivals and in fact all aspects of production, are monoculturally white and 
middle class. And over the twenty years I’ve been published I’ve been to 
several high profile conferences, taken part in countless initiatives to 
improve things. It has to be said that the book world is in general a massive 
diversity fail.

There are many reasons. There is unconscious bias of course, but there is also 
fear of getting it wrong, and for picture book publishers a fear of what 
overseas partners might want. Maybe some assume that rabbits and bears are more 
relatable than a brown face?

Diverse voices: the 50 best culturally diverse books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/13/50-best-culturally-diverse-childrens-books>
But listening to the small changes enacted over the past year in individual 
publishers and other organisations, the book audits looking at exactly what is 
being produced, the mainstreaming of diverse books undertaken not only by
Letterbox Library <http://www.letterboxlibrary.com/> but by small publishers 
likeSweet Apple <http://www.sweetapplebooks.com/> (see their wonderful 
Oddsockasaurus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HlnBuq6t9Zo>), there is some 
movement.

In the past few years the change affected by bloggers promoting LGBTQ 
characters issues and themes in books – especially in YA – has been phenomenal.

In just a few years we have seen an explosion in books by, concerning and 
including, a range of characters. These books aren’t marginalised – they win 
prizes. It’s an inspiration.

We need to talk about mental health without shame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/08/teen-mental-health-ibs-juno-dawson>
There has also been an increase in awareness, which is beginning to be 
reflected in inclusive stories, around mental illness. It’s only a start, and 
there’s a long way to go, but it’s happening. Inclusive Minds is working hard 
to ensure that it’s action not just words. Their charters, which are open for 
publishers and booksellers to sign up to, encourage change and action.

Here are some other bright spots on the horizon.

 * Megaphone <https://leilarasheeddotcom.wordpress.com/megaphone/> is a 
mentoring scheme for unpublished BAME authors run by Leila Rasheed, a source of 
new children’s writers of the future.

 * BAME in Publishing <http://bameinpublishing.tumblr.com/faqs>, launched by 
Sarah Shaffi and Wei Ming Kam, is a brand new networking group fro those in the 
industry. 
 * BareLit <http://barelitfestival.com/>, organised by Media Diversified, was 
the first and hugely successful literature festival completely crowdfunded and 
totally sold out with no diversity panels in sight. 
So there’s plenty of hope, and plenty of organisations and individuals working 
hard to make sure that all children can find a place for themselves and that 
this should be completely unremarkable. So that – as the Inclusive Minds logo 
says – Everybody’s In.

Making children's books more diverse: what you can do
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/17/childrens-books-diversity-everybody-in-twitter-campaign>
Catherine Johnson’s latest novel The Curious Tale of The Lady Caraboo was 
shortlisted for the 2016 YA Book Prize and isavailable from the Guardian 
Bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/munro-inheritance.html>.
 