
Once upon a time there was a Fleet Street in the north of England, based in 
Manchester.National newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/national-newspapers>, which together printed 
hundreds of thousands of copies there each day, between them employed hundreds 
of reporters (plus subs, feature writers, photographers and sports journalists).

The retreat from Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> began 
soon after the Wapping revolution in 1986. Compositors and linotype operators 
went quickly. Other printing employees followed them when new, less labour 
intensive, print plants were set up. Editors and production journalists 
disappeared too.

Gradually, over a period of years, dedicated northern reporting staffs at 
titles proclaiming themselves to be "nationals" were whittled away.

And now the title once known as the paper of record, The Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes>, is abandoning "the north". Its 
northern correspondent, Russell Jenkins, is one of the 20 people who has been 
made redundant by the paper in its recent editorial cull.

It is claimed that he will not be replaced. Though News International will 
neither confirm nor deny the claim, it is clear that the paper is making posts, 
rather than people, redundant.

If The Times does leave the position unfilled, the newsdesk will surely need 
to scramble reporters northwards on a regular basis.

Note that Jenkins's departure coincided with the breaking of two major stories 
on his news patch - the sentencing of Stuart Hall for sex offences and theIan 
Brady <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ian-brady> health tribunal.

The Times was therefore obliged to send two London correspondents "oop north" 
to cover both. (The paper's investigations editor, Andrew Norfolk, is based in 
the north but does not deal with day-to-day news).

At present, the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> has no northern staffer. 
Since the departure of its correspondent, Nigel Bunyan, the paper has relied 
instead on the services of its Derby-based Midlands correspondent, Nick Britten.

But I understand that the Telegraph is determined to appoint a new northern 
correspondent as soon as it can be arranged.

The Telegraph also sent two London-based staff to Manchester to cover the 
Brady story.

It is sobering for all London nationals to reflect on the proliferation of big 
non-political domestic stories in and around the north this year, such asDale 
Cregan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/jun/13/dale-cregan-life-police-killing>, 
April Jones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/may/30/april-jones-murder-case-timeline>, 
Chetham's music school abuse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/mar/26/chethams-music-school-sexual-abuse-inquiry>
, plus the Jimmy Savile scandal.

Death of former Sun reporter Brian Dixon

The Sun's former Midlands-based correspondent, Brian Dixon, has died, aged 76. 
He covered many stories well north of his own patch, notably the 1984 miners' 
strike, the 1985 Bradford City football club fire and the 1981 trial of the 
serial murdererPeter Sutcliffe <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/peter-sutcliffe> 
(aka the Yorkshire Ripper).

He spent 17 years with The Sun, which referred to him in its own report of his 
death as "legendary". But the paper failed to mention -as HoldTheFrontPage's 
report did 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2013/news/north-east-journalist-who-went-to-fleet-st-dies-at-76/>
 - that he left The Sun in 1988 on "moral grounds."

Dixon started his career at the now-defunct Gateshead Post in 1953, while 
still at school. After military service, which included a spell with the 
parachute regiment, he joined the Newcastle Evening Chronicle.

He went on to work for the now-defunct Daily Sketch in London and the Daily 
Mail in Birmingham before spending his stint atThe Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun>. He then moved into broadcasting as a 
crime reporter with the then Central Television (now ITV Central) in Nottingham.

He retired in 2001 and became an enthusiastic world traveller with two 
long-standing friends, the Daily Mirror's Frank Palmer and formerBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio Nottinghamshire news editor Chris 
Throup. He spent the last couple of years before his death, on 3 June, at a 
Nottinghamshire nursing home.

Throup's report on his funeral - here on the National Union of Journalists' 
website <http://www.nuj.org.uk/innerPagenuj.html?docid=2958> - mentions the 
oration by Lieutenant Colonel Nick Doyle.

He told how Dixon parachuted into Egypt during the Suez Canal crisis and, when 
he turned 60, he did his last jump in company with his son, Luke, who had 
become an army officer.
 