
Many of the 70,000 children in the care of the state will have experienced 
abject neglect or abuse at the hands of parents unable or unwilling to provide 
the care and nurture that comes naturally to most families. While adoption will 
only be appropriate for a minority of these children, it can be transformative, 
offering them the best chance of growing up in a stable, permanent, loving home.

The 12% drop in the number of children being adopted in the year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/29/adoption-numbers-drop-steeply-as-governments-flagship-policy-falters>
ending in March is therefore deeply concerning. Experts believe this will be 
followed by even steeper falls, as applications for placement orders, the first 
step in the adoption process, have falleneven more markedly 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/508633/ALB_Business_Intelligence_Quarter_2_2015_to_2016.pdf>
.

This is an area fraught with sensitivity: the decision to remove a child from 
their parents’ care is one of the utmost gravity. Yet there is a great deal of 
evidence that in recent decades, courts have been too reluctant to make this 
call, at huge cost to children’s lives. Martin Narey, the former chief 
executive of Barnardo’s, observed in his 2011 investigation into the adoption 
system: “Frequently, a child is living in observed neglect for many months, 
years sometimes, before first being removed to care.”

Adoption rates have only risen when senior politicians have made the issue a 
political priority

Adoption faces similar issues in the courts. For too long, it has been seen as 
an option of draconian last resort, appropriate only in the most exceptional of 
circumstances.Adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> rates 
have only risen when senior politicians such as Tony Blair and Michael Gove 
have made the issue a political priority.

The recent fall in adoption is associated with a 2013 court ruling made by Sir 
James Munby, president of the Family Division, which implied adoption is only 
appropriate as a last resort when “nothing else will do”. This has paved the 
way for a renewed reluctance by the courts to approve adoption orders, despite 
guidance that has since been issued to make clear this ruling did not 
constitute a change in law. Instead of being considered for adoption, some 
children are being placed with kinship carers, even when that isclearly not in 
their best interest 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/487243/SGR_Final_Combined_Report.pdf>
.

In response, the government is revising adoption law to restate best practice. 
This is to be welcomed: for too long, some of our most disadvantaged children 
have been failed by a system that makes decisions based on misplaced ideology 
rather than evidence about what is best for the child.

• Comments will be opened later today
 