
Depicting female sexuality on screen including, cover your eyes, women proudly 
admitting their enjoyment of sexual activities appears to frighten Hollywood 
more than making a blockbuster that isn’t a reboot, a remake or a rehash.

The 50 best films of 2015 in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/dec/04/best-films-of-2015-australia>
Sex remains a male topic projected to cinema audiences via a man’s 
perspective. If a woman does possess sexual confidence, she is usually 
chastised for it, even in this year’s disappointingly moralistic Amy Schumer 
comedy Trainwreck. It’s the surprising proliferation of this tired and 
old-fashioned view that makes Marielle Heller’s gutsy debut all the more 
thrilling.

In The Diary of a Teenage Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>, the titular 
teen is Minnie, an awkward yet precocious 15-year-old, played with absolute 
conviction by Bel Powley, living in 1970s San Francisco. She’s unhappy with her 
looks and her weight and spends her days drawing cartoons, recording an audio 
diary and figuring out how she can lose her virginity. Her mother is a largely 
disinterested bohemian whose boyfriend takes an interest in Minnie and her 
sexual pursuit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
A teenager having sex with her mother’s boyfriend is a set-up we’ve seen 
played out in Lifetime movies, agony aunt columns and hair-pulling 
confrontations on Jerry Springer but rather than milk the dynamic for all the 
tawdry sleaze that it teases, Heller offers a refreshingly non-judgmental take 
on well-worn material. Importantly, Minnie isn’t a victim. She’s a girl trying 
to become a woman by taking control of her own sexuality and her impetuous 
inexperience is both beautifully and horribly well-observed.

Five great female-friendly comic-book adaptations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/aug/03/five-great-female-friendly-comic-adaptations-diary-teenage-girl-gemma-bovery>
It’s not that the film condones what is essentially a paedophilic relationship 
but it focuses on the effect it has on Minnie’s ascent to womanhood rather than 
the legal ramifications.

As her free-spirited mother, Kristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig> adds a believably aloof turn to 
an increasingly impressive indie repertoire while Alexander Skarsgaard helps to 
add humanity to a character that could be played as a one-note sleazeball in a 
different film. But it’s undeniably Powley’s film.


The British actor, known mainly for ITV sitcom Benidorm, is so well cast that 
it feels as if the film was created for her. She convinces as a child initially 
unsure of the power she possesses against the opposite sex and eventually as a 
teenager grappling with her identity as a female, with innocence lost yet 
knowledge gained. It’s one of the year’s most impressive feats of acting and in 
a fairer world, she’d be an Oscar frontrunner.

While Trainwreck might have made a superficially louder argument with its 
brash marketing campaign alleging a non-judgmental look at a sexually liberated 
women and earlier this year, Fifty Shades of Grey claimed to give us an x-rated 
view of a woman enjoying kinky sex, both buckled and gave way to conservatism 
and dated sexual politics. The Diary of a Teenage Girl does neither, refusing 
to play safe and messily handing us something far closer to reality.
 