
“Now that the new order is past, and the thousand-year reich has crumbled in a 
decade, we are able at last, picking among the still smoking rubble, to 
discover the truth about that fantastic and tragical episode.” Some books 
simply exude excitement and self-confidence, as if the writer is on fire with 
ideas, or intoxicated with information. This is one of those titles.

From his commanding opening sentence, the author of this engrossing forensic 
masterpiece, a work of brilliant reportage, knows that the story he is about to 
unfold will be unputdownable, a scoop of historic proportions: history in the 
making. That, as we shall see, would come to haunt him at the end of a long and 
distinguished career.

In 1945, Hugh Trevor-Roper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hugh-trevor-roper> was a 31-year-old British 
intelligence officer, an academic historian who had been recruited to Bletchley 
Park to fight the secret war against the Nazis. When hostilities ended, 
Trevor-Roper found himself in occupied Germany. He was appointed by Dick White, 
then head of counterintelligence in the British zone, to find out what had 
happened to Hitler. The Nazi leader had, by then, been missing for more than 
four months since Germany’s unconditional surrender on 7 May, becoming the 
subject of many bizarre and outlandish rumours inimical to a secure postwar 
settlement.

Trevor-Roper, working under the pseudonym of “Major Oughton”, completed his 
report in record time. “The British Intelligence Report on the Death of Hitler” 
was delivered to the four-power intelligence committee in Berlin on 1 November 
1945. To his credit, Dick White saw that there might be a book in it, and 
persuaded his protege to undertake a revision of his material once his official 
duties were over. The outcome of one spy’s intuition about a gifted subordinate,
The Last Days of Hitlerwas published in March 1947 and became an immediate 
bestseller.

Trevor-Roper’s contemporary and rival, the historian AJP Taylor, later wrote 
in theObserver: “Trevor-Roper’s brilliant book demonstrated how a great 
historian can arrive at the truth even when much of the evidence is lacking or, 
as in this case, deliberately kept from him… This was all the doing of one 
incomparable scholar.”

The remarkable luxury Trevor-Roper enjoyed as an investigative historian was 
that most of his informants were still available for interview. The stage was 
set for an enthralling quest into the heart of darkness, the smouldering ruins 
of the postwar Reich, a plot worthy of any thriller.

Trevor-Roper’s narrative starts with a long scene-setter, describing Hitler, 
his court and the “vast system of bestial Nordic nonsense” with which the Nazi 
high command was obsessed. Goering, Speer, Himmler and Goebbels are memorably 
depicted with a rhetorical zest inspired by Trevor-Roper’s admiration for great 
British historians such as Gibbon and Macaulay. Himmler, for instance, becomes 
“an inexorable monster whose cold, malignant rage no prayers, no human 
sacrifices can ever for one moment appease”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Flast-days-of-hitler-hugh-trevor-roper-100-best-nonfiction-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7891bade6c5973e82000328f2553d7ceef6c91f8%2F599_656_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2032%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Last%20Days%20of%20Hitler%20by%20Hugh%20Trevor-Roper%20(1947)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Flast-days-of-hitler-hugh-trevor-roper-100-best-nonfiction-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20100%20best%20nonfiction%20books%3A%20No%2032%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Last%20Days%20of%20Hitler%20by%20Hugh%20Trevor-Roper%20%281947%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Flast-days-of-hitler-hugh-trevor-roper-100-best-nonfiction-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7891bade6c5973e82000328f2553d7ceef6c91f8%2F599_656_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 Hugh Trevor-Roper at home in Oxford in 1980. Photograph: Graham Harrison/Rex 
Features 
In resonant periods, Trevor-Roper establishes how, after the failure of the 
bomb plot of 20 July 1944, the Führer retreated further and further into his 
bunker, the secure catacomb beneath the Reich chancellery, from which Hitler 
could direct his last stand, the Götterdämmerung scenario made famous in movies 
such asDownfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/mar/20/features.review1>.

After this compelling introduction, the narrative moves swiftly to the 
impending defeat of April 1945, and the shocking physical deterioration of the 
Führer’s final days, especially the drugs administered to him by a sinister 
cabal of Nazi doctors, to the point at which he became, in Trevor-Roper’s 
words, “a physical wreck”. Inside this murky hell-hole, there was, however, a 
figure of innocence, an Aryan maiden who would sacrifice herself for her hero.

At the moment when the young historian first investigated the bizarre and 
fascinating psychodrama of life in Hitler’s bunker, Eva Braun, who would marry 
her lover in the last days of April, was still an unknown. His portrait of 
Hitler’s devoted companion is one of the many mini-scoops scattered through 
these pages:

Braun had none of the colourful qualities of the conventional tyrant’s 
mistress, writes Trevor-Roper. But then neither was Hitler a typical tyrant. 
Behind his impassioned rages, his enormous ambition, his gigantic 
self-confidence, there lay not the indulgent ease of a voluptuary, but the 
trivial tastes, the conventional domesticity, of the petty-bourgeois. One 
cannot forget the cream buns.

Hitler’s 56th birthday fell on 20 April. Fifty feet underground, beneath the 
garden of the Reich chancellery, the Fuhrer struggled to direct an ever more 
desperate rearguard action as the allies, led by the Red Army, closed in on 
Nazi Berlin. On 22 April there was a three-hour conference of war at which, 
famously, Hitler’s rage exceeded all previous eruptions. He shrieked; he 
railed; he denounced; finally, in exhaustion, he declared that the end had 
come. By 27 April the heart of the city was cut off from the rest of Germany. 
Now the Russians were shelling it without mercy. As hope faded, Hitler’s court 
bade farewell. Incredibly, some were still reluctant to leave their master. 
However, at this juncture, there was a bitter distraction: the feuding at the 
top of the party between Bormann, Goering and Himmler added to the air of 
crisis surrounding life in the bunker.

After 27 April, Hitler’s days were numbered. Life in the bunker became 
progressively madder and more apocalyptic. Trevor-Roper extracts maximum 
theatricality from his narrative, describing the inferno of those last days. 
How, he asks, can the ordinary reader envisage the life that was led in those 
doomed, subterranean bunkers, amid perpetual shelling and bombing, often in 
total darkness, in which all count of the hours was lost; when meals took place 
at wayward hours, and the boundaries of night and day had been forgotten?

During the night of 27-28 April, with Red Army shelling cacophonously 
overhead, Hitler rehearsed with his court their plans for suicide and the 
various methods by which their corpses might be destroyed. Two days later, word 
came that Himmler had set himself up as a new Reichsführer, and was negotiating 
with the Swedes. In the delirium of treachery surrounding Hitler, this was the 
end.

And now the Wagnerian climax was complete, with a doomed protagonist to lend 
some weird poignancy to the drama. On Trevor-Roper’s account,Adolf Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler> presented a pathetic spectacle.

His look was abstracted, his eyes glazed over with a film of moisture. Some of 
those who saw him even suggested that he had been drugged… He walked in silence 
down the passage and shook hands with all the women in turn… The suicide of the 
Führer was about to take place. Thereupon an unexpected thing happened. The 
terrible sorcerer, the tyrant who had charged their days with melodramatic 
tension, would soon be gone, and for a brief twilight moment they could play. 
In the canteen of the chancellery, where the orderlies took their meals, there 
was a dance.

Joseph Goebbels’ 105-year-old secretary: ‘No one believes me now, but I knew 
nothing’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brunhilde-pomsel-nazi-joseph-goebbels-propaganda-machine>
Soon after, a single shot was heard. After Eva Braun had taken poison, Hitler 
shot himself in the mouth. It was 3.30pm on 30 April 1945.

When it was first published, The Last Days of Hitler had a quasi-propaganda 
purpose: to prove, definitively, by brilliant detective work, that the Hitler 
was not only dead, but had killed himself.

This, triumphantly, Trevor-Roper achieved. His account has never seriously 
been challenged. More than that, he also contrived to interweave into his 
narrative a critique of the Nazi state and its origins that would help shape 
the prodigious historiography of the Hitler regime that blossomed like a 
pernicious weed throughout the second half of the 20th century.

So magisterial was Trevor-Roper, now Lord Dacre, in relation to Hitler studies 
that when in 1983 Britain’sSunday Times, by then owned by Rupert Murdoch, 
acquired the rights to a set of notebooks purporting to be Hitler’s personal 
diaries, the now ageing but immensely distinguished historian was cynically 
deployed to authenticate the “Hitler Diaries”. In the media frenzy that 
surrounded the publication of “the scoop of the century”, Murdoch threw 
Trevor-Roper to the wolves, dismissing the elderly historian’s subsequent 
doubts with the memorably brutal: “Fuck Dacre. Publish.”

In the uproar that preceded the exposure of these documents as shameless 
forgeries, Trevor-Roper was first humiliated, then pilloried. (Initially, he 
had expressed doubts, then changed his mind under duress, and declared that 
they could be genuine, before finally agreeing that they were a fake.) His 
reputation never recovered.

He died in 2003, but his influence lingers. He wrote the first bestseller 
about Adolf Hitler, and has unquestionably inspired many subsequent generations 
of popular historians, journalists and novelists to follow the same mesmerising 
path into the Nazi state’s labyrinth of evil.

A signature sentence


“There, in scenes of Roman luxury, Goering feasted and hunted and entertained, 
and showed his distinguished guests round the architectural and artistic 
wonders of his house – a study like a medium-sized church, a domed library like 
the Vatican library, a desk 26ft long, of mahogany inlaid with bronze 
swastikas, furnished with two big golden baroque candelabra, and an inkstand 
all of onyx, and a long ruler of green ivory studded with jewels.”

Three to compare


Hugh Trevor-Roper: Hitler’s Table Talk (1951 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hitlers-Table-Talk-1941-1944-Conversations/dp/184212028X?SubscriptionId=AKIAILSHYYTFIVPWUY6Q&tag=duc08-21&linkCode=xm2&camp=2025&creative=165953&creativeASIN=184212028X>
)
Robert Harris: Selling Hitler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/13296/category/42/> 
(1986)
Joachim Fest: Inside Hitler’s Bunker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/11/historybooks.features> (2002)

The Last Days of Hitler is published by Pan (£9.99). Click here to buy it for 
£8.19 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/last-days-of-hitler.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 