
True Grit is going great guns at the American box office, making it the Coen 
brothers' highest-grossing movie ever. Some might see this as a sign that the 
western is making a comeback. But, honestly, I don't think it ever really went 
away.

Observers have been predicting the genre's demise for a hundred years; Edward 
Buscombe, in The BFI Companion to the western, quotes a trade reviewer who in 
1911 dismissed it as "a gold mine that had been worked to the limit". But by 
1953 westerns were making up more than a quarter of Hollywood's output, and 
much of television's, too; my generation was weaned on The Lone Ranger, 
Gunsmoke and Rawhide.

In the 1960s, that figure went into a slump from which it never recovered, 
though there were still landmark oaters such as The Wild Bunch or Unforgiven. 
But the dramatic emphasis changed from righteous armed struggles against 
lawlessness, might is right and the triumph of civilisation over savagery, to 
psychological portraits of outlaws or gunslingers, revisionist studies of the 
hero's role in the modern world, acknowledgements that Native Americans were 
people, too, and allegories of Vietnam.

But if the number of westerns fell, the genre never really disappeared â€“ it 
just went underground. Just as westerns were a peculiarly American variation on 
old-world tales of mythological heroes or wandering knights, so, from the 1970s 
onwards, the cowboys, gunslingers and bounty hunters of yore passed the baton 
to cops and detectives, hitmen and astronauts. Henceforth the western disguised 
itself as the road movie, the action film or science fiction. Clint Eastwood 
and Don Siegel bridged the gap with Coogan's Bluff, while John Carpenter's 
Assault on Precinct 13 was a modern urban reworking of Rio Bravo. Many of 
Carpenter's other films, like those of Walter Hill, are westerns in all but 
name.

Sci-fi films such as Westworld, Outland or Battle Beyond the Stars barely 
bother to disguise their western roots, but, essentially, any movie in which 
the characters pass through hostile territory or rid the community of its bad 
guys is cleaving to the western tradition, whether it's Arnold Schwarzenegger 
in Central America, Bruce Willis or Eddie Murphy in LA, or Mel Gibson and Danny 
Glover skipping the paperwork real cops would need to tackle in favour of the 
latterday equivalent of galloping around on horseback and yelling "Yeehaw!"

This sort of genre slippage allowed westerns to move with the times. In 
science fiction, for example, Native Americans could be replaced by unstoppable 
killer robots or invading extra-terrestrials, with no need to worry about 
political correctness (unless we're talking about Jar-Jar Binks, or deliberate 
allegories such as District 9).

These days, you can spot the influence of the western in everything from The 
Expendables to There Will Be Blood to Predators. Avatar is pure "Cowboys and 
Indians". Even Lotso, the strawberry-scented bear in Toy Story 3, is a 
successor to Burl Ives in The Big Country, or one of Anthony Mann's monstrous 
patriarchs. But if there's one genre that hews to western convention more than 
any other, it's movies about comic-book heroes.

The comic-book hero, like the cowboy, has a distinctive costume and 
behavioural code. His weaponry and mode of transport are fetishised. He often 
has a sidekick (Kato = Tonto). His stories climax in an OK Corral-type showdown 
against the villain. And the female characters are as marginal as in any 
western; the function of Mary Jane Watson or Rachel Dawes is essentially to be 
rescued.

The one big difference is that comic-book hero stories are almost always 
urban, with gothic cityscapes taking the place of Monument Valley or the 
Tabernas desert, but their topography is just as recognisable as that of John 
Ford's wide-open spaces. And superhero movies are already following the western 
pattern of moving from popular escapism into the darker, more introspective 
territory of The Dark Knight or Watchmen.

The western never went away. Now it's everywhere you look.
 