
In eco news as in fashion, it has all gone a bit early 90s. Illegal outdoor 
raves are returning. Remember them? Recent police crackdowns include Operation 
Enigma in Hampshire, which sounds like a rave itself. Oddly, it is wildlife 
crime police who are charged with shutting down these events.

In truth, it’s hard to stop a multi-sound-system outdoor rave in the dark once 
it gets going, so the police often have to sit it out. When dawn comes the 
extent of the damage is revealed. According to police, landowners and many 
conservationists, illegal raves trash habitats.

Certainly this can happen. Debris, including gas canisters and broken glass, 
from an illegal rave held on important heathland in Lincolnshire last year 
derailed a regeneration project. Tucker Gumber, who runsthefestivalguy.com 
<http://thefestivalguy.com/>, says electronic dance music events “tend to be 
the dirtiest”, but this is anecdotal. TheCLA <http://cla.org.uk/> (representing 
landowners) says raves cause damage.

Clearly nobody has any business attending an event held near a vulnerable 
habitat, or where livestock is kept. But to focus purely on rave damage is to 
ignore the green roots of the movement. The original outdoor ravers were 
expected to defend the environment.

As Naomi Klein puts it, the common demand of such groups, ranging from Twyford 
Down anti-road protestors to permaculture groups and the anti-capitalists who 
originated communities likeMarsh Farm in Luton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/mar/12/regeneration.communities>, was 
to do with “the right to uncolonised space – for homes, for trees, for 
gathering, for dancing”.

It’s been a while since I hung up my own glow sticks. But I hope the new 
ravers care about this green heritage. The outdoor rave that leaves no trace 
would be truly subversive.

The big picture: RSPB big garden birdwatch results

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368974cf4dc0dca37e1ae4698ecf70375ae39c9a%2F0_184_2480_1489%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20raves%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20raves%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368974cf4dc0dca37e1ae4698ecf70375ae39c9a%2F0_184_2480_1489%2F2480.jpg>
 On a wing and a prayer: a long-tailed tit, which has benefited from a mild 
winter after numbers increased this year in an annual survey. Photograph: John 
Bridges/RSPB/PA 
The RSPB’s annual Big Garden Birdwatch represents turbo-charged citizen 
science. In January more than half a million people recorded the birds that 
appeared in their local areas. The results are in. I’m not one to cheer global 
warming, but the mild winter has been a boon for small birds, including 
long-tailed tits (see picture): numbers are up by 44% on last year. But 
starlings and song thrushes experienced marked declines.

Well dressed: Slow Fashion by Safia Minney

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32e7123fcf6b773f3150988a4869dc7c2e4ee527%2F0_777_2175_1304%2F2175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20raves%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20outdoor%20raves%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-outdoor-raves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32e7123fcf6b773f3150988a4869dc7c2e4ee527%2F0_777_2175_1304%2F2175.jpg>
 Required reading: Safia Minney’s new book about the relationships between 
consumers and producers. 
Continuing in my ambition to slim down your wardrobe by including as many 
books, apps and swapping opportunities as new stuff to buy, here’s another 
library addition: Slow Fashion, written by Safia Minney. She is the founder of 
much-loved fairtrade fashion brand People Tree, well known in the UK and Japan. 
She’s also a stalwart of fair trade who has spent years forging supply chains 
with overseas producers. Yes, her new book advocates slow fashion in the face 
of the onslaught of near-disposable fast fashion – but it is really a book 
about relationships between consumers and producers. There’s also a chapter on 
the most exciting sustainable-fashion stores. It makes you want to buy new 
stuff, but at least it’ll be ethical.
Slow Fashion is pubished by New Internationalist, at £14.99. To buy a copy for 
£11.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/359350/>

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 