
Bill Paterson is looking alarmed. He wants to drink his red wine but fellow 
actor Brian Cox keeps pulling his fingers from the stem of the glass. As 
Paterson’s grip gets more precarious, his eyes grow wide in theatrical outrage.

Cox carries on regardless as he demonstrates what the late Billie Whitelaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/21/billie-whitelaw-dies-actor> told 
him about working with Samuel Beckett. “Billie was a close friend and she would 
tell me about how amazingly particular Beckett was,” he says, yanking at 
Paterson’s hand to illustrate. “He would come up and take her fingers and ask 
her to just hold it like that. He would micromanage everything.”

“We’d be in deep shit,” they laugh, thinking of their own less-than-precise 
behaviour in rehearsals for Waiting for Godot.

Lisa Dwan on Beckett: ‘We don’t normally look at our frailty’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/31/lisa-dwan-samuel-beckett-not-i-interview>
David Smith on why Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot still matters more than 
50 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/08/samuel-beckett-waiting-for-godot>
Give or take a bowler hat, the two men could be just the kind of vaudeville 
double act on which Beckett based the parts of Vladimir and Estragon, although, 
on this showing, it’s impossible to tell which is the straight man and which 
the fall guy.

The play kicks off the 50th anniversary season of Edinburgh’s Royal Lyceum, a 
theatre where everyone from David Tennant to Richard Eyre and Bill Bryden have 
cut their teeth and where playwrightDavid Greig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/sep/10/david-greig-artistic-director-royal-lyceum-theatre-edinburgh>
 will take over as artistic director in 2016.

It also marks the 60th anniversary of Godot’s English-language premiere. Back 
in August 1955 
<https://www.theguardian.com/century/1950-1959/Story/0,6051,105436,00.html>, 
audiences weren’t quite as ready as they are today for Beckett’s blend of 
formal experimentation and existentialist despair. Peter Bull, the actor who 
played Pozzo, recalled the “waves of hostility” that “came whirling over the 
footlights” and the “mass exodus” that followed soon after.

Within a decade, however, the public mood had changed. “I saw it in 1965 at 
the Citizens and I didn’t find it in any way a problem play,” says Paterson. 
“Within the 10 years it had become a classic – because it’s immensely 
approachable.”

Cox had seen it at around the same time at London’s Royal Court in Anthony 
Page’s production starringNicol Williamson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/26/nicol-williamson> and Alfred 
Lynch. A few years later, he had two brief encounters with the playwright 
himself. The first was when Cox was working with Lindsay Anderson onDavid Storey
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jan/31/theatre.stage>’s In Celebration 
at the Royal Court. “Beckett had something around him that you couldn’t 
penetrate,” he says. “You just felt there was no way you could come near him.”

His second encounter sounds like a scene from a lost arthouse movie – or even 
a Beckett play. “I was driving through London with my then wife [actor Caroline 
Burt]. It was by the Albert Memorial when you come out into Kensington Gore. I 
turned to my wife and said, ‘That’s Sam Beckett. What’s he doing?’ He was 
standing on a traffic island looking in all kinds of directions not doing 
anything. It was quite bizarre.”

In those days, there would have seemed little chance of Waiting for Godot 
turning into a star vehicle, but from its avant garde beginnings, the play has 
become part of the mainstream repertoire. So much is this the case that Michael 
Billington opted not to include it in his newly published compendium,The 101 
Greatest Plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/26/choosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington>
. “It’s a landmark play,” the Guardian critictold listeners 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p031g8l1> of Radio 4’s Today programme, “but I 
think it’s a landmark in its time and now it’s become a rather safe, successful 
boulevard hit … it’s lost some of its innovative power.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbrian-cox-bill-paterson-waiting-for-godot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442477717009%2Fa24c6159-77c9-4006-8f25-3fc8eafdf247-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Waiting%20is%20over%3A%20Brian%20Cox%20and%20Bill%20Paterson%20on%20finally%20sharing%20a%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbrian-cox-bill-paterson-waiting-for-godot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Waiting%20is%20over%3A%20Brian%20Cox%20and%20Bill%20Paterson%20on%20finally%20sharing%20a%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbrian-cox-bill-paterson-waiting-for-godot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442477717009%2Fa24c6159-77c9-4006-8f25-3fc8eafdf247-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stuck in traffic ... Samuel Beckett, author of Waiting for Godot. Photograph: 
PR 
Unsurprisingly, Billington’s suggestion that Godot lacks the “smell of 
reality” gets short shrift from the actors. This is a play thatwent down a storm
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/08/samuel-beckett-waiting-for-godot>
 with the prisoners of San Quentin – not known for their esoteric tastes – and 
again with disenfranchised black audiences in apartheid-era South Africa. As 
director Athol Fugard wrote in 1962: “I told the cast that Vladimir and 
Estragon must have read the accounts of the Nuremberg trials – or else they 
were at Sharpeville or were the first in at Auschwitz. Choose your horror – 
they know all about it.”

“The play has tremendous resonance because it is a tragicomedy,” says Cox. 
“It’s about being dispossessed, about being stateless. There are a lot of war 
references in it, a lot of references to a country under siege and to a 
wasteland left behind.”

That Cox should have turned out for the Lyceum’s 50th anniversary is no 
accident. Fresh from drama school at the age of 19, he was in the company’s 
inaugural production of The Servant o’ Twa Maisters in October 1965. Fellow 
cast members in Victor Carin’s vernacular take on the Goldoni comedy (now best 
known asOne Man, Two Guvnors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/22/one-man-two-guvnors-review>) 
included Russell Hunter, Una McLean, Tom Conti and Eileen McCallum.

“I didn’t particularly enjoy my time here because I was a kid on the make and 
I had my own demons to deal with,” says Cox. “But now I look back and I realise 
to be part of that was such an honour.”

Waiting for Godot has tremendous resonance because it is a tragicomedy – it’s 
about being dispossessed, being stateless
Brian Cox 
In the audience for a matinee performance was a 20-year-old Paterson, a 
theatre enthusiast from Glasgow who was keen to see the capital’s new company 
at work in the 19th-century Howard and Wyndham building. “I remember it being 
very good,” says Paterson. “I was really impressed by the sheer scale.”

Two years later, Paterson made his own professional debut in Arturo Ui, the 
Glasgow Citizens production that launched the career ofLeonard Rossiter 
<http://www.leonardrossiter.com/ArturoUi.html>. As a founder member of 7:84 
Scotland, he starred in John McGrath’s The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, 
Black Oil (along with fellow Godot actor John Bett who plays Pozzo) and, 
through his old friend Kenny Ireland, became a member of the small-scale Young 
Lyceum company. Roles in Comfort and Joy, A Private Function and The Killing 
Fields followed.

Over the years, Paterson and Cox have occasionally appeared on screen together 
and it was Paterson’s wifeHildegard Bechtler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/sep/17/hildegard-bechtler-portrait-artist>
 who designed Deborah Warner’s 1990 National Theatre production of King Lear in 
which Cox played the title role. Both men were artistic associates at the 
Lyceum during the time of the late Kenny Ireland, to whom this production is 
dedicated. This, however, will be the first time they have appeared in the 
theatre together.

So how does it feel finally to share a stage? “Very, very disappointing,” 
deadpans Paterson. His stage partner agrees: “It’s all been a shocking 
illusion.”

 * Waiting for Godot is at Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh <http://lyceum.org.uk/>, 18 
September–10 October.
 