
Lined with the Italianate mansions of ambassadors’ residences and the palatial 
pieds-à-terre of Middle Eastern royals, Porchester Terrace in westLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is an unlikely place to find the 
original icon of suburbia. But the building that would spawn Britain’s most 
ubiquitous suburban housing type lurks right here: now protected behind 
defensive layers of intercoms and electric gates stands the paradigmatic 
progenitor of the English semi-detached house.

Walking along the Mercedes-dotted street in leafy Bayswater, a stone’s throw 
from Hyde Park, it might be hard to see the resemblance between the building’s 
grand Palladian proportions and the homely pebble-dashed semis that it went on 
to inspire.No 3–5 Porchester Terrace 
<http://list.historicengland.org.uk/resultsingle.aspx?uid=1226942> is a 
substantial pile by anyone’s standards. A colonnade of white doric columns 
marches around its raised veranda, crowned with heroic grecian urns and fronted 
by a glazed conservatory, featuring a glass dome topped with a pineapple 
finial. Behind this stately enclosure rises a three-storey brick villa, its 
triple-bayed frontage exuding the height of refined Georgian elegance, giving 
off all the signs that this must have been the abode of a well-to-do family of 
the day. And that’s exactly what its architect would have wanted you to believe.

Built in 1825 by Scottish-born landscape gardener John Claudius Loudon 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/gardens/gardens-gardening/great-british-garden-makers-john-claudius-loudon-18860>
, the house is a model of domestic architectural deception. It is in fact two 
houses, conjoined at the middle to give the illusion of a single, grand 
residence. Described by Loudon, in the oxymoronic language of the day, as a 
“double-detached house”, the idea was “to build two small houses which should 
appear as one, and have some pretensions to architectural design”. Through 
cunning techniques of architectural trickery, the design would “give dignity 
and consequence to each dwelling by making it appear to have the magnitude of 
two houses”.
 Illustration from Loudon’s The Suburban Gardener 
This germ of an idea he unleashed in Bayswater would go on to become the UK’s 
most popular housing type of the 20th century. The semi is a peculiarly British 
compromise, symbolising a break away from the humble terrace and the first step 
up on the aspirational ladder towards a fully detached house. Almost 200 years 
later it still embodies the dream of suburban security: according to themost 
recent census 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blog/2012/dec/11/census-data-released-live-coverage>
, almost a third of the houses in England and Wales are semi-detached, and the 
three-bedroom semi remains themost sought-after home in the country 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2611281/Semi-detached-homes-three-bedrooms-Britains-sought-properties-say-estate-agents.html>
.

While Loudon’s double detached dwelling wasn’t strictly the first of its kind 
(that question has occupied enthusiasticNotes and Queries correspondents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,,-1454,00.html> in the 
past), it was one of the earliest to be published and propagated, its 
principles expounded in a hugely influential book.The Suburban Gardener and 
Villa Companion 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=KWYEAAAAQAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, which Loudon wrote in 1838, was an epic manual designed to guide the 
newly-moneyed on matters of home management. It provides a fascinating window 
on to the domestic anxieties of the emerging Victorian middle-classes, with 
chapters covering everything from the selection of trees and shrubs to the 
correct style of entrance gates and chimney pots, even the proper arrangement 
of collections of stuffed birds. It is a written monument to the origins of 
British curtain-twitching culture, a guidebook for how to keep up with the 
Joneses.

But it is most revealing in the exhaustive measures that must be undertaken, 
when designing a double-detached house, in order to deceive the visitor into 
thinking that your home is a lot bigger than it actually is. The arrangement of 
entrances, Loudon writes, should be “so contrived that both cannot be seen at 
once”, a sight that would destroy the illusion of a single dwelling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427810921568%2F675ddbbf-6e97-404f-88d6-14147cd4a9f0-1020x749.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20grand%20London%20'semi'%20that%20spawned%20a%20housing%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%208&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20grand%20London%20%27semi%27%20that%20spawned%20a%20housing%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%208&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427810921568%2F675ddbbf-6e97-404f-88d6-14147cd4a9f0-1020x749.jpeg>
 3–5 Porchester Terrace in 1967 – the semi-detached house became the UK’s most 
popular housing type of the 20th century. Photograph: City of London 
At Porchester Terrace, where Loudon lived in one half while leasing out the 
other, you can see the trick in action. The projecting porches to Nos 3 and 5 
are located on the side elevations, away from the street, and incorporated into 
the colonnade so as to be invisible from the front. As Loudon proudly notes, 
with “the porches not being so conspicuous, and it being utterly impossible to 
see any considerable part of both at the same moment, from any point of view, 
the illusion is more complete”.

The central domed conservatory, it emerges, is another device for hiding the 
point where the two houses meet. And if funds don’t run to such a lavish 
gesture, the manual advises that the same effect can be achieved with a shared 
bay window, or even the use of dummy windows to hide the party wall.

In Loudon’s hands, even the garden shed is to be mobilised as an actor in this 
great domestic deceit

But Loudon’s trickery is not confined to the fabric of the building alone. The 
deception extends out into the garden itself, where planting is strategically 
deployed to further the fantasy of a detached villa. “The space in front of the 
houses is divided by a wire fence in the centre,” he explains, “so that a 
stranger entering from the street, and proceeding towards either house, sees 
across the whole width of the front garden; and both the houses and gardens 
appear to him to be one, and to be occupied by the same family.” He goes on to 
demonstrate, with the aid of a planting illustration, “how shrubs and low trees 
may be distributed so as to aid this illusion”.
 Illustration from The Suburban Gardener. 
Around the back, you might think you could relax and drop the guise for a 
moment – surely by the time your guests have reached the back garden, the game 
is up? But no: in Loudon’s hands, even the garden shed is to be mobilised as an 
actor in this great domestic deceit.

He advises that a double shed should be topped by a turret with a clock in the 
centre of the gable facing the house, and that a semi-circular window should be 
incorporated in the gable facing the lane, “so that, from whichever side it is 
viewed, this double shed is symmetrical, and appears as completely a single 
one, as the double detached dwelling to which it belongs appears to be only one 
house.”

While much of the advice in the Suburban Gardener focuses on outward image, 
and how to make the whole appear greater than the sum of its two more modest 
parts, Loudon is not shy about mentioning the pragmatic reasons for joining two 
houses in one. Foreshadowing the contemporary culture of live-work units, he 
suggests that one house might serve as an office, while its neighbour could 
function as the principle residence – in order to avoid excessive tax. “By such 
an arrangement,” he writes, “[the owner] would have all the advantages of a 
large house; while he would only pay the government and parochial taxes for two 
small ones.” In the days of window tax, the design would also reduce the burden 
by helpfully cutting an entire wall of the house out of the equation altogether.

Frank Kelsall <http://www.architecturalhistory.co.uk/pages/frank-kelsall>, an 
architectural historian who wrote the listing description for 3-5 Porchester 
Terrace when it was grade II-listed in 1987, suggests the semi-detached house 
took off for such practical reasons as much as anything else. “It had great 
advantages over the typical Georgian terrace: it was good for smaller builders, 
who might only have been able to finance the construction of a pair of houses 
at a time; and for residents, it had the convenience of being able to get round 
to the back garden with a wheelbarrow without having to go through the house. 
It was seen to be healthier too, allowing more fresh air to circulate around 
the house – even though many of the later semis still had the same plan as a 
terraced house, with no openings in the side walls.”

The house has been recast once more, this time by the forces of global 
investment, as an empty status symbol
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427794355624%2F89375302-9dd5-4891-91d3-1c0ac3ff7229-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20grand%20London%20'semi'%20that%20spawned%20a%20housing%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%208&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20grand%20London%20%27semi%27%20that%20spawned%20a%20housing%20revolution%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%208&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F31%2F1427794355624%2F89375302-9dd5-4891-91d3-1c0ac3ff7229-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Both houses now belong to Sheikh Faisal bin Qassim Al-Thani. Photograph: David 
Levene 
The semi really took off between the wars and became the house of choice in 
the post-war suburban boom. Between 1945 and 1964, over 40% of all properties 
built were semi-detached – although, by then, they had mostly shed any attempt 
to follow Loudon’s rules of deception, happily displaying both entrances on the 
front of the house, with little care for disguising party walls. Classical 
revival was also ditched in favour of the half-timbered gables of Tudorbethan, 
or what cartoonist Osbert Lancaster called “bypass variegated” – semi-detached 
homes designed “to achieve the maximum of inconvenience ... [using] the least 
attractive materials and building devices known to the past.”

Timur's Registan: noblest public square in the world? – a history of cities in 
50 buildings, day 7
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/31/registan-samarkand-square-history-cities-buildings>
As for Loudon’s former abode, it has come full circle. No3-5 Porchester 
Terrace now has a single owner: it is one of the many trophy properties of 
Sheikh Faisal bin Qassim Al-Thani, a distant relative of the current Emir of 
Qatar and owner of Leicester Square’s W Hotel, who enjoys anestimated net worth 
of $2.2 bn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-03-25/hidden-qatar-billionaire-al-thani-seen-with-hotel-empire>
. The sheikh submitted a plan to unite the semi-detached houses in 1985 
<http://idoxpa.westminster.gov.uk/online-applications/applicationDetails.do?previousCaseType=Property&previousKeyVal=002U1XRPLI000&activeTab=summary&previousCaseUprn=100022791685&previousCaseNumber=0025FKRPBU000&keyVal=ZZZZW9RPXC540>
, and insert a lavish subterranean entertainment room beneath Loudon’s historic 
garden, but his application was refused on conservation grounds.

I ring the buzzer, but there is no reply. “In the seven years I’ve been 
working here,” says a doorman across the road, “I’ve seen him twice.” The house 
has been recast once more, this time by the forces of global investment, as an 
empty status symbol of social aspiration.

• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below

 