
Entrepreneurs should know that venture capitalists are, by definition, going 
to say no to the majority of investment opportunities they review. A look at 
the numbers says it all; according to data from Passion Capital, of the 2,000 
business plans it received in a year,35 investments were made 
<https://a.swipeusercontent.com/l4rzgxe18sZXX44Le4h0KnwEZaMIem-800.jpg> – a 
success rate of one in 55 for hopeful entrepreneurs. Similarly, the VC firm 
Homebrew reviewed 900 opportunities in 2013, but made nine investments,a 
success rate of just 1% 
<http://venturegeneratedcontent.com/2014/01/09/homebrews-1-the-vc-metrics-behind-investing-in-one-of-every-100-companies-we-meet/>
. This also rings true with our own investment ratio over the past year, close 
to one in 100.

When pitching to VCs, there are several things to take into account to turn a 
default "no" from investors into that crucial "yes".

First, it's important to ascertain whether the startup is at an appropriate 
stage for the fund. At White Star Capital, we make early stage investments on 
seed (where insiders provide startup capital) and series A (a startup's first 
significant round of venture funding) opportunities.

If entrepreneurs come to us to raise an angel round (where early outside 
investors buy common stock), it will be too early for us. Equally, if they are 
looking for a series C (a startup's third and more significant round of venture 
funding), it will be prohibitive for the size of our fund. Entrepreneurs should 
research what stage funds have invested in previously, which you can do at
Crunchbase <http://www.crunchbase.com/>.

Second, entrepreneurs should take geography into consideration. Some early 
stage funders will invest in a specific area only because they want to be 
physically close to their investments, or because their investor base demands 
it. Before pitching a winning idea to the wrong investors, entrepreneurs must 
make sure they research the geographic constraints of the funds.

Third, investors need to be convinced that a business has scale. Each VC has 
shareholders – its limited partners – who have entrusted money to the fund 
under the expectation that investments will generate significant returns. So 
very early on a VC will be evaluating whether the business plan is addressing a 
large enough market to have significant scale for a potential exit.

This is made harder by the fact that VC investors are, by definition, in the 
business of funding businesses that create new markets, so the size of the 
potential market is hard to measure. A great example of this isAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/jun/15/sharing-economy-uk-mobile-technology-uber-airbnb>
; its "market" didn't really exist when it first raised funds, but it also 
captured the majority of value in that space.

Finally, a key area of focus for VCs is the founding team. We are backing the 
founders as much as, if not more than, the business itself because a pivot to a 
new product is highly likely. Take Instagram – it was initially funded by
Andreessen Horowitz <http://a16z.com/>, back when it was called Burbn and was a 
location-sharing app. Andreessen and Horowitz backed not only Burbn but also 
Kevin Systrom and supported him through his decision to pivot and make 
Instagram, latersold to Facebook for $1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/apr/09/facebook-instagram-1bn-storify>
. So it's important to convince the investors early on that the team has the 
experience, skills and passion to pull it off, as well as the openness to pivot 
where necessary.

One reason for receiving a "no" from investors is totally outside the 
entrepreneur's control. It involves the maturity of the fund and its ability to 
deploy capital into new opportunities (ie "dry powder" – cash reserves for 
future obligations). It also involves the ability for the partner to devote 
bandwidth and time to a new deal. "Portfolio construction" issues may also 
jeopardise an entrepreneur's chances, which is VC speak for how to allocate 
fund resources across companies at different stages of maturity to time when 
exits will happen and funds will start being returned to their investors.

To navigate these risks effectively, any aspiring entrepreneur should research 
when a VC raised its last fund – if it was more than three or four years ago, 
it's likely that it will be running out of funds and focusing only on existing 
portfolio companies while raising a new one.

Turning the default "no" into a "yes" is more of an art than a science and 
involves a number of factors, many of which are not completely in the control 
of the entrepreneur. Most importantly, sell your vision with passion, which is 
the single biggest driver for getting a "yes". Embrace failure if it's a "no" 
and don't be afraid to pivot when necessary.

Christian Hernandez Gallardo is co-founder of White Star Capital 
<http://whitestarvc.com/> – follow him on Twitter @christianhern 
<https://twitter.com/christianhern>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 