
1) Meet the Mercury Mets


Mets man of the hour Matt Harvey is an extraordinary pitching talent, a fierce 
competitor,punctual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/06/mets-ace-matt-harvey-apologizes-for-missing-mandatory-workout>
, and just an all-around great guy. But did you know that the amazin’ ace is 
alsosomething of a fashionista 
<http://sports.cbsimg.net/images//visual/whatshot/Matt-Harvey-fashion-Mets-070913.jpg>
? True story.

“Some fun brands I like right now are Rag and Bone, ATM, Zegna, Tommy Hilfiger 
and, of course, my go-to, John Varvatos,” Harvey toldnycgo.com 
<http://www.nycgo.com/articles/matt-harvey-interview-mets> back in April, right 
around the time Mets brass either set or didn’t seta pitching limit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/06/matt-harvey-says-he-will-pitch-for-new-york-mets-in-the-playoffs>
 with his super-agent Scott Boras. Considering the amount of fuss that came 
from throwing a few extra post-Tommy John surgery innings, can you even begin 
to imagine what kind of distress calls Harvey would have made to his agent had 
he actually been forced to appear on the mound as a Mercury Met? Orel Hershiser 
on the other hand, a bulldog of a pitcher cut from an entirely different cloth, 
did what he had to do without complaint, donning this unique, futuristic jersey 
for one night only back on 27 July 1999.

How else can you describe something that, if nothing else, was completely out 
of this world? The only solace Mets fans can take in this all-but-forgotten 
moment in their history, is that they were not alone. No fewer than 21 teams 
had prints designed during a stunning piece of corporate symmetry that helped 
sell the real estate firm of Century 21 during an unprecedented promotion 
dubbed “turn ahead the clock 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turn_Ahead_the_Clock>” night, which is of 
course, the reverse of turnback the clock nights featuring throwback jerseys of 
yesteryear. The promotion actually extended all the way onto stadium 
scoreboards:Tomorrowland <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tomorrowland_(film)>
-ish graphics featuring updated position names such as “left-sector” (left 
field) and “intermediate station” (shortstop) put a shiny bow on the 
festivities. For whatever reason, the turn ahead the clock promotion failed to 
catch on enough to warrant a second date.

2) At loggerheads with leatherheads
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85394a5d2e8f0cfbaf394e1bd783d9327c9b6d55%2F224_32_2776_2050%2F2776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85394a5d2e8f0cfbaf394e1bd783d9327c9b6d55%2F224_32_2776_2050%2F2776.jpg>
 Someone needs to tell Ben Roethlisberger that horizontal stripes do little for 
his figure. Photograph: Justin K. Aller/Getty Images 
Throwback uniforms are supposed to celebrate the good old days, and the 1930s 
were not that for the NFL. The league was in its infancy, dominated by the 
college game, and featured a style, speed and strategy that’s unrecognizable 
when compared with the game of today. Yet the Pittsburgh Steelers andGreen Bay 
Packers 
<http://www.sbnation.com/nfl/2015/7/28/9059873/packers-alternate-throwback-jerseys-nike-2015-season>
 a duo which, by the way, have a pair of classic looks that rank towards the 
very top of the NFL jersey standings, have insisted on wearing these 
leatherhead-era uniforms every now and then. Now, I’d buy in happily if they 
rolled out wearing old-school soft helmets, but that’s not going to happen. So, 
having said that, I’d limit NFL throwbacks to 1960s AFL classics such as theSan 
Diego Chargers powder-blue bolt look 
<http://www4.pictures.zimbio.com/gi/San+Diego+Chargers+v+Kansas+City+Chiefs+CzSD4pEQjZtl.jpg>
, which should obviously be adopted full-time, and the Bills “OJ” uniforms, 
featuring a kinder, gentler, simpler red buffalo.

As for the Pittsburgh throwback, well, it is even worse than the team which 
originally wore it: the 1934 Steelers went 2-10. That the franchise would 
occasionally wear uniforms donned some 35 years before the team made its first 
legitimate impact on the sport makes no sense ... never mind that it puts at 
least 20 extra pounds on their already robust quarterback Ben Roethlisberger.

3) Workin’ on our knight moves
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5979b3c36f308e64573fea4c308dfe048b882b11%2F0_0_706_423%2F706.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5979b3c36f308e64573fea4c308dfe048b882b11%2F0_0_706_423%2F706.jpg>
 Poor Grant Hill: forced to wear pathetic these pantone colors, the antithesis 
of fashion forward. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
Once upon a time, teal was more or less the exclusive property of the Miami 
Dolphins 
<http://static.nfl.com/static/content/public/pg-photo/2013/05/26/0ap2000000206654/4-larry-csonka-rb_pg_600.jpg>
. Then came the Charlotte Hornets who took on a varyingshade of aqua 
<http://sharks.nhl.com/club/page.htm?id=67738>, and before long, the copycats 
were off and running a race to the very bottom. When it comes to uniforms, one 
of the more unforgivable sins is changing your color scheme. Only a few teams 
have gotten away with it over the years, including two listed below. Needless 
to say, the Detroit Pistons were notnot one of those teams. 

The years between 1996 and 2001 were known to Pistons as the “teal era”, but 
perhaps even worse than the color scheme, was the logo. Somehow a chess piece 
made its way on to their tank tops in the form of a fire-breathing knight, one 
that made Grant Hill look just foolish, not to mention what it did to Joe 
Dumars. The Pistons guard won two titles during the teams glory yearswhile 
wearing their classic red white and blue look 
<http://s258.photobucket.com/user/seeyasauce/media/Basketball%20Autographs/scan0002-7.jpg.html>
, which, truth be told, did include rather circumspect lacrosse style shorts. 
Imagine the indignity he suffered as his distinguished career closed out while 
wearing a look that was eventually abandoned for something more in line with 
franchise traditions.


4) The Ducks don a dud while the Great One wears a whopper
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e0f71d3513e0d1b3337de9bbe0eca584b02907%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e0f71d3513e0d1b3337de9bbe0eca584b02907%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 In January of 1996, The Los Angeles Kings and Mighty Ducks of Anaheim threw 
all hockey traditions aside as they assaulted the senses of the So-Cal crowd by 
wearing these alternate jerseys. Photograph: Glenn Cratty /Allsport; Michael 
Tweed/AP 
Can I be frank? I do not like the Anaheim Ducks, at all. Their existence is 
revolting. That a real, live, NHL team was born out of a film,The Mighty Ducks 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0104868/>, offends each and every one of the 
senses. TheCharlestown Chiefs 
<http://media1.break.com/breakstudios/2012/5/24/newman%20slap%20shot.jpg> 
joining the circuit? Well, that would be another story altogether ... but I 
digress.

Today the Ducks have one of the more nauseating color schemes in the NHL: 
orange, black and gold, to go along with a “D” that is devoid of any reasonable 
design standard 
<http://www.icejerseys.com/images/products/33/Anaheim-Ducks-Reebok-Premier-Replica-Home-NHL-Hockey-Jersey-N32957_XL.jpg>
. That’s a tradition born out of tradition of course, and that tradition is 
nasty uniforms. The Mighty Ducks of Anaheim have always looked ridiculous, once 
featuring a color described as “eggplant” in addition to a host of other vile 
missteps. The granddaddy of them all came when they introduced an alternate 
jersey featuring an enormous cartoon duck.A cartoon duck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F862839dc917158ef67dcb4eff9707b6972fefe3f%2F34_96_1438_862%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F862839dc917158ef67dcb4eff9707b6972fefe3f%2F34_96_1438_862%2F1438.jpg>
 Wayne Gretzky wore this, and that’s just wrong. Photograph: Michael Tweed/AP 
Even more incredible is that the sweater was introduced during a date with 
their So-Cal rivals, who at the very same time were also wreaking havoc with 
design.

The Los Angeles Kings are one of those teams that survived an overhaul of 
their color scheme, abandoning thepurple and gold, LA Lakers look 
<http://cdn.nhl.com/kings/images/upload/2009/04/1967-68-jersey.jpg> (they were 
both owned by Jack Kent Cooke when the Kings came to the NHL in 1967) for a 
somewhat clichéd but more robust Raiders layout in 1988. Then, in 1996 came an 
alternate jersey, just in time for a meeting with the Ducks.

It included several rash changes including thick gradient stripes. The 
humdinger was, of course, the human-ish image on the front corner which looked 
a whole lot likea certain burger chain king 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/b7/ed/b9/b7edb9dea557c8f99ebce770a7ea85e9.jpg>
. The face, and total package, is in fact so impossibly bad, that it’s almost 
good. That Wayne Gretzky was forced to lace up his skates in a shirt as hideous 
as this is as close to hockey heresy as you can get (that or Maurice Ricard in 
the Ducks alternate).

5) Look at me, I can be, (short) center field
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d5c2cf1ec4a4a10b4c49b0ee0a9279fb93c9059%2F0_533_3000_2788%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d5c2cf1ec4a4a10b4c49b0ee0a9279fb93c9059%2F0_533_3000_2788%2F3000.jpg>
 Recognize those shorts? Your gym teacher wore them...and so did Goose Gossage. 
Photograph: Diamond Images/Getty Images 
Uniforms are a big part of franchise identity: the Detroit Tigers’ Old English 
“D” <https://40.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_mc44xqUVdX1r02dhio1_500.jpg>, the 
Yankees’ interlocking NY and pinstripes, theCardinals redbirds on the bat 
<https://localtvwreg.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/st-loui-cardinals.jpg?w=1200>, 
and so on. Those teams have been around a long time, and so have the White Sox, 
except over the years, the Pale Hose never seemed to hold on to any jersey 
style for very long. Black,red 
<https://suttonstylepoints.files.wordpress.com/2012/01/white-sox-red.jpg>, 
powder blue <http://mlb.imageg.net/graphics/product_images/pMLB2-8749317dt.jpg>
, navy blue, yellow accents, different logos,different fonts 
<http://www.ootpdevelopments.com/board/attachments/ootp-mods-logos-graphics-html/253127d1336276445-white-sox-uniforms-thumbnailcafdiz14.jpg>
, different everything: that they’ve been wearing more or less the same uniform 
for roughly 25 years constitutes a minor miracle.

Which look stands out the most over their 112-year history? Well, that would 
have to be the pullover “pajama style” tops, with shorts (that’s right, 
shorts), worn for just a few games in August of 1976.Dan Epstein of Rolling 
Stone Magazine 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/white-sox-shorts-anniversary-mlb-history-20140808>
 described them best: “...collared V-neck pullovers that looked like a cross 
between 1870s baseball tunic and a 1970s leisure suit.” Epstein also described 
them as “dressing like a beer-league softball team,” another spot on 
observation.

Bill Veeck bought the team a year earlier, and was quick to show his sense of 
humor, in addition to that famous, trademark penchant for marketing. The shorts 
also had a practical function: for anybody who ever felt sorry for players 
having to wear pants in the summer, especially in the AstroTurf era, when 
television cameras routinely picked up waves of heat rising off the plastic, 
shorts were a refreshing look, even if the Chisox must have picked up a fair 
share of raspberries.

In August of this year manager Robin Ventura and his Chisox wore the tops as a 
tribute to this one-year-wonder, but in a move just as shameful as the initial 
creation of these once-in-a-generation “designs”, they didn’t wear the shorts, 
and shame on them.

6) No, no, no...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8faddd3629ba0aba05ac614839e8c24b443788f7%2F213_26_1492_896%2F1492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20US%20sports%20uniforms%20that%20will%20make%20your%20eyes%20bleed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fthe-joy-of-six-us-sports-uniforms-that-will-make-your-eyes-bleed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8faddd3629ba0aba05ac614839e8c24b443788f7%2F213_26_1492_896%2F1492.jpg>
 If only Dikembe Mutombo had rejected these Atlanta Hawks jerseys, life in the 
NBA would’ve been more visually pleasing. Photograph: Fred Jewell/ASSOCIATED 
PRESS 
In Roman Mars’ Ted Talk, “Why city flags may be the worst-designed thing 
you’ve never noticed 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/roman_mars_why_city_flags_may_be_the_worst_designed_thing_you_ve_never_noticed?utm_source=newsletter_weekly_2015-05-16&utm_campaign=newsletter_weekly&utm_medium=email&utm_content=top_right_image>
,” he lays out some basic parameters for flags. Five principles are discussed:

 * Keep it simple. 

 * Use meaningful symbolism. 

 * Use two to three colors

 * No lettering or seals. Never use writing of any kind.

 * Be distinctive. 

Let’s apply that logic to the the 1995-1999 Atlanta Hawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-hawks> jerseys and see how we do.

First off, since uniforms generally require lettering or seals in order to be 
uniforms, let’s throw out that parameter. Now, the Hawks jerseys use two to 
three colors, and are, well, reasonably distinctive. However, there is nothing 
simple about an enormous print on a basketball uniform, which generally 
speaking, has less surface area to work with than other sports jerseys because 
there are no sleeves (except on Christmas).

The uniform is also devoid of any sort of meaningful symbolism, unless you 
take inspiration from a killer hawk holding a basketball. Oh, and it’s also 
plain ugly. Surely players, at the very least, have the ear of owners in these 
sort of decisions. If so, Dikembe Mutombo, who was renowned for his rejections, 
whiffed on this one.
 