
American Wrestlers – Kelly

One of the most exciting albums I’ve heard this year comes from this new 
signing to Fat Possum. A Scotsman who relocated to Missouri to be with his now 
wife, he recorded its eight melodic, layered, beautiful songs on a Tascam 
8-track and used pawn-shop instruments. Debut single I Can Do No Wrong appeared 
towards the end of last year, and since then another track – the fuzzy, hazily 
punked-up Kelly – has materialised. There are a hundred echoes and influences 
to spool out here – shades of the War on Drugs, Kurt Vile, Grandaddy, as well 
as Tom Petty, a little Kevin Tihista, but this is something distinct and 
special in its own right. The album is promised in late April.
&lt;a 
href="http://americanwrestlersband.bandcamp.com/album/american-wrestlers"&gt;American 
Wrestlers by American Wrestlers&lt;/a&gt; 
The Weather Station – Way It Is, Way It Could Be

Loyalty, the third album by Toronto’s Tamara Lindeman (who records as the 
Weather Station), is due for release later this year. Recorded at La Frette 
Studios, a 19th-century mansion just outside Paris, Lindeman has described 
these new songs as unpacking the idea of loyalty. “It’s a force that you have 
to reckon with,”she has said <http://www.paradiseofbachelors.com/pob-19>. “It 
can be a weakness as much as a strength; it can keep you from the reality of 
your own life, your own self.” This track, the album’s opener, is a stunningly 
beautiful thing, charting a road trip through Quebec, the passing landscape of 
snow, ice, river, and the near possibility of catastrophe. Lindeman’s voice has 
acquired a new depth, a smoky, distant, intriguing quality, while both 
musically and lyrically this is an intricately constructed piece, exacted with 
a cool gaze and sensuality reminiscent of Joni Mitchell or Leonard Cohen.

Alabama Shakes – Don’t Wanna Fight

I’ve said it before, I’ll say it again: 2015 is shaping up to be a stunning 
year for music. Among the early humdingers of the year is the second album from 
Alabama Shakes. What I love about this record is how bold this band have been – 
instead of simply retreading the territory of their extremely successful debut
Boys & Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/05/alabama-shakes-boys-and-girls-review>
 they’ve produced a collection of songs that is slick, ambitious and polished 
to a high gleam by co-producer Blake Mills (late of this parish). Think Gil 
Scott Heron and sultry 70s funk rather than the grainy southern soul of their 
first outing. This track is a muscular, seductive classic, Brittany Howard’s 
voice – here a melding of James Brown, Prince and Vicki Anderson – getting 
frisky with the track’s near audacious bassline.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx-5OX7CO26c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx-5OX7CO26c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx-5OX7CO26c&media=>
Blind Roosevelt Graves – I’ll Be rested When the Roll Is Called

Towards the end of last year came the release of When I Reach That Heavenly 
Shore – Unearthly Black Gospel 1926-36, a box set of 78rpm gospel recordings 
selected by Grammy-winning producer and engineer Christopher King from his 
private collection (and worth the investment for his liner notes alone). It’s a 
fantastic, deeply moving set of songs, from the forlorn to the spirited, the 
witty, and the spry. This track has sometimes been cited as the first ever 
rock’n’roll record, and it’s worth a listen just to trace the lineage. Graves 
was a blues guitarist and singer from Mississippi who recorded both sacred and 
secular music – and tunes that sat, as this, somewhere in the happily blurred 
space between. The lyrics here might be God-fearing, but the rhythm, the 
hummunuh-hummunuh quality to his voice, as well as his brother Uaroy’s 
tambourine shaking suggest something a little more worldly-wise. As King writes 
in his notes, the effect is “both ineffable and carnal”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDJr45xHwDZ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDJr45xHwDZ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDJr45xHwDZ8&media=>
Wes Tirey – My Grandfather’s 12 Gauge

I came to this track via Volume 13 of Tompkins Square’s Imaginational Anthem 
series – collections of acoustic guitar music, old and new, from Kaki King to 
Steve Gunn, William Tyler to Sylvester Weaver. This latest volume was curated 
by 20-year-old Texan guitarist Hayden Pedigo, who has chosen tracks from 
Oregon, Florida, Portugal, the UK and South America. This song hails from North 
Carolina and was originally released last year as a split record, with Andrew 
Weathers’ 20-minute electronic drone track Stay 100 on the flip side. Tirey’s 
playing has a grain-deep feel to it, something stirring and quite magical; it 
immediately brought to mind an unexpectedly heart-lifting drive I once took one 
bright January morning through the land around Asheville – not far, I now 
discover, from Tirey’s hometown of Black Mountain. Wonderful stuff.
&lt;a 
href="http://westirey.bandcamp.com/album/split-w-andrew-weathers"&gt;Split 
w/Andrew Weathers by Wes Tirey&lt;/a&gt;  