
Admittedly, The Diary Of A Teenage Girl is never going to be an easy sell when 
you’re standing outside the cinema, persuading your other half how to spend the 
next two hours. Simply put, the story goes: 15-year-old Minnie begins 
drug-addled affair with mum’s 35-year-old boyfriend. Couldn’t director and 
screenwriter Marielle Heller have made her directorial debut a nice romcom or, 
at least, something a bit less sexual-abuse-y?

18 certificate ruling keeps The Diary of a Teenage Girl away from teenage girls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/18-certificate-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>
“I was so expecting financiers or producers or actors along the way to 
question the film but as soon as anyone had a conversation with me, I had so 
much passion and conviction that nobody ever did!” says Heller down the line 
from New York. “That’s all I had going for me!”

Whatever the process, the result – and stay with us here – is a surprisingly 
empowering story about teenage sexual awakenings. At its heart are all those 
hormonal emotions teen girls think are so important, chronicled in awkward and 
embarrassing detail. Minnie speaks about sex and desire so frankly into her 
portable recorder – the very first thing she says is “I had sex today. Holy 
shit!” – that you might want to think twice before taking your mum.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The film team review Diary of a Teenage Girl 
In fact, it’s the adults in this film whom you feel sorry for. Minnie (played 
by young Brit Bel Powley) sleeps with the boyfriend Monroe (Alexander 
Skarsgård) not because she thinks she can, Lolita-style, but because she 
considers it her only chance to have sex. She doesn’t regard that decision as 
shameful, however, and by the end of the film – as with most coming-of-age 
stories – she’s learned from her experiences. The grown-ups, meanwhile, are 
left confused and insecure. We might judge Monroe for sleeping with a 
15-year-old, but only because an affair – and the lying and guilt that goes 
with it – is something he doesn’t have the emotional bandwidth for, not because 
it’s an abuse of power. If anything, Minnie ends up holding him to ransom 
emotionally.

Sundance 2015 review: The Diary of a Teenage Girl – today I slept with 
Alexander Skarsgård
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/25/sundance-2015-review-the-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>
Heller was keen to address this tricky subject matter. “Minnie, when she’s in 
the midst of it, isn’t feeling abused and she isn’t feeling like she’s being 
taken advantage of, and so we need to feel that way, too,” she says. “A lot of 
abusive situations are actually much more complicated, like this. There’s a lot 
of psychological manipulation. People don’t always believe they are being 
abused. I was trying to paint a complex picture of this situation.”

For Heller, any shift in expectations of female characters is to be welcomed, 
however icky. “We need to see women’s stories reflected in ways that feel 
genuine and honest,” she says. “I think [mainstream cinema] does such a 
disservice to women by trivialising them and their emotions.” Heller wanted to 
craft a more realistic view of women and sex. “As soon as you come across 
something like [this story] you realise how much it’s missing [from cinema],” 
she continues. “It just makes you realise how starved you are for it. I hope 
what we’re doing is opening up the dialogue, telling women’s stories in more 
honest ways and [seeing] interesting, flawed characters we can relate to.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438251734793%2Fb36dcf4f-e7e8-49c5-86cb-14f1c63221b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Diary%20Of%20A%20Teenage%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98a%20more%20realistic%20view%20of%20women%20and%20sex%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Diary%20Of%20A%20Teenage%20Girl%3A%20%E2%80%98a%20more%20realistic%20view%20of%20women%20and%20sex%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438251734793%2Fb36dcf4f-e7e8-49c5-86cb-14f1c63221b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Striking cords: Skarsgard with Kristen Wiig in Diary Of A Teenage Girl. 
Diary… was originally a graphic novel by Phoebe Gloeckner, which Heller 
received as a Christmas present from her sister eight years ago. She related so 
strongly to the tale that she immediately adapted it into a play and, later, a 
screenplay. It was, says Heller, whenKristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig> signed on as Minnie’s 
irresponsible, jealous, wildly insecure mum Charlotte that she knew a film 
would be made. Heller then personally slipped the script to True Blood star 
Skarsgård via a mutual friend. Powley, meanwhile, is best known over here for 
her role in ITV’s Benidorm. Yet it’s largely thanks to her confidence in the 
role that you don’t feel the need to wash your brain after watching her (many) 
sex scenes.

Heller says it would have been a very different film had Diary… been directed 
by a man. “That’s not to say that I don’t think men can do a good job of 
telling women’s stories or vice versa,” she insists, “but this particular one 
is a really intimate story and, no matter what, that would be different if it 
was not directed by a woman.”

Even so, her close-up on intimacy has its own setbacks. The Diary Of A Teenage 
Girl’s “strong sex” content landed the film an 18 certificate, not the 
hoped-for 15, effectively cutting off part of its target audience. But Heller 
hopes the film’s existence will fulfil a secondary function; making it possible 
to tell more stories about and to young women in the future. “People are 
finally realising that we need to be representing women in front of the camera 
and behind the camera – and this industry just needs to catch up to rest of the 
world,” she says. “I think there’s just a feeling of: it’s our time and we’re 
gonna kill it.”

The Diary Of A Teenage Girl is out in cinemas from Friday 7 August
 