
How much sensuality can you take? Gustav Klimt offers the greatest overload in 
the history of art. The rich mix is his forte: nudes kissing, lounging, 
yearning, coupling against a world of gold leaf and jewel-bright colours, a 
hint of spirituality here balanced by luxurious sexuality there. He is the 
master of consumption, material and sensual, and by now the very epitome of 
decadent fin-de-siecle Vienna. But he only caught on worldwide in the Sixties 
and this belated show is the first comprehensive survey ever staged in Britain. 
From Salome to The Golden Knight, paintings from all stages of Klimt's life 
will be on display: sink into proto-psychedelic opulence.

Gustav Klimt, Tate Liverpool, 30 â€¯May-31 August

Also arriving in Liverpool this spring are some of the biggest names in modern 
painting: Edouard Manet, Claude Monet, Vincent van Gogh, Camille Pissarro and 
Edward Hopper in a show at the WalkerArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery (18 April-10 August) 
devoted toArt in the Age of Steam. There will be trains, certainly - think of 
Hopper's locomotives disappearing across the prairie - but the focus is on the 
art of industrial cities: Paris, New York, London, from the birth of the 
railways until the 1960s.

You might think Alberto Giacometti oversold, but in fact there hasn't been a 
British show in decades. This one, at the beautiful gallery of Compton Verney 
in Warwickshire (until 1 June) looks at the sudden development of his thin men 
in the months following the armistice in 1945. Expect many classics, plus rare 
portraits, among others, of Jean Genet.

Tate Modern's big spring show is a colossal survey of 20th-century portraiture 
-Street and Studio: An Urban History of Photography (22 May-31 August) - highly 
posed indoors, casually snapped on the streets outside. All the master- and 
mistress- photographers of the century will be represented, from 
Cartier-Bresson, Arbus and Beaton to Mapplethorpe, Tillmans and Sherman. It all 
adds up to one in the eye for the NPG.

And for anyone more interested in places than people, Modern Art Oxford is 
celebrating the magical landscapes of the father of American photography,Ansel 
Adams (2 April-1 June). From the soaring monoliths of Yosemite by moonlight to 
the ice lakes of Alaska, 70 images of the sublime will represent a career of 50 
years.
 