
In his Memoir on Pauperism, published following a visit to England, Alexis de 
Tocqueville <http://www.civitas.org.uk/pdf/Tocqueville_rr2.pdf>, wrote: “One 
part of the population is obliged to rely on the gifts of the other in order to 
live.” He had discovered with “indescribable astonishment” that “one sixth of 
the inhabitants of this flourishing kingdom live at the expense of public 
charity”. That was 1833.

Last week the all-party parliamentary group on hunger and food poverty 
published its report,Feeding Britain 
<http://bristol-cathedral.co.uk/images/uploads/Food_Poverty_Feeding_Britain_FINAL_PDF.pdf>
. The Archbishop of Canterbury warned that hunger “stalks large parts” of the 
country.

The report shows how in the years following the second world war the cost of 
housing, utilities and food kept at a reasonable level while wages increased, 
permitting the accumulation of a financial buffer against periodic hard times.

In the past decade, in contrast, the rising cost of living has hit Britain’s 
poorest households savagely. The report says that in the 10 years to 2013, 
prices rose more than 30%; food inflation hit 47%; the price of electricity, 
gas and other fuels increased 153.6% and housing costs went up 30.4%. At the 
same time, average wages have flatlined and the rich have grown richer. For 
those on the lowest incomes or out of work, making ends meet is an increasingly 
impossible task.

Is this down to fecklessness, dependency and a lack of moral fibre – or are 
too many people becoming the casualties of a harsh economic reality in which 
profits come before people?

Iain Duncan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, 
the secretary of state for work and pensions, believes that some of those on 
jobseeker’s allowance display insufficient determination to find gainful 
employment. Where the black economy thrives, as employment has vanished, he may 
be right.

But many people struggle against enormous odds – and the system doesn’t help 
in the way that it could. The young woman with a baby living on benefits of 
around £145 a week while she attends college, for instance, has to be a 
superhuman accountant to make the money stretch.

Irrationally, if she fails to perform a Jobcentre Plus task to prove her 
willingness to seek work, often for a perfectly good reason, she is sanctioned 
and loses yet more of her income.

Last year more than a million claimants were sanctioned. Sanctions may lead to 
a loss of benefits for up to 13 weeks; welcome to the modern day workhouse. The 
system too often sets people up to fail. That must change.

In a scathing article last week 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/shame-on-iain-duncan-smith--he-has-presided-over-a-system-which-has-led-to-widespread-hunger-9916404.html>
 the commentator Andreas Whittam Smith chastised Duncan Smith over the use of 
sanctions, the increase in food banks and the rise in hunger. He was right to 
do so.

This week, in Manchester, the Wood Street Mission 
<http://www.woodstreetmission.org.uk> will distribute food, toys and clothes to 
the least well served by society – many of them the working poor – as it has 
done since 1869. Referrals had to close in November because the demand is so 
high. Benefits sanctions are a major issue.

The Feeding Britain report says: “The glue that once held us together and gave 
life to our communities is gone.” It is wrong. Donations fuel the Wood Street 
Mission; volunteers are vital.

In spite of the current divisive political narrative that pits us against each 
other, there still exists support and understanding for those who have the 
least.

What is shameful is that too many citizens in the sixth largest economy in the 
world are denied a decent job. Instead, they are forced to rely on food banks 
and handouts.

In the 21st century, nearly 200 years after de Tocqueville’s observation, they 
are still, humiliatingly “obliged to live on the gifts of others”.
 