

Ariel Pink <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariel-pink> - Put Your Number in 
My Phone


If you’ve come here in search of indie bangers you will almost certainly leave 
disappointed: I’ve picked a series of fairly slow, fairly mopish tracks that 
would be better digested during a drizzly bus journey home from work rather 
than on a dancefloor. Dancefloor? Does anyone even say that anymore? Everyone’s 
too busy on Twitter to go to indie discos anyway,Ariel Pink included 
<http://www.stereogum.com/1719018/ariel-pink-calls-grimes-stupid-and-retarded/franchises/wheres-the-beef/>
, so let him be your soundtrack to whatever Iggy Azalea think-piece you’re 
currently in the midst of retweeting. The leading single from latest albumPom 
Pom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/10/ariel-pink-pom-pom-exclusive-album-stream>
 fused the sweet with an underlying of sinister: while there are cliched pop 
lyrics – “There’s magic in the air/T he night sky lit your face like a mystery 
left uncovered/T alk to me, it’s now or never, babe” – and a delicate Byrdsy 
melody, its serenity is deliberately disconcerting, especially when you 
consider Pink’s penchant for makingradically offensive and sensationalist 
statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/15/ariel-pink-pom-pom-4ad>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fariel-pink%2Fput-your-number-in-my-phone-music-video%2F2298555%2F&media=>
Childhood - As I Am

The rest of their debut album, Lacuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/07/childhood-lacuna-review>, is a 
love letter to frontman Ben Romans-Hopcraft’s home borough Brixton, and 
specifically the blight of gentrification on the residents who’ve been edged 
out or alienated. The music itself isn’t as direct as its backstory however, 
and a lot of the album is a mix of very structured shoe gaze that’s just 
melodic enough to soundtrack a cafe breakup scene in Made in Chelsea. This is 
its strongest stab at a single, however – and although its chorus is bombastic 
and infectious, the verse’s lyrics are garbled and ambiguous – “Why won’t you 
tell me that I need you?” It’s as if he’s speaking mid-sleep, which is 
befitting of their dreampop tag, when you think about it that way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzyKPeXod1g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzyKPeXod1g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdzyKPeXod1g&media=>
Cate Le Bon - I Can’t Help You 

Released as a single in 2014 but originally featured on Mug Museum, her third 
album from last year, I Can’t Help You starts off with hope and nostalgia – “I 
wanted to bathe you in endless summer” – but slowly disintegrates into scorn, 
hervocals deadpanning metaphors such as “split me like timber” and “beat me 
like egg yolks”. This trackis totally transportive, it takes me to mountains, 
to childhood, its dual guitars tripping over one another like clumsy children 
playing with a skipping rope. Although often compared to Nico, or other music 
from the 60s psych scene, this particular song makes the list because of its 
ties to an era of indie that’s oft overlooked – the serenely bucolic feel of 
Stereolab, Belle and Sebastian or Gorky’s Zygotic Mynci. Mild mannered but with 
just a little undertone of menace.

Dutch Uncles - In N Out 

The narrative behind Dutch Uncles new album, O Shudder, out in February next 
year, centres around a 20something protagonist who agonises over topics such as 
pregnancy, social media, terrorism, divorce, job seeking, health scares, doubt, 
love and sexual dysfunction – the latter of which they decided to tackle on 
first single, In N Out. Represented by two indiscriminate creatures grappling 
suggestively on the cover, the song is a primal groove with equally primal 
lyrics – “I want in and out/ I’ve got it bad since you know me/ I want in that 
trap.” It is perhaps inspired by the “out-in-out-in!” lyrics of Kate Bush’s 
Breathing, featured on her third album, a record they say partly influenced O 
Shudder, alongside the jaunty pop of Prefab Sprout’s 1988 classic From Langley 
Park to Memphis. In a year where brazen sexuality clogged up the music world, 
it was glorious to hear such a curious, fumbling take on the intricacies of 
intimacy.

Slow Club - Everything Is New 

Slow Club’s new album Complete Surrender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/10/slow-club-complete-surrender-review>
 felt like the duo’s bid to break the charts - but it was an old song without 
the Phil Spector ambition that stood out as one of the best indie tracks of the 
year. With Charlie taking the lead, backed by the hurricane force of Rebecca on 
backing vocals, the song’s chorus is a collapsed sigh, with an instrumental 
track both epic and intimate that manages to conjure the nocturnal yearning of 
Jeff Buckley’sLover, You Should’ve Come Over 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XHXVDWsSm38> (and if that’s all sounding a bit 
earnest, I must recommend Rebecca’s comedy venture with Vic and Bob favourites, 
sketch troupe Seldom Differ - take a look at their web series, in particular
Duck Face <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrC-xVnaxB4> and Looking For Keegan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3qD6PoT50fw>).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DloEHM7eT9T4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DloEHM7eT9T4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DloEHM7eT9T4&media=> 