
So far, the NBA playoffs have felt underwhelming. Maybe because seven of the 
eight first-round series weren’t settled untilthe very last day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/15/much-remains-undecided-entering-final-day-of-nba-regular-season>
 of the regular season. Or maybe there have been too many teams taking 2-0 
leads in this first round. However, there are some intriguing plotlines 
developing:


Even the first-round sweeps could be interesting


Oddly enough, two of the most competitive series could end up being four-game 
sweeps. TheGolden State Warriors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golden-state-warriors> and the Cleveland 
Cavaliers were the favorites to win their conferences, and were expected to 
breeze through the opening round.

They still are on pace to do that. The Warriors won their first two games 
against theNew Orleans Pelicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-orleans-hornets> while the Cavaliers put 
the Boston Celtics in a 2-0 hole last night. The games themselves, however, 
ended up being far more dramatic than anyone expected.

Russell Westbrook and the Oklahoma City Thunder, eliminated from playoff 
contention on the very last day of the season, could have provided the Warriors 
witha stronger first-round opponent 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/the-oklahoma-city-thunder-are-out-and-just-getting-started/?utm_vicesportstwitter>
. Then again, we wouldn’t have gotten our first look at Anthony Davis in the 
playoffs.


On Saturday, Davis scored 35 points while collecting seven rebounds and four 
blocks. It was an impressive performance in a game where the Pelicans were able 
to cut the Warriors’ lead tofour in the game’s closing seconds before Golden 
State iced the game. The Warriors won 106-99, but it felt closer than that.


On Monday, he didn’t put up quite as an impressive box score, but his 26 
points and 10 rebounds were a huge reason why the Pelicans and Warriors entered 
the fourth quarter tied 71-71. The Warriors eventually won 97-87, but they had 
to be shaken, especially since they haven’t lost at home at Oracle since 
January.

Meanwhile, the Celtics have played the Cavaliers far closer than they should 
have, given that one team’s best player (LeBron James) is the greatest of his 
era and the other team’s best player (Isaiah Thomas) is a sixth man of the year 
runner-up. In game 1, the Celtics shocked a sleepwalking Cavaliers team by 
taking a first-quarter lead, and remained competitive for the first three 
quarters before Cleveland broke away in the fourth en route to a 113-100 
victory.


Last night, the Cavaliers won the second game of the series 99-91, mostly 
because LeBron James and Kyrie Irving combined to score the Cavaliers’final 28 
points 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/lebron-james--kyrie-irving-take-over-late-to-lead-cavs-past-celtics--take-2-0-lead-030942910.html>
. Once again, though,the Celtics made them sweat 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/nba/playoffs/2015/04/22/cavaliers-lebron-james-kyrie-irving-celtics-brad-stevens-isaiah-thomas-game-2/26164405/>
, they trailed the Cavs only by a single point at half-time and never allowed 
them to rest.
Marc D'Amico (@Marc_DAmico) 
Brad Stevens on D on LBJ/Kyrie: "We made those guys earn everything they got, 
and I think that's a step in the right direction from Game 1."
 <https://twitter.com/Marc_DAmico/status/590693761803517952> April 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Marc_DAmico/status/590693761803517952> 
Neither the Pelicans nor the Celtics have any shot of reaching the second 
round, not with their opponents. Neither team may, in fact, win a single game 
this postseason, even though they have two home games yet to play. However, if 
they continue to play at this level, we could witness the two most entertaining 
first-round sweeps inNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> playoff 
history.


Paul Pierce is making friends in Toronto


There was little excitement surrounding the battle between the Washington 
Wizards <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-wizards> and the Toronto 
Raptors, two teams that have been on a downward spiral since the all-star break.

Thankfully, Wizards forward Paul Pierce has made things entertaining 
<http://www.bulletsforever.com/2015/4/19/8452079/paul-pierce-troll-nba-history-washington-wizards-toronto-raptors>
, at the expense of a Raptors teamthat looks completely out of its depth. 
Before the playoffs began, the veteran forward made some enemies in Canadawith 
a quote 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12690080/washington-wizards-paul-pierce-speaks-truth>
 suggesting that the Raptors didn’t concern him:

We haven’t done particularly well against Toronto, but I don’t feel they have 
the ‘it’ that makes you worried.

While these words led to some anti-Pierce chants at Air Canada Centre, Pierce 
backed up his comments with his performance. After an 82-82 tie in regulation, 
Pierce put Washington ahead for good with a three-pointer in an overtime where 
he outscored the entire Raptors offense 5-4. The Wizards won 93-86 and the 
Raptors did not look like a team that had “it”.


Pierce wasn’t as prolific in game two, scoring just 10 points. He simply 
didn’t need to be, not with John Wall and Bradley Beal combining for 50+ points 
in the117-106 win 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nba-ball-dont-lie/wall-and-beal-star-as-wizards-handle-raptors--head-to-dc-with-2-0-lead-034349402.html?utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter>
.

Eric Koreen (@ekoreen) 
In the NBA playoffs, home teams playing in the United States are 11-0. Home 
teams playing Canada are 0-2.
 <https://twitter.com/ekoreen/status/590745598103523329> April 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ekoreen/status/590745598103523329> 
Pierce did, however, up the ante on his trash talk. With the Raptors two 
losses away from elimination, and the series shifting to Washington for the 
next two games, reportersquoted him 
<http://www.sbnation.com/lookit/2015/4/21/8465821/paul-pierce-customs-wizards-raptors-game-2>
 as saying: “I don’t want to go through customs no more.” That’s one way to 
motivate your team to complete a sweep.


Derrick Rose and Rajon Rondo return to the postseason


The 2015 NBA playoffs have featured two point guards, once the MVPs of their 
respective teams, making their return to postseason play. So far, the 
experience has gone rather differently for the Bulls’ Derrick Rose and the 
Mavericks’ Rajon Rondo.


Before Saturday, the last memory anyone had of Rose in the playoffs was from 
2012, when he tore his ACL in the Bulls’ first game of the postseason. It was 
the first of several major injuries that at the time put his very career at 
risk, the most recent of which was a meniscus tear he returned from just 
earlier this month.


All of this made it even more remarkable that vintage Derrick Rose 
unexpectedly reappeared in Chicago’s first playoff game. Rose scored 23 points 
in 27 minutes of game time while dishing out seven assists in a 103-91 victory 
over the Bucks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjwQdiczuW_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjwQdiczuW_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjwQdiczuW_Q&media=>
 Derrick Rose’s triumphant return to the postseason. 
Nobody should expect that version of Rose to appear again in this series – not 
when he’s only a few weeks removed from his latest injury setback. It’s more 
likely that Rose will look more like the player he was in Monday’s game two.

While Milwaukee’s defense prevented Rose from scoring for the entire first 
half, he was able to adjust. Rose eventually scored 15 points, while also 
contributing nine assists and seven rebounds in what ended up being a 91-82 
Chicago win. It was a more modest contribution from him, but it was a more 
successful performance than that of Rondo.

The Mavericks took the mercurial Rondo, then with the Boston Celtics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boston-celtics>, earlier in the season. 
Although he hasn’t proven to be a good fit in Dallas – he’s openly feuded with 
head coach Rick Carlisle – the hope was that the trade would pay off in the 
playoffs, where Rondo has shone in the past. In his last postseason appearance, 
against the Miami Heat in the 2012 Eastern Conference finals, he had his 10th 
career triple-double.


“Playoff Rondo” made a cameo in the Mavericks’ 118-108 game one loss 
<http://www.cbssports.com/nba/eye-on-basketball/25154614/-pointer-what-you-need-to-know-about-rockets-mavericks-game-1>
 to the Houston Rockets, scoring 15 points and making five assists. Instead of 
building on that, however, Rondo was a complete non-factor last night, scoring 
four points in 10 minutes before Carlisle permanently benched him 30 seconds 
into the third period. He apparently thought that the Mavericks would have a 
better chance of winning by playing Raymond Felton, which speaks volumes about 
what he thinks he can get from Rondo.


Rondo was supposed to be the guy who would make the difference. Instead, the 
mid-season acquisition that swung game two ended up beingJosh Smith 
<http://www.sbnation.com/2015/4/22/8465671/rockets-mavericks-2015-results-game-2-score-nba-playoffs>
, who the Houston Rockets claimed for almost nothing after the Detroit Pistons 
flat-out cut him less than halfway through a hefty four-year contract. Smith 
not only scored 15 points he was responsible for seven assists in the fourth 
quarter, helping the Rockets securea 111-99 win 
<http://probasketballtalk.nbcsports.com/2015/04/22/smoove-operators-josh-smith-dwight-howard-lead-houston-past-dallas-to-2-0-series-lead/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
.

The series now shifts back to Dallas, but with Rondo now a huge question mark, 
and Chandler Parsonspossibly out indefinitely 
<http://mavsblog.dallasnews.com/2015/04/parsons-harris-out-for-game-2-and-concern-mounts-that-parsons-will-be-out-longer.html/>
 with a right knee injury, the Mavericks might have to hope to find 
contributions from an unexpected source as well.

Amar’e Stoudemire, consider yourself on call.


Spurs, Trail Blazers and Nets aim to avoid the 2-0 trend

We love dominant teams, but we like long series even more. With that goal in 
mind, it’s time to root for some game one losers to win their games tonight.


OK, maybe it’stough to hope that the series between the top-ranked Atlanta 
Hawks and eighth-seededBrooklyn Nets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brooklyn-nets> lasts any longer than it 
needs to. While the Hawks’ 99-92 win over the Nets featured the smallest margin 
of victory of Sunday’s four games. Unfortunately, that only proved the fact 
that “closest” isn’t necessarily the same as “most watchable”. The Pelicans and 
Boston have proven worthy to watch because they have young, intriguing players.

The Nets? The Nets have Joe Johnson. Maybe it would be for the best if the 
Hawks just get this one over with.


Luckily, the other two game one losers who have a chance to tie up their 
series not only are more entertaining, they might be the teams with the best 
chances of bouncing back. ThePortland Trail Blazers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/portland-trail-blazers> lost 100-86 to the 
Memphis Grizzlies on Sunday. Now, the Trail Blazers played absolutely dreadful 
basketball during the game, and the Grizzlies are hard to beat at home, but 
there’s no way that Beno Udrih scores 20 points on them two games in a row, 
right?


Meanwhile, the San Antonio Spurs are looking to even their series against the 
Los Angeles Clippers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-clippers> 
after losing to them 107-92 in game one. Sunday’s game was an impressive win by 
a Clippers team that hasn’t received a lot of attention as a potential 
championship contender. Still, the number one rule when it comes to covering 
the NBA postseason is just assume the Spurs will win until they are 
mathematically eliminated. It would be downright shocking to see them down 0-2 
before their first home game of the postseason.


Other things we’ve learned

• There was a modicum of good news for the Toronto Raptors over these last few 
days as guard Lou Williams wonsixth man of the year 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12728167/lou-williams-toronto-raptors-named-nba-sixth-man-year>
. Unfortunately, this result means that we have to acknowledge that Drake 
correctly predicted this in song and thus is the greatest basketball prophet of 
our times.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHAcDBGobqtI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHAcDBGobqtI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHAcDBGobqtI&media=>
 This video is included for reference purposes only, we strongly recommend not 
actually listening to this Drake song, or any other Drake songs, for any reason.
• The awards keep leaking out. Mike Budenholzer was named coach of the year 
<http://www.nba.com/2015/news/04/21/hawks-coach-mike-budenholzer-2014-15-coach-of-the-year-official-release/>
 for his role in transforming the Atlanta Hawks from perennial eighth-seeders 
to the team with the best record in the Eastern Conference. Plus he deserved 
some extra kudos for being the one key figure in the organization who didn’t 
stupidly indulge in racially insensitive nonsense.

• The best part about the Warriors’ postseason so far? The fact that Draymond 
Green’s mother has been live-tweeting them. This is the biggest moment for NBA 
moms since Kevin Durant declared his the real MVP.

Mary Babers-Green (@babers_mary) 
Come in fellows..no heroics ...Who is holding Gordon..hell somebody man is 
open!
 <https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590348475319091200> April 21, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590348475319091200> Mary Babers-Green 
(@babers_mary) 
Come on Dubs...go to HOLE AND DRAW SOME FOULS! I DONT WANT TO HEAR Barkley's 
MOUTH!
 <https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590349675426754560> April 21, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590349675426754560> Mary Babers-Green 
(@babers_mary) 
They BETTER COME ON....they are allowing AD to work out! I'm getting PISSED!
 <https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590350157960630273> April 21, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/babers_mary/status/590350157960630273> 
• Oh, and last night, LeBron James passed Jerry West 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2438646-lebron-james-inner-scorer-makes-cavaliers-nearly-impossible-to-stop>
 in playoff points. He’s currently in seventh place and Karl Malone is probably 
next. It’s a testament to James’s postseason accomplishments that it feels 
surprising he hadn’t surpassed these guys yet.

 