
Perhaps it’s all those Olympic medals, but our small preview of Fairtrade gold 
wedding bands from Argos several weeks ago has led to a rush of queries about 
clean gold. So here are some further nuggets.

Be led by the UK’s pioneer jewellery activists. Greg Valerio 
<https://blog.gregvalerio.com/> and cred- jewellery.com 
<http://credjewellery.com/> have fought to make the supply chain transparent. 
Critically, they have also put ethical gold into jewellery so we can buy it. 
Meanwhile, small-scale independent jewellers such asannaloucah.com 
<http://www.annaloucah.com/> and yumejewellery.com <http://yumejewellery.com/> 
are part of Fairgold’s goldsmiths’ registration scheme.

Fairgold, the Fairtrade standard for gold introduced in 2011, addresses both 
humans and the environment. But it’s only part of the story. We should also be 
looking at the medical and technology industries – big consumers of gold.

One route to encourage uptake could be “mass balance”. Widely used by big 
brands in the chocolate and coffee industries, this system would allow the big 
players to commit to using a certain amount of Fairtrade gold in their supply 
chain and make up the rest with non-Fairtrade.

Many says this dilutes Fairtrade’s value and impact, however. So could local 
gold offer a third way? According to consortium Scotgold, there is gold in them 
there hills, more precisely in the Loch Lomond and Trossachs National Park, 
where they are hoping for 400-600 ounces of gold in the next six months.

Ethical jewellers in Scotland such as Vivien Johnston of fifibijoux.com 
<http://www.fifibijoux.com/> are excited because, although there’s no such 
thing as a zero-impact mine, this represents an unbelievably short supply 
chain, creates local jobs and uses gravity and flotation to recover the gold 
instead of mercury or cyanide.

The big picture: seal and Alex Mustard
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa39d8f9caa85299111c69d555fe1caed0edd55%2F0_30_4629_2778%2F4629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa39d8f9caa85299111c69d555fe1caed0edd55%2F0_30_4629_2778%2F4629.jpg>
 Signed, sealed and delivered: Alex Mustard with a young friend in the North 
Sea. Photograph: Alex Mustard 
It’s not every day you get to take a selfie with a seal. Photographer Alex 
Mustard (above) says, ‘I had turned my camera round so I could see what this 
young [harbour] seal was doing in the reflection.’ This is just one of many 
extraordinary images in Secrets of the Seas (Bloomsbury, £25), by Mustard and 
marine scientist Callum Roberts, who explains: ‘Animals are returning to breed 
on mainland beaches once more.’



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1886302b685e68dd6d5c304071afc3c17995d5e6%2F0_177_3618_4523%2F3618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-gold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1886302b685e68dd6d5c304071afc3c17995d5e6%2F0_177_3618_4523%2F3618.jpg>
 Conscious luxury: Garnet slip dress £220, available at Frances Thackray, 
Leamington Spa, and rosefulbright.com (from 5 September). 
Well dressed: luxury ethical fashion


The phrase ‘conscious luxury’ became synonymous with the push towards a 
determinedly more sensuous version of ethical design. It was used by a clutch 
of forward-looking designers in the early 2000s who wanted to display their 
commitment to clean design and supply chains, but who also wanted to show that 
they had nothing to do with hippie clichés and hairy fabrics. Now Rose 
Fulbright is bringing it back with her own conscious- luxury silk collections, 
which include loungewear, lingerie and beachwear. The slip dress is admittedly 
pricey, but it’s a long-term, show-stopping fashion commitment. Fulbright is 
meticulous about sourcing materials: silk from a European supply route, 
elastics made and dyed in one of the last Midlands factories, and garments 
constructed in her London workshop.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 