
Only a week after Theresa May promised an industrial strategy 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
 that was capable of stepping in to defend a nationally important sector,ARM, 
one of Britain’s most successful technology companies, is being sold to the 
Japanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 tech group SoftBank in a £24.3bn deal. Inward investment, say Prime Minister 
May and her new chancellor, Philip Hammond, both consulted ahead of the 
announcement. Foreign takeover, suggests the Labour donor John Mills elsewhere 
on these pages. The official enthusiasm might owe more to relief that foreign 
companies still want to invest in the UK, despite Brexit – which, by causing 
sterling to depreciate sharply, made it such an attractive deal – than it does 
to a realistic appraisal of what it means to a sector that is the engine of the 
next industrial revolution.

ARM is a company of 4,000 people that has quietly and very profitably 
manufactured nothing at all for the last 26 years. Instead it has designed 
processors for others to build and around 80% of the world’s inhabitants now 
own something with an ARM-designed chip inside it. Most often these are in 
phones, but also in televisions, cars, printers – anything that needs reliable 
low-energy computing power, as almost everything built in the world now does. 
The purchase ofARM <https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> is a bet 
by SoftBank that computing power and connectivity will be embedded into almost 
every physical object in the world, from cars to wristwatches, from air 
conditioning to light switches, until it becomes as invisible, as ubiquitous 
and as indispensable as electricity.

This “internet of things” will not necessarily be recognised; just as a modern 
car is a network of 50 or more computer systems all talking to each other and 
some to the outside world as well, even when it appears to be entirely 
controlled by the driver, the house of the future will increasingly consist of 
low-power networks working invisibly and often to our benefit. Manufacturing 
will be even more radically transformed by networked production and by 
interdisciplinary research that develops new ideas, such as networks that allow 
roads and cars to communicate with one another. SoftBank, a company whose 
acquisitive founder and chief executive, Masayoshi Son, boasts of always 
looking for his next big idea, is betting that all this will happen with the 
help of ARM chips. For its part, ARM is looking to expand its technology and 
graphics capacity. It is a company with a steady income stream and no 
borrowing, whose capital consists almost entirely of its small, very 
highly-qualified workforce.

Critics of the idea of an industrial strategy argue that no government has 
ever been good at picking winners; markets should shape investment decisions, 
not politicians and civil servants. Mrs May’s Birmingham commitment to an 
industrial strategy was notable not only because it broke with recent 
tradition, nor because within hours she had become the prime minister elect, 
but because she placed the lack of an industrial strategy squarely at the heart 
of the wider problems of low pay and low productivity. She held out the promise 
of an economy that worked for everyone. Technological excellence and innovation 
are not enough; but if leading companies, like ARM, that are most likely to 
drive such a transformation are sold abroad, their tax revenues and ultimately 
their management put in the hands of individuals with less stake in the 
country, their strategic value is at least compromised.

Two new studies underline the scale of the challenge to the inequality that 
Mrs May has pledged to address. TheInstitute for Fiscal Studies 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/>’ latest annual survey of pay and poverty shows median 
incomes finally above the level at the time of the 2007-08 crash. But that is 
only because the over-60s are better off and there are more and more of them. 
Incomes of people between 30 and 60 are just back at pre-crash levels, and 
those of under-30s are still a monstrous 7% below. At the same time, research by
the Resolution Foundation <http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/>, which is 
setting up a commission to examine intergenerational unfairness, suggests this
Generation Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/millennials-generation-y-guide-to-much-maligned-demographic>
 may actually earn less over their lifetime than their parents. Too much work 
no longer pays.

It is not companies like ARM that will in themselves drive up the country’s 
pay and productivity. But exploiting what they and companies like them do by 
integrating them in the development of an industrial strategy as the German
Industrie 4.0 
<http://www.gtai.de/GTAI/Navigation/EN/Invest/Service/Publications/business-information,t=industrie-40--smart-manufacturing-for-the-future,did=917080.html>
 does, and actively seeking to make Britain a leader in innovation, must be at 
the heart of any 21st-century industrial policy.
 