
There’s a long history of technology appearing in films: from outlandish 
futuristic advances in science-fiction movies, to social networking and the 
digital-age presented on screen.

From “robot lovers” to “the dangers of selfies”, most themes have been 
covered. Some films nail their depictions of technology, but a lot of others 
get it embarrassingly wrong, or at least don’t get it 100% right.


Then there’s the fact some consist of around 90% product placement (*cough* 
Taken 2 <http://www.brandspotters.com/movie.aspx?id=3087> *cough*). We take a 
look at films dealing with tech, and whether they’re good, bad or downright 
ugly.

The good


Hackers (1995)

The film that brought Jonny Lee Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jonny-lee-miller> and Angelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> together in the pre-Brad Pitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> era, Hackers has become a cult 
classic. Made in the mid-90s before the days of infamous hacking collectives 
such asAnonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> and LulzSec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lulzsec> – the plot concerns a group of 
computer-savvy high school students.

The source material for the film was the Hacker Manifesto 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hacker_Manifesto> (aka The Conscience of a 
Hacker), an influential essay written in 1986 by a prominent hacker. As such, 
Hackers is a mostly accurate depiction.

Miller’s character, supreme hacker Dade, who hacked 1,507 computers as an 
a11-year-old, is very similar to real life computer savants such as the teenage
Raphael Gray 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-34315/Teenage-hacker-jailed.html> and 
Jake Davis 
<http://gadgets.ndtv.com/others/news/alleged-lulzsec-teenage-hacker-released-on-bail-225613>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8wXBe2jTdx4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8wXBe2jTdx4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8wXBe2jTdx4&media=>
Her (2013)

Spike Jonze <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spike-jonze>’s widely acclaimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/her> operating system rom com (never a 
sentence I thought I’d ever write), was a great reflection on how humans now 
interact with technology, and the impact it has on our psychology and social 
conditioning.

Joaquin Phoenix <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joaquin-phoenix>’s Theodore 
begins a relationship withScarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson>’s Samantha (the operating 
system in question). Eventually, the operating systems in Her evolve beyond 
their human counterparts, so perhapsStephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking>’s assertion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/dec/02/stephen-hawking-intel-communication-system-astrophysicist-software-predictive-text-type>
 that robots will take over is not that far-fetched.

And if you think the premise of forming a relationship with an operation 
system or a virtual assistant is outrageous, read thislovely article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/19/fashion/how-apples-siri-became-one-autistic-boys-bff.html?_r=0>
 about a boy with autism befriendingApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>’s Siri. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3n5muEWaE_Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3n5muEWaE_Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3n5muEWaE_Q&media=>
Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004)

Who among us hasn’t wanted to rid our brain of memories of an ex? Nobody. 
Nobody, is the answer.

This is the premise of Michel Gondry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michel-gondry> and Charlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman>’s 2004 sci-fi narrative, in 
whichJim Carrey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jimcarrey> and Kate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet>’s former lovers erase each other 
from their minds, thanks to a futuristic high-tech lab.

In real life there are also examples of biohacking 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biohacking>: including “electronic skin 
<http://mhealthwatch.com/electronic-skin-tech-provides-breakthrough-for-wearable-remote-patient-monitoring-17268/>
”, introducing computing into the body, andmagnetic finger implants 
<http://io9.com/what-you-need-to-know-about-getting-magnetic-finger-imp-813537993>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyE-f1alkq9I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyE-f1alkq9I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyE-f1alkq9I&media=>
WALL-E (2008)

WALL-E was the darling of 2008 animated film, and was yet another much loved 
Pixar hit. Critically acclaimed, it holds a96% 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/wall_e/> “fresh rating” on Rotten Tomatoes. 

The picture envisions a time when robots and artificial intelligence are 
cognisant and have their own emotions and morality.

It could also be seen as an example of how programmed and automated technology 
has replaced the need for manual labour, given that WALL-E is a programmed 
waste disposal unit, charged with cleaning up an abandoned, waste covered 
planet Earth.

Is it, therefore, a two-and-a-half hour comment on the decline of industry and 
the inexorable rise of Silicon Valley? Who knows, but it sure looks pretty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQHH3iSeDBLo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQHH3iSeDBLo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQHH3iSeDBLo&media=>
The Social Network (2010)

Aaron Sorkin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin>, currently 
putting the world to rights with his press ethics heavy HBO seriesThe Newsroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-newsroom>, wrote this 2010 
narrative of howFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> came 
to be.David Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher> of Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher> fame directed.


The film of the social network’s rise to ubiquity, from Mark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>’s initial idea as a 
Harvard undergraduate student, through his legal battles with theWinklevoss 
twins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jan/16/facebook-zuckerberg-winklevoss-legal-battle>
, and the teaming up with Napster’s Sean Parker (played by an ableJustin 
Timberlake <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/justin-timberlake>). 

The Social Network <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network> was 
critically acclaimed, has a96% fresh rating 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the-social-network/> on Rotten Tomatoes, and 
won a slew of awards, includingBest Motion Picture 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hV8o40KbFDs> at the Golden Globes. It also 
probably had the most redundant wardrobe department ever, given Zuckerberg’s
normcore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/may/14/happy-30th-birthday-mark-zuckerberg-time-to-dress-like-a-man>
 look.


Although Zuckerberg said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/08/mark-zuckerberg-social-network-made-stuff-up-hurtful>
 the film was “hurtful”, for a step-by-step guide to setting up a megalomaniac 
social media company and earning tons of money, you could do worse. Great 
trailer too (below).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlB95KLmpLR4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlB95KLmpLR4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlB95KLmpLR4&media=>
You’ve Got Mail (1998)


It’s testament to how perennially loved and resonant You’ve Got Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/23/christmas-festive-films-home-alone-youve-got-mail>
 is that itsoriginal website <http://youvegotmail.warnerbros.com/> is still up 
and running, a lovingly preserved – like the mosquitoes encased in amber in 
Jurassic Park – late-90s effort, written in verdana font and featuring a pop-up 
gallery and not much else.

The Nora Ephron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nora-ephron>-penned film 
sees veteran rom-com leads Meg Ryan andTom Hanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomhanks> fall in love via an over-30s chat 
room, under typically banal usernames (in this case Shopgirl and NY152), and 
then byAOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> inbox. Which I guess in 
this scenario counts as second base.

If You’ve Got Mail was made today, in the age of the naked selfie, it could 
have turned out a completely different prospect altogether. Lucky escape there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwB8xPnhpzAM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwB8xPnhpzAM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwB8xPnhpzAM&media=>
The bad


AI Artificial Intelligence (2001)


Any film which involves Jude Law <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jude-law>
 muttering seductively: “Once you have a robot lover, you’ll never want a real 
man again”, is obviously a winner . Steven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>’s 2001 sci fi epic, based on 
aBrian Aldiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/brian-aldiss-science-fiction-author-review>
short story <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Super-Toys_Last_All_Summer_Long>, 
took a haul at the box office, but I remember being so bored by it that I gave 
up halfway through.

If living with AI is gonna be this dull, then pray the robot revolution never 
comes. If shagging technology is your thing though, there’s plenty of fun to be 
had IRL. How about aFleshlight 
<http://www.fleshlight-international.eu/male-toys/>? Or the Autoblow 2 
<http://www.autoblow2.co.uk/>? 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLuVQWech6N0&media=>
AntiTrust (2001)

When I was younger, I thought I would marry Ryan Phillippe 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000202/>. Part of me still thinks I will, because 
I’m not the type of person who lets reality stand in the way of ambition.

Phillippe moved away from his pretty boy and/or jock roles with AntiTrust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/may/04/culture.reviews>, in which he 
played a nerdy hacker with prescription glasses fighting against an Evil Tech 
Corporation.

AntiTrust was widely panned, because of its ostensibly ludicrous plot (and, to 
be fair, bad acting). But in a post-Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> world, the idea of a tech 
behemoth in bed with the Justice Department and surveilling everything and 
everyone around it, and stealing secrets and information, no longer seems 
ridiculous. In fact, it seems prescient.

The name of the fictional tech company is bang-on in its ambition and 
cringe-worthiness - Never Underestimate Radical Vision, or NURV - and believe 
me, programmers really do get as excited about code as they do in this movie. 
Andapparently <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0218817/reviews>, there are lots of 
inside coding jokes andeaster eggs 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=easter+egg> scattered 
throughout the film for those in the know.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTHN42GYtWrw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTHN42GYtWrw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTHN42GYtWrw&media=>
The ugly


Jobs (2013)

The first biopic of the late iconic Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> co-founder and CEO Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> came out in 2013. Ashton 
Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> takes the role of 
Jobs, and the film charts the beginnings of Apple in the 1970s, to Jobs’ 
leaving and returning to the company, and then the massive successes of the 
i-prefixed product ranges.

The film was, obviously, pretty much full of product placement for Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> – as if they didn’t have enough 
advertising.


It was critically a dud, though, with one review calling it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jobs> “the equivalent of a feature-length 
slow hand clap”.

However, fans of Jobs need not despair – a new biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jobs>, written by The Social Network’s Aaron 
Sorkin, is due for release this coming year with Christian Bale in the lead 
role (afterLeonardo DiCaprio dropped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/03/leonardo-dicaprio-drops-out-steve-jobs-biopic-danny-boyle>
).

That version will be based on moments from Walter Isaacson’s bestselling 
biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/oct/30/steve-jobs-exclusive-biography-review>
of Jobs, including real-time depictions of Apple product launches.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM5f511ISnI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM5f511ISnI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFM5f511ISnI&media=>
Men, Women and Children (2014)

The most recent film we’re looking at, Men, Women and Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/men-women-and-children>, addresses the very 
pertinent issue of internet privacy and the dangers of sharing risque 
photographs on the internet or across networks.

On the back of the hacking scandal which saw stars such as Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> and Rihann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna>a’s phones scraped for pictures, 
it’s an issue which has inspired hundreds of think pieces and become uppermost 
in the public’s consciousness. Just a shame this flick is so awful.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7DMlP4NdnCs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7DMlP4NdnCs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7DMlP4NdnCs&media=>
The Fifth Estate (2013)

Oh, where to start with this one? Despite being based around a real-life story 
perfect for the blockbuster treatment: subterfuge, war crimes, government fury 
and cross-continent chases,The Fifth Estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fifth-estate> flopped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2013/dec/01/fifth-estate-flopped-julian-assange-wikileaks-guardian>
 majorly.

And it wasn’t just Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>’s awful hair do that 
did it – in fact Cumberbatch was the only good thing about the picture.

The hacking scenes could have been an advert for a Fisher Price “My First 
Hacking” set, so amateurish did they seem, and the strange language the tech 
whizzes spoke, an attempt at jargon, came off sounding both laboured and 
ridiculous.

This lax approach to accuracy even extended to a awkward replica of the 
Guardian offices 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2008/12/15/1229358638561/New-Guardian-offices-at-K-001.jpg>
, which is, quite frankly, unforgivable. The Fifth Estate definitely belongs to 
the category of film in which the trailer is superior to the full feature.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZT1wb8_tcYU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZT1wb8_tcYU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZT1wb8_tcYU&media=>
Skyfall (2013)

Last but not least, Daniel Craig <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig>
’s portrayal ofJames Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> and Ben 
Whishaw <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw>’s Q might have 
attracted critical praise, but there is one particular scene in the third Bond 
installment of Craig’s tenure which is ridiculously cringeworthy.


It’s a hacking scene that includes the usual cliched tropes of a man typing 
incredibly quickly, muttering about “polymorphic changes”, and scrolling 
numbers and 3D shapes flashing across a screen.


OK, so maybe it’s not that far fetched that somebody could hack into the MI6’s 
computer network, and by managing to do that, crash a tube in London’s 
underground, right?Adele <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DeumyOzKqgI> should 
totally have sung about that instead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaApTVqeGJMw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaApTVqeGJMw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaApTVqeGJMw&media=>
Finally, while not a scene from a feature film, it would be remiss not to 
mention this beautiful moment in the video for Nelly and Kelly Rowland’s 
inescapable early 2000s hit, “Dilemma”. Nicely played, Nelly, nicely played
Jon D. Barker (@JonDBarker) 
Thanks Facebook, now I'm aware that Kelly Rowland tried to text Nelly in the 
Dilemma video using Microsoft Excelpic.twitter.com/w5Cyysiztm 
<http://t.co/w5Cyysiztm>
 <https://twitter.com/JonDBarker/status/405127253140312065> November 26, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/JonDBarker/status/405127253140312065> 
What are other examples of tech in films? Please leave your comments below


• Crowdfunding: what new film would you want to raise money for? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/23/crowdfunding-documentaries-joan-didion-whos-next>

 