
The EU’s allegedly undemocratic nature has become one of the most potent 
arguments in thecoming referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. It is a rallying cry for 
Eurosceptics of right and left.

Boris Johnson has slammed the EU for being “increasingly anti-democratic 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/12177006/Dont-be-taken-in-by-Project-Fear-staying-in-the-EU-is-the-risky-choice.html>
”. Iain Duncan Smith, another leading Tory Eurosceptic, says he was horrified 
whenSilvio Berlusconi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/silvio-berlusconi>, 
the former Italian premier, was replaced by an administration of unelected 
technocrats in 2011.He told the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/eureferendum/12176291/IDS-No10-can-sack-me-but-the-EU-fight-is-too-important-to-back-down.html>
 he raised the topic in a cabinet meeting: “I said, am I the only one here that 
feels distinctly uneasy about Big Brother turning around to the elected 
government and saying, you must go?”

Why should Iain Duncan Smith have access to EU referendum papers? | Archie 
Bland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/29/eu-referendum-iain-duncan-smith-brexit>
Kate Hoey <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katehoey>, one of the Labour 
party’s most prominent campaigners for Britain’s exit, has railed against the 
EU for being anti-democratic, anti-socialist and unaccountable. Yanis 
Varoufakis, the former Greek finance minister meanwhile has called the EU a “
democracy-free zone 
<http://yanisvaroufakis.eu/2016/01/29/why-a-pan-european-democracy-movement-interviewed-by-nick-buxton/>
” – although, unlike Hoey, he thinks Britain should stay in the union and fight 
for reform. Some criticisms of the EU’s democratic deficit – for example, that 
it is bureaucratic, untransparent and remote – are partly valid. It also lacks 
a demos, an electorate that thinks of itself as European. But it is a gross 
exaggeration to say it engineers coups against elected governments that it 
doesn’t like.

The European commission, a hybrid of a civil service and a government, can be 
bureaucratic. There are too many rules in some policy areas, some of which 
aren’t well thought out.

But that is true of all governments. Civil servants can be infuriating. But 
government would be even more amateurish if politicians took all the decisions 
without any experts at their side.

What’s more, the notion that the European commissioners are faceless 
bureaucrats is misleading. While they are not directly elected by the people, 
they are chosen by each of the 28 governments which in turn are elected. Almost 
all are politicians. Think of former British commissioners such as Peter 
Mandelson or Roy Jenkins.

The most extreme critique of the EU, though, is that it has brought down 
elected governments

The situation isn’t so different from the US cabinet. The secretary of state, 
treasury secretary and so forth are not directly elected by the people. They 
are appointed by the president. But few would call them bureaucrats.

It is also fair to say the EU isn’t transparent enough. The main weakness is 
the council of ministers, which along with the European parliament is 
responsible for passing laws.

The council <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Council_of_the_European_Union>, in 
which Britain has a 13% vote, is made up of ministers from the 28 member 
countries. That is democratic enough. But its proceedings are held behind 
closed doors. When it is acting as a legislative assembly, that isn’t right.

An even bigger weakness, though, is the EU’s remoteness. Though voters elect 
members of the European parliament,turnout in elections is low 
<http://www.ukpolitical.info/european-parliament-election-turnout.htm>, and few 
people know who represents them.

There are two main solutions to this problem. The one advocated by Varoufakis, 
and his new pan-European reform movement, is to create a truly sovereign 
parliament. But most British voters would reject the idea of a more powerful 
European parliament. The better approach is to decentralise power and 
strengthen national parliaments.

David Cameron’s deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/camerons-eu-deal-what-he-wanted-and-what-he-got>
 to renegotiate Britain’s relationship with the EU did make some progress on 
this score. He got the other leaders to pay more attention to the principle of 
“subsidiarity”: decisions being taken as closely as possible to the citizen. He
also secured a “red card” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2016/feb/10/introducing-camerons-eu-red-card-limited-impact>
 that will give national parliaments power to block EU laws if at least 55% of 
them club together – though that is, admittedly, quite a high threshold.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F09%2Fgeorge-papandreou-resigns-greek-prime-minister-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Papandreou%20resigns%20as%20Greek%20prime%20minister%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F09%2Fgeorge-papandreou-resigns-greek-prime-minister-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Papandreou%20resigns%20as%20Greek%20prime%20minister%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fnov%2F09%2Fgeorge-papandreou-resigns-greek-prime-minister-video&media=>
George Papandreou resigns as Greek prime minister - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/nov/09/george-papandreou-resigns-greek-prime-minister-video>
The most extreme critique of the EU, though, is that it has brought down 
elected governments. When Eurosceptics make this allegation, they typically 
point to three examples: Berlusconi’s departure in Italy,George Papandreou’s 
resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/nov/09/george-papandreou-resigns-greek-prime-minister-video>
 as Greek premier at roughly the same time, andAlexis Tsipras’s inability to 
get rid of austerity policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/alexis-tsipras-pledged-to-end-austerity-now-he-is-asked-to-sign-up-for-more>
 after he was elected Greek prime minister last year.

Although the EU certainly played a role in each of these situations, none 
meets the definition of a coup.

Look first at Berlusconi. By autumn 2011, he had already lost the confidence 
of the Italian people becauseof sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/13/berlusconi-sex-scandal-escort-says-film-is-on-the-way>
 andjudicial scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/08/silvio-berlusconi-sentenced-to-3-years-for-bribing-italian-senator>
. Meanwhile, his coalition splintered and as a result was on a wafer-thin 
majority.

Then the government’s borrowing costs started rising after Berlusconi refused 
to implement retrenchment policies advocated by his finance minister. Italy was 
on the verge of bankruptcy when the premier was hounded out of office. Sure, 
Berlusconi also lost the confidence of Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, and 
Nicolas Sarkozy, France’s then president. But the main factor behind his 
resignation was that “his majority was not there any more”,says Roberto 
D’Alimonte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/03/silvio-berlusconi-resignation-euro-crisis>
, professor of political science at Luiss university in Rome.

Europe’s growing tensions show us exactly why we need the EU | Natalie 
Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/27/europes-growing-tensions-show-us-exactly-why-we-need-eu>
The Papandreou story was in some ways similar. He decided to hold a referendum 
on a bailout plan he had negotiated with Greece’s eurozone creditors. But he 
failed to tell in advance either those creditors or senior members of his own 
party, including Evangelos Venizelos, his finance minister and deputy prime 
minister. Merkel and Sarkozy were certainly unhappy. But Papandreou could still 
have hung on to power if his own MPs hadn’t turned against him.

When a prime minister loses the confidence of his parliament that surely 
cannot be called a coup – even if foreign heads of government are pleased with 
the outcome.

The Tsipras situation is different because he managed to keep the confidence 
of the Greek people and parliament. The issue, rather, is that he wasn’t 
allowed to get rid of the conditions set by the country’s creditors, despite 
promising the electorate that he would do so. But when a country borrows a vast 
sum of money, it obviously comes with strings attached. Tsipras made wild 
promises he couldn’t hope to keep. What happened wasn’t a coup: it was the case 
of a demagogue being forced to face reality.

So yes, the EU suffers from a democratic deficit. But that doesn’t make it 
anti-democratic. And the solution is not to quit the EU but rather to fight to 
make it more decentralised, transparent and accountable. Who knows? In a 
generation or two it might even develop  a demos.
 