
In Bastards <https://maryannaking.com/bastards/>, her memoir of a life shaped 
by family dysfunction and the resourceful pursuit of resolution, Mary Anna King 
addresses the internal monologue she has honed over two decades of existential 
angst that revolves around her status as an adoptee. “I had always told myself 
that it was a kind of triple-win scenario – birth families relieve the pressure 
of a child they are unable to care for, adoptive families gain a much wanted 
child, a child gains a stable, loving family,” she writes. “But I was beginning 
to see there was a flipside. There can be no winners without losers. Once 
adoption was on the table everyone had already lost – lineage, origin, the 
visions of the future lives they thought they would live – and all our losses 
were attached to someone else’s gain in an endless, confusing loop.”

It is amazing we all came back. The truth is that not all adopted people 
search…

Sitting in the shade of a Los Angeles café, Mary is asked to ponder her own 
words. “It’s complicated,” she says and in doing so transports the notion of 
understatement to the outer limits of its commonly understood meaning. 
Complicated? Even Mary has to smile.

She is second eldest of seven children born in the 80s to a New Jersey couple, 
a semi-religious and semi-present, bohemian father (she calls him “Michael” in 
the book) and a mother struggling with the legacy of her own fractured 
childhood and strained financial circumstances. Her early years were spent in 
an apartment building full of single mothers. “It operated like a commune of 
amputees, living with the lost limbs of former lovers. Resources were shared, 
the kids were subject to discipline of whichever mother happened to be nearest 
by at the time, rides or walks to school were shared and alternated… that sort 
of thing.”

When her father did show up more pregnancies soon followed. The couple already 
had three kids – Mary, her older brother Jacob and younger sister Becca – and 
four more arrived. All four were adopted by different families on the East 
Coast, while Mary and Becca were adopted by their maternal grandfather and 
stepmother in Oklahoma. Mary was very young at the time of this dispersion, but 
was present at several stilted meetings between her own parents and couples 
hoping to adopt her yet-to-be-born sisters. “I never thought it was strange in 
the slightest. I just thought that’s what happened; what needed to happen. 
Looking around the apartment we lived in, there really wasn’t a place where a 
new baby would go,” she recalls. “When I got a little older, around six or 
seven, I was annoyed about remaining the baby in our family. I was ready to 
boss someone around. But, really, that was it for me.” It would be another 25 
years before Mary was able to realise her dream of bossing her siblings around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdf8315ac1d048a8627338de2e8a15096ab9c075%2F0_3_2592_1556%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdf8315ac1d048a8627338de2e8a15096ab9c075%2F0_3_2592_1556%2F2592.jpg>
 Family bonds: Mary Anna King with her sister Becca and the grandparents who 
adopted them. Photograph: Courtesy of Mary Anna King 
The Adoptee Memoir is a relatively recent literary creation. Misconceptions 
surrounding adoption – the most prevalent (and patently unfair) being that the 
birth parents were social misfits with responsibility issues and low moral 
standing and the children put up for adoption were somehow destined to go off 
the rails – silenced the people most directly involved in the process. The few 
voices that were heard were heartfelt, but not exactly revelatory, as typified 
by this anonymous contribution to a 1920 edition of theAmerican Magazine: “The 
records do show that there are thousands of foster parents and thousands of 
adopted children who, like myself, declare that they have never known ‘any 
difference’, and who have lived happily ever after.”


I am not angry at my parents. My mother had a lot of struggles in her life

Whatever insight the wider public gained came from drier, more official 
sources, such as social workers and the lawyers who were peripherally involved 
in the adoption system. Secrecy surrounded the process, with birth parents and 
adoptees denied access to the documentation recording their separation. How 
could anyone reconstruct a life without the necessary biographical material? 
The vast majority couldn’t, a personal loss for them, of course, but a wider 
loss, too, in an era when western societies were breaking through all kinds of 
taboos, from class to race, from sexuality to the traditional notions of what a 
family should look like.

Many within the thriving adoption “activist” community credit the American 
authorBetty Jean Lifton 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/27/us/27lifton.html?_r=0> with finally smashing 
through the barriers. Her 1975 bookTwice Born: Memoirs of an Adopted Daughter 
tackled her own experiences of being adopted with a freedom and candour that 
had never been publicly expressed before. Where Lifton went, many have 
followed, charting the adoption experience and its modern social complexities. 
Mary Anna King does not claim to break new ground inBastards, but her story 
says a lot about the strength of the biological and spiritual ties that bind a 
family together. Somewhere within herself she always suspected she and her 
siblings would get back together. It helped that her parents imposed a 
condition on the adoptions that the children be allowed to seek out their birth 
family once they had reached adulthood.

The four other daughters who were separated – Lisa, Rebekah, Meghan and Lesley 
– started looking for their birth family as soon as they could. “It is amazing 
that they all came back, because the truth is that not all adopted people 
search,” Mary says. “What I have come to learn is that women tend to search 
more than men, and that this urge to search is spurred on when they start 
having their own children. Doctors start asking questions about family health 
history and people start to wonder. The discovery that the adoptee has siblings 
is another motive, especially among those like my sister Rebekah, who were 
brought up as only children.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48dc0c06117ba75192e699acb5a48f89e678976e%2F68_71_1102_661%2F1102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48dc0c06117ba75192e699acb5a48f89e678976e%2F68_71_1102_661%2F1102.jpg>
 All dressed up: Mary in New Jersey in 1985. Photograph: Courtesy of Mary Anna 
King 
Gradually the family reassembled, giving Mary the chance to glimpse at least 
part of an alternative life to the one she had lived. Her brother Jacob had 
been in the army. Becca, with whom she had spent most of her childhood in 
Oklahoma, had drifted off into a netherworld of punk rock bands and dabbled in 
drugs. Lisa, the mother of two children and founder of a successful insurance 
billing company, ended up in Florida. Rebekah, the middle children of seven, 
lives in Philadelphia with her husband and, like Mary, is a writer.

As for the final two pieces in the King family jigsaw – Meghan hadn’t ventured 
far from her place of birth in New Jersey, while Lesley, the youngest, had 
taken the opposite path. “She’s what you would call a free spirit, doing all 
sorts of things – nannying, farming, playing guitar – in all sorts of different 
places, from Hawaii to New Jersey,” says Mary, who lives in Los Angeles with 
her boyfriend and in typical Tinseltown fashion is trying to forge a path into 
the film and TV world after almost a decade in the restaurant business. This 
process of discovery has been one of her greatest joys: “We learned that 
Rebekah had never smoked a cigarette or tasted alcohol!”

The reality of pulling the family back together was remarkably smooth, 
although not everyone involved was overjoyed. “I wasn’t anticipating the 
antagonism of some of my sisters’ adoptive parents. They had the attitude, ‘OK, 
now that you have met your birth family and had your questions answered you 
never have to meet them again’,” Mary says. That was never going to be the 
case. “I think we got very lucky in that we are all like stair steps in terms 
of age. The seven of us were all born within nine years so that makes us close. 
We are all part of the same generation, which gives us the same pop culture 
touchstones from our childhood. We also reunited in our late teens and early 
20s, when we were all still malleable and in that college mindset mode of 
‘Hello new friend, let’s be close, let’s stick together.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F443c835630b34b89686c8da594d27da0056dc161%2F0_0_3520_4410%2F3520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20family%20I%20found%3A%20a%20memoir%20of%20adoption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fthe-family-i-found-adoption-memoir-mary-anna-king%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F443c835630b34b89686c8da594d27da0056dc161%2F0_0_3520_4410%2F3520.jpg>
 ‘We all fell straight into a typical sibling dynamic’: (from left) Lesley, 
Rebekah, Mary, Meghan, Lisa and Becca with Jacob on the top bunk. Photograph: 
Polly Barrowman 
The shared – albeit separate – experience of being an adopted child helped the 
bonding process. So does a sense of humour which runs through all seven 
children like a gene and, of course, the shared parents. IfBastards has a 
heroine, it is the siblings’ mother (she is given the pseudonym Peggy in the 
book). “She is doing great these days and would have given anything she had to 
any one of us, even if it was detrimental to her,” says Mary. There is no 
competition with her siblings for their mother’s affection. “She gives freely 
and openly to all of us. The only rule we have is that none of us can ask for 
something she cannot give.”

Scattered across the US, and rooted in their own worlds by economic 
circumstances and family responsibilities, the siblings kept in touch via 
social media. There were occasions when two or three or four of them found 
themselves in the same city. Mary is the eldest sister and is happy to claim 
the title of “showrunner”, but all seven were never physically in the same room 
until last year, when they came together in Los Angeles to mark the American 
publication ofBastards.

“What was so funny about seeing everyone in the same room was that even though 
most of us hadn’t grown up together, we all fell straight into a very typical 
sibling dynamic. Little Rebekah, who falls in the middle of the family 
chronology and who had grown up as an only child, really is the middle child, 
saying: ‘Hey guys, I’m here. Don’t forget about me.’”

The book began its life as a family project before the creative process 
gradually fell exclusively to Mary. She was happy to accept the responsibility, 
although she was at pains to protect the privacy and to some extent feelings of 
her family. The names of her birth parents have been changed, although she is 
as unsparing in admiration of her mother as she is cool about the father who to 
all intents and purposes abandoned his family. “I am not angry at all at my 
parents. I understand them both, my mother in particular, who had a lot of 
struggles in her life and who has come through them remarkably well.”

The siblings all turned down Mary’s offer to protect their anonymity, 
insisting they wanted to help her promote a story they are all proud to be a 
part of. These days, the family is more geographically dispersed than ever, 
from New Jersey in the east to Hawaii in the west. Relationships are good, 
probably better than in most families it is safe to assume, in part because the 
years of separation serves as reminder of what it is they now have.

So, is it happy ever after? Mary shakes her head. “I realised that wasn’t what 
this story was supposed to be. Sure, we all meet and get back together again, 
but it is still complicated. Like all families, it’s a negotiation. But…,” she 
says, searching for the words that will serve as the King family motto, until 
finally she speaks: “It feels like everything is going to be OK.”

Bastards is published in paperback by W.W. Norton & Co. Ltd on 5 August. To 
order a copy for £9.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bastards-424603.html>
 