
It is tempting to wipe from the record 13 years of western military engagement 
in a faraway land that has cost much treasure for very questionable results in 
terms of nation-building.Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is a very imperfect example of 
international intervention.

The initial and legitimate reason for landing British, US and other troops 
back in 2001 was to eliminate the al-Qaida bases (and the Taliban government 
that refused to cooperate) in the country that had made 9/11 possible. But over 
the years, the operation morphed into a complex, overblown, high-maintenance 
coalition of 140,000 soldiers and more than 40 nations. One of the issues 
experts debate is whether it was right to deploy large numbers of western 
soldiers in the Pashtun territories after 2004-05, which may have fuelled a 
Taliban insurgency that found its roots in the age-old instincts of Afghan 
resistance to outside invaders. The ancient name of these lands, “kingdom of 
insolence”, could have served as a reminder of how difficult the enterprise was 
bound to be. Now we are faced with another question: as 31 December, the day 
set for the completion of the withdrawal of Nato combat troops from 
Afghanistan, approaches, what will be left behind?

If there is one lesson to be drawn from the rise of Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) in Iraq this year, it is that 
hasty or mismanaged withdrawals will return to haunt you. Public opinion in 
America and Europe is tired of military expeditions that seem to create more 
problems than they solve, that strain western budgets and leave an obligation 
to prop up weak states in remote parts of the world. Against this backdrop, 
Afghanistan could all too easily be allowed to become a forgotten cause. That 
must not happen.

Fortunately the US administration and some of its allies appear acutely aware 
of the risks of closing down western involvement in Afghanistan too quickly. In 
2011, Barack Obama wasclearly over-confident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/21/obama-us-troops-withdrawal-iraq> 
when he declared: “we are leaving behind a sovereign, stable and self-reliant 
Iraq”. Three years on, Iraq is the theatre of a new international military 
engagement, as an extremist Islamist force carves out swaths of land and 
attracts jihadists from around the world.

A similar scenario in Afghanistan is the stuff of nightmares. The London donor 
conference this week 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/london-conference-on-afghanistan-2014>
 will have this in mind. Garnering enough support for the newly electedAfghan 
president, Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, will 
be crucial. After the Soviets retreated from Afghanistan in 1989, it took just 
three years for their man,Mohammad Najibullah 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohammad_Najibullah>, to be toppled, and for the 
country to plunge into the abyss of all-out civil war after Moscow abruptly cut 
off all financial support.

Clearly fearing the worst, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has partly reversed the 
narrative of complete western combat-troop withdrawal from Afghanistan by the 
end of the year. He has widened the spectrum of operations that the remaining 
10,000 or so US soldiers will be able to undertake. But it is less clear how 
the international community will sustain Afghanistan’s national security 
forces, which now number 350,000 soldiers and police.

An Iraqi scenario is by no means a certainty in Afghanistan. First, the 
political leadership elected this year has a much more inclusive approach than 
the sectarian, Shia-centred government of Nouri al-Maliki in Iraq. President 
Ghani is in a better position to prevent a break-up of Afghanistan along ethnic 
or religious lines. Second, he has signed an agreement allowing US troops to 
remain to try to reinforce stability, something that turned out to be 
impossible in Iraq.

Yet the situation remains perilous. As the weekend attacks in Kabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/29/two-die-Taliban-attack-guesthouse-kabul-afghanistan>
 illustrated, in anticipation of the withdrawal, the Taliban is on the 
offensive. But for all its flaws, it is international commitment to Afghanistan 
that has allowed the country to undergo the first democratic handing-over of 
power in its history. The scale of the achievement in the development of 
education and civil society should be recognised too. The fate of millions of 
Afghan women will be at stake if the Taliban is allowed to return to power. 
Western policy should not be short-sighted. There should be no dashing for the 
door. Financial aid, commitment to bolster security, and strong regional 
diplomacy will all be required. To allow Afghanistan to become a forgotten 
cause would be, as it was in the 1990s, at our peril.
 