
1 - Paul Thomas Anderson
 Dillon Freasier and Daniel Day-Lewis in There Will Be Blood. Photo: Allstar 
Though he's released only five films over a 16-year career, Paul Thomas 
Anderson has risen from promising young whiz-kid to Hollywood royalty with 
barely a bump along the way. As the scope of his work has tightened – from the 
sprawling ensembles ofBoogie Nights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34488/boogie-nights> and Magnolia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/81820/magnolia> through the intimate 
duologue ofPunch-Drunk Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94083/punch-drunk-love> to the 
all-consuming solipsism ofThere Will Be Blood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122167/there.will.be.blood> – so his 
dedication to his craft has intensified, with his disdain for PR and celebrity 
marking him out as the most devout film-maker of his generation (as well as the 
owner of one of Wikipedia's most glitz-free "personal life" sections). His 
upcoming filmThe Master <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146341/master>, a 
controversial look at the birth of a cult not entirely dissimilar to the Church 
of Scientology, should make that title inarguable.

2 - Lynne Ramsay
 Tilda Swinton in We Need To Talk About Kevin. Photo: Nicole Rivelli/Imagenet 
When it was first announced that Lynne Ramsay was to direct an adaptation of 
We Need To Talk About Kevin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141828/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, 
there were enormous sighs of relief all round: "It's in safe hands." And so it 
proved to be. Kevin was a heavenly marriage of the source material and its 
Glaswegian director's long-running preoccupations (kids, death, guilt), allied 
to her startling, hypnotic visual sense. Making her feature debut with 1999's 
hauntingly beautifulRatcatcher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/79578/ratcatcher> (although a clutch of 
award-winning shorts preceded it), she's remained a critical darling ever 
since. Her forthcoming take onMoby Dick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/oct/25/lynne-ramsay-moby-dick-space> 
should be as powerful as it is personal. As Tilda Swinton says, "She's the real 
McCoy."

3 - Nicolas Winding Refn
 Ryan Gosling in Drive. Photo: Rex 
Like a patient zen archer, this is one film-maker who doesn't let fly until 
he's absolutely ready. Refn has made only nine films in 15 years but the end 
product is as singular as it is stunning. Refn's films look like nobody else's 
(although, admittedly, 2009'sValhalla Rising 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/132559/valhalla-rising> was pretty 
Malick-like). From his brutalPusher trilogy to the weird and wonderful 
anti-biopicBronson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126512/bronson>, these 
films are more like art installations, shimmering with stylish violence and 
near-hallucinatory moments. Last year'sDrive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142036/drive> suddenly made a whole lot 
of people remember his name, however. His next two projects also star Ryan 
Gosling: Thai boxing filmOnly God Forgives, and a remake of carousel-based 70s 
sci-fiLogan's Run. They will soon be sick of the sight of each other.

4 - Joss Whedon
 Chris Hemsworth and Chris Evans in Avengers Assemble. Photo: Zade Rosenthal 
Joss Whedon's background as a writer/director of cult TV – Buffy The Vampire 
Slayer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/may/03/buffy-the-vampire-slayer-boxset>
,Angel <http://www.syfy.co.uk/shows/angel>, the short-lived Firefly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/27/firefly-your-next-box-set> 
– ensured a loyal following, which paid off with the rabidly successful (but 
only to a vocal minority) continuation of the latter series inSerenity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/107697/serenity>, which marked his movie 
directorial debut in 2005. Since then, Whedon has pulled off the rare trick of 
turning niche popularity into blockbuster success, with films that appease 
fanboys and fangirls alike while maintaining serious box-office traction. This 
year, Whedon pulled off a rare one-two by delivering not just one of the year's 
biggest hits – Marvel'sAvengers Assemble 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144027/avengers> – but one of its 
best-reviewed counter-programming titles, the postmodern horror-comedyThe Cabin 
In The Woods <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146753/cabin-in-the-woods>, 
which he wrote and produced. ThoughAvengers 2 is pencilled in for 2015, his 
micro-budget B&WMuch Ado About Nothing <http://muchadothemovie.com/> 
adaptation, shot in his own house in eight days and starring Whedon favourites, 
is due first.

5 - Lars Von Trier
 Kirsten Dunst in Melancholia. Photo: Allstar 
With his juvenile love of provocation, it's easy to forget that Lars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> is, first and foremost, a 
film-maker, and a truly remarkable one at that. In the past 10 years alone, 
he's turned out a nightmare-fuelling psychological horror, a shattering 
arthouse disaster movie, a fluffy Danish office comedy, an experimental 
documentary on the nature of creative endeavour and the first two parts of a 
trilogy about American culpability. His next project,The Nymphomaniac, is set 
to become the first film to feature both Shia LaBeouf and graphic scenes of 
unsimulated sex. No other director can straddle the arthouse/Hollywood divide 
with such audacity.

6 - Jason Reitman
 Charlize Theron in Young Adult. Photo: Phillip V Caruso 
Hollywood nepotism is a well-documented force for evil, inflicting upon the 
world horrors as wide-ranging as "rapper" Chet Haze (son of Tom Hanks) and 
Jaden Smith (son of Will). So Jason Reitman, offspring of Ghostbusters director 
Ivan, had his work cut out when he followed his father into the family business 
with the independent Big Tobacco satireThank You For Smoking 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112704/thank.you.for.smoking>. In the 
seven years since, though, he's had four Oscar nominations and matured 
exponentially with each film, his efforts culminating in this year's 
devastating tragicomedyYoung Adult 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142806/young-adult>, which furnished 
Charlize Theron with a career-best role as embittered ghostwriter Mavis Gary. 
Next, he directs Kate Winslet inLabor Day. Ivan "father of Jason" Reitman, by 
contrast, was last seen churning out the Ashton Kutcher vehicle No Strings 
Attached.

7 - Steve McQueen
 Michael Fassbender in Shame. Photo: Rex 
Making the jump from gallery artist to film-maker, Steve McQueen was expected 
to deliver provocative ideas with imagery to match. What few could foresee was 
his talent with actors, drawing a career-defining performance from Michael 
Fassbender in the IRA dramaHunger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/124579/hunger> and following it with 
another in the sex-addiction storyShame 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142860/shame>. In the flesh, McQueen is 
straightforward, imposing and hates pretension. His films, despite their 
beautifully composed tableaux, follow a similar template. His first two dealt 
with willpower and the lack of it, in that order, and his next –12 Years A Slave
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jun/01/benedict-cumberbatch-twelve-years-a-slave>
 – reunites him with Fassbender alongside Benedict Cumberbatch, Paul Giamatti 
and one Brad Pitt. The pressure will be on but don't expect McQueen to duck the 
issues on another hot-button movie.

8 - Leos Carax
 Edith Scob in Holy Motors. Photo: Allstar 
Alex Oscar Dupont – his working name is an anagram of the first two – came to 
prominence in the early-80s with the intimate, ultra-stylised romanceBoy Meets 
Girl <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83323/boy-meets-girl>, and from 
there went the way of all auteurs, wasting time and money on long-gestating 
passion projects. His two films in the 1990s,Les Amants Du Pont-Neuf 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83322/amants-du-pont-neuf> and Pola X 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83326/pola.x>, were respectively a hit 
and a miss, but his new filmHoly Motors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147447/holy-motors> restored his crown as 
French cinema's arthouse counterpart to the mainstream Luc Besson. Often 
cryptic, sometimes boring, Carax nevertheless has a showman's touch, and though 
his films deal with navel-gazing issues – blocked artists are a recurring motif 
– it's hard to think of another film-maker whose work features hair-eating 
leprechauns, accordion blues solos and Kylie Minogue.

9 - Edgar Wright
 Scott Pilgrim Vs The World 
The two men and a dog who watched late-night 90s ITV comedy Asylum will have 
been alerted to his talents early on, but for the rest of us it was Spaced that 
first introduced us to Edgar Wright, as well as collaborators Simon Pegg and 
Nick Frost. The trio successfully brought their reference-heavy humour to the 
big screen with zom-comShaun Of The Dead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/99960/shaun.of.the.dead> and cop pastiche 
Hot Fuzz <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/116979/hot.fuzz>. Wright then 
went solo withScott Pilgrim vs The World 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135879/scott-pilgrim-vs-the-world> and 
2013 promises to be busy as he reunites with Pegg and Frost forThe World's End 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/may/10/simon-pegg-edgar-wright-worlds-end>
, then helms top-secret sci-fi filmCollider, before starting work on his most 
high-profile feature to date, Marvel'sAnt-Man.

10 - Andrea Arnold
 Natalie Press in Red Road 
A former children's TV presenter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ia8urPXX5kA>, 
Kent-born Andrea Arnold has not only overcome the commercial obstacles of a) 
being female and b) making non-genre British movies, she has done so on her own 
terms, creating an instantly recognisable brand of social realism. With her 
Oscar-winning shortWasp <http://www.shortoftheweek.com/2011/09/08/wasp/> she 
drew a beautiful performance from Danny Dyer, withRed Road 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112338/red.road> and Fish Tank 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/129893/fish-tank> she took Loach's 
improvisatory technique to new levels, and even with her one misfire, last 
year'sWuthering Heights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142867/wuthering-heights>, she proved 
herself radical in the face of traditional material. We eagerly await her next 
move.

And the rest...

11 - Steven Soderbergh

To move from male stripping in Magic Mike 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148230/magic-mike> to pharmaceutical 
addiction inThe Bitter Pill is classic Soderbergh. Still the least bracketable 
director in Hollywood.

12 - Quentin Tarantino

Inglourious Basterds 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/128690/inglourious-basterds> dragged the 
arch stylist back towards critical and commercial esteem. Next up: slave 
drama/westernDjango Unchained 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144406/django-unchained>.

13 - Lena Dunham

Director, writer, producer and just about everything else in between, Dunham 
made waves with debut featureTiny Furniture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140851/tiny-furniture>, and HBO's 
much-talked-about seriesGirls <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/girls>.

14 - Christopher Nolan

The go-to director for the thinking person's blockbuster divided opinion with 
theThe Dark Knight Rises 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141046/dark-knight-rises>, but still made 
a killing at the box office.

15 - Jacques Audiard

Now 60, Audiard has made two of the best thrillers of the past decade in The 
Beat That My Heart Skipped 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/107557/beat.that.my.heart.skipped> and A 
Prophet. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/129970/prophet> Next is Rust & 
Bone <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146658/rust-and-bone>, the story of 
a tortured love affair.

16 - JJ Abrams

Surely the busiest man in Hollywood, and indeed TV, production whiz Abrams 
returns to directing with a sequel to his massively fun reboot ofStar Trek 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/127546/star.trek>.

17 - David Fincher

The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142850/girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo> was 
not the undisputed smash that everyone expected, but Fincher remains Fincher, 
his ability to sustain tone and tension is still the model to which other 
directors aspire.

18 - Werner Herzog

The German master has been sticking to documentaries lately (cave drawings, 
death row, you name it). Next up, however,Queen Of The Desert 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/aug/15/robert-pattinson-lawrence-arabia> – 
a biopic of 19th-century adventurer Gertrude Bell.

19 - Ben Wheatley

The queasy mix of the banal and the brutal in Kill List 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140926/kill-list> marked Wheatley as a 
potentially genre-redefining figure in horror.Sightseers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/aug/28/sightseers-trailer-ben-wheatley?newsfeed=true>
 will provide his take on black comedy.

20 - Mia Hansen-Løve

Her third feature, Goodbye First Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146125/goodbye-first-love>, confirmed the 
31-year-old as having a rare ability to define mood and tone. She makes her 
leads look gorgeous, too.

21 - Gaspar Noé

Noé's segment in directorial megamix 7 Days In Havana 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148083/7-days-in-havana> proved a timely 
reminder of the talents of the man behind the dizzying, provocativeEnter The 
Void <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/130014/enter-the-void>.

22 - Terrence Malick

With last year's The Tree Of Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life>, Malick reignited 
the old visionary/pretentious debate. With at least two projects set for next 
year he's certainly upping his productivity.

23 - Gareth Edwards

With Monsters <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/136970/monsters>, Edwards 
reinvented a genre – and did it on a minuscule budget. Naturally, the next 
project he signed up for was the mega-money reboot ofGodzilla.
 