
How to write about these scoundrel times? WH Auden dubbed the 1940s "the age 
of anxiety" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/10/auden-age-anxiety-leonard-bernstein>
, but it feels a better term for now than then. For days I've been unable to 
rid myself of the mask of George Osborne's face, lips zipped tight with malice,
as he abolishes any viable future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/29/osborne-class-war-autumn-statement>
.

Yes, we've been here before, and having come of age during the Thatcher 
administration, I can testify to that personally – but I was young then and, 
for all the ferocity of the Iron Lady's assault, we were still in a 
pre-globalised, largely social democratic society; and if things got really bad 
across the water Europe seemed to offer an alternative. Now after the 
dismantling of those remnants of a juster age, and the worldwide race to the 
bottom has reached its nadir, we stand naked before the blast. Oh, and did I 
forget to mention climate change, the loss of much of the biosphere and 
intractable poverty?

Hard times can generate great writing, but they can also freeze the 
imagination in a rictus of fear. The 80s saw a left-leaning theatre on the back 
foot, but also were accompanied by the optimism of new voices breaking through. 
Yes, there was theFalklands war <http://www.falklandswar.org.uk/> and the 
running sore ofNorthern Ireland <http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/recent/troubles/>
, not to mention the second cold war – but these events feel dwarfed by the 
body-count in our current conflicts, the ferocity of our current brands of 
terror. What is most absent, however, is a coherent opposition. For all that we 
look back on 80s Labour as a shambles it was alsoa rallying point 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loony_left>, as was CND, the trade union 
movement, the various gay, black and Asian, and feminist fulcrums. I hugely 
admire the Occupy movement orUK Uncut <http://www.ukuncut.org.uk/> or the 
passion of the"indignados" <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_Spanish_protests> 
in Spain – but as yet they seem to form an end in itself, their chief role 
being protest, rather than presenting alternative visions for how things might 
be.

Meanwhile, the political foreground offers dismal dramatic pickings. The thin 
quality of the debate, the strangely anachronistic characters who dominate the 
view, all somehow belie theatrical representation. Thatcher had an epic quality 
for all her shrill, mean-mindedness; Cameron is all sleek vagueness by 
comparison. The Lib Dems, too, don't make the grade for tragedy, skulking in 
partnership, hiding behind the judgments of credit agencies. No wonder in 
southern Europe technocrats on secondment from Goldman Sachs are greeted with 
such relief –why bother with the financial class pretending to be politicians 
when you can have the real thing 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/election/article-1280554/The-coalition-millionaires-23-29-member-new-cabinet-worth-1m--Lib-Dems-just-wealthy-Tories.html>
?

This time last year, working on my play Little Platoons 
<http://www.bushtheatre.co.uk/production/little_platoons/> I could entertain 
the ideas of the Gove-leaning right in education as material for a bitter 
comedy aboutfree schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools>. 
Now, as money is snatched from the poor to fund another wave of thesePotemkin 
villages <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-15901118>, the joke's gone pretty 
sour. At least the so-calledPIIGS  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PIGS_(economics)> in the eurozone don't have to 
contend with "reform" and austerity at once – in the UK, however, everywhere 
the eye travels there's the prospect of botched, ideological wrecking afoot.

Given this it's hardly surprising the imagination turns in on itself. Writing 
yesterday,Michael Billington noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/04/best-theatre-2011-michael-billington>
 the theatrical turn to the past; partly this might be explained by the long 
retreat from politics in the arts as a whole. Theatres still seek to be deemed 
contrarian, yet the assault on "left-liberal" values about race or 
environmentalism or gender in fact fit the elite mood perfectly. Hammering the 
complacency of this thing called the left has been a national sport for 30 
years now; no one seems to have noticed it no longer exists in any meaningful 
sense.

Writers have many priorities before them; primarily audience pleasure. But if 
theatre is to survive these dark times as anything other than one more 
diversion for the metropolitan rich, it will need to lay out the ground for a 
better world than the one offered to us by those same rich folk and their 
hirelings. Having captured our institutions, they seem intent on condemning us 
to a future of an unimaginable bleakness.
 