
Built on the site of a sanctuary tower where notorious fugitives once evaded 
medieval justice, the supreme court - and its comings and goings - still exert 
a unique fascination among the law-enforcement community.

With its approved complement of 12 distinguished judges already reduced by the 
recent retirement ofLord Saville 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2010/jun/11/lord-saville-profile-bloody-sunday>, 
of Bloody Sunday fame, and about to decline further with the imminent departure 
of Lord Collins, there are now two eagerly, competed for vacancies at the 
highest court in the land.

Along with its elevated legal status, the position of justice of the supreme 
court enjoys a salary of Â£206,857. Interviews were held in January and 
speculation has swirled around the names of potential candidates.

Those seen, according to my colleague Joshua Rozenberg 
<http://www.standpointmag.co.uk/node/3795>, were Sir Maurice Kay, Sir John 
Laws, Sir Timothy Lloyd, Jonathan Sumption OBE QC and Sir Nicholas Wilson.

Recent reports suggest one of the victors is Sumption, joint head of Brick 
Court chambers <http://www.brickcourt.co.uk/silks/jonathan-sumption-qc.asp> who 
appears regularly as an advocate in the higher, appellate courts.

Both his chambers and the supreme court decline to comment about the identity 
of the new appointments. A formal announcement, released simultaneously by the 
court and Downing Street, is expected in the next few weeks.

Sumption, described on his chambers biography as "an accomplished historian" 
is also a Judicial Appointments Commissioner. Theselection panel 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov.uk/about/appointments-of-justices.html> convened 
by the lord chancellor to chose the new justices will, among others, have a 
member drawn from that commission.

But Sumption has meanwhile landed a prestigious brief, representing the 
Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich for a courtroom showdown with his rival Boris 
Berezovsky. His fee for the much anticipated contest overoil industry ownership 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/apr/18/berezovsky.ambramovich> is said to be 
stupendous. (Brick Court chambers insist the sum is a confidential matter and 
brush aside mention of "millions".)

The trial is not expected to start until October. Some sources have suggested 
Sumption would like any appointment to the supreme court deferred so that he 
can meet his commitment to the owner of Chelsea football club.

Can anyone detect a sympathetic hint about Sumption's chances from the interim 
statement put out by the Supreme Court? On the question of timing, it observed:

"There has been a variety of practice in the amount of time that elapses 
between appointment and taking up of the position of either a justice of the 
supreme court, or previously, a law lord at the House of Lords. Managing the 
transition is a complex matter and the date that a justice starts work at the 
supreme court will not always coincide with the retirement date of their 
predecessor."

Sounds like that should leave ample time for a 12 week trial.
 