
Bring Up the Bodies by Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> (Fourth Estate) (Critic's 
choice)

In the much-anticipated sequel to  Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/06/booker-prize-hilary-mantel-wolf-hall>
, Mantel's hero Thomas Cromwell watches Henry VIII fall in love with Jane 
Seymour.May.

Home by Toni Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison> (Chatto)

Nobel laureate Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison> tells 
the story of the difficult homecoming of a black Korean war veteran to a racist 
America. Frank Money must return to his hated Georgia hometown and to his 
bitter memories of childhood and the war, if he is to save his abused sister.
May.

Gold by Chris Cleave <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chris-cleave> 
(Sceptre)

It has been four years since Chris Cleave combined literary and bestselling to 
stunning effect inThe Other Hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/09/fiction5>. Cleave is back with 
the timely novel Gold, about two female cyclists competing for a place in the 
Olympics, one of whom has an ill daughter.June.

The Second World War by Antony Beevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor> (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)

A single-volume history of the second world warfrom one of Britain's best 
historians,Antony Beevor <https://www.theguardian.com/books/antony-beevor>, 
author of the prize-winning Stalingrad. Described as a "landmark" history of 
the war, focusing on its human aspects and using the most up-to-date research.
June.

The Age of Miracles by Karen Thompson Walker (Simon & Schuster)

One of the biggest debuts of the season, this apocalyptic literary novel was 
acquired for £500,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/18/publishers-auction-the-age-of-miracles>
. Told from the perspective of a young girl in California, this tells of an 
Earth whose rotation is slowing, gradually causing environmental catastrophe.
June.

Canada by Richard Ford (Bloomsbury)

Pulitzer-winning Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-ford> returns 
with Dell Parsons, whose family settles in Montana and whose parents decide 
to rob a bank. Dell is saved from the authorities, and crosses the border 
into the Canadian unknown.June.
 