
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/17/turnbull-faces-party-room-pressure-over-superannuation-and-liberal-campaign>
, unveiled details of his cabinet reshuffle at a media conference in Canberra 
on Monday but, amid the renamed ministries andtalk of “stability and continuity”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/turnbull-new-cabinet-reshuffle-pyne-defence-role-frydenberg-environment-and-energy->
, some clear winners and losers have emerged.

Winners

The Nationals have emerged victorious from the frontbench reshuffle, with 
Matthew Canavan promoted into cabinet and Michael McCormack becoming the new 
small business minister.

Matthew Canavan was elected to the Senate from Queensland in 2013 and became 
the minister for northern Australia in February 2016. In the reshuffle, Canavan 
gained the resources portfolio and entered cabinet.

Since September, he has served as Nationals party whip in the Senate.

Turnbull cabinet: Pyne given defence industry role as Frydenberg gains 
environment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/turnbull-new-cabinet-reshuffle-pyne-defence-role-frydenberg-environment-and-energy->
Before entering parliament Canavan was a senior research economist and then 
director at the Productivity Commission and a senior executive of KPMG. He 
worked as then-senator Barnaby Joyce’s chief of staff from 2010 until 2013.

Zed Seselja was elected to the Senate from the Australian Capital Territory in 
2013 and became the assistant minister for social services and multicultural 
affairs in the reshuffle.

Seselja was a member of the ACT legislative assembly and served as the 
opposition leader from 2007 to 2013. Before that, he was a lawyer at the 
department of transport and regional services.

Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/31/josh-frydenberg-targets-labor-candidates-opposed-to-new-coalmines>
 loses the resources part of his portfolio to Canavan but gains the environment 
portfolio from Greg Hunt and combines it with his existing energy portfolio.

Frydenberg was first elected to the House of Representatives in 2010 and has 
served as parliamentary secretary to the prime minister and assistant treasurer.

Before entering parliament, Frydenberg was a director of Deutsche Bank and an 
adviser to John Howard and, before that, foreign affairs minister Alexander 
Downer.

Coalition urged not to water down superannuation changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/superannuation-changes-coalition-urged-not-to-water-them-down>
The Nationals MP Michael McCormack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/28/michael-mccormack-indicates-he-might-run-for-nationals-leadership>
 was promoted to the outer ministry as the small business minister, a portfolio 
lost by Kelly O’Dwyer. He was previously assistant defence minister.

McCormack was a journalist for Wagga Wagga’s the Daily Advertiser in the 
1980s, before becoming editor and entering parliament in 2010.

Losers

Kelly O’Dwyer remains in cabinet but lost the small business portfolio. Her 
role as assistant treasurer has been renamed, making her the minister for 
revenue and financial services, which Turnbull said better described her 
responsibilities.

O’Dwyer retained her seat of Higgins in a tough struggle with the Greens but 
had a scratchy campaign, including claimsshe failed to sell the government’s 
superannuation changes adequately 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-kelly-odwyer-explains-superannuation/news-story/9e3343fb5582d60bf8564096a75d905f>
 and perceptions she was out of touchwhen faced with a question on ABC’s Q&A 
about low-income earners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/10/qa-recap-questions-about-trickle-down-economics-open-the-floodgates>
 and the tax-free threshold.

Richard Colbeck, a Liberal senator for Tasmania struggling to hold his seat 
after being bumped down the ticket, lost his positions. He had been the 
minister for tourism and international education and the assistant minister for 
trade and investment.

Julie Bishop backs calls for Liberals to put more women into parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/17/julie-bishop-supports-rank-and-file-plebiscites-to-get-more-liberal-women-elected>
Although Colbeck may yet hold his seat, courtesy of a below-the-line Senate 
vote campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/09/labor-lisa-singh-liberal-richard-colbeck-senate-voting-below-the-line-election-tasmania>
, Turnbull said he decided not to reappoint him because his position was not 
assured. Although the prime minister left the door open to return him to the 
ministry in future, for the moment Colbeck has lost out.

Sideways

Christopher Pyne moves out of industry, innovation and science and into the 
new portfolio of minister for defence industry. The new role will oversee the 
defence industry plan, includingthe $50bn submarine contract in the naval ship 
building program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
.

Greg Hunt moves out of the environment portfolio, which he has been involved 
in since 2004 as a parliamentary secretary, then shadow minister from 2007, 
then minister since 2013.

Hunt gains Pyne’s old portfolio of industry, innovation and science, and stays 
in cabinet.
 