
You'd think pianist Till Fellner was a late developer. Having entered the 
Vienna Conservatory in 1981 at the respectably early age of nine, he didn't get 
round to graduating until a few months ago. But what disrupted Fellner's 
studies was an international career. "I had so many concerts to play in the 
last 10 years that I didn't find time. Last year, though, I just thought, 'OK, 
let's do it.' They gave me a piece of paper and I handed it over to my parents."

Over the past decade, Fellner has established a growing reputation as a 
pianist of rare technical accomplishment and musicality. After one London 
performance, one critic wrote: "There is more class in the 30-year-old 
Austrian's little finger than in all Evgeny Kissin's flash octave-stretchers."

Alfred Brendel <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alfred-brendel>, with whom 
Fellner has worked closely since 1990, is no less enthusiastic. Fellner, he 
says, "has all the ingredients: intelligence, sensitivity, curiosity, an ample 
aesthetic appetite, a high capacity for concentration, tenacity, an enviable 
command of the instrument, strong rhythmic control".

Fellner was born in Vienna in 1972, the child of music lovers. "My father is a 
pianist and plays the violin a little," he says. "But they took me to concerts 
very early and they had a piano at home." At four, he began to pick out tunes 
with his right hand. "Then I started to accompany with my left hand, so my 
parents thought I might have some talent and I started lessons." He was 
admitted to the Conservatory just five years later.

Fellner's relationship with Brendel began in Austria when he was 18. "We had a 
friend in common, a teacher at the Conservatory who had been one of Alfred 
Brendel's best friends from his early days in Vienna. He arranged for me to 
play for him. Immediately, Brendel started making suggestions. At the end, he 
said, 'You may call me.' And of course I did." Since then he has come to play 
for Brendel two or three times each year.

Naturally enough, perhaps, critics still have a tendency to refer to Fellner 
as Brendel's pupil, and Fellner clearly regards him as the most important 
influence on his work, but this shouldn't carry any suggestion that he has been 
moulded to the older pianist's style. In his sonority and his musical 
responses, Fellner is very much his own man. (In one of the conversations in 
his latest book, Brendel actually mentions "young Till Fellner" as someone who 
plays Bach, for instance, "differently and perhaps better than me".) What he 
has inherited, perhaps, are certain musical values.

Brendel once remarked of himself that, if he belonged to a tradition, "it was 
one that makes the masterpiece tell the performer what he should do and not the 
performer tell the piece what it should be like". This is echoed, consciously 
or unconsciously, in Fellner's own description of how he works on his material. 
"With some pieces, you have a certain idea from the beginning: that's the 
character, and it works somehow. With other pieces it's a long route, and you 
try different things. But you have to find out: I try different tempos, for 
instance, and some clearly don't work. You always hope the piece is telling you 
how to play it."

Neither does such experimentation end once Fellner has started to play a piece 
in public. On tour, he records each of his recitals on his digital tape 
machine. "For me, that's the best way to work. I play a concert and then 
normally the next day is spent travelling so I can listen to a whole concert 
and make notes. And at the next concert I do the same again. Let's say I play 
eight or 10 concerts on such a tour - by the end, the details may have changed 
quite a lot."

Nevertheless, if Fellner remains open to revise his view of how a piece should 
be played, there is, as Brendel says, a noticeable tenacity in his musical 
character, something that seems to have been an early characteristic. Take 
Fellner recounting his playing a Mozart concerto with Claudio Abbado and the 
Vienna Philharmonic in the mid-1990s. Abbado, he said, "listened to the whole 
piece before the rehearsals. Normally, when you meet the conductor, you just 
the play the beginning of the movements for the tempo. He listened to the whole 
thing, even the cadenzas, and he would just ask, 'Here, are you sure you would 
like to play it like that?' And I would say, 'Yes.'" The point of the story was 
to illustrate Abbado's generosity with his time, but how many musicians in 
their early 20s would have the nerve to stick to their interpretative guns like 
this when working with someone like Abbado?

There is something uncompromising, too, in his attitude to his own career. He 
is certainly not inclined to rush into the recording studio. At the start of 
February, ECM are to release his first new solo recording for more than five 
years, which is of the first book of Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier, the "old 
testament" of the piano repertoire. Does he regret that he hasn't recorded 
more? "Actually, no. It takes a long time to know a piece well. For me it's 
very important to play something many times in concert."

The solo recital remains the focus of his work, and he is aware of the demands 
it places both on himself and his audience. "Normally when you start a concert, 
the audience does not concentrate so hard, which is understandable because 
maybe they've just arrived and have been in a hurry. But I try to concentrate, 
and very often I think I hope that my own concentration gets to the audience."

His platform manner, too, is focused rather than flamboyant, offering none of 
the romantic gestures that can themselves bewitch an audience. Fellner, 
however, is unsure that such restraint is in itself a virtue. "There's a 
difference between being showy and being able to underline what you are 
playing. I am a pianist, and so a performer. Maybe I have to work on this, 
because it's important that you can indicate certain things."

It is entirely characteristic that Fellner, unlike so many pianists, should 
think of developing his physical manner in order to help communicate the 
details of the music rather than allowing it to distract the audience from the 
music to the performer. He gives a second example of the way the performer's 
manner can properly be used to influence an audience: "If you finish a piece 
very softly, then you don't want the audience to applaud too soon." He really 
is an un-virtuoso virtuoso.

Â· Till Fellner's recording of book one of Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier is out 
on ECM. Fellner plays the Wigmore Hall, London W1 (020-7935 2141), on May 19.
 