
These days fresh air is hard to find, even in parks. Nearly a quarter of 
London’s green open spaces now breach laws on nitrogen dioxide pollution (the 
stuff that spews out of diesel exhausts).

When the air in the park is worse than at the side of the road, that’s a new 
low. If you’re a Londoner, type in your postcode atAsi Open Data 
<http://www.asiopendata.com/londonair> to find the nearest park where NO2 
emissions don’t exceed 40 micrograms per cubic metre.

This is not just diverting; it’s potentially life-saving. We know pollution 
can be a factor in developing lung cancer. Now new research shows that it may 
also shorten the life span of lung cancer survivors. Researchers are joining 
the dots between pollution and dementia, too. We tend to give pollution polite 
names like “haze” and “smog”. We should call it “the killer”.

Sadiq Khan, the new London mayor, who suffers from adult-onset asthma, is 
talking tough on this. He has promised new measures for the capital including a 
green bus route forPutney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/08/london-takes-just-one-week-to-breach-annual-air-pollution-limits>
 that will reduce NO2 emissions by 84%.

But what about the rest of us? According to the WHO, 41 out of 52 UK towns and 
cities breach safe levels of so-called PM10 particles, which can increase the 
risk of heart attacks and strokes if inhaled. Eleven breach standards on even 
scarier finer particles. Among the cleaner ones were Southend and Saltash.

But does every region of the UK need a high-ranking official to take an 
interest before we can breathe in clean air? Some fear that Brexit will send 
pollution soaring, because so many environment laws come from Brussels.

The legal NGO ClientEarth <http://www.clientearth.org/> will take the 
government to court in order to get clean air laws enforced. We should get 
squarely behind their#no2dirtyair 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/no2dirtyair?src=hash> campaign.

The big picture: the art of the banquet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed9e66a21b405ec5589805d2dadcfd0d824afd8%2F0_14_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed9e66a21b405ec5589805d2dadcfd0d824afd8%2F0_14_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Art you can eat: Lucy + Jorge Orta’s Peterborough event last year. Photograph: 
Chris Porsz 
Artists Lucy + Jorge Orta express their anxieties about food security on a 
giant scale. Fans of ‘social sculpture’, they put together ‘70 x 7 The Meal Act 
XXXIX’, part banquet, part artwork, last year in Peterborough. Now comes a new 
exhibition, also in Peterborough from 10 September, and a book, Food and the 
Public Sphere, which delves further into food recycling, gastronomy and mobile 
soup kitchens (studio-orta.com).

Well dressed: fashion’s new model
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ec5d84dbce663a1564dee10b78365f80b347d4%2F0_136_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-air-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47ec5d84dbce663a1564dee10b78365f80b347d4%2F0_136_3280_4098%2F3280.jpg>
 Marketing multifunctionality: what you may be wearing next winter. Clothes: 
Hannah Louise Baxter, Barbara Kolaskinski, Elizabeth Martin Tweed, Styling: 
I’ll Be Your Mirror, Hair: Emma Diamond, Make Up: Collette Murphy Photograph: 
Kris Kesiak 
Here’s a question for fast fashion lovers. How long do you intend to keep 
shopping this way, and when will you know when you have a full wardrobe? Nu 
Blvck co-founders Becca Flory and Andrew Vincent envisage a time when you’ll 
pre-order your clothes months ahead (that’s why the accompanying picture is so 
wintry) from a limited collection and have more of a connection with the maker 
and designer. The idea is that you pre-order the designs that you believe in, 
and if there is enough interest, then the item goes into production. The first 
collection, made by artisans in the UK and bringing together emerging 
designers, is about multifunctionality. So, the backpack has an elastic 
cross-over section at the front that holds a clutch bag, too. Another design 
breakthrough is the cardigan that doubles as a scarf.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 