
David Gower



Aug 82; Mar 84-Jun 86; 1989

P32 W5 L18 D9

Why he took over Deputised for the injured Bob Willis and was handed the job 
on a full-time basis

First result as captain Lost by 10 wickets against Pakistan

How it ended After a second 5-0 whitewash to the West Indies in 1986, Gower 
was dismissed following a home defeat against India. Had a year back in charge 
for the 1989 Ashes series

Mike Gatting

Jun 86-Jun 88

P23 W2 L5 D16

Why he took over Led Middlesex to the County Championship title in 1985, was 
an established England international and succeeded Gower, who had lost six 
successive Tests

First result as captain Lost by 279 runs to India at Headingley

How it ended Sacked following an alleged encounter with a barmaid during the 
Trent Bridge Test

Graham Gooch

Jun 89-Jul 93

P34 W10 L12 D12

Why he took over With the right characteristics and experience, seen as the 
natural successor to the sacked Gatting

First result as captain Draw with West Indies at Trent Bridge

How it ended Resigned with England trailing 3-0 in 1993 home Ashes series

Michael Atherton



Aug 93-Mar 98

P54 W13 L21 D20

Why he took over Was seen as captaincy material from a young age and had 
established himself in the Test team

First result as captain Lost to Australia by eight wickets at Edgbaston

How it ended Resigned after five years, frustrated with a back injury and 
failure to lead his team to an Ashes victory

Alec Stewart

Jun 98-July 99

P15 W4 L8 D3

Why he took over “The Gaffer” took over as a 35-year-old from Atherton. Had 
been an ever present in the team since 1990

First result as captain Drew with South Africa at Edgbaston

How it ended Sacked following an Ashes failure and a poor World Cup in 1999

Nasser Hussain



Jul 99-Jul 03

P45 W17 L15 D13

Why he took over A regular in the England team and captain of Essex, he was 
the obvious choice to lead his country

First result as captain Beat New Zealand by seven wickets at Edgbaston

How it ended Said he had “grown tired” of leading England and resigned. Had 
already relinquished the one-day role

Michael Vaughan

Jul 03-Aug 08

P51 W26 L11 D14

Why he took over Was already captain of England’s one-day team. Obvious choice 
to succeed Hussain as Test leader

First result as captain Lost to South Africa by an innings and 92 runs at 
Lord’s

How it ended Led England to first Ashes victory in 18 years, but form and 
injuries forced his hand

Andrew Flintoff

Feb 06-Mar 07

P11 W2 L7 D2

Why he took over Installed with Vaughan’s chronic knee injuries becoming a 
major issue

First result as captain Drew with India in Nagpur

How it ended Vaughan recuperated in time for the World Cup in West Indies in 
2007

Kevin Pietersen

Aug 08-Jan 09

P3 W1 L1 D1

Why he took over Brilliant, maverick batsman, a surprise choice to succeed 
Vaughan

First result as captain Beat South Africa by six wickets at The Oval

How it ended Fell out with then coach Peter Moores – who was sacked – and 
resigned

Andrew Strauss

Jul 06; Jan 09-Aug 12

P50 W24 L11 D15

Why he took over Initially deputised for Flintoff in 2006, but took over 
full-time following Pietersen’s resignation

First result as captain Drew with Pakistan at Lord’s

How it ended Retired with form fading and on back of series defeat at home to 
South Africa

Alastair Cook

Nov 12 –

P23-W9-L7-D7

Why he took over Given the job on full-time basis following Strauss’ 
retirement.

First result as captain Lost to India by nine wickets in Ahmedabad
 