
For a non-baker (like me), a zero-energy cake used to mean one someone else 
made. But I’ve forced myself to recognise the footprint of shop-bought 
croissants and cream puffs. It’s no joke. First, there are obviously the giant 
ovens devouring energy, then there’s industrial baking’s reliance on palm oil, 
too. Anew report 
<https://nicholas.duke.edu/about/news/conservation-key-curbing-emissions-oil-palm-agriculture-africa>
 highlights the devastating impact of the continued march of palm oil 
monocultures. A further ingredient is bread miles: in the UK an estimated 130m 
extra road miles are caused by getting “fresh” bread into stores.

Home baking gives you some control. But a homemade cake still has an impact. 
Research from the Centre for Alternative Technology 
<http://blog.cat.org.uk/2012/05/23/wheres-the-impact-of-a-home-baked-cake/> 
highlighted the impact of the eggs (1.8kg of CO2 per box) and the 350 ears of 
wheat it takes for one loaf.

What we’ve tended to overlook traditionally is the energy footprint of the 
actual baking. Until now. This is the sort of energy use (and expense) that the 
next generation of smart meters (there’s a nationwide roll-out by 2020) makes 
explicit in cold, hard currency. Ultimately these meters banish the whole farce 
of estimated bills and ridiculous uncertainty in energy consumption that we’ve 
lived with for too long.

The prodigiously talented 2015 Bake Off finalist Ian Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/07/icing-on-the-cake-nation-awaits-great-british-bake-off-final>
 is an early adopter. He’s been using one of the new meters to get a grip on 
his oven and has developed a series oflow-energy baking recipes 
<https://www.smartenergygb.org/cook-smart> in response. They also tell you the 
actual energy cost of baking (as a smart meter does). So feta and spinach buns 
will cost you 5p in energy use but Welsh cakes just 2p. I like the recipes 
because I feel he’s demystifying energy and baking in one fell swoop. And 
there’s not a soggy bottom in sight.

The big picture: electric aircraft
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85382655832f1c0269f7144f2495c0061935a847%2F158_0_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20home%20baking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20home%20baking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85382655832f1c0269f7144f2495c0061935a847%2F158_0_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
 On the quiet: an artist’s image of Nasa’s X-57 hybrid electric research plane, 
with its 14 electric motors turning the propellers. Photograph: AFP/Nasa/Getty 
Images 
More electrification! In fact there’s an outside chance the electric car 
revolution be might leapfrogged altogether by the evolution of the green plane. 
As Nasa unveils the X-57, dubbed the Tesla of the skies, green travel gets 
interesting. So far the all-electric model is only a four-seater, so it’s 
presumably a while before budget airlines swap aviation fuel (the annual fuel 
bill for global aviation is £88bn) for electric.

Well dressed: Holi studio coats and jackets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf351e5206b9f6cb928db7aaa418991db0e9efa4%2F0_226_3493_2096%2F3493.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20home%20baking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20home%20baking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-home-baking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf351e5206b9f6cb928db7aaa418991db0e9efa4%2F0_226_3493_2096%2F3493.jpg>
 Quality time: Holi Studios, in Cambodia 
Volunteering in Cambodia in 2011, Leah Rodrigues watched as NGOs ran sewing 
programmes for local women – who were then drafted into sweatshops. So she 
started Holi Studios, in Siem Reap, employing mostly former sweatshop workers 
who now have, mostly for the first time, decent working conditions, career 
opportunities, holiday entitlement and a wage they can live on. Holi produces 
an eponymous collection of coats and jackets and beachwear for Lilliput & Felix 
and sells at Avenue 32. The studio never outsources. “This is the only way we 
can ensure the safety of our team and rigorous quality control,” says 
Rodrigues, who trains staff for six to 12 months (almost unheard of in the 
garment industry). “The industry will only change,” she says, “when we place 
value on the skills needed to make clothing.” TheHoli coats and jackets 
collection <http://www.holi.org.uk/> starts from £275 (sale price).

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 