
The next chapter of The Rest Is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/the-rest-is-noise-festival> is called 
Politics and Spirituality in the Late 20th Century. In it, we hope to capture 
the shifting, changing political and social landscape of the 1970s and 80s, 
exploring how this permeated the mood and music of the era.

Behind the iron curtain, as Shostakovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dmitri-shostakovich> was writing the last of 
his symphonies, life was beginning to change. The Soviet Union under Brezhnev 
was slowly beginning to modernise, and symbols of the west such as jeans and 
rock music became popular. Even in the face of enduring official atheism, many 
Soviet bloc composers were writing music with a spiritual and sometimes overtly 
religious impetus – a very subversive act, considering the atmosphere.

The Estonian composer Arvo Pärt <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arvo-part> 
had been fascinated with the serialism of western modernist composers such as
Karlheinz Stockhausen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/karlheinz-stockhausen> 
andPierre Boulez <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pierre-boulez> in the 
1960s. However, in the mid-70s he dramatically changed his musical style. Pärt 
stripped it back to a startlingly simple, static, bell-like style he called 
"tintinnabuli". This sound first appeared in Pärt's 1977Cantus in Memoriam 
Benjamin Britten 
<http://www.last.fm/music/Arvo+P%C3%A4rt/_/Cantus+in+Memory+of+Benjamin+Britten>
. The piece consists of little more than A minor scales played at different 
speeds, but the effect is of a resonant, shimmering halo of sound.

Pärt's major contemporaries in the Soviet bloc also had a religious momentum 
behind their music. Alfred Schnittke combined it with a daring, eclectic mix of 
styles from Tchaikovsky to baroque to jazz. Polish composer Henryk Mikołaj 
Górecki's Symphony No 3 (the Symphony of Sorrowful Songs) was written in memory 
of victims of the Holocaust and combined melodies from church and folk 
traditions. It was recorded on CD in the west in the late 80s. More than a 
million people were drawn to its beauty, which contrasted painfully with its 
text, some of which used words written by an 18-year-old girl on the wall of a 
Gestapo cell. Sofia Gubaidulina's violin concerto Offertorium embodies the 
Christian concept of offering or sacrifice, and quotes Bach's Musical Offering 
at the opening of the piece.

 An altogether less consoling view was provided by Galina Ustvolskaya. A 
student and occasional lover of Shostakovich, Gubaidulina lived an isolated 
existence in a tiny flat in Leningrad. Her works, which often have religious 
titles, are stark and often deal in extremes: extremely loud, extremely soft, 
extremely high and extremely low. The music has a bleak, poetic beauty, and 
seems to tell the truth about her life in the Soviet Union with devastating, 
laser-like accuracy.

In the west, composers reflected the radical politics of the 1970s and 80s, an 
era of recessions followed by extreme consumerism. In Holland,Louis Andriessen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/15/louis-andriessen-classical-music-guide>
 was spurning concert halls and taking music into the streets. In his 1976De 
Staat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLcHpLH_TJU>, Plato's text about the 
power of music to change the world is set to Andriessen's characteristically 
thrilling sound: Stravinsky meets American minimalism meets hard rock. 
Throughout his career, the German composerHans Werner Henze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/27/hans-werner-henze> pursued 
beauty and justice in his art, after the ugliness and cruelty of his childhood 
in Nazi Germany. In his song cycle Voices, from 1973, Henze wrote songs for 
people who didn't have a voice: a sex worker in a nightclub, a young soldier 
dead in a ditch, a factory worker, Vietnam war victims.

In London, Cornelius Cardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/dec/17/cornelius-cardew-music-guide>
 was teaching at Morley College in south London and, from his experimental 
music class, formed the Scratch Orchestra. The ensemble flourished briefly in 
the early 70s, until Cardew's increasingly hard-left politics led to the 
group's split. Around the same time, Gavin Bryars formed thePortsmouth Sinfonia 
<http://www.gavinbryars.com/journal/photo/portsmouth-sinfonia-southsea-beach-1970>
 while teaching at Portsmouth College of Art. Here was an orchestra that 
challenged classical music's conventions and hierarchies by only hiring people 
who couldnot play their instruments. The intention was serious, the results 
were, knowingly, hilarious – and they even had a top 40 hit on the UK singles 
charts.
 