
EUROPEAN TRAVELS...

Liverpool’s “reward” for finishing third in their Champions League group will 
be to enter the Europa League, though as one of the four worst performing 
third-placed teams they will not be seeded. The same goes for Tottenham, whose 
defeat by Besiktas forced them to settle for second in Group C and meant they 
risk a last-32 tie against – among others – Internazionale, Napoli or 
Fiorentina.Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>, on the other 
hand, are seeded after finishing top of Group H and possible opponents include 
the French Cup winners Guingamp, who come from a town of 7,500. he draw, not it 
must be hoped as labyrinthine as the tournament itself, is at noon tomorrow.

NETBALL ...

England’s netballers play a three-Test series against Malawi this week and 
will hope for improvement after losing their recent two-game series against 
Australia and New Zealand. They will play at Liverpool’s Echo Arena on Sunday 
(5pm) and London’s Copper Box Arena on Wednesday (7.30pm) before finishing at 
Worcester’s University Arena on Saturday (3pm). All three Tests will be 
screened on Sky Sports 4. Anna Mayes’ side were beaten in both games against 
the Aussies and eventually lost to New Zealand on goal difference.

BIG BASH...

Kevin Pietersen will write a new chapter in his T20 career on Thursday when 
Melbourne Stars commence this winter’s Big Bash League against Adelaide 
Strikers. The tournament’s fourth edition will run for six weeks andAndrew 
Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff>, continuing his 
reincarnation as 20-over specialist, will also be taking part, for Brisbane 
Heat. Flintoff’s team do not play for a further three days. Tim Bresnan, 
meanwhile, will join Hobart Hurricanes in January.

BULLSEYES AND BEER ...

We all have a friend who insists darts is not a real sport but it has become a 
huge draw since its pub beginnings and a BBC Four documentary namedBullseyes 
and Beer: WhenDarts <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darts> Hit Britain  
(Monday, 9pm) will chart its meteoric rise during the 1980s, a time when its 
star players became household names.
 