
Ninety years ago this spring, MR James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/01/collected-ghost-stories-mr-james-review>
 publishedone of his most unsettling ghost stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/01/collected-ghost-stories-mr-james-review>
, “A View from a Hill”. It opens on a hot June afternoon, when a Cambridge 
academic called Fanshawe arrives at the house of his friend Squire Richards, 
deep in the south-west of England. Richards proposes an evening walk to a 
nearby hilltop, from where they can “look over the country”. Fanshawe asks if 
he can borrow some binoculars. After initial hesitation, Richards agrees, and 
gives Fanshawe a smooth wooden box. It contains, he explains, a pair of 
unusually heavy field-glasses, made by a local antiquary named Baxter, who died 
under mysterious circumstances a decade or so earlier. In opening the box, 
Fanshawe cuts his finger on one corner, drawing blood.

So the two men walk up to the viewpoint, where they stop to survey the “lovely 
English landscape” spread out beneath them: “green wheat, hedges and 
pasture-land”, “scattered cottages” and the steam-plume of the last train. The 
smell of hay is in the air. There are “wild roses on bushes hard by”. It is the 
pinnacle of the English pastoral.

But then Fanshawe raises the binoculars to his eyes – and that “lovely 
landscape” is disturbingly disrupted. Viewed through the glasses, a distant 
wooded hilltop becomes a treeless “grass field”, in which stands a gibbet, from 
which hangs a body. There is a cart containing other men near to the gibbet. 
People are moving around on the field. Yet when Fanshawe takes the binoculars 
from his eyes, the gibbet vanishes and the wood returns. Up, eerie; down, cosy. 
Up, corpse; down, copse. He explains it away as a trick of the midsummer light.

From there, though, the story takes further sinister turns. The next day 
Fanshawe bicycles out to Gallows Hill, as it is called locally, to investigate 
the illusion. In the wood on the hilltop, he becomes convinced that there is 
someone watching him from the thicket, and “not with any pleasant intent”. 
Panicking, he flees.

Eventually the grim secret of the binoculars is revealed. Baxter had filled 
their barrels with a fluid derived by boiling the bones of hanged men, whose 
bodies he had plundered from the graves on Gallows Hill, formerly a site of 
execution. In looking through the field-glasses, Fanshawe was “looking through 
dead men’s eyes”, and summoning violent pasts into visible being. Prospect was 
a form of retrospect; Baxter’s macabre optics revealed the skull beneath the 
skin of the English countryside.

We do not seem able to leave MR James (1862–1936) behind. His stories, like 
the restless dead that haunt them, keep returning to us: re-adapted, reread, 
freshly frightening for each new era. One reason for this is his mastery of the 
eerie: that form of fear that is felt first as unease, then as dread, and which 
is incited by glimpses and tremors rather than outright attack. Horror 
specialises in confrontation and aggression; the eerie in intimation and 
aggregation. Its physical consequences tend to be gradual and compound: 
swarming in the stomach’s pit, the tell-tale prickle of the skin. I find the 
eerie far more alarming than the horrific: James is one of only two writers 
(the other beingMark Danielewski) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/09/fifty-year-sword-mark-danielewski-review>
 who has caused me to wake myself with my own screaming.Saw sends me to sleep.

A second reason James stays with us is his understanding of landscape – and 
especially the English landscape – as constituted by uncanny forces, 
part-buried sufferings and contested ownerships. Landscape, in James, is never 
a smooth surface or simple stage-set, there to offer picturesque consolations. 
Rather it is a realm that snags, bites and troubles. He repeatedly invokes the 
pastoral – that green dream of natural tranquillity and social order – only to 
traumatise it.

James’s influence, or his example, has rarely been more strongly with us than 
now. For there is presently apparent, across what might broadly be called 
landscape culture, a fascination with these Jamesian ideas of unsettlement and 
displacement. In music, literature, art, film and photography, as well as in 
new and hybrid forms and media, the English eerie is on the rise. A loose but 
substantial body of work is emerging that explores the English landscape in 
terms of its anomalies rather than its continuities, that is sceptical of 
comfortable notions of “dwelling” and “belonging”, and of the packagings of the 
past as “heritage”, and that locates itself within a spectred rather than a 
sceptred isle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428585029788%2F2ded7dc5-706b-42e7-98b5-569b0d47e055-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428585029788%2F2ded7dc5-706b-42e7-98b5-569b0d47e055-1360x2040.jpeg>
 MR James portrays the landscape – especially the English landscape – as 
constituted by uncanny forces, and part-buried sufferings. Illustration by 
David McConochie Photograph: The Art Market 
Such concerns are not new, but there is a distinctive intensity and variety to 
their contemporary address. This eerie counter-culture – this occulture – is 
drawing in experimental film-makers, folk singers, folklorists, academics, 
avant-garde antiquaries, landscape historians, utopians, collectives, 
mainstreamers and Arch-Droods alike, in a magnificent mash-up of hauntology, 
geological sentience and political activism. The hedgerows, fields, ruins, 
hills and saltings of England have been set seething.

To name names: in music, I think of PJ Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pjharvey>’s albums White Chalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/16/shopping.popandrock1> 
(2007) andLet England Shake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/10/pj-harvey-let-england-shake-review>
 (2011); ofJulian Cope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jun/27/julian-cope-interview-visionary-state-wild-beast>
 (of course); of the heavily haunted music of Richard Skelton; of English 
Heretic, the Memory Band, and the Owl Service (whose 2010 album was calledThe 
View from a Hill); of Rob St John’s circlings of Pendle Hill in Lancashire, 
associated with the north-west witchcraft trials and hangings of 1612; of the 
spectral electronica of Grasscut; and perhaps above all ofThese New Puritans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/these-new-puritans>, especially their albums 
Hidden (2010) and Field of Reeds (2013), both informed by the estuarine Essex 
environment in which the band’s members grew up. Their 2010 single “We Want 
War” thrums with buried furies, encryptions and the stirring of things best 
left unstirred: “Secret recordings were made in the marsh / I bore a hole in 
the tree just to see”, chants Jack Barnett, “Knights dance in molecules … / 
They’re rising back up, they’re rising back up.”

Contemporary literature is rich with this ghost-writing, as we could call it. 
Paul Kingsnorth’sThe Wake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/02/the-wake-paul-kingsnorth-review-literary-triumph>
 (2014) forges an Anglo-Saxon “shadow language” with which to evoke a new-old 
sense of how in “angland … all is broc”; Melissa Harrison’s novelAt Hawthorn 
Time, published on 23 April, gives ghostly voice to the hedges and lanes of 
England itself;M John Harrison’s most recent novel, Empty Space: A Haunting 
(2012) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/02/empty-space-m-john-harrison-review>
, continues his brilliant union of science fiction with everyday English life; 
and the influence is ubiquitous of bothChina Miéville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/china-mieville>’s “weird fictions” and WG 
Sebald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>’s wraithy peregrinations 
along the Suffolk coast and across the Manchester moors, in which landscape is 
figured as a porous or brittle substance, and in which place operates often 
only as a sum total of losses and confusions.

Then there is the poetry of Geraldine Monk and Autumn Richardson, Tim Dee’s 
lyric disinterments inFour Fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/24/four-fields-tim-dee-review> 
(2012), Nina Lyon’s ongoing pursuit of the Green Man myth,Jez Butterworth’s 
Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/19/jerusalem-royal-court-review> 
(2009), with its channelling of English place lore into the toking, joking 
figure of Johnny Byron, and indeed Mark Rylance’s broader commitment to being, 
as he recently put it,“curious outside the set cosmology” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/15/mark-rylance-wolf-hall-interview-the-gunman>
. My bookThe Old Ways (2012) has four eerie episodes in it, each narrated 
without analysis or interpretation. One took place at night on Chanctonbury 
Ring in the South Downs, a wooded hilltop not unlike that on which Fanshawe 
experiences his malign watcher. I have received more letters and questions 
about that incident than any other in my books.

In 2013, Mark Fisher and Justin Barton created On Vanishing Land, a 45-minute 
“audio essay” that traverses the Suffolk coastline from the Felixstowe 
container port to the Anglo-Saxon burial ground at Sutton Hoo, tracking what 
Fisher calls “the cumulative forces of the eerie that animate the East Anglian 
landscape”, and openly in conversation with both the stories of MR James and 
the music of Brian Eno. There is also, unforgettably, Iain Sinclair’s 
extraordinary work in prose, film and poetry, committed for decades to the 
retrieval of heterodox histories and eldritch pasts even as they face occlusion 
by regeneration and other forms of cultural flattening-out.

In film, I think of Patrick Keiller’s Robinson in Ruins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/20/robinson-ruins-patrick-keiller-dillon>
 (2010), Michael Hrebeniak’s forthcomingStirbitch 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/features/stirbitch-mapping-the-unmappable>, 
located around Stourbridge Common in east Cambridge, Ben Rivers’s Two Years at 
Sea(2011), the mooorland expressionism of Daniel Wolfe’s Catch Me Daddy (2014), 
andBen Wheatley’s brilliant A Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/04/a-field-in-england-review> 
(2013), in which an alchemist’s assistant joins a group of civil war deserters, 
high on psychedelic mushrooms, on a hunt for treasure supposedly buried in a 
field. The film is shot in black and white, which invests the grass, trees, 
clouds and gun smoke with a strangely luminous intensity of greyscale. The 
result of the treasure hunt is “unspeakable violence in a rural setting”, in 
Wheatley’s phrase, or “Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> among the hedgerows”, in 
Jonathan Romney’s. Over the last year I have been working with a young writer 
and film-maker,Adam Scovell <http://celluloidwickerman.com/>, to adapt a 
co-written book calledHolloway into a nine-minute Super-8 short, inspired in 
part byDerek Jarman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/derek-jarman>’s early 
silent filmJourney to Avebury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/14/wiltshire-cycling-routes-stone-age-stonehenge>
 (1971).Holloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/19/holloway-robert-macfarlane-dan-richards-review>
 is about about time-loops and unexplained occurrences in a sunken Dorset lane; 
among its histories is the hanging at Dorchester in 1594 of four Catholic 
recusants. In the longer term I want to adapt Algernon Blackwood’s 1907 ghost 
novella “The Willows” for screen, relocating it from the willow deltas of the 
Danube to thePhragmites reed forests of the East Anglian fens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586102328%2Fd9f256f9-c922-45af-b76c-c4c634da3ff8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586102328%2Fd9f256f9-c922-45af-b76c-c4c634da3ff8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Duchess of Cambridge looks at Self Portrait as a Drowned Man by Jeremy 
Millar during a visit to Turner Contemporary, Margate. Photograph: Suzanne 
Plunkett/Getty Images 
The eerie is widespread in contemporary English art, there in the work of 
(among others)Tacita Dean <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tacita-dean>
,Marcus Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/08/marcus-coates-artist-elephant-castle>
, Steve Dilworth, Stanley Donwood and Jeremy Millar 
<http://www.jeremymillar.org/works.php>. In 2011, also inspired by Blackwood, 
Millar created a sculpture entitledSelf-Portrait of a Drowned Man (The Willows)
. He cast his own body in silicone, dressed it in his own clothes, then gouged 
“his” face and skull with odd puncture wounds, as occurs in Blackwood’s 
novella. The disconcertingly lifelike (deathlike) “drowned man” that resulted 
was displayed prone on the gallery floor. It was first shown at Glasgow’s CCA, 
and proved so unnerving to audiences that warnings had to be issued. It is 
presently on show at Turner Contemporary in Margate. Earlier this month, the 
Duchess of Cambridge visited the gallery and was photographed looking at 
Millar’s pseudo-corpse selfie. The image went viral: two divergent 
Englishnesses were embodied and juxtaposed, the monarchical/hereditary and the 
uncanny/unsettled.

Yes, the contemporary eerie feeds off its earlier counterparts, as with Millar 
off Blackwood, Fisher off James and Scovell off Jarman. A renewed interest in 
classics of the tradition is in evidence: director Robin Hardy’s 2013 “print” of
The Wicker Man (1973) for instance, or Witchfinder General (1968), a film that, 
as Sinclair put it last year, “really takes on landscape to reveal the 
underlying sense of psychotic breakdown”, by staging an “argument between the 
English pastoral … and unscripted brutal violence”. Wheatley cites it, with
Culloden (1964), as hugely influential for A Field in England. The radical 
histories ofKevin Brownlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/22/kevin-brownlow-academy-award-oscar>
 and Andrew Mollo’sWinstanley (1975) are taken up again by Keiller in Robinson 
in Ruins, which examines moments of failed revolution in the quiet fields of 
today’s Cotswolds.

There is also the recent reissue of Alfred Watkins’s cult book of landscape 
mysticism,The Old Straight Track (1925), the argument of which is largely built 
around the views from hills, and the totemic status among contemporary 
place-writers of JA Baker’sThe Peregrine (1967) – all bloody killing, 
field-haunting and ritual reperformance. Vital to the modern moment, too, are 
the novels of Alan Garner and Susan Cooper; especially Garner’sThe Weirdstone 
of Brisingamen (1960) and The Owl Service (1967), and Cooper’s dazzling The 
Dark Is Rising sequence, published between 1965 and 1977. Once read, these 
novels are hard to forget. They lodge and loom in the memory. Garner turned 
eighty80 last autumn, and a volume of essays exploring his legacy, calledFirst 
Light, is being compiled at present, with contributions from Philip Pullman, 
Ali Smith and Neil Gaiman among others. I regard the second book of Cooper’s 
sequence as among the eeriest texts I know;Helen Macdonald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/28/helen-macdonald-h-is-for-hawk-costa-prize-six-nature-books>
 is another for whom Cooper’s novels have been imaginatively vital.

It would be easy to dismiss all this as an excess of hokey woo-woo; a surge of 
something-in-the-woodshed rustic gothic. But engaging with the eerie 
emphatically doesn’t mean believing in ghosts. Few of the practitioners named 
here would endorse earth mysteries or ectoplasm. What is under way, across a 
broad spectrum of culture, is an attempt to account for the turbulence of 
England in the era of late capitalism. The supernatural and paranormal have 
always been means of figuring powers that cannot otherwise find visible 
expression. Contemporary anxieties and dissents are here being reassembled and 
re-presented as spectres, shadows or monsters: our noun monster, indeed, shares 
an etymology with our verb to demonstrate, meaning to show or reveal (with a 
largely lost sense of omen or portent).

We are, certainly, very far from “nature writing”, whatever that once was, and 
into a mutated cultural terrain that includes the weird and the punk as well as 
the attentive and the devotional. Among the shared landmarks of this terrain 
are ruins, fields, pits, fringes, relics, buried objects, hilltops, falcons, 
demons and deep pasts. In much of this work, suppressed forces pulse and 
flicker beneath the ground and within the air (capital, oil, energy, violence, 
state power, surveillance), waiting to erupt or to condense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586452918%2F3790b2d7-3301-459d-b9f6-14a839853a15-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586452918%2F3790b2d7-3301-459d-b9f6-14a839853a15-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A suitable place for violence? Orford Ness, Suffolk. Photograph: Photograph by 
Emma Johnson/Getty Images/Flickr RM 
Taken together, in all its variety, this work suggests what the writer and 
archaeologist Eddie Procter recently called a“new landscape aesthetic” 
<http://www.landscapism.blogspot.co.uk/2015/02/towards-new-landscape-aesthetic.html>
: dedicated to a busting of the bucolic, a puncturing of the pastoral. Last 
month an interdisciplinary conference was convened in Cambridge on“The 
Alchemical Landscape” <http://www.thealchemicallandscape.blogspot.co.uk/>, 
prompted by the “increasing number of writers, artists and film-makers [who] 
are reinvesting the landscape with esoteric and mythic imagery”, and seeking to 
assess how this body of work “articulates pressing contemporary concerns”.

What are those pressing concerns, though, and what are the sources of this 
unsettlement? Clearly, the recent rise of the eerie coincides with a phase of 
severe environmental damage. In England, this has not taken the form of sudden 
catastrophe, but rather a slow grinding away of species and of subtlety. The 
result, as James Riley notes, is “a landscape constituted more actively by what 
is missing than by what is present”. This awareness of absence is expressing 
itself both in terms of a vengeful nature (a return of the repressed) and as 
delicate catalogues of losses (Skelton and Richardson’s poetry, for instance).

There is a dissenting left politics also at work here. Joe Kennedy has sharply 
documented 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/14114-country-life-british-politics-uncanny-music-art>
 how the “pastoral has become … a cornerstone of austerity politics” underDavid 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, with the 
“compensatory cant of Green Toryism” helping kitschly to reduce the rural to
Bake Offtents in flower meadows, Hunter wellies, and 
Keep-Calm-and-Holiday-at-Home messages, even as fiscal forces churn and ruck 
the landscape. For Kennedy, this “cupcakification” of the nation – this rise of 
“Mumfordland” – has generated a vigorous anti-pastoral counter-culture, 
animated by what he nicely calls “the terror in theterroir”. In a blistering 
2013 essay, Nick Groom 
<http://theclearingonline.org/2013/08/lets-discuss-over-country-supper-soon-rebekah-brooks-and-david-cameron-rural-realities-and-rustic-representations-nick-groom/>
 used the infamous “Let’s discuss over country supper soon” text fromRebekah 
Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade> to Cameron, sent on the 
eve his leader’s speech to theConservative Party Conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/toryconference>, to excoriate the Tory 
reduction of the rural to a Cotswold pageant of G&Ts and predistressed timber 
tables. Groom deplored the “pastoral cliches that have tyrannised the land for 
decades”; we need “to start rethinking what we understand by the English 
countryside”, he wrote, “and we need to be doing it now”. That political 
“rethinking” is partly apparent in the preoccupation of eerie culture with the 
English civil war (there inA Field in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-field-in-england>, in the band name of 
These New Puritans, in Keiller’sRobinson in Ruins), a historical moment in 
which, as Wheatley puts it, the country was “so radicalised that normal people 
were forced into political positions they had never been in before”.

Digging down to reveal the hidden content of the under-earth is another trope 
of the eerie: what is discovered is almost always a version of capital. 
Keiller’s Robinson tracks the buried cables and gas-pipes of Oxfordshire, 
following them as postmodern leylines, and tracing them outwards to hidden 
global structures of financial ownership. Wheatley’s deserters rapaciously 
extract “treasure” from the soil, by means of enslavement and male violence. In 
his cult novelCyclonopedia (2008), the Iranian philosopher Reza Negarestani 
figured oil as a sentient entity, developing Marx’s implication that capital 
possesses emergent and self-willed properties, that it is somehow wild. 
Negarestani, like Miéville, is inspired by the weird fiction of HP Lovecraft 
(1890–1937). I eagerly await the English oil-horror film that must surely soon 
be shot: Quadrilla as Godzilla, sink-holes as maws from out of which rises 
Chthulu (Chthoilu). Perhaps filming is already under way, somewhere in a field 
in Dorset, with nodding donkeys backlit on the skyline.

“Why does the countryside seem such a fit place for violence?” Matthew Sweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthewsweet> asked Wheatley on Radio 3, 
reflecting on the charnel-house ending of his film. Wheatley, who grew up in 
Essex, spoke of his long-standing sense of the English countryside as somewhere 
in which violence was always imminent. “There was something in the land-scape,” 
he said, “that plainly terrified me ... If you went out into it you could just 
be killed.” His comments echo those of Sinclair, who invoked King Lear on the 
heath: “You’re turned outdoors into something more savage than you are, and you 
know something terrible is going to happen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586793057%2Ff2c2d759-b0a8-40b5-9f97-ecfaad1fd71b-1020x957.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eeriness%20of%20the%20English%20countryside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F10%2Feeriness-english-countryside-robert-macfarlane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428586793057%2Ff2c2d759-b0a8-40b5-9f97-ecfaad1fd71b-1020x957.jpeg>
 An image from Ingrid Pollard’sPastoral Interlude series. Photograph: 
ingridpollard.com 
They also uncannily recall those of the photographer Ingrid Pollard, 
<http://www.ingridpollard.com/pastoral-interlude.html> whose remarkable 1988 
series of images,Pastoral Interlude, explored the black British experience of 
the English countryside and especially theLake District 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/lakedistrict>, where Pollard “wandered 
lonely as a Black face in a sea of white”. “A visit to the countryside,” she 
wrote in the caption to one image, “is always accompanied by a feeling of 
unease, dread.” Pollard’s 19th-century photographic techniques allude to the 
connections between the high-Victorian pastoral and the colonial control in 
Africa and the Caribbean that enabled that pastoral’s maintenance. The 
photographer Marc Atkins and the poet Rod Mengham are together making a study 
of English arable land, responding to fields “that all look the same to some 
extent”, but that have undergone “utterly different specific histories”, from 
battlefields to prisoner of war camps to sites of execution.

Contemporary eerie culture is also drawn to the military and security 
infrastructure that occupies much of England’s land and air space, from 
Salisbury Plain to Otterburn to Foulness. This dispersed geography of conflict 
and surveillance has attracted the interests of Garner (Alderley Edge), Fisher 
and Barton at Bawdsey Manor (the Suffolk home of radar research in the 1940s), 
Keiller (passim), andWG Sebald at Orford Ness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jul/08/untrue-island-orford-ness-macfarlane>
, where still standing are the high towers and fine string-antennae of Cobra 
Mist, a top-secret cold war over-the-horizon radar station, which allegedly 
provided returns so clear it could track the movements of individual trains in 
Siberia. The monumental era of 20th-century detection technology, when 
structures needed to be vast in order to see further, has proved especially 
attractive. Tacita Dean and Brian Dillon have both responded to thesound 
mirrors of Denge <http://www.andrewgrantham.co.uk/soundmirrors/locations/denge/>
, nearDungeness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/may/20/gowalk.guardianspecial29>
, in Kent. These forerunners of radar are huge “acoustic mirrors”, resembling 
“listening ears”, designed to concentrate into audibility those forms of 
distant noise (approaching aircraft engines, for instance) that would otherwise 
subtend the range of human hearing.

It isn’t hard to see why contemporary eerie culture should be drawn to such 
evidence of record and detection. If the eerie is – as Fanshawe found on 
Gallows Hill – about the experience of being watched by a presence that you 
cannot perceive, then this, certainly, is another cause for its present 
relevance. For the state has never before been as able to detect and follow the 
movements of its subjects. Nor – since Snowden – have we been as conscious of 
the extent to which we are continuously being observed by unseen forces, not 
always operating with what Fanshawe called “pleasant intent”. Yet state 
surveillance is no longer testified to in the landscape by giant edifices. 
Instead it is mostly carried out in by software programs running on computers 
housed in ordinary-looking government buildings, its sources and effects – like 
all eerie phenomena – glimpsed but never confronted.

Shortly after A View from a Hill appeared in the London Mercury in May 1925, 
MR James was contacted by the poet AE Housman, a friendly acquaintance and 
fellow Cambridge don. Housman admired the story, but felt there was “something 
wrong with the optics”. It was a nitpick on Housman’s part – he was suggesting 
that anyone looking through liquid-filled binocular barrels would experience a 
blurred refraction of vision, rather than its strange sharpening. His 
literalism missed the point entirely, of course – and it is tempting to read 
Housman’s quibble with the story as a broader objection to James’s unsettling 
of the pastoral, a mode in which Housman was deeply invested. For there was, in 
fact, something very right with James’s optics. Where Housman looked backwards, 
to the “land of lost content”, James looked forwards, and saw the English 
countryside not only as a place of beauty, calm and succour, but also as a 
green and deeply unpleasant land.
 