

 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/30806435@N04/4307047617>
Yes, the US Army really does use Powerpoint to show voting choices. Photo by 
hectorir <http://flickr.com/photos/hectoralejandro/> on Flickr. Some rights 
reserved <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en>

A quick burst of links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Special: #gizmodogate links
Apple asked for 'lost' iPhone criminal probe >> Silicon Valley / San Jose 
Business Journal: 
<http://sanjose.bizjournals.com/sanjose/stories/2010/04/26/daily36.html>
"Investigators said they have identified and interviewed the person who took 
the phone from the Gourmet Haus Staudt on March 18 after it was left there by 
Apple engineer Gray Powell following a birthday celebration. "Officials were 
unable to tell the Business Journal whether that person, whose name has not 
been released, was the same person who eventually sold the phone to tech Web 
site Gizmodo.com."

Thoughts on the Legality of the Gizmodo Warrant > Eugene Volokh 
<http://volokh.com/2010/04/27/thoughts-on-the-legality-of-the-gizmodo-warrant/>
He actually is a lawyer - a professor at the University of California at Los 
Angeles who teaches First Amendment law. He thinks the warrant is likely OK on 
4th amendment (against unreasonable searches); OK on nighttime warrant ("night" 
starts after 10pm). Shield Law? Probably doesn't apply. Nor does the Privacy 
Protection Act for journalists. In other words, Jason Chen really needs a very 
good lawyer, and could face a felony charge.

iPhone blogger has computers seized by police >> BBC News 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/8645884.stm>
Interesting for the EFF comment: "The second issue the EFF is concerned about 
is if police officers are doing the investigative work of a private company. 
"If there was some offence here it is not apparent what it is", [Jennifer 
Gannick, the EFF's civil liberties director] said. Apart from the potentially 
receiving property that under the law is stolen?

OK, back to normal again...
Twitter buys Cloudhopper >> Twitter blog 
<http://blog.twitter.com/2010/04/cloudhopping.html>
"Over the last eight months we have been working with a startup called 
Cloudhopper to become one of the highest volume SMS programs in the 
worldâ€”Twitter processes close to a billion SMS tweets per month and that number 
is growing around the world from Indonesia to Australia, the UK, the US, and 
beyond."

Google's Andy Rubin on Everything Android >> NYTimes.com 
<http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/04/27/googles-andy-rubin-on-everything-android/>
Google's Andy Rubin talks about the importance of being open, and says Adobe 
Flash will be built into version 2.2

Wikimedia Foundation Form 990 for 2010 - no riches in nonprofit salaries >> 
Infothought <http://sethf.com/infothought/blog/archives/001449.html>
Seth Finkelstein looks at Wikimedia's 'form 990' (a tax return for 
non-profits): "We finally get to find out what Sue Gardner, Executive Director, 
receives for being ringmaster of the wiki-circus: $150,000 base salary, $6,350 
benefits, and $18,700 of what looks to be a one-time housing relocation 
expense. "That's decent money in general in the midst of a recession, but in a 
relative sense, it strikes me as quite reasonable for the position, especially 
in Silicon Valley."

BuildBot: Chromium >> Chromium.org 
<http://build.chromium.org/buildbot/waterfall/waterfall>
See where all the different builds - and wow, there's a lot of builds - of 
Google's Chrome browser are. And also what's stopping them building.

The Windows Phone difference >> Windows Phone Secrets 
<http://windowsphonesecrets.com/2010/04/27/the-windows-phone-difference/>
"Clarity Consulting has drawn up some amazing prototypes of Windows Phone 
experience to show off what's possible," reports Paul Thurrott.

Microsoft's Office Web Apps - Google killing not included >> The Register 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2010/04/27/office_2010_web_apps_review/>
"These are the first ever, in-browser versions of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and 
OneNote from Microsoft. They represent a significant break with the past for a 
suite that's been one of Microsoft's cash cows," says Tim Anderson.

Israel lifts ban on imports of Apple iPad >> Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE63O0C220100425>
iPad wireless: mostly harmless.

Find where you parked your car with Sally Park >> Doseido 
<http://www.doseido.com/sallypark/>
As Rick Wray points out, "surely you'd only need this if you were drunk, in 
which case you shouldn't be driving your car anyway?"

Brands become top technology tweeters according to TweetLevel >> The Naked 
Pheasant 
<http://thenakedpheasant.wordpress.com/2010/04/23/brands-become-top-technology-tweeters-according-to-tweetlevel/>
A list of the top bazillion "technology tweeters". Good to see that 
@barackobama still has some heft. Though his gadget reviews have been a bit 
slipshod lately, don't you think?

Is Facebook testing HTML5 video for iPad? Apparently not >> ReadWriteWeb 
<http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/facebook_testing_html5_video_for_ipad_apparently_not.php>
Instead, it's transcoding to MP4. Simples!

Apple rejects Michael Wolff's iPhone app; is it because he criticizes Steve 
Jobs? >> BusinessInsider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/apple-rejects-an-app-dedicated-to-michael-wolffs-columns-2010-4>
"Lacks sufficient amounts of content to appeal to a broad audience" has to be 
one of the lamest excuses ever used to reject an app.

Enemy Lurks in Briefings on Afghan War - PowerPoint >> NYTimes.com 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/27/world/27powerpoint.html>
"Like an insurgency, PowerPoint has crept into the daily lives of military 
commanders and reached the level of near obsession. The amount of time expended 
on PowerPoint, the Microsoft presentation program of computer-generated charts, 
graphs and bullet points, has made it a running joke in the Pentagon and in 
Iraq and Afghanistan," says The New York Times.

Squeezing the life out of your free Google Appengine Quota >> Anekdotz blog 
<http://blog.anekdotz.com/2010/04/squeezing-life-out-of-your-free-google.html>
"From personal experience, if used properly, the free quota is generous enough 
to serve far more than Google's estimated 5 million page views/month." If 
that's not jaw-dropping enough, keep reading.

Computer tycoon Sir Clive Sinclair, 69, weds his 33-year-old lap dancer ... 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1269050/Computer-tycoon-Sir-Clive-Sinclair-69-weds-33-year-old-lap-dancer.html>
"The pair wed at the Civil Court in Las Vegas on April 16. The single witness 
is believed to have been a passer-by," says Mail Online. Miss Bowness is also a 
former Miss England.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 