
David Hockney’s celebrated painting 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-a-bigger-splash-t03254> of the 
title doesn’t actually appear in A Bigger Splash, but the same sense of 
sunbaked, febrile waterside sexuality permeates this beautifully atmospheric 
chamber drama from Italian director Luca Guadagnino. It’s actually a remake of 
a Jacques Deray film from 1969,La Piscine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/la-piscine-film-review>, with 
Alain Delon, Romy Schneider and Jane Birkin; in Guadagnino’s version, the 
emphasis is altered to make Schneider’s character Marianne – now reinvented as 
Tilda Swinton’s near-mute, Bowie-ish rocker – the pivotal figure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
A Bigger Splash: exclusive clip featuring Ralph Fiennes and Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/28/a-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
In what is essentially a four-hander, Swinton’s Marianne has retreated to a 
holiday home – equipped, of course, with a limpid swimming pool – onPantelleria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jun/07/pantelleria-island-sicily-italy>
, the Italian island not far from Africa. She is trying to preserve her voice 
after an operation, and has for company hunky film-makerMatthias Schoenaerts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/28/matthias-schoenaerts-rust-bone-interview>
. Into this idyll slimes Ralph Fiennes’s Harry, a motormouth record producer 
and former boyfriend of Marianne, clearly attempting to win her back by driving 
a wedge between her and her new beau. His main weapon: slinky Dakota Johnson, 
his daughter, whom he subtly aims at Schoenaerts.

The main pleasure of Guadagnino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/04/bigger-splash-director-luca-guadagnino-italian-cinema-is-mostly-a-bureau-for-tourism>
’s drama – apart from the languorous beauty of its location – is the shifting 
sands of the four-way interaction, as the goodwill and affection eddies and 
swirls between each character. Swinton and Schoenaerts are robust performers in 
their different ways, we know, managing to establish a palpable chemistry; 
Johnson, in what is admittedly the thinnest role of four, is good at projecting 
a sort of artless dissatisfaction. But it’sFiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/ralph-fiennes-i-wish-id-been-more-of-a-punk-but-its-not-in-my-dna-to-be-truly-anarchic>
 that is the showstopper here: the scene where he goes on an extended freakout 
to the Rolling Stones’ Emotional Rescue is certain to pass into cinema legend. 
Coupled with his turns for Wes Anderson (in Grand Budapest Hotel) and the Coen 
brothers (in Hail, Caesar!).

Guadagnino also injects a distinctive note of uncertainty and distaste into 
the mix by alluding to the presence of thehuman migrant tide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/08/people-smugglers-using-facebook-to-lure-migrants-into-italy-trips>
 washing up on the island, as well as the brutishness of the local police: it 
was this aspect that earned it a smattering of boos on its debut at the Venice 
film festival. That hostile reception is actually a tribute to A Bigger 
Splash’s unnerving nature: few films have established such exquisitely judged 
unease to such great effect.

• More best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list>
 