
We like to think that a modern society is open and mobile – and our failure on 
social mobility <https://www.theguardian.com/society/socialmobility> really 
matters to Theresa May. It is one of the reasons for successive waves of 
education reform, the latest of which is being debated in parliament today, 
sparking a fiery debate aboutgrammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 not seen for decades. What has gone wrong with social mobility and why?

Despite what’s often said, there has never been a golden age of high social 
mobility.John Goldthorpe at Nuffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/12/uk-education-reforms-not-helped-social-mobility>
 argues that our record has never been much good once we allow for changes in 
the employment market. The shift from the blue-collar jobs of the older 
generation to the white-collar jobs of their children did make it look as if we 
had cracked the problem in the 1950s and 1960s. But when these trends slowed 
down the underlying problem was revealed more starkly.

‘Value for money’ can’t be the only measure of university | Julian Coman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/20/value-for-money-not-only-measure-of-university>
Education is often thought of as the facilitator of social mobility. But the 
uncomfortable truth is that despite education being so obviously a good thing, 
its interaction with changes in the jobs market has not been good for social 
mobility. The decline of steady jobs in industry for school leavers and the 
expansion of higher education as the pre-eminent route to well-paid jobs has 
meant that the academic performance of secondary schools matters more than 
ever. The shocking gap in school standards may not have widened but it 
certainly makes more of a difference to your life chances once your school’s 
role becomes to provide a route to university. It is the urgent need to get 
their children into the schools that get them into the prestigious universities 
that has led to the parental arms race that eventually feeds through intohigher 
house prices around the primary schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/oct/27/house-prices-state-schools-higher>
 that feed the secondary schools that feed the universities.

The expansion of universities also initially benefited the middle class – 
notably daughters whose educational opportunities had lagged behind their 
brothers’. This expansion of their life chances is one of the great triumphs of 
the 20th century. But when you add in the phenomenon of assortative mating – 
affluent, well-educated women marrying similarly educated men – then you get 
wider gaps between the earnings of different households and wider gaps in the 
levels of investment in children.

Then add to this mix the single most unusual feature of the English and Welsh 
schools system – that we expect 16-year-olds to take decisions about which 
subjects to specialise in. Again, this mattered less when most young people 
went off to work at 16, but now it matters much more. Take what that means for 
engineering, for example, which in many countries is a popular university 
subject. Only 7% of young people in England and Wales take theA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> that make them eligible for 
most university engineering courses. Very few other countries have designed an 
education system that narrows down young people’s options so that by the age of 
16, 93% could not become an engineer without a dramatic change of tack. You 
might think that, given this educational approach, at least we would make 
exceptional efforts to provide careers advice and guidance, but actually this 
is one of our worst policy failures. A serious effort there would pay dividends 
for social mobility.

It is not all about A-levels, however – what about vocational qualifications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2011/may/24/vocation-qualifications-graduate-unemployment-university>
? German apprenticeships are widely admired, but in more than 300 areas they 
lead to a licence to practise, which means an apprentice is on a route to a 
guaranteed job. The British labour market has fewer such guarantees. We can 
enhance apprenticeships – but it becomes harder for colleges and employers to 
provide them. And of course you do need a job first. So apprenticeships of 
higher quality are hard to expand, at the same time as A-levels are becoming 
tougher and more academic. That leaves a real need for vocational 
qualifications that are rigorous and trusted by employers, as proposed in an 
important report byDavid Sainsbury in July 
<https://www.tes.com/news/further-education/breaking-news/sainsbury-review-triggers-biggest-change-post-16-education-70>
. Successive governments have fiddled around with these to little effect. And 
spending on education for 16- to 18-year-olds has been squeezed the most – 
caught between a school spending pledge that stops at age 16, and university 
fees and loans that bring extra resources into higher education.

There are always going to be people who fall through the cracks first time 
round and need a second chance as adults

There are always going to be people who fall through the cracks first time 
around and need a second chance as adults. This is another area where we are 
not doing enough. In fact, atightening of the rules 
<http://university.which.co.uk/advice/gcse-choices-university/gcse-shake-up-what-the-changes-mean-for-you>
 on the environment for sitting GCSEs and A-levels next year means there will 
be even higher practical barriers for adult learners who want to take the 
exams. This is exactly the kind of area where Theresa May’s government could 
make a difference.

We need a social mobility strategy that includes all the stages of education, 
throughout our lives. It has to include competitive pressures on schools to 
improve their performance – and not simply by selecting the kids who are going 
to do best. It means serious information, advice and guidance. It also means 
vocational qualifications for 18-year-old school leavers that do not depend on 
employment first.

There are bright spots on the educational map – the most conspicuous being in 
London. This has been achieved by putting schools under relentless pressure and 
not just allowing some to appear to do better by academic or social selection. 
Universities are reaching out too – places such as King’s College London, where 
I am a visiting professor, realise that prior attainment is not the sole 
predictor of educational achievement. The good news is that university is the 
only stage of education where poor kids outperform their wealthier peers – if 
they can get in.

With the disappearance of big local manufacturing firms; no school-leaving 
exam at 18; no stable, reliable set of vocational qualifications outside 
apprenticeships; and poor-quality careers advice, it is easy to see why 
working-class teenagers are having a tough time. It is unfair on them to say 
they lack aspiration – the evidence is that they have conventional aspirations 
for decent jobs, but the unusual English and Welsh education system has been 
tilted against them.
 