
Barack Obama’s three-day visit to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/barack-obama-donald-trump-nato-commitment>
 this week, the last of his presidency, is inevitably overshadowed by the 
capture of the White House by the man whose victory he tried but failed to 
prevent. Donald Trump’s values, or lack of them, are in stark contrast to those 
that have tied the two continents since 1945. His campaign pledges have shaken 
Europe’s confidence to the core. His victory has turned a trip that was 
originally intended to showcase Mr Obama’s foreign policy legacy intoa US 
damage limitation exercise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/barack-obama-faces-awkward-task-on-sad-farewell-visit-to-europe>
.

The choice of a first stop in Greece, birthplace of democracy, was originally 
intended to convey strong symbolism, as well as to express support forthe kind 
of debt relief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/barack-obama-calls-for-meaningful-debt-relief-for-greece>
 that Alexis Tsipras’s government has long been asking for. Mr Obama’s aides 
have indicated that Wednesday’s speech in Athens will focus on democratic 
governance and the need for “more inclusive growth” in the face of 
globalisation and its inequalities. The president may now have to add a new 
section about the challenges that confront American democracy too.

That Mr Trump’s first contact with a foreign politician was with Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
 has not calmed European fears. Mr Obama will not be meeting any of the 
continent’s far-right politicians who, like Mr Farage, have applauded the rise 
of Mr Trump as a vindication of their own views. But the threat from leaders 
like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán or challengers like France’s Marine Le Pen looms 
over this visit nevertheless. Mr Obama is determined to calm Europe’s tendency 
to panic and adopt separate approaches to common problems. In Berlin, after 
talks with Chancellor Merkel – whom he has called “my closest partner in the 
past eight years” – he will meet Theresa May, François Hollande, Italy’s prime 
minister Matteo Renzi, and Spain’s Mariano Rajoy. Much is required of all of 
them at such a serious moment.

Mr Obama has come to argue that there will be more continuity than disruption 
in the US-Europe relationship. From his first conversation with Mr Trump, he 
has drawn the conclusion that his successor has “great interest in maintaining 
our core strategic relationships” and that there will be “no weakening” of US 
“resolve” in upholding “alliances that are vital”. So far, however, Mr Trump 
has not quite said as much himself, in public at least. There are far more 
questions than answers about the evolution ofUS foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy>. These uncertainties 
are felt acutely in Europe, not least because of Russia’s new assertiveness and 
the glee with which it has welcomed Mr Trump’s election.

Speculation that the transatlantic community is on the verge of destruction 
may be exaggerated. But Mr Obama will need more than eloquence to reassure 
Europeans. It was a striking coincidence that, as Air Force One landed in 
Greece on Tuesday, news came ofRussia’s intensified offensive in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/aleppo-airstrikes-resume-as-russia-announces-major-syria-offensive>
. Greece is the country to which thousands of Syrians escaped in 2015, an event 
that upended European politics and has shaken its institutions, not least in 
the Brexit vote.

Mr Obama’s messages this week about democracy and the need for a “strong, 
integrated and united Europe” are necessary and serious. They echo thespeech he 
gave earlier this year in Hanover 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/04/25/remarks-president-obama-address-people-europe>
. “You can be confident that your greatest ally and friend, the United States 
of America, stands with you, shoulder to shoulder, now and for ever,” he said 
then. But it is Mr Trump who will dispose now, not Mr Obama.

Europe’s problems are many, complex and evolving. Some have been caused by 
external shocks. Others are self-inflicted, not least in Greece. Mr Obama is 
right to highlight that finding a path to economic growth remains vital, and
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is a good place to say it. 
But the words he confidently pronounced in April about the bond between America 
and “the people of Europe” now seem fragile and contingent. Mr Obama’s grace 
cannot disguise the fact that this farewell tour to Europe carries with it more 
foreboding than optimism.
 