
Gareth Southgate 


England Under-21s head coach

The former Crystal Palace and Aston Villa player, and England centre-half, is 
well respected, intelligent and works at St George’s Park alongside the 
technical director, Dan Ashworth, potentially making him the in-house option of 
choice within the Football Association. Yet it is seven years since he managed 
in the Premier League, and Middlesbrough sacked him while they were fourth in 
the Championship. Furthermore, the junior side’sdismal failure at last summer’s 
Euros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/england-under-21-italy-european-championship-match-report>
 cannot be totally eclipsed by the current crop’s recent successin the Toulon 
tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/england-france-toulon-tournament-final-match-report>
. The fear is he would merely be considered another yes-man.

Eddie Howe


Bournemouth manager

Considered one of the brightest managerial prospects in English football on 
the back of his success with Bournemouth, whom he has helped hoist from bottom 
tier to Premier League over two spells, enduring a trickier period at Burnley 
in between, and ensuring the Cherries’ top-flight status last term was a fine 
achievement. Yet concerns linger over his experience. This job may have come 
too soon.
Odds 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/participation/poll/embed/?id=englandmanager> 
Glenn Hoddle


TV pundit and coach at his academy in Spain

The FA would be taking a brave move to reappoint the man sacked in 1998 for 
stating contentious religious beliefs relating to disability and the sins of a 
former life, but the 58-year-old has support from within the game for his 
innovative coaching style and approach. He has received backing from former 
players such as Alan Shearer, Chris Waddle and Paul Ince – “His vision on 
football is second to none,” said Ince – but he has not coached in the 
professional game since leaving Wolverhampton Wanderers in 2006. The fear would 
be some of his ideas, and his general approach, might be outdated, but could he 
not work alongside a younger candidate?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89aa74015bd1b5855e8b15b8955bb18a4526115%2F305_44_1072_643%2F1072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89aa74015bd1b5855e8b15b8955bb18a4526115%2F305_44_1072_643%2F1072.jpg>
 Slaven Bilic has transformed West Ham. Photograph: Paul 
Currie/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Slaven Bilic


West Ham United manager

The man whose Croatia side so humiliated England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> in qualifying for Euro 2008, 
costing Steve McClaren his position en route, and a man of the world having 
coached in Croatia, Russia, Turkey and now the Premier League. His side’s 
attacking style would gain support, as would the manner in which he has 
transformed West Ham. Yet that club are about to embark on a brave new era at 
the Olympic Stadium and would fight tooth and nail to retain the manager whose 
performances as a pundit over Euro 2016 have illuminated television coverage 
back home.

Arsène Wenger


Arsenal manager

In so many ways Wenger would be the FA’s dream candidate. He boasts the purist 
philosophy into which the hierarchy would eagerly tap, is blessed with 20 
years’ coaching in England at the highest level and could be charged with 
shaping the entire system, from junior ranks up, if that was deemed to be his 
brief. He has a year to run on his contract at Arsenal, where the team’s 
familiar frailties have generated some frustration within the fanbase. But 
would he really be keen to leave the Emirates Stadium? And would he put up with 
the hassle that comes hand in hand with the England job?

Gary Neville


Due to return to Sky Sports as a pundit

His punditry showcased his potential as a coach, and manager, and earned the 
former England right-back a place in Roy Hodgson’s coaching set-up. One wonders 
if he has been tarnished by association and his first foray intomanagement at 
Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
 was miserable, albeit in difficult circumstances.

Brendan Rodgers


Celtic manager

Rodgers would tick all the criteria having coached youngsters at Chelsea, 
managed Liverpool in a title race, and even enjoyed some experience of European 
football. Dan Ashworth spoke to the Northern Irishman, although the England job 
was apparently not discussed, just prior to his appointment at Celtic, though 
the FA may seek to ascertain whether there is a release clause in the one-year 
rolling deal Rodgers signed at Parkhead.

Claudio Ranieri

Leicester City manager

A year ago his candidacy would have felt laughable given he had just lost to 
the Faroe Islands during a four-game spell with Greece. Now, though, his 
reputation is soaring on the back of Leicester’s staggering Premier League 
success. Whether he would be keen to venture back into international football, 
however, remains open to question.He has never managed a perceived elite club, 
and boasts no international experience as a player.

Alan Pardew


Crystal Palace manager

One of the more experienced English managers currently working in the top 
flight, he was considered a realistic candidate after overseeing eye-catching 
progress at Selhurst Park in 2015. Yet his team’s form deteriorated markedly 
this year to cast doubt over his candidacy, not least as it brought back 
memories of prolonged periods of toil at Newcastle. He has never managed a 
perceived elite club, and boasts no international experience as a player.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1642aa9d08442c2897c0c2155664bea76d55bf50%2F196_216_2968_1781%2F2968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1642aa9d08442c2897c0c2155664bea76d55bf50%2F196_216_2968_1781%2F2968.jpg>
 Sam Allardyce tends to be popular with his players. Photograph: Ian 
MacNicol/Getty Images 
Sam Allardyce


Sunderland manager

Allardyce has succeeded at almost all the clubs he has coached, for all that 
his style of play is too often dismissed as pragmatic, and tends to enthuse the 
players with whom he is working. He was considered when McClaren was appointed 
in 2006 and still describes the chance to coach his country as “the ultimate 
dream”. Yet he conceded recently that his time had probably been and gone. 
“They say they’re looking for an English manager but will they? It’s got this 
‘what’s sexier?’ element now, rather than how good you are at doing the job.”

David Moyes


Unemployed

A Scot in charge of the England team? He would certainly be keen to take on 
the role and revive a reputation which is still dented by that unhappy and 
brief spell as Sir Alex Ferguson’s successor at Manchester United. Life did not 
improve that much at Real Sociedad, either, but his quality was established at 
Preston North End and Everton, even if silverware was always elusive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59d8e7cd06f1a56b6f8438dc2e85f0c518e33831%2F857_350_2964_1779%2F2964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20England%20succession%3A%20candidates%20in%20line%20to%20succeed%20Roy%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fengland-manager-succession-roy-hodgson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59d8e7cd06f1a56b6f8438dc2e85f0c518e33831%2F857_350_2964_1779%2F2964.jpg>
 Jürgen Klinsmann has a track record but might take some persuading to return 
to Europe. Photograph: John Dorton/ISI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Jürgen Klinsmann


USA manager

Or a German in charge of the England team? A World Cup winner as a player, 
Klinsmann the manager took his national team to third place at the tournament 
in 2006 and, in 2011, took up the mantle with the USA. He claimed the Gold Cup 
two years later, reached the last 16 at Brazil 2014 and has just finished 
fourth in the Copa América, an achievement which appears to have eased some of 
the pressure which had been mounting on him. He has two years to run on his 
deal and might take some persuading to return to Europe.
 