
Tobias Wolff: ‘The coolness of his style has led to a lack of praise for what 
he has achieved’

Tobias Wolff is best known for his memoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/19/fiction2> This Boy’s Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/this-boy-s-life.html>, which won the Los 
Angeles Times book award for biography. His 1984 novella,The Barracks Thief 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1985/06/02/books/men-with-rifles.html?pagewanted=all>, 
won the Pen/Faulkner award for fiction. He was the director of creative writing 
at Stanford from 2000 to 2002 and received a National Medal of Arts from the 
president in 2015.

Our candidates for president campaign as if they’re running for king, and not 
just any king – no quaint, hospital-touring symbol of national unity, no mere 
figurehead answerable to a constitution and a popular assembly. Congress? 
What’s that? If elected, our American candidate will, like an absolute monarch, 
resolve the thorniest problems of state simply by exerting his (or her!) will. 
Is the domestic economy on fire, and about to spread to our neighbours? He will 
“fix” it, because he “knows how”. Students drowning in debt? He’ll make college 
free! Islamic jihadists taking over cities in Syria and Iraq? He’ll carpet bomb 
them until we find out“if sand [and innocent civilians] can glow” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/16/republican-debate-isis-war-crimes>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b6b6e57d4d9a597f85b60702e43a0dfb11129b%2F0_284_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b6b6e57d4d9a597f85b60702e43a0dfb11129b%2F0_284_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Tobias Wolff: ‘Despite my years, I believed in Obama – believed not only that 
he meant what he said, but that he could get it done.’ Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Observer 
Do suspected terrorists know more than they’re telling? He’ll have them 
tortured till they sing like Pavarotti, and kill their families into the 
bargain, and the military will just have to suck it up and do what he says, 
even if they say they won’t, and have the law to back them up. Law? What’s 
that? She’ll ban assault weapons; he’ll make sure you can take them to church.

The promise of immediate and radical change is a campaign fiction presented 
with such bald-faced effrontery that we hardly question it any more, unless 
it’s coming from the other side. Indeed, the performance can’t be sustained 
unless we support it with our credulity, like a tentful of rubes gaping at the 
tricks of a carnival magician, even offering ourselves up as subjects.

We wanted heat. We wanted him to call liars liars, idiots idiots. We wanted 
him to bully the bullies

The wishful thinking that is the source of this credulity is, of course, a 
prelude to disappointment if our candidate actually gets elected. Take the case 
of candidateBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>. He 
was going to get us out of Iraq and Afghanistan, and close Guantánamo. He would 
save our failing economy, mend our broken healthcare system, and enact sensible 
gun control legislation. He would overhaul our immigration system, address 
climate change with meaningful policies, and change the bilious tone of our 
political discourse. We weren’t a nation of red states and blue states, he 
reminded us: we were the United States. Despite my years, I believed – believed 
not only that he meant what he said, but that he could get it done.

My wife and I gathered several friends on a November night in 2008, and 
watched with joy and disbelief as this young, literary, ironical man with a 
Kenyan father was elected to the presidency. Some of us had tears in our eyes. 
I was one. But as time went on those tears began to burn. He wasn’t getting it 
done, or so it seemed to me. Guantánamo was still in business. The planet kept 
heating up, and the wars dragged on, though increasingly waged by special 
forces. As before, just about anybody was free to walk into a gun store and 
come out armed, and each year some 30,000 Americans continued to pay for that 
freedom with their lives.

And the tone of political life had become even more toxic than before the 
election. During President Obama’s first State of the Union address, a 
congressman fromSouth Carolina shouted: “You lie!” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/10/you-lie-joe-wilson-obama-speech> 
and became a Republican hero, even as the leaders of that party dedicated 
themselves to obstructing President Obama’s legislative initiatives and 
judicial appointments, effectively disabling the government in order, as the 
senate majority leader shamelessly admitted, to make Obama a one-term 
president. The birthers continued to question his legitimacy, and, further, to 
imply that he was a secret Muslim and supporter of Isis. He was Hitler. He was 
Lenin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56117a38f01fbd094540f19d141d7eeec2b9ae9%2F0_137_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56117a38f01fbd094540f19d141d7eeec2b9ae9%2F0_137_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Obamacare supporters react to the US Supreme Court decision to uphold 
President Obama’s health care law, 28 June, 2012, Washington, DC. Photograph: 
Mark Wilson/Getty Images 
None of this of this was Obama’s fault. Indeed, he reacted to the unrelenting 
stream of slander and congressional malfeasance with unflappable calm and an 
air of faintly amused detachment. And for that I did blame him. The coolness I 
had admired during his campaign became an irritant. In fact, it drove me sort 
of crazy. Why didn’t he fight back? Show some rage at what was truly 
outrageous, the obstruction, the name-calling, the attacks on Michelle Obama 
for encouraging schools to serve healthy food, even for occasionallywearing 
dresses that showed her arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/mar/04/fashion-michelleobama>? 
Call these liars and bullies out, damn it! Politics is mud wrestling, did he 
not understand that? And if he really didn’t feel anger, then why not take some 
acting lessons, and fake it?

Well, I was wrong. As Barack Obama prepares to leave office, I think about 
what he managed to do in the face of implacable resistance.No, he didn’t close 
Guantánamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/24/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans>
; the Republican congress wouldn’t let him, nor would they let him bringsanity 
to our gun laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/05/what-obama-said-on-gun-control-doesnt-matter-republicans-oppose-it>
, or to our immigration policies. But as most economists agree, his financial 
initiatives, narrowly approved, did save us from a profound recession, possibly 
even a depression. Hissuccessful auto industry bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/aug/06/auto-industry-obama-bailout>
, fiercely contested at the time, saved countless jobs at virtually no expense 
to the taxpayer. If Obama couldn’t entirely extricate us from the wars he 
inherited, he has refrained from entangling us in new wars, despite being 
constantly urged to do so by congressmen and senators who otherwise refuse to 
spend tax dollars – on, say, education, or roads, or environmental safeguards.

Finally, 20 million Americans who did not have health insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/28/obama-healthcare-reform-key-provisions>
 when Barack Obama took office have it now; and in spite of dire Republican 
predictions, and umpteen votes for repeal, it has actually lowered the 
healthcare cost inflation rate. No one in this country, however poor, or sick, 
need be without insurance. This achievement eluded Theodore Roosevelt and Bill 
Clinton, among others.

So why has Obama not been celebrated for what he’s done? Why did so many of us 
so often feel a sense of impatience, even disappointment? I believe it comes 
down to immaturity – in us, not him. At least part of the reason for our 
failure to recognise and praise what he’s accomplished has to do with his style 
– that coolness. He doesn’t brag, or gloat. He doesn’t call attention to 
himself, or proclaim his deeds in the thoroughfares, or ridicule those who 
oppose him. But we wanted him to. We wanted heat. We wanted anger, slashing 
rhetoric, mockery. We wanted him to call liars liars, idiots idiots. We wanted 
him to bully the bullies. We wanted him to wage war, and crow over his fallen 
enemies. And because we did not get the melodrama we demanded, we lost the plot.

But now we have a candidate who will give us all the sound and fury we could 
ask for, or imagine. Let’s see how we like it. Me, I’m already nostalgic for 
Obama.

Akhil Sharma ‘Now I am much less tolerant of white stupidity’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F597d3bc940077cbd7c7329b62544c2e83be8f9d4%2F0_0_3900_2486%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F597d3bc940077cbd7c7329b62544c2e83be8f9d4%2F0_0_3900_2486%2F3900.jpg>
 Akhil Sharma: ‘I understood the tenderness on the faces as hope.’ Photograph: 
Tim Knox 
Akhil Sharma is the author of the 2015 Folio prize-winning novel Family Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/10/family-life-akhil-sharma-review-novel>
 as well asAn Obedient Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/12/an-obedient-father-by-akhil-sharma-review-moral-corruption-in-delhi>
, for which he won the 2001 Hemingway Foundation/PEN award. Born in India, he 
moved to the US as a child and he is currently an assistant professor of 
creative writing at Rutgers University-Newark. His short story Cosmopolitan was 
turned into a2003 film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vXmHOJlifaM> of the 
same name.

At the Times Square subway stop there is an electronics good store with TVs in 
the windows. For perhaps the first two years of the Obama presidency, one of 
the TVs was constantly showing Obama swearing the oath of office. Always there 
was a small knot of black people standing before the window, looking at the TV 
tenderly.

To me now, those black people standing before the window were smarter than I 
was

I am Indian and I have experienced some racism in America but I did not 
experience Obama’s inauguration or presidency as some great promise coming true.

When I saw the knot of black people watching the inauguration, what I felt was 
embarrassment. I understood the tenderness on the faces as hope. That things 
would change. To me, it seemed obvious that things would not change. That 
racism and fear of others getting ahead is so deeply rooted in the white 
American psyche that there was bound to be a backlash. To me, the tenderness 
seemed like people believing a lie they desperately wanted to believe.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
In eight years a person can change quite a bit and, to me now, that tenderness 
I saw is not hope but joy. There can be joy in the moment and one can be joyful 
without believing that things will necessarily get much better. To me now, 
those black people standing before the window were smarter than I was in that 
they chose to enjoy their happiness.

One other way that I have experienced the Obama presidency is that I have 
begun to be intolerant of certain types of stupidity from white people. My role 
is no longer to help them become comfortable with racial issues or to help them 
see another point of view. My response to white stupidity now is to tell people 
to grow up. I have an acquaintance who was Obama’s boss when Obama had just 
gotten out of college. My acquaintance, a white man, was deeply irritated that 
Obama had become president and that he himself had not. I can certainly claim 
to my share of irrationality but when I heard this, it seemed to me a new level 
of bizarreness. Before the Obama presidency, if I had heard something so stupid 
I would have just laughed. Now I asked the man if he would have thought this if 
Obama had been white?

Attica Locke: ‘His healthcare reforms were humongous’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740404a9b3249a336289727f0293a2d8b999558e%2F110_389_6514_3887%2F6514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740404a9b3249a336289727f0293a2d8b999558e%2F110_389_6514_3887%2F6514.jpg>
 Attica Locke: ‘When Obama was elected… I was stunned in my soul.’ Photograph: 
Ulf Andersen/Getty Images 
Attica Locke was born in Texas. Her first novel, Black Water Rising 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-water-rising.html>, was nominated for a 
2010 Edgar award, an NAACP Image award, and a Los Angeles Times book prize. Her 
second,The Cutting Season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/30/cutting-season-attica-locke-review>
, was a national bestseller and winner of the Ernest Gaines award for 
literature. She is an academy member for the Folio prize UK, as well as being 
on the board of directors for the Library Foundation of Los Angeles.

When Obama was elected, what I felt was bigger than joy – though I’m not sure 
I have a word for what it was. I remember watching the results on TV and saying 
over and over: “Is this actually happening? Is this real?” I just couldn’t take 
it in. I was stunned in my soul.

A few months later, I went to stay on a plantation in southern Louisiana, 
doing research for my second book. I was sleeping in a little cabin right by 
the field where slaves used to cut sugar cane. One night a storm was coming and 
you could hear the leaves rustling against each other, and it sounded to me 
like voices. I remember talking to whatever spirits were out there and telling 
them: “Your labour was not in vain. Everything you lived for was not in vain.” 
And I felt a deep sense of hope – hope beyond what was written on an election 
poster.

A perverse gift of his presidency is the fact it allowed a sickness to bubble 
up to the surface, like a boil on the skin

Has that hope been fulfilled? Not exactly. Don’t get me wrong, there was never 
a part of me that thought we were going to get a post-racial society. I’m not 
interested in living in a post-racial society. But I had a hope that we were 
about to move past the worst of our racial history. Right now, America is at a 
crossroads. The Obama presidency can move us forward, or we can backslide into 
racial intolerance and violence for good. One of the effects of Obama being 
elected is that there is a level of racism in America that can no longer be 
ignored. If a man like Barack Obama, so well-educated, so graceful, so 
intelligent, so charming, can be so reviled and denigrated on a daily basis in 
some parts of the country and in Congress (to the point that he can hardly do 
his job), you can no longer as a normal American ignore the profound problem of 
race in this country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f4c73953412b135a39a7e8521615a3dc8e4eca6%2F39_90_1261_723%2F1261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f4c73953412b135a39a7e8521615a3dc8e4eca6%2F39_90_1261_723%2F1261.jpg>
 Barack and Michelle Obama: ‘We’re just beginning to see what this man and his 
wife together are going to do for the country. ‘ Photograph: Rebecca 
Blackwell/AP 
There are a lot of well-meaning white folks who for years could not see the 
breadth of racism in America, so I feel that one of the gifts of Obama’s 
presidency – a perverse gift – is the fact it allowed a sickness to bubble up 
to the surface, like a boil on the skin. You can’t treat what you can’t see. 
And now that we see it, maybe there’s a chance to treat this racial sickness 
for good.

As for my feelings about Obama, the man himself, I think he’s done a lot of 
positive things. He got dumped with an economy in freefall in 2009 but he’s 
managed to turn it around. And his healthcare reforms were humongous, as big to 
me as stuff that Lyndon Johnson did back in the 60s, like creating Medicare. Of 
course he’s done things that I do not agree with. I have a problem with the 
failure to close Guantánamo, I have a problem with drone strikes around the 
world. But you’re never going to like everything that any president does. What 
I’m not going to do is hold Obama to a higher standard, where he has to be a 
magical negro who is perfect. He’s allowed to make missteps.

I think we’re just beginning to see what this man and his wife together are 
going to do for the country. He’s done what he can within the office of the 
presidency, but now I think he could be like Jimmy Carter, who has done some 
incredible work since leaving office. We’re just seeing the beginning of 
Obama’s power as a human being.As told to Killian Fox

Hari Kunzru: ‘His rhetorical skill soothed the terror induced by his blackness’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653f1e541c75ea4010862fe0e24f3c64b5ea3fc7%2F0_132_4368_2780%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F653f1e541c75ea4010862fe0e24f3c64b5ea3fc7%2F0_132_4368_2780%2F4368.jpg>
 Hari Kunzru: ‘His clearest legacy is symbolic.’
 Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Observer 
British novelist Hari Kunzru left London for New York eight years ago. He was 
the recipient of the Betty Trask prize (2002) and the Somerset Maugham award 
(2003) for his debut novel,The Impressionist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/mar/31/fiction.features1>. His 2011 
novel,Gods Without Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/27/gods-without-men-hari-kunzru-review>
, led to the coining of the genre “translit”: novels that “cross history and 
geography without being historical nor changing psychic place” (New York Times).

The clearest legacy of the Obama presidency is symbolic. It’s hard for 
non-Americans (and, indeed, non-whites) to understand the psychic blow dealt to 
the nativist right by the ascent of a black man to the White House. That part 
of the Republican base that abandoned the Democrats after the passage of the 
Civil Rights Act in 1964, and which has been so irresponsibly indulged by the 
party of Lincoln, took the news like medieval villagers witnessing an eclipse. 
We’ve now spent eight years watching Republican congressmen scurrying hither 
and thither brandishing pitchforks, outraged at the latest whiff of terrorist 
fist-bumpery.

Obama has always been a cautious centrist Democrat, not a man likely to align 
himself with the politics of black power

The obstructionist opposition to Obama came tricked out in 18th-century 
Founders’ drag, bewigged and buckle-shoed. Ostensibly they were angry that the 
framers of the constitution were being traduced by a stoner Kenyan community 
organiser, yet beneath the surface, their grievances often turned out to be 
rooted in the erosion of the racial deference that has been expected in this 
country since the days when Jefferson and Washington toured their slave 
quarters .

The presence of a black first family in the White House, the nation’s 
lifestyle fishbowl, is just as symbolically powerful as the sight of a black 
husband and father shouldering the responsibilities of the presidency. In their 
immaculate media presentation, the Obamas have communicated themselves to the 
readers of the kind of magazines found in supermarket checkouts as a family 
whose dignity and essential decency are well sheathed in the necessary American 
armour of glamour. Whoever wins the presidency in November, the first spouse 
will command a fraction of the respect that Michelle Obama enjoys. The sight of 
the two Obama daughters, young black women growing up with unlimited 
aspirations in a loving home, begs a response from a country where the number 
one cause of death for black women aged 15-34 is homicide by a current or 
former partner.

Many of the young people driving the Black Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> came of age 
during the Obama presidency, their political consciousness formed by the 2008 
election. For them, Obama turned out to be more hope than change, and his 
failure to speak in a full-throated way in their support has felt like a 
betrayal, but once the thick rind of symbolism has been peeled, the president 
has always been a cautious centrist Democrat with an instinct for consensus, 
not a man likely to align himself with the politics of black power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9ffa28b259de0ab5fc2f7a010a58bb318bc948%2F0_0_3512_2098%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9ffa28b259de0ab5fc2f7a010a58bb318bc948%2F0_0_3512_2098%2F3512.jpg>
 ‘The drone war is considered in many parts of the world the administration’s 
signal moral disaster’: a US Air Force MQ-1B Predator drone at a secret air 
base in the Persian Gulf: Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images 
In policy terms, the Obama legacy is mixed. The passing of the Affordable Care 
Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/live/2015/jun/25/supreme-court-rules-obamacare-healthcare-law>
 has curbed some of the more egregious iniquities of the dysfunctional US 
healthcare system, but hundreds of thousands of Americans still go bankrupt 
every year because of medical bills. Eight years after the financial crisis, 
the president has succeeded in keeping the wheels on American capitalism, but 
once the dust settled, it became clear that the crash accelerated the transfer 
of wealth from the middle class to the very rich, an injustice he has done 
nothing to address.

Middle Eastern policy has been rudderless. There were, to be honest, no good 
options available after the squalid disaster of the Bush wars, but Obama’s 
vacillation about engagement helped produce the chaos in Libya and the vacuum 
in Syria so ruthlessly exploited by Isis and the Russians. He allowed “red 
lines” to be crossed without sanction.The drone war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/20/americas-drone-policy-all-exceptions-no-rules-yemen>
, considered in many parts of the world as the administration’s signal moral 
disaster, has carried on with little serious domestic opposition. The failure 
to close Guantánamo is, in the scheme of things, the least of these failures. 
Only time will tell whether thevaunted Iran deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/18/obama-iran-deal-weekly-address-world-safer-republican-opposition>
 produces a harvest of peace and stability.

And yet Obama will be missed. Sometimes, out of his extensive rhetorical tool 
kit, the president pulls a weird folksy tone, a subliminal suggestion of Merle 
Haggard, designed, no doubt, to soothe the terror induced by his blackness. 
Desperate as it is to go on a psychic vacation in the magical kingdom of the 
“post-racial”, America will discover that it was lucky to have had a figure 
capable of such virtuosic code-switching, a man who demonstrated that it was 
possible to communicate across the lines.

Jayne Anne Phillips: ‘Just by being who he is he has made an enormous impact’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c80c3cc95be6b3bc15f1b54451ae4e13636f83%2F0_759_2912_2154%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c80c3cc95be6b3bc15f1b54451ae4e13636f83%2F0_759_2912_2154%2F2912.jpg>
 Jayne Anne Phillips: ‘Obama has been a stealth president.’ 
Guggenheim fellow Jayne Anne Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/11/fiction.familyandrelationships> 
won the 1980 Sue Kaufman prize for first fiction when she was only 26, for her 
debut book of stories, Black Tickets. Twenty-one years later, her novel
MotherKind <https://www.nytimes.com/books/00/05/28/reviews/000528.28ederlt.html>
 won the Massachusetts Book award. She is the holder of two National Endowment 
for the Arts fellowships.

Obama has been a transformational president, and this may not become entirely 
clear until he leaves office. People forget that when he assumed the presidency 
in 2009, he was handed a financial disaster in the making and his response to 
it really saved the country, and possibly the world, from financial collapse. 
But he’s done so much more. In the two years in which he had a Democratic 
Congress, he passed the Affordable Care Act and oversaw a $36bn dollar 
expansion in Pell Grants, which very much affects students at Rutgers 
University-Newark, where I direct the MFA programme.

Obama’s presidency marks an honourable few years in American history. He is 
Trump’s polar opposite

Obama has been a stealth president. He’s had to be: six years of his 
presidency have been completely obstructed by the Republicans. But he’s managed 
to change energy policy, improve medical care and academic standards, he 
changed “don’t ask, don’t tell” in the military andinfluenced awareness of 
LGBTQ issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/obama-announces-stonewall-inn-national-monument>
 both legally and in popular culture.He went to Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/barack-obama-cuba-visit-raul-castro-analysis>
, he went toHiroshima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/barack-obama-first-us-president-to-visit-hiroshima-japan>
. He has worked hard to fight climate change. Solar energy production has 
increased 30-fold since he became president. Jobs in the solar industry have 
grown exponentially, and he’s leading the effort to phase out damaging 
hydrofluorocarbons used in air conditioning. His presidency has accomplished so 
much of which citizens are not aware. He has embraced executive actions, 
unwilling to accept the stasis Congress embodies.

Then there’s the whole leadership case. He can’t end racism and sexism in 
America, but just by being who he is, he’s made an enormous impact. I think he 
is truly a visionary who is uniquely qualified to serve. He’s a biracial 
African American man who grew up in a white household. He came from a 
background of law and community organising. He’s an absolutely wonderful 
orator: funny, elegant and humane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ad69ce5baec1a9a9bd71995842c92cbccd32e5b%2F0_0_4200_2799%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Obama%20years%3A%20novelists%20assess%20his%20legacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fgoodbye-obama-what-the-novelists-say-tobias-wolff-akhil-sharma-attica-locke-hari-kunzru-jayne-anne-p%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ad69ce5baec1a9a9bd71995842c92cbccd32e5b%2F0_0_4200_2799%2F4200.jpg>
 Same-sex marriage supporters in front of the supreme court in Washington, DC. 
Photograph: Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images 
I suppose it’s clear that I’m a big Obama fan and that this election year has 
been a psychedelic nightmare. It’s like going from the sublime to – if Trump is 
actually elected – the ridiculously dangerous. It’s a very strange time in this 
country and we can only hope that Trump will continue to implode. Hillary 
Clinton is exceptionally qualified and I think she’d be a good president; 
American sexism plays a huge part in her supposed “unlikability”. She might not 
be as inspiring as Obama, she’s not cool or chic, but she is such a policy 
wonk, so prepared and careful. And constant. Her priorities – children, 
families, justice – are the same after 30 years. Yet she is suspected because 
she has breached the establishment. I’m just praying she’ll win. If Trump wins, 
there’ll be a lot of people in America trying to marry Canadians.

Obama has been a inspiring and provocative leader. The fact that this is more 
or less the consensus around the world really matters, because it means he’s 
not vulnerable to the sniping and griping, to the ridiculous “go low, no, go 
lower” tone that Trump has set in this election. I don’t think anything will 
change the fact that Obama’s presidency marks an honourable few years in 
American history. He is Trump’s polar opposite. What a country this is, to 
nurture and succour two such opposite cultural/political beings. The best and 
the worst have moved further and further apart; we are a completely divided 
nation. Those paradise moments – the very surprising 2008 Obama election, the 
crowds, the alliances, the decency, charm and intelligence of it all – exist 
alongside all that we now endure. It’s a world that only a 24-hour news cycle 
could love. What will Trump do or say next? Like everything Trump touches, it’s 
all about him. But I digress.

Desperation and chaos are distracting. How dark will it get? Regardless, Obama 
is not going away. The America that elected him twice is not going away either. 
Like Elvis, that America has left the building. Hopefully it will reappear on 
election day.
 