
Most of us are trapped in rectangular living, trying to retrofit 
eco-efficiency, but we could be enjoying life in a geodesic freedome. For 
starters, freedomes are inherently efficient: they need no intermediate columns 
or supporting walls. After all, a geodesic line is the shortest line between 
two points on the surface of a spheroid, and the sphere is nature’s most 
efficient shape.

Buckminster “Bucky” Fuller, who created the Montreal Biosphère in 1967, was 
the foremost pioneer of geodesic domes, the master of tensegrity – tensile 
integrity – and the reason why geodesic structures are forever associated with 
eco living.

Out of 90 pavillions built for Montreal’s 1967 World’s Fair, only two are 
standing. And one is Bucky’s famed geodome, now known as the Montreal 
Biosphère, minus its acrylic shading canopy (which was lost to fire in the 
1970s).Intended to be built in the middle of nowhere by inexpert hippies (kits 
were sold through theWhole Earth Catalog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/05/stewart-brand-whole-earth-catalog>
) the domes were designed to be durable and able to withstand high winds. But 
“anticipatory architects”, designing after the oil shock for tough times ahead, 
loved their efficiency. Domes use a third less material in construction, and 
33%-50% less energy than conventional houses, according to 1980s research. But 
this was probably the last time they were popular as residences. These days we 
are more familiar with them as showcase structures, such asthe Eden project 
<http://www.edenproject.com/> or Disney’s Epcot.

Now it’s time to break out and rediscover the freedoms of freedomes. At 
Geo-dome <http://geo-dome.co.uk/> you’ll find kits. Go to Blackleaf for a 
heimplanet geodesic inflatable tent 
<https://www.blackleaf.com/en-UK/Heimplanet-The-Cave-Inflatable-Tent/bl3339598.htm?colour=Cairo+Camo>
£512.95. Or get a proper geodesic structure in the form of Bouf’sgarden igloo 
<http://www.bouf.com/94497/garden-igloo-360--multipurpose-dome-outdoor-room--with-free-uk-and-european-delivery.html>
 (£629) that also comes with a shading canopy.

For the pioneer designers and dwellers, dome living was about “ecosophy’” – a 
personal response to planetary crisis. Your geodome won’t provide all the 
answers, but it gives you a harmonious space in which to ponder the future.

The big picture: Flood House
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e07f4602b7ef615991c7b1162e46b5a5b716a4c%2F0_624_2299_1379%2F2299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20geodesic%20domes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20geodesic%20domes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e07f4602b7ef615991c7b1162e46b5a5b716a4c%2F0_624_2299_1379%2F2299.jpg>
 Weather permitting: Flood House, the floating weather station. Photograph: 
Brotherton-Lock 
Arts programme Radical Essex <http://radicalessex.uk/> aims to reclaim the 
county from perceptions generated by shows such asThe Only Way is Essex. I’ve 
certainly never seen anything likeFlood House <http://flood.house/> on Towie. A 
piece of nomadic architecture by Matthew Butcher, it’s a companion piece to his 
earlier design, Filter House. The structure asks how we might live through 
seasonal flooding and is a floating weather station.

Well dressed: ethical handwoven bags
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b610ecbb93ad88b8c5d8c55ab76fcbda7ab8c%2F0_60_1200_1342%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20geodesic%20domes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20geodesic%20domes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Feco-guide-to-geodesic-domes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b610ecbb93ad88b8c5d8c55ab76fcbda7ab8c%2F0_60_1200_1342%2F1200.jpg>
 In the bag: a Basket Room x Jigsaw woven tote bag, £110 
After pursuing careers in the mainstream fashion industry, Camilla Sutton and 
Holly Dutton met while studying fashion design at art college.

Determined to do fashion differently, in 2014 they set up the ethical 
lifestyle companythe Basket Room <http://www.thebasketroom.com/>. They 
specialise in handwoven baskets and accessories, working directly with weaving 
co-operatives in rural Kenya, Ghana, Rwanda and Swaziland, using traditional 
techniques.

Now their first collaboration with high-street stalwart Jigsaw has just 
launched online and in selected stores. More than 100 women in rural Kenya have 
worked on the limited-edition collection, which includes a basket shopper bag 
in a choice of two colours and a curved clutch finished with black or brown 
leather. Both designs were handwoven using sisal grass. Available from £89 at
thebasketroom.com <http://www.thebasketroom.com/> and jigsaw-online.com 
<http://clothing.jigsaw-online.com/search?view=grid&w=baskets>

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 