
The north-east: Rachel and Becky Unthank, musicians

We grew up on the banks of the Tyne in a little village called Ryton. Our 
parents are from Teesside but moved to Tyneside, and with Northumberland a 
stone’s throw away and Newcastle just along the road, we feel very connected to 
the whole of the north-east. Our parents have always been really into folk 
music and we were brought up with lots of north-eastern traditions: we both 
still go clog-dancing every week and our dad didrapper dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/07/morris-dancing-longsword> – a 
type of sword dancing that came out of the pit villages.

We draw on a lot on the traditional songs and stories of the north-east in our 
music – songs about border battles and the mining industry, about the river and 
the sea. This area feels inexhaustible as a source of inspiration. We’re noted 
for singing in our accents, and why wouldn’t we? There’s such a strong sense of 
identity here, and so much history and culture to draw from.

It’s only recently that we’ve started to write songs of our own. Usually we 
look for songs in old songbooks or talk to knowledgeable people in the area. 
But sometimes going out for a walk is the best inspiration. One of our 
favourite walks begins in Ryton: you go down the hill into an area called the 
Willows, where we used to play as kids, then past the ponds, along by the 
river, through the forest, through the graveyard and back into the village. 
It’s really beautiful down there.

If you listen closely to our albums you can hear the cows from the next-door 
farm

Another walk we both love is up along the Northumberland coast – you get great 
big, beautiful beaches up there that are usually quite empty, even in the 
summer. So you start in the village ofCraster 
<http://www.visitnorthumberland.com/craster>, which is famous for its kippers, 
and walk up the coast pastDunstanburgh castle 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/dunstanburgh-castle/> and along Embleton Bay 
<http://www.yournorthumberland.co.uk/area-guides/embleton>, where the sand is a 
lovely orange-golden colour. If you keep going around the corner, the sand 
becomes silvery and you get toLow-Newton-by-the-Sea 
<http://www.yournorthumberland.co.uk/area-guides/low-newton>, which is one of 
our favourite places in the world. There’s a square of houses open to the sea 
and in the corner is a wonderful pub called theShip Inn 
<http://www.shipinnnewton.co.uk/>, which does fabulous crab sandwiches and has 
its own microbrewery. It’s a good place to be.

On the subject of favourite pubs, there’s a really good one in Newcastle 
called theCumberland Arms <http://www.thecumberlandarms.co.uk/>. It’s in the 
Ouseburn Valley, an industrial area of the city that’s becoming a hangout for 
artists and musicians. The Cumberland Arms has always been a hub of music – our 
dad used to take us to Irish sessions there when we were kids. Lots of bands 
play there and we practise clog-dancing in the top room every Wednesday. It’s 
changed hands over the years, but if anything it’s got more wonderful – maybe 
that’s because we’re allowed to drink the beer now.

Our studio is in a little hamlet called Aydon, where Rachel lives. We used to 
record at home, and we’re pretty certain that if you listen closely to our 
albums you can hear the cows from the next-door farm. The studio is in a lovely 
old granary that belongs to the neighbours. It’s definitely an inspiring place 
to rehearse. There were times when we ended up practising in sticky indie-rock 
studios and we were like, “Ugh, get me out of this boy environment.” Here you 
can step out the door and be in the fresh countryside air. We’ve got our 
bunting up. It’s brilliant.

The folk scene in the north-east has a very cohesive identity. It’s not 
buried: it’s very much alive. The tunes and traditions are in everyone’s 
vocabulary. There are lots of sad tales but we sing silly songs too – our dad 
certainly does. It definitely feels like we’ve got our own thing going on up 
here.KF

Cumbria: Sarah Hall, novelist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672229532%2Fc8c114e4-9147-4f09-ad9b-74eba841a0e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440672229532%2Fc8c114e4-9147-4f09-ad9b-74eba841a0e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sarah Hall by Haweswater, Cumbria. Photograph: Mark Pinder/Observer 
I left Cumbria when I was 18, and apart from five years in Carlisle I’ve lived 
outside the county since then: in Aberystwyth and then St Andrews for 
university, in America for a while, and now in Norwich. One reason I return to 
Cumbria in my writing has to do with intimacy. You want people to be convinced 
of the place they’re reading about, and with Cumbria there’s a shorthand I can 
use to do that.

I grew up in a little hamlet near Haweswater, on the east side of the Lake 
District. It was quite a wild place to be a kid – lots of moorland to explore 
and rivers to swim in. My parents moved up from the south before I was born, so 
I’m first-generation Cumbrian. I think being local but not entirely local gives 
you an interesting perspective – you can look at your community from a bit of a 
distance and appreciate the characteristics that might not be part of your own 
makeup.

I’ve always been away from Cumbria whenever I’ve written about it. I wrote my 
first two novels in America andThe Carhullan Army in Cambridge; The Wolf Border 
was written in Norwich. Having that geographical distance gives you a different 
lens on a place and more imaginative freedom. My first novel,Haweswater, was 
more or less a map of the territory, whereas many of the places inThe Wolf 
Border are made up. I like the idea that the Lake District, which has very 
strong associations with the Romantic tradition, is a mutable place that you 
can reshape in your imagination.

I look down over the valley and feel reassured

I go back to visit quite a lot. My parents still live in the same village. 
There’s a little hill right by their house which I walk up every day I’m there 
– it’s almost a ritualistic thing at this point – and when I look down over the 
valley I feel reassured. The village is only a couple of miles from Haweswater, 
and I go walking up around the crags where the golden eagle nests, or used to 
nest (nobody’s quite sure what’s going on with the golden eagle anymore). I 
still go swimming in waterfalls nearby and I still have my favourite pubs in 
the area – I used to really like thePunchbowl 
<http://www.punchbowlinnaskham.com/> in Askham but now I tend go to the Crown 
and Mitre <http://www.crownandmitre.com/> in Bamford Grange because it’s close 
to my parents’ house.

The county is full of interesting and unusual buildings. I really like St 
Mary’s Church in Wreay <http://www.punchbowlinnaskham.com/>, just south of 
Carlisle – it was designed in the mid-19th century by Sara Losh, who was one of 
the few female architects working at the time. I don’t really believe in 
masculinity and femininity but if you look at the building you can somehow tell 
it’s been designed by a woman. It’s very strange.

I like Long Meg and her Daughters 
<http://www.visitcumbria.com/evnp/long-meg-and-her-daughters/>, which is a very 
strange stone circle in the Eden Valley, andCastlerigg 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/castlerigg-stone-circle/> near 
Keswick, another stone circle that’s fantastically well-preserved. Nobody knows 
why they’re there, but I get a sense they were mapping the region for people 
and I really like that.

I’ll always say that the Lake District is my spiritual home. It’s a place 
where I feel really comfortable, and if my parents weren’t still living there 
I’d feel slightly bereft. I was so lucky to have been brought up there. The 
area definitely has a bind on people and I wouldn’t rule out moving back.KF




Dorset: Anna Calvi, musician
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667552576%2F46b8db67-9eba-4264-975d-24b01a6acfc8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667552576%2F46b8db67-9eba-4264-975d-24b01a6acfc8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Swanage in Dorset, where the sea unlocked Anna Calvi’s songwriting 
imagination. Photograph: Alamy 
 Earlier this summer, I spent three weeks by myself in Swanage on the Dorset 
coast. It was a writing trip, to overcome a bit of block, but I also wanted to 
experience what it would be like to go to a place where I knew no one and could 
be completely on my own.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667807260%2F5238e137-586f-40bd-a3bb-f6018bdbe8c0-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667807260%2F5238e137-586f-40bd-a3bb-f6018bdbe8c0-680x1020.jpeg>
 Anna Calvi. Photograph: PJB/SIPA/Rex Shutterstock 
I’d been to Dorset a couple of times when I was younger and it had made a big 
impression on me. When I was eight, my parents took me to Studland Bay, where 
there’s a really beautiful beach, sand dunes and marshes. I found it really 
magical, like being in another world. A few years later we went to the Jurassic 
coast, and I have a memory of looking for fossils and finding it quite amazing. 
I’d always wanted to go back, so when a friend’s flat became available in 
Swanage I felt it would be the perfect opportunity.

I’d sit on a rock and listen to the boats in the wind making chinking sounds

The flat was high up with a balcony that looked out to sea, which was exciting 
because I’d never lived by the sea before. I got into this routine where I’d 
have my breakfast and then go walking by the sea and think about songs. I would 
compose them in my head, come back and write them down, and then go straight 
out again. I found that the walking and thinking was more important than the 
actual writing, something I’d never experienced before.

There was a certain spot by the marina where I would sit on a rock and listen 
to the boats in the wind making chinking sounds and bell-like noises – it was 
almost like being next to a Buddhist temple. After being in London, I found 
that having space around me and being able to see the horizon was really good 
for my state of mind. It helped me feel calmer so that my ideas could come out 
more easily. I was writing every day and I only spoke to one person the entire 
time – I asked the woman at the café, “Can I have a hot chocolate please?” and 
that was the only time I spoke.

Some of the songs I wrote in Dorset contain references to the sea and feeling 
like a small part of this huge expanse. I’m not sure which ones will make it on 
to my next album, but if you hear a reference to the sea, you’ll know where it 
came from.KF

South-east London: Destiny Ekaragha, playwright
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667997281%2F1a2c57e6-e39e-4d35-8891-d44bb3e38e13-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440667997281%2F1a2c57e6-e39e-4d35-8891-d44bb3e38e13-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Film-maker Destiny Ekaragha’s work is inspired by Deptford, where she was born 
and bred and still lives. Photograph: Andy Hall/Observer 
Growing up, I didn’t move around at all: I was straight-up south-east London. 
My primary school was south-east London, my secondary school was south-east 
London, my college was south-east London. The furthest I moved was to 
university, and that was just across the river in east London. So when I’m 
writing and making films, I base most of my characters in New Cross, Deptford, 
Peckham... the areas that are familiar to me.

Hate it or love it, there’s no place like it. I think it’s the people that 
make it different. In south London as a whole, there’s a warmth and a realness 
and a sense of community I haven’t found elsewhere. It also gives you street 
smarts. You develop this antenna for trouble or danger, and for good stuff as 
well – good people and good food. I carry that with me everywhere I go.

My parents were Nigerian and came over here in the 70s, so I grew up in a very 
Nigerian household. I only saw British life – food, clothes, the way British 
people spoke – outside of home. New Cross was pretty much black in the 80s and 
90s, but there were also different cultures around. That’s the great thing 
about state schools: people from different backgrounds all thrown together. It 
creates tolerance. We never spoke about our differences that much. It was more 
like, “I can’t be bothered to do maths today”.

A lot of films set in my part of London focus on gang violence and drug 
dealers but that wasn’t my childhood. Yes, I know people who were in and out of 
prison, but my friends and I weren’t getting in trouble, we were just hanging 
out and talking and eating. I’ve always wondered why this aspect of the city 
wasn’t on screen. Why were we only seeing the bad parts? So I decided to tell 
stories from my own experience. That’s why I love [playwright Bola Agbaje’s]
Gone Too Far! so much, as a play and as a script [it became Destiny’s debut 
feature <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IEbIkZJgNGg>]. That story was much 
closer to so many people’s reality. That was our lives: hanging out on roads, 
dealing with cultural differences and trying to fit in as teenagers, like 
everybody else.

Everything I need is on Deptford High Street

 I still live in Deptford. Deptford High Street, which people call “Little 
Lagos”, is one of my favourite places. As a person of Nigerian descent, I can 
go into any of the shops and buy hair creams and stuff that caters to my skin. 
It’s the same with food. If I can’t be bothered to cook, I can go down the road 
to Island Buka or Tomi’s Kitchen and get jollof rice. Everything that I need, 
culturally, is on that street.

I really love Peckham as well. It’s being gentrified very quickly but there’s 
still a real sense of community. I really like the high street there and the 
library and the PeckhamPlex, a cinema where you can still see a film for a 
fiver.

I’ve travelled now and seen other places and met other people and loved their 
cultures, but my voice is south-east London. You hear stories about people not 
being proud of where they grew up and pretending they’re from somewhere else. 
South-east London is given such a bad rap – it’s like: “You’re nothing if 
you’re from here, you’ll never achieve anything.” That’s why it’s so important 
for me to tell stories about this place, stories that show that south-east 
London is much more than what the media say it is.KF

Cornwall: Patrick Gale, author
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668427726%2F23ec081a-ea0a-47ef-b975-ca6bee5593e3-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668427726%2F23ec081a-ea0a-47ef-b975-ca6bee5593e3-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Patrick Gale at home near Sennen, Cornwall. Photograph: Harry Borden/Observer 
I live by Land’s End, on the last farm in England in a hamlet near Sennen. 
When I’m needed, I help out with the cattle and drive the tractor during the 
barley harvest. I’ve had to learn all that since meeting Aidan, my husband; 
it’s his family farm. We’ve got our own little beach, Nanjizal, which is 
west-facing, so you have the sun right until sunset. It’s a famous beauty spot 
because it has the Song of the Sea, a natural arch in the side of the cliff, 
and there are seals and occasionally dolphins and basking sharks… I’m very 
lucky – it’s like living on a writers’ retreat.

Culturally, Cornwall is incredible. Especially west Cornwall, because it’s so 
remote: there’s a well established tradition of being self-reliant. There’s a 
fantastic art colony, a really good music scene, lots of writers, book 
festivals… There is a huge sense of community and a very strong ethos of 
understanding; you don’t have to apologise for the fact that you spend your 
days writing stories.

It’s a fantastic place to be any kind of artist as you can still buy somewhere 
pretty cheaply if you don’t want a sea view, and we’ve got so many arts 
festivals here: Penzance, North Cornwall, Fowey, St Ives festival, and the 
wonderful Port Eliot festival as well. For local writers, there’s usually a way 
for them to get their work heard without having to go too far. I startedthe 
North Cornwall book festival 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=8&sqi=2&ved=0CEwQFjAHahUKEwiQxqu64cnHAhXpFtsKHbyOC3I&url=http%3A%2F%2Fgalewarning.org%2F2015%2F06%2Fnorth-cornwall-book-festival%2F&ei=TkXfVZDnJemt7Aa8na6QBw&usg=AFQjCNFL5owMvB8fQS20Y7oQSXIv4sZ0Pg&sig2=P2XCKM-83NQs9Tg3VjgAqQ>
 three years ago – it’s enormous fun, and by keeping it small I can invite 
writer friends and writers I admire. On top of that, I’m patron of the Penzance 
literary festival.

I love Penzance – it’s not well known by tourists, but it’s an undiscovered 
jewel. It has lovely regency squares and sub-tropical gardens; rather like 
Brighton, but prettier. It’s got a great hippyish vibe, with pop-up cafes and 
little art galleries, and it’s slightly eccentric, too: it has one of the only 
hospitals in England where you can ask for the wise woman instead of the 
Catholic priest, which I think is very charming, because there are so many 
pagans down here.

It’s that mix of hard-bitten poverty and natural beauty

Cornwall is the second poorest region in the UK, but it happens to be very 
beautiful, so although a lot of households here are struggling financially, 
many say they’re happy and feel that their children have a nice time. That 
mixture of hard-bitten and poor, and yet rich in natural beauty certainly feeds 
my kind of writing. I’ve set quite a few books here, as Cornwall gives me 
lovely, atmospheric settings. But it also stops me ever taking for granted my 
good luck in being able to make a living as a writer, or ever being tempted to 
write a book about writers or artists; it reminds you there are people who have 
real needs.

I work in longhand, so if it’s sunny, I’m fond of writing outdoors in the 
garden, or on a bench in our field overlooking the Atlantic. The cattle mill 
around by my feet; it’s pretty idyllic. In the winter I love writing in my 
little shed in the garden. It has a wood-burning stove, so it’s very cosy – I 
sit out there with the dogs, it’s great. I often find that if I’m wrestling 
with some difficulty in a book then walking the dogs around the cliffs helps. 
The footpath from Sennen down to Nanjizal and then round to the beach towards 
Land’s End is one of the most dramatic clifftop walks going. It’s especially 
good when there’s a big swell, so the waves are breaking right up against the 
cliffs.

I moved to Cornwall from London in 1987. The thing that really appealed to me 
initially was how cheap it was. As a starving novelist, I could afford to buy a 
three-bedroom house with a garden here for £45,000, which you certainly 
couldn’t do in London. But the thing I love really is the remoteness; I don’t 
mind that it’s a five-and-a-half-hour train ride to London: that suits me, 
because I get loads of work done on the train rides, but it also means I don’t 
get visitors all the time.CJ





Wales: Owen Sheers, writer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668529076%2Fa0c60b4f-dae3-4fea-a780-239fd5b21049-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668529076%2Fa0c60b4f-dae3-4fea-a780-239fd5b21049-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Owen Sheers at home in Talgarth near Brecon, mid Wales. Photograph: Dimitris 
Legakis/Observer 
I grew up in Wales, in an old Welsh longhouse just outside Abergavenny, and 
moved back here about 18 months ago, to the northern edge of the Brecon 
Beacons. We live just beneath Castell Dinas, an iron age hill fort near the 
village of Talgarth. Even though I’ve had lots of periods of travelling in my 
life, my parents haven’t moved, so I have that sense of being rooted in a very 
specific place.

What I love about Talgarth is that there are lots of artists and writers and 
sculptors here, but it’s a living market town. It has its livestock market 
every Friday and it’s got its feet on the ground. Place takes a long time to 
distil through you, so it’s probably too soon to say what effect it’s had on my 
writing, but on a practical level, the possibility of solitude is much more on 
hand. I can walk down and sit by the river and know that I’ll have silence and 
no one else there.

Sometimes I’ll walk up to the hill fort or across to Mynydd Troed, which means 
foot mountain. It looks over Llangorse Lake, which is another area of ancient 
habitation. Just being in this environment, you feel more connected to the 
fundamental aspects of life and a longer view of history. Our neighbour runs a 
horse-trekking business, and in the summer he puts a couple of horses in our 
field. That has been amazing, to be able to saddle up and be on the hill in 10 
minutes. It’s a totally different way of exploring the landscape. The wildlife 
stays much closer to you, you cover so much more ground and there’s something 
elemental about sharing these totally unpeopled views with this living, 
breathing animal.

The possibility of solitude is much more on hand here

At the bottom of our lane, the old chapel has been bought and converted by 
Alan McGee [former boss of Creation Records and manager of Oasis] into this 
fantastic live music venue, the Tabernacle. He has great acoustic nights, and 
I’m going to start curating a series of readings there. I started a writers’ 
book club with our neighbour Ben Rawlence, who’s a non-fiction writer, and we 
thought there might be three or four of us. By the second session there were 12 
of us, and it was kind of hilarious – all of these authors hiding in the hills, 
and none of us knew the others were there.

There were many driving factors for us to move back to Wales, but one of them 
was that I was increasingly coming here to work because this was where the 
interesting stuff was happening. I was doing things here I couldn’t do anywhere 
else. I spent a year as writer in residence with the Welsh Rugby Union team, I 
didMametz [a play about Welsh soldiers in the first world war], which took 
place in a wood. Before that there was theThe Passion [a 72-hour performance of 
a work inspired by the Passion plays co-directed by and starring Michael 
Sheen], which used all of Port Talbot. We do seem to be in a moment where 
you’re allowed to do some pretty unique and cutting-edge stuff.

The thing I miss most about London is the parks. Over the past four or five 
years I’ve really found that parks are where I can have that crucial experience 
of the first words on the page. There’s something about the communal solitude, 
taking a bath in the crowd and yet being on your own. My latest novel,I Saw A 
Man, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/27/i-saw-a-man-owen-sheers-review> 
was basically written on the benches of Victoria Park in east London.

Now if I want to work surrounded by the hubbub of noise, I’ll pop down to our 
local cafe, The Bakers Table. It’s attached to Talgarth Mill, where they make 
this great bread. It’s partly powered by the river that runs through our land. 
There is something lovely about working with this great big mill wheel turning.
JO’C

The south-west: Richard Long, artist
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440669382400%2F171ef8dd-c3a3-42a3-99e8-772d0af11c22-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20place%20that%20inspires%20me%3A%20artist%20reveal%20their%20secret%20getaways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fplaces-that-inspire-me-artist-creative-hotspots-unthanks-anna-calvi-richard-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440669382400%2F171ef8dd-c3a3-42a3-99e8-772d0af11c22-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Richard Long photographed with his work on the Clifton Down, Bristol. 
Photograph: Max McClure 
I’m one of those few artists who still lives where I was born, which is 
Bristol. I’ve always lived here, apart from the two years when I was a student 
in London. There are lots of reasons why I’ve never left. For one, I’m not an 
urban artist and there was no reason for me to stay in London. In some ways 
Bristol is still the heart of my work: it was where I did my early works in the 
landscape, and I still to this day get my mud from the River Avon.

Dartmoor was like a tabula rasa in the old days, a prototype landscape

Many of the walks I do as art begin from my front door. One of my favourite 
areas in the world is from Bristol to Land’s End, and I’ve made many walks 
leaving my front door in Bristol, crossing the Mendips, the Somerset Levels and 
on through Cornwall – and vice versa: I’ve walked from Land’s End back to 
Bristol. The territory also includes Dartmoor, which is the nearest proper 
wilderness to my home in Bristol. Since 1969 I’ve done many wilderness walks on 
Dartmoor. It is beautiful and it’s empty. It was like a tabula rasa in the old 
days, a prototype landscape.

Bristol is just the place where I live. The city itself isn’t relevant to my 
work, though I would say the River Avon has been very important: the limestone 
gorge, the caves, the towpath, the mud banks, the tides… Watching the river 
fascinated me as a kid; sometimes it was completely full, sometimes it was 
completely empty and you could see right to the bottom of these enormous mud 
banks.

I still cycle over the same bridges I did as a child – the swing bridges going 
over the harbour and Brunel’s famous suspension bridge, which I cross every 
day. Childhood pleasures feed into the pleasures of making art now. The first 
things I ever made were mud pies on my front path. In some ways I’m still 
making mud pies.KF
 