
Cannes prizewinner The Past (aka Le Passé), directed by A Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142608/separation>'s Asghar Farhadi, 
has joined the race for the best foreign language Oscar after beingsubmitted as 
Iran's official entry 
<http://www.presstv.ir/detail/2013/09/29/326707/past-submitted-to-2014-oscar-awards/>
. Press TV, the state backed English language news channel, reported that The 
Past had beaten off competition from the likes of Parviz Shahbazi's Trapped to 
get the nod from Iran's Farabi Cinema Foundation, which nominates the contender.

The Past, which won the best actress award in Cannes for Bérénice Bejo, is a 
study of an Iranian man (played by Ali Mosaffa) who returns to Paris to 
finalise his divorce from his French wife (Bejo), who in a relationship with 
another man, Samir (Tahar Rahim).Marion Cotillard had been due to take the lead 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/24/berenice-bejo-marion-cotillard-asghar-farhadi>
 in the 11m euro drama, Farhadi's first to be shot outside Iran, but was forced 
to drop out due to scheduling conflicts. The Past was well-liked at Cannes, 
with the Guardian's Peter Bradshaw calling it "an absorbing, fascinating if 
slightly contrived movie" ina four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/17/cannes-2013-the-past-review>; it 
emerged as a serious contender for the Palme d'Or before losing out toBlue Is 
the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155325/blue-is-the-warmest-colour>.

Farhadi now has the chance to add a second best foreign language Oscar, after 
A Separation's victory in the category in 2011. The selection also comes at a 
pivotal moment for US-Iranian relations, as Iranboycotted last year's awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/25/iran-boycott-oscars-2013> in 
protest at the Innocence of Muslims video controversy. But with the widely 
publicised current thaw, the success of The Past is seen as a small advance for 
the reformers: as the Fars news agency, normally aligned with Iranian 
conservatives, criticised the decision, saying: "Unlike 'The Separation', there 
is nothing Iranian in this film."
 