
In my continued effort to experiment with green living, I’m trying naked 
cosmetics. I’ve traded in over-engineered pump-action pots for slices of soap 
wrapped in paper, and chunks of “solid” shampoo in reusable tins.

I’d have liked to have spread my experiment around various brands, but when it 
comes to solid beauty there’s only one serious player on the high street:Lush 
<https://uk.lush.com/>. What it lacks in sophistication the brand makes up for 
in non-conformism – 35% of the product range is deemed “naked”, devoid of both 
synthetic preservatives and packaging. Lush says that last year it displaced 
more than 15m plastic bottles through global sales of its shampoo bar.

This will seem like lunacy to the mainstream beauty industry, which uses 
packaging not so much for function but for marketing. As Bob Lilienfeld, author 
of theUse Less Stuff Report <http://www.use-less-stuff.com/>, puts it: “The 
cosmetic industry is in the perception business. The environmental industry is 
in the reality business. It’s perception versus reality.”

The reality is a dependency on plastics – 280m tonnes of plastic are produced 
globally each year and 8m tonnes of plastic waste finds its way into oceans. 
Then there are greenhouse gas emissions from producing plastic feedstock. 
According to Stanford University, one tonne of recycled plastic saves 16.3 
barrels of oil.

Great, but in terms of recycling I’m constantly outwitted by personal care 
products in complex plastic containers. My tins and wrapping paper represent a 
reprieve. There are some negatives. My hair is crying out for a more nuanced 
conditioner. On the plus side, Lush’s famously pungent perfumes make my gym bag 
smell great. And the ingredients in these simple products are more 
straightforward, meaning fewer chemicals in my life.

The big picture: migrating with swans

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642a09c5bc77032de740b4c16213dc314de5c42e%2F137_0_2248_1350%2F2248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20naked%20cosmetics%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20naked%20cosmetics%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642a09c5bc77032de740b4c16213dc314de5c42e%2F137_0_2248_1350%2F2248.jpg>
 Sky’s the limit: Sacha Dench in training over Sweden, before she sets off to 
follow the migrating swans. Photograph: Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust/PA 
Is it a bird, is it a plane? No, it’s Sacha Dench of the Wildfowl and Wetlands 
Trust. From September she will follow a flock of endangered Bewick’s swans on 
their 4,660-mile migration from Siberia to the Severn Estuary using a 
paramotor. Suspended from a paraglider with a propeller on her back, she’ll 
visit essential breeding, wintering and passage sites for the swans and other 
migratory birds (wwt.org.uk <http://www.wwt.org.uk/>).

Well dressed: Camper Camaleon collection

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606ce7444ab01c427811c339a883b720b7a4cdc3%2F169_712_3261_4077%2F3261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20naked%20cosmetics%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20naked%20cosmetics%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Feco-guide-to-naked-cosmetics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606ce7444ab01c427811c339a883b720b7a4cdc3%2F169_712_3261_4077%2F3261.jpg>
 Hidden assets: boots from Camper’s collection made in partnership with 
Ethiopian artisans. Photograph: Louis Nderi 
The Mallorca-based footwear company inspires devotion among fans for its naive 
styling coupled with technical prowess. Now it is adding social justice to the 
mix. Last summer, Camper cordwainers and leather specialists began working with 
Ethiopian artisans in partnership with the Ethical Fashion Initiative, set up 
to utilise the skills of marginalised artisans in sub-Saharan Africa and Haiti. 
The Camaleon collection represents the fruits of their labours. Camaleon was 
actually one of the brand’s original designs, based on a traditional Mallorcan 
peasant shoe typically made from scraps of leather, canvas and tyres. This time 
the shoe gets a material upgrade: it’s manufactured from bati goat leather in 
Ethiopia using historic tie-dye techniques to get the distinctive patterns. The 
Camaleon range is available in selected CamperLab stores, or atcamper.com 
<http://www.camper.com/en_GB>

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 