
The opening question on ABC’s Q&A program last week was from a young man named 
Jake Miller-Randle. The day before, Malcolm Turnbull had claimed victory with 
the slimmest majority after eight days of vote counting. Jake asked the panel: 
“What has happened to the state ofAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>?” We’d already 
had six prime ministers in a decade, and some conservative commentators were 
demanding Turnbull resign. “Should Australian voters blame the 
headline-grabbing media, our opinion poll-hungry politicians or ourselves?” 
Jake asked.


I was interested in the answer to this question – as hard as it was – because 
surely it touched on something fundamental in the aftermath of this election, 
the rumblings beneath the seat count, the discontent behind another record vote 
for minor parties and independents, the shaky ground on which our politics play 
out.

First up, Derryn Hinch, the new senator for Victoria: “Well, you can’t blame 
the media. We just report the stuff.” Really? I cannot believe someone as 
experienced as Hinch could believe that journalists are mere messengers in our 
political system.

Kevin Rudd seeks nomination for UN secretary general role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/18/kevin-rudd-seeks-nomination-un-secretary-general>
Then it was the turn of the other panellists, who delivered a grab bag of 
intensely partisan points that missed the cry at the heart of Jake’s question. 
Turnbull would survive, Turnbull was gone. Labor’s primary vote was pathetic. 
The Coalition lost votes, too, and was tearing itself apart. Blah, blah, blah.

“We won the election,” said the ever-smug attorney general, George Brandis. 

Tanya Plibersek: “But you lost a million votes. You lost a million 
conservative votes between one election and the next. And that’s all right, is 
it?” 

Brandis: “Well, Tanya, as you know, there are no prizes for second place in 
this business.”

Host Tony Jones tried to bring it back to the question: “So no need for any 
soul searching whatsoever by the sound of it?”

Brandis replied that all parties reflected after an election. “There’s no such 
thing as an election campaign, successful or unsuccessful, that you can’t take 
lessons from. So of course there’ll be that discussion.”

Of course. A bewildered looking Jake explained that his question was not meant 
to be a partisan one, although in truth he did get an answer, loud and clear.

It took effort not to switch off this show. To do so would have been a tiny 
suburban protest, a thing to do with this sinking feeling of annoyance, despair 
and sadness. It is a rational choice, surely, to leave politics to those who 
love it as sport, who have a stake in the game staying the same.

It is astonishing how little reflection there has been since 2 July. After his 
churlish election night speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/tale-two-speeches-frustration-boiled-over-wait-for-testy-turnbull>
, in which there were no lessons for the prime minister apart from Labor’s 
hoodwinking voters on Medicare, Turnbull acknowledged a few days later that 
yes, there might be a problem.

“There is no doubt that there is a level of disillusionment with politics, 
with government, and with the major parties,”he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/05/australian-election-2016-peta-credlin-malcolm-turnbull-vote-counting-politics-live?page=with:block-577b33b3e4b05db362ab76b4#block-577b33b3e4b05db362ab76b4>
. Mostly though, he continued to blame Labor’s “shocking lie” on Medicare for 
the government’s poor showing after a single term of office, conceding only 
that perhaps the Coalition had left some“fertile ground” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/05/turnbull-offers-mea-culpa-but-hints-abbott-era-health-cuts-played-role-in-result>
 for that lie to take root.

“There are lessons to be learned from this election. It’s too early for 
definitive judgments and it will take time to analyse and ­absorb all of the 
learnings from the campaign.”

It will be interesting to see what Turnbull believes those lessons to be once 
they are analysed and absorbed. His deputy Julie Bishop was asked the following 
night on the ABC’s 7.30 why she thought the public was so turned off. “There’s 
a level of frustration, a level of disillusionment,” she said. “They want to be 
heard, they want their concerns heard.” Again, she said it would take some time 
to work it out.

The danger is that the lessons learned will be tactical ones: that negative 
campaigns really do work, that ground campaigns targeting individual voters 
need to be sophisticated and better-funded, that media fragmentation can be 
used more intensively for political advantage. One wonders if the deeper 
messages, those that have been apparent for several election cycles but are 
growing louder and more insistent, will be ignored again, as though a sullen, 
mistrustful citizenry is something only to be managed and manipulated.

The election result to date <http://vtr.aec.gov.au/HouseDefault-20499.htm> is 
50.37% to the Coalition, and 49.63% to Labor, making any statement about 
“mandates” from either party beyond parody. Twenty three per cent of votersgave 
their first preference 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/federal-election-2016/results/> in the House of 
Representatives to minor parties and independents, up from the 2013 election, 
itself a record. In the Senate, more than one in three people voted for a small 
party or independent.

There’s nothing inherently troubling about that – it is pointed out often 
enough that many countries have multi-party systems and they can work well – 
yet there is no evidence that Australians were casting their votes in a spirit 
of joyous choice. The evidence suggests the opposite.

Queensland is not backward: it's an early warning system | Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/15/queensland-is-not-backward-its-an-early-warning-system>
Survey after survey, here and globally, point to declining trust in politics, 
business, the media and institutions. A poll a couple of years ago by the 
Australian National University found that only 56% of those surveyed believed 
their vote made a difference – down from almost 80% in 1996.

A recent international study, the Edelman Trust Barometer 
<http://www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-property/2016-edelman-trust-barometer/>
, fleshed out the nuance behind the figures – wealthier, better educated people 
were more confident and trusting in public institutions than the rest of the 
population. Public trust in institutions, it found, was “evaporating”.

None of this is new or surprising, but surely this phenomenon has gone beyond 
providing interesting research topics for academics. The suggestion that there 
is something systemically wrong with our politics, that it has proven 
inadequate to address our challenges, is not new, either. It is just that there 
is a surreal disconnection between what most of us know to be true and the way 
our political system grinds on as though oblivious.

The Australian’s Paul Kelly writes 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/paul-kelly/seismic-shifts-rattle-the-foundations-of-democracy/news-story/76c8894a97b9cd676e2ab32910631c9c#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C1%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CPaul_Kelly%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1468557636461>
 that “deep tremors shake our democracy. Unless they are managed and defused 
Australia will succumb, in some form or another, to the more virulent revolt 
against the political status quo that now bedevils both Britain and the US”. 

In his Quarterly Essay earlier this year, George Megalogenis wrote that 
“something deeper is happening here than the predictable incompetence of 
politics”. His thesis was that the belief on both sides of politics in the open 
economic model had to change because the challenges we face require a stronger 
government role, especially in areas such as infrastructure, education and 
climate change. “The political system cannot restore public confidence without 
a more responsive government,” he wrote.

Professor Helen Sullivan, the outgoing director of the Melbourne School of 
Government at the University of Melbourne,wrote recently 
<http://electionwatch.unimelb.edu.au/articles/does-turnbull-have-an-impossible-task>
 that our politics has deteriorated to such an extent that it was now “too late 
for sound decision-making, too late for sustainable public policy, and 
potentially even too late for democracy.” She suggested that there is a case 
for a more consensual style of government now, but she acknowledged that this 
will not happen.

I thought this election might prove a tipping point, that this might be the 
moment when the crumbling of our politics could no longer be ignored. I was 
wrong. Perhaps it will take a Brexit or an earthquake of the magnitude that is 
now shaking American politics to bring about a reckoning here.

The new UK prime minister, Theresa May, may or may not prove up to the task, 
but she at least gets what the problem is, and is willing to speak about it 
with candour.She wants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
 “a democracy that works for everyone, so we can restore trust and confidence 
in our most important institutions – and the political process itself”.

Quotas for women: maybe the conservative side of politics is just more 
misogynist | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/quotas-for-women-maybe-the-conservative-side-of-politics-is-just-more-misogynist>
“Right now,” she says, “if you’re born poor, you will die on average nine 
years earlier than others. If you’re black, you’re treated more harshly by the 
criminal justice system than if you’re white. If you’re a white, working-class 
boy, you’re less likely than anybody else to go to university. If you’re at a 
state school, you’re less likely to reach the top professions than if you’re 
educated privately. If you’re a woman, you still earn less than a man. If you 
suffer from mental health problems, there’s too often not enough help to hand. 
If you’re young, you’ll find it harder than ever before to own your own home.”

Neither Turnbull nor Shorten appears capable of making such a speech, to 
address citizens directly about the crisis in our own democracy, the failure to 
achieve significant reform, the insecurity of our young, the injustices of 
growing inequality, the institutionalised unfairness in our education system.

Instead, we have conservatives such as Eric Abetz aware that the election was 
a “big kick up the pants” for the Coalition, but claiming the crux of it was 
resentment about proposed superannuation reforms that would impact only the 
wealthiest. We have Shorten already planning for another election, and a 
Coalition divided.

Normally after an election, there is a sense of a fresh start. Whether your 
favoured party won or not, there is at least a moment of relief, and hope in 
the energy of a new government with new ideas. On Monday, as theCoalition party 
room meets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/17/turnbull-faces-party-room-pressure-over-superannuation-and-liberal-campaign>
 for the first time after the election, there is no sense of a fresh start. The 
gulf between our citizens and our political system is too wide, the mistrust 
that our politics can deliver solid, equitable policy too deep. At some point, 
one day, ignoring it won’t be an option.
 