
Everyone assumes that lead poisoning is no longer a real risk, and that the 
horror story of lead-laced water in Flint, Michigan, would mean that the only 
safe amount is no lead at all.

Yet lead is still in use and that means we run the risk of exposure. In the UK 
we still subscribe to 40-year-old legislation that permits some concentrations 
of lead (products must contain less than 2,500 parts per 1,000,000).

Fortunately, Dr Andrew Turner <https://www.plymouth.ac.uk/staff/andrew-turner>
, reader in environmental science at Plymouth University, is on the case. I 
spent a day with him in Bristol as he fired an XRF spectrometer (a type of 
laser gun) at climbing frames and seesaws. What bounced back were readings 
showing toxic levels of lead, mainly from paint used to coat play-park 
equipment.

Some of Turner’s research has shown amounts 40 times greater than legal 
levels. Lead can remain in the body for 30 years and its toxicity affects 
bodily systems including the kidneys. It can also interfere with enzymes, and 
have irreversible effects on the central nervous system.

Once lead is introduced into the environment, you can’t get rid of it. Decades 
of research byProfessor Alan Emond 
<http://www.bris.ac.uk/social-community-medicine/people/alan-m-emond/index.html>
 and his team at the University of Bristol shows that lead at low levels can 
have an impact on child development. The team followed some children into 
adulthood and discovered that exposure to lead early in childhood can affect 
educational attainment, as well as levels of hyperactivity and antisocial 
behaviour.

So it would be great to find out why, or how, local authorities are 
commissioning play equipment that is still using lead paint. Until then, 
there’s no need to panic – but neither is there an excuse for toxic swings and 
roundabouts.

The big picture: Wildscreen’s eco exhibition
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8042e96797da26b52a18b623529840c1052df0cd%2F0_266_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20unleaded%20playgrounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20unleaded%20playgrounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8042e96797da26b52a18b623529840c1052df0cd%2F0_266_3984_2390%2F3984.jpg>
 No monkey business: a memorable image from Wildscreen 2016. Photograph: Jasper 
Doest 
Bristol is a hub for natural history photography and this prowess is showcased 
in Wildscreen 2016, a free exhibition running until 28 October, celebrating 
storytelling about the natural world. There’s a pedal-powered outdoor cinema 
and a stunning display of large-scale photographs. It’s also a good example of 
sustainability. The images are printed on 100% Tyvek and mounted on 
solar-powered LED stands. Wildscreen will be the UK’s first fully recyclable 
outdoor photography display, a lesson to exhibitors the world over 
(wildscreen.org).

Well dressed: tough workout-wear that’s soft on the planet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13d391a6272a7555441f89a5ab2785301d335524%2F0_22_1400_1748%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20unleaded%20playgrounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20unleaded%20playgrounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-unleaded-playgrounds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13d391a6272a7555441f89a5ab2785301d335524%2F0_22_1400_1748%2F1400.jpg>
 Cycling and recycling: ethical workout-wear. Photograph: underthesamesun 
If you haven’t yet switched your workout wardrobe to a more environmentally 
friendly version, now is the time. The Same Sun range is a Swedish based label 
by designers Ann Engelliau and Emelie Lindgren, who met at yoga class (of 
course). “We dived in and viewed the fashion industry with the eyes of a 
newborn,” they recall. The result is their customised fabric which uses Newlife 
premium recycled polyester, made from recycled water bottles using 53% less 
energy and water and producing 54.6% fewer greenhouse emissions. The fabric 
also offers UV protection and low environmental impact. “The complexity of 
aligning fashion with sustainability hit us like a brick wall,” they admit with 
admirable frankness. But I’m glad they pushed through the wall.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 