
Hilary Benn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn> has quite a 
robust interpretation of the parable of the Good Samaritan. In his version, the 
Samaritan doesn’t just help the traveller who’s been mugged, he volunteers to 
seek out and blow the living crap out of the poor chap’s assailants, despite 
the obvious practical difficulties of knowing who they are and tracking them 
down. This is the Good Samaritan as played by Charles Bronson. But to do 
anything less, the shadow foreign secretary apparently believes – as revealed 
when he quoted the parable while urging his fellow MPs to bomb Syria last week 
— would be to “walk by on the other side of the road”.

Benn’s claim that only by releasing explosives over another large section of 
the Middle East are we truly respecting Jesus’s exhortation to love our 
neighbour as ourselves was the most ingenious piece of rhetoric in what has 
been quite the rhetorical purple patch for British politics.

It’s like they’re jostling to make soundbites worthy of the trailer for a Jack 
Ryan movie

Benn’s speech was full of gems, calling Isis (or IS or Isil or Daesh – there 
are almost as many words for it as there are for shagging) “fascists”. “They 
hold us in contempt. They hold our values in contempt… They hold our democracy… 
in contempt… And my view, Mr Speaker, is that we must now confront this evil.” 
Close your eyes and feel those Churchillian rhythms.

But Hilary didn’t have the monopoly on portentous utterances. Alan Johnson 
said there was “a real and present danger”. Another Labour MP, Dan Jarvis 
declared “there is still a dignity in uniting with our allies in common cause 
against a common enemy in defence of our common humanity”, a phrase he might 
have saved for when theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> votes on a motion to 
fight back against the Martians.

David Cameron started the week saying that “the decision to take military 
action is one of the most serious a prime minister can make” – you could just 
sense how much he was looking forward to it – and the burden of seriousness 
seemed to lift pretty quickly as, by Tuesday, he was referring to those who 
opposed military action as “terrorist sympathisers”. And, after the Commons 
debate had gone the government’s way, Philip Hammond, like an ageing and kindly 
gunslinger, declared “Britain is safer tonight”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwords-of-war-can-seduce-david-mitchell-hilary-benn-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e4f8317f01d45902e2253d87088e7b131d193%2F0_0_2126_2396%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20airstrikes%20debate%3A%20once%20more%20unto%20the%20breach%20%E2%80%93%20of%20good%20taste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwords-of-war-can-seduce-david-mitchell-hilary-benn-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20airstrikes%20debate%3A%20once%20more%20unto%20the%20breach%20%E2%80%93%20of%20good%20taste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fwords-of-war-can-seduce-david-mitchell-hilary-benn-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e4f8317f01d45902e2253d87088e7b131d193%2F0_0_2126_2396%2F2126.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
It’s like they’re jostling to make soundbites worthy of the trailer for a Jack 
Ryan movie. It’s all serious and stirring, but also inappropriately slightly 
fun. Frankie Boyle summed up my misgivings whenhe tweeted about Wednesday’s 
Commons debate <https://twitter.com/frankieboyle/status/672121030744383490>: 
“Kind of disturbed by the palpable excitement in parliament. The truth is our 
politicians like wars because they make them feel important.”

I know that’s not true of all our politicians – and even when it is, it 
doesn’t mean they’d start a war for that reason alone. But the parliamentary 
atmosphere slightly reminded me of an occasion when I was helping install the 
set and lighting for a theatre show and someone started playing the soundtrack 
toCrimson Tide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/22/why-i-love-captain-cannot-concur-crimson-tide>
 through the speakers. Suddenly everyone’s behaviour changed: it now felt like 
we were heroically erecting the set “against the odds”. Everything felt 
cheesily dramatic. In a similar way, I think some MPs were seduced by the 
dramatic beat of a war debate, and it’s ironic that Frankie Boyle was the one 
to point out that that’s in rather bad taste.

This isn’t to say that I think bombing Syria is the wrong course of action to 
take. I honestly have no idea. We’re already bombing Iraq (as usual), which I’d 
actually sort of forgotten but it does make bombingSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> as well seem like less of a big deal. 
The question, I suppose, is whether we can kill people who hate us at a faster 
rate than we make other people hate us by killing so many people. And I don’t 
know the answer to that.

By the way, I realise that the MPs who spoke against military action were 
probably only less melodramatic in their language because, when advocating 
appeasement or diplomacy, you have a much less rich rhetorical heritage to draw 
on. There’s no “Let’s stay out of the breach for now and really commit to the 
peace process” speech inHenry V.

The truth is that it may be impossible to know the best thing to do. There are 
situations when military action is disastrously counterproductive and 
situations when failing to intervene stores up trouble for later. It’ll be a 
long time before we know for sure which type this one is. Which is why the tone 
with which our deliberations are conducted might be quite important.

10 of the best speeches from the Syria airstrikes debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-debate-best-commons-speeches>
It’s an over-expressed, but often fair, criticism of modern politics that it’s 
all about style over substance – it’s all spin and we don’t focus on what 
should actually be done. Well, this issue is an exception: we are focusing on 
what should be done, but the spin has been rather neglected. And that’s a 
problem. The politicians need to be worrying less about whether bombing Syria 
will do any good (which nobody knows) and more on how they’re coming across. 
Because currently they’re coming across as people enjoying, and buoyed up by, 
the trappings and exercise of power. And that won’t do.

The most powerful person in Britain is the prime minister, not the Queen. 
That’s important not just because the choice of prime minister results from a 
democratic process, but because it separates real power from the paraphernalia 
of power. For both to be vested in the same person, the wisdom passed down in 
our constitution declares, is unseemly and unsafe. Being in charge of things 
feels good; that’s dangerous and only becomes more so if the person with the 
power also has the biggest chair, wears a gold hat and has to be bowed to. In a 
constitutional monarchy, real power is exercised with restraint, discretion and 
the trappings of service: powerful politicians “minister” to the crown, senior 
officials with billions to spend are known as “civil servants”.

These are presentational issues – symbolism and spin – yet the principles they 
represent are never more important than when the country doesn’t know what to 
do, but has to do something. The decision to bomb Syria may be a disaster, and 
the contrary decision might have been equally disastrous. But it would be 
easier to live with whatever the consequences turn out to be, if we felt the 
decision was made by conscientious public servants in a spirit of sober 
reluctance, rather than by enthusiastic patriots fizzing with martial verve.
 