
Anomalisa review: sex and depression in Charlie Kaufman's superb stop-motion 
breakdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/anomalisa-review-sex-and-depression-in-charlie-kaufmans-superb-stop-motion-breakdown>
Anomalisa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa> is a perfect film I was 
lucky enough to first watch it in perfect conditions: alone, abroad, exhausted, 
before returning to work in a hotel room as pleasantly, depressingly bland as 
that in which most of the movie unfolds.

Charlie Kaufman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman> and Duke 
Johnson’s stop-motion masterpiece is set largely in a bedroom at the Fregoli, a 
moderately upscale Cincinnati hotel, home for the night to Michael Stone 
(voiced by David Thewlis), a customer service guru due to give a keynote speech 
the next day. Everyone but Michael not only looks the same – the puppets 
(uncanny enough as it is) have identical heads, save for hair and make-up. They 
also sound the same (all are voiced, without modulation for age or gender, by 
Tom Noonan).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDT6QJaS2a-U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDT6QJaS2a-U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDT6QJaS2a-U&media=>
 Watch the trailer 
Michael suffers, you gradually decipher, from a delusion called Fregoli 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fregoli_delusion>, in which the sufferer thinks 
believe everyone is the same person. Anomalisa is about the horror and 
isolation of that – but also about a larger loneliness borne of living in 
increasingly identik world. A world in which connection and communication are 
muffled by hegemony. In which people blur and smooth into one another, in which 
everyone has the same purchase on everything: all their experiences, including 
those that once seemed rare and special.

But it is also about what it is like – in the words of its hero – “to be 
human, to ache”. It gives us the most graphic representation yet of how it 
feels to fall in love with someone, to sense a connection you can’t explain – 
and then to witness it crumble in front of your face. For Michael is not the 
only person he recognises as different from every other member of the human 
race. Also staying at the hotel is Lisa, who has a different – even disfigured 
– face, and a voice courtesy not of Noonan but Jennifer Jason Leigh.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftelluride-film-festival-day-two-suffragette-i-am-malala-and-anomalisa&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Telluride%20film%20festival%20day%20two%3A%20Suffragette%2C%20He%20Named%20Me%20Malala%20and%20Anomalisa%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftelluride-film-festival-day-two-suffragette-i-am-malala-and-anomalisa>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Telluride%20film%20festival%20day%20two%3A%20Suffragette%2C%20He%20Named%20Me%20Malala%20and%20Anomalisa%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Ftelluride-film-festival-day-two-suffragette-i-am-malala-and-anomalisa&media=>
 Watch a video review of Anomalisa from Telluride 
Their courtship is the heart of the film, and it takes you into enchantingly 
unknown territory. The real-time, full-frontal sex scene is both unlike 
anything you’ve ever seen before and miles more touching, human – and even 
realistic – than cinema has yet managed.

I saw the film for a second time recently, in more singular settings: in 
London, at home, not returning to a room full of throw pillows in a manicured 
mountain village of condo upon condo. Rather than lessening the impact, it 
reconfirmed for me the movie’s genius. It is a fleeting film (just 90 minutes) 
filled with richness and humour and endless interest, with 
breathtakingly-realised conceits and moments I think might haunt me forever. I 
can’t wait to watch it again.
 