
In its final week, the 113th US Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-congress> managed to pass a spending 
bill loaded with policy giveaways to special interests, and a year-long 
extension of mostly corporate tax breaks.


But they couldn’t finish off the lobbyist Triple Crown. There was one task 
Congress couldn’t tackle: approve an extension of the Terrorist Risk Insurance 
Act, known as TRIA. The bill provides lucrative government bailout protection 
for the insurance industry in case of a terrorist attack like 9/11 or, as 
Hollywood has feared, retribution for American entertainment choices by North 
Korea.


Although both Democrats and Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, motivated by fear of 
terrorism and support for commercial real estate developers and insurance 
companies, mostly favored extending TRIA, it failed to get through the Senate. 
That’s partly due to unrelated policy changes attached to the bill, and partly 
because – get this – Congress wanted to go home early for the holidays.

This means that on 31 December, TRIA will expire. 

Good riddance.

TRIA was sold as a temporary program and not a permanent bailout guarantee for 
a wealthy industry with lots of clout in Washington. For the most part, only 
conservatives opposed to “crony capitalism” have raised questions about TRIA. 
But everyone should question the need for giant subsidies that the insurance 
industry doesn’t even have to pay for.

Unfortunately, both the insurance industry and big businesses, who pay lower 
premiums because of the bailout guarantee, support TRIA. And you can be sure 
they will flood the new Congress with lobbyists to demand a restoration of the 
program.

Big developers and insurers have freaked out over losing this cushion, warning 
even of acancellation of the Super Bowl 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-12-09/the-terrorism-risk-insurance-act-is-vital-to-the-super-bowl?wpisrc=nl-wonkbk&wpmm=1>
, but we may soon find that life can go on without the government guaranteeing 
a market for a large, profitable business sector.


Maybe some good old-fashioned American innovation will ensure that TRIA, 
initially sold as a temporary program, stays expired.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419262957402%2F9b7184d8-6cdd-441d-9e0f-2aea5a7df48a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Super%20Bowl%20doesn't%20need%20terrorism%20insurance.%20Here's%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Super%20Bowl%20doesn%27t%20need%20terrorism%20insurance.%20Here%27s%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419262957402%2F9b7184d8-6cdd-441d-9e0f-2aea5a7df48a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The CEO of AIG, Edward Liddy, looks back at protesters from the group Code 
Pink as he arrives to testify before the House in Washington DC in 2009. Do we 
really want more bailouts? Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
I explained TRIA for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/19/congress-renews-tria-terrorism-insurance-bill>
 back in June. Under the program, insurers must offer terrorism policies for 
commercial developments like skyscrapers and arenas, but they don’t have to pay 
damages above a certain threshold. The government can then recoup those costs 
later with a 3% surcharge on annual premiums.

In the 12 years since its inception in 2002, insurers have made roughly $40bn 
from government-guaranteed terrorism insurance, without having to pay a dime on 
any claim or give the government anything in exchange for that backstop.

Before the final machinations, it looked like TRIA would be fast-tracked for 
extension, as it has been twice before. TheHouse 
<http://www.banking.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Newsroom.PressReleases&ContentRecord_id=d759e623-ca6c-f90e-483f-4cd485db8404>
 andSenate <http://www.kirk.senate.gov/?p=press_release&id=1051> crafted 
bipartisan coalitions to extend TRIA, and this month the House financial 
services committee chairman, Jeb Hensarling of Texas, and Senator Chuck Schumer 
of New York came together in principle on compromise legislation.

The deal 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/hensarling-schumer-near-deal-on-terrorism-insurance-20141204>
 would have maintained the program for six more years and would have raised the 
threshold for the government to begin paying out terrorism insurance claims 
from $100m to $200m. Fiscally conservative Republicans like Hensarling had 
sought a threshold as high as $500m, to reduce government’s exposure to claims. 
But he accepted the compromise.

Negotiators were all set to stick the TRIA extension into the must-pass 
CRomnibus budget bill. But Hensarling decided to attach to TRIA another 
rollback of the Dodd-Frank law, which would relieve non-financial companies of 
having to follow the same rules as banks on the derivatives they purchase, 
including the posting of collateral for every trade.

Hensarling described this as a technical change and pointed out how Democrats 
once supported it 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/house/226448-terrorism-fight-risks-government-shutdown>
. But Schumerblasted 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/12/11/usa-congress-insurance-idUSL1N0TV18F20141211>
 the inclusion of an unrelated policy rider – not unlike those that filled the 
CRomnibus.

The House passed the Hensarling version of TRIA with the Dodd-Frank change 
before it left town, dropping extension in the Senate’s lap. Despite Senate 
Democrats’ insistence that they would not put Hensarling’s version up for a 
vote, the majority leader, Harry Reid, did try to quickly pass the bill on 17 
December.


But outgoing Republican senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma objected to unanimous 
consent to advance the bill in opposition to an entirely different provision 
which maintained a national insurance agent licensing board. Instead of 
fighting, Reid decided to drop the bill, andwrapped up the congressional session
 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/another-republican-upends-the-senates-year-end-plans/2014/12/16/127292d8-8559-11e4-9534-f79a23c40e6c_story.html?hpid=z3>
 for the year.

Coburn could not kill TRIA by himself. His objection merely meant that the 
Senate would have had to go through the time-consuming process of cloture votes 
to break filibusters, as they do on other legislation. The House version of 
TRIA passed the chamber 417-7; it’s highly likely that 60 votes were available 
to pass it in the Senate.

So Coburn didn’t really stop TRIA – Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> chose not to pursue it: because 
they were peeved about the Dodd-Frank rider, because it would take too much 
time, and because everyone really wanted to get back home for the holidays. If 
a terrorism insurance backstop were of such monumental importance to the 
country, one would think the Senate would delay its vacation a few days.

At the time Reid said: “Senator McConnell can bring TRIA up on the first day 
of the new Senate, and I hope he will since there is no time to waste.” But 
perhaps a better solution would be to see how the insurance industry adapts to 
losing the government guarantee.

For example, reinsurers – the companies that insure insurance companies – 
could actually try to model the risk of a terrorist attack, as they said they 
would in 2002, and price terrorism coverage accordingly.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419263475770%2F17313905-57f0-454c-ab05-ad5b8431c29e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Super%20Bowl%20doesn't%20need%20terrorism%20insurance.%20Here's%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Super%20Bowl%20doesn%27t%20need%20terrorism%20insurance.%20Here%27s%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fterrorism-risk-insurance-act-expiration-super-bowl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419263475770%2F17313905-57f0-454c-ab05-ad5b8431c29e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The events of 9/11 and other terrorist acts have left many countries on high 
alert – but is that enough reason to provide a bailout for insurers? 
Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
Or states could band together to create risk pools that would kick in to 
handle the issue. Or the program could be taken out of the hands of the 
industry and made completely public, with the federal government taking in 
premiums and paying out claims themselves, eliminating the middleman.

Regardless, trade groups have already stepped up the pressure. Thomas 
Bisacquino of the Commercial Real Estate Development Association said in a 
statement on Wednesday: “We hope the President and the new Congress will make 
renewal of TRIA the first order of business when they return in January.”

But perhaps the expiration of TRIA can shed some light on its necessity. 


Supporters claim new real estate development will collapse without affordable 
terrorism coverage; let’s see if that’s the case. They argue that the economy 
will suffer; we can certainly find out. They claim that no other solution but a 
government guarantee exists; we can test that theory.

In fact, we already have some evidence that the industry caterwauling is 
overblown: the NFL has said theywill not need to cancel the Super Bowl 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/early-lead/wp/2014/12/15/fox-news-says-congress-could-cancel-the-super-bowl-forgets-to-check-with-nfl/>
 in the wake of the failure to pass TRIA, despite news reports to that effect.

Congress rarely gets the chance to run a natural experiment on whether the 
policies they enact make sense in the real world. The bungling of TRIA provides 
that opportunity. It’s up to them whether or not they seize it.
 