
Gulp - Vast Space 

Super Furry Animals bassist Guto Pryce releases his new album with his latest 
project Gulp this week. Consisting of Pryce and his partner – synth player and 
vocalist Lindsey Leven – they make a dense sound-explosion of psychedelic pop 
and motorik Krautrock, in keeping with most of the music put out on the 
ever-excellent Sonic Cathedral label. Written while Pryce and Leven were on a 
road trip through both the Californian desert and holidaying through the 
Scottish Highlands, their music combines in equal parts the scorched sunsets of 
far away lands and the weirdo musings of British bandsfrom rainier climes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wsbR2dEmHGc>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvcgMiyv05Tc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvcgMiyv05Tc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvcgMiyv05Tc&media=>
Superfood - Right on Satellite

"Right on Satellite is the sound of Superfood transferring that acclaimed live 
show on to tape," so says Superfood's recent press release, which, for those 
who attended their gig at KPH in Ladbroke Grove this weekend, may not be such a 
virtuous selling point. The band's London gig on Saturday literallybrought the 
roof down <http://www.nme.com/news/superfood/78511>, with plaster and 
floorboards apparently falling from the ceiling to the bar below just 90 
seconds into their set. Their new single, however, is free from the shrieks of 
fearful fans, but instead includes an intro influenced byTracy Jacks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xJ940y2ggY0&feature=kp>, a bridge indebted to 
theBluetones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7JVFHCcHv5Y&feature=kp> and just 
a little bit of theSeahorses <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hVzUFNWIYM0>. 
Whether or not that last reference is an insult to the band I'm not sure, but 
I've got absolutely no qualms with referencingLove Is the Law 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hVzUFNWIYM0> in this blog. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nhu1zBSAtI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nhu1zBSAtI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3nhu1zBSAtI&media=>
Alt-J - Hand Free 

Hunger of the Pine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/18/listen-to-alt-j-hunger-of-the-pine-premiere>
 presented Mercury winners Alt-J as maudlin Miley Cyrus fans, but this new 
track, Left Hand Free, experiments with far more traditional alt-rock routes. 
The second taster track from their forthcoming This Is All Yours album plays 
with that geekywhite boy rap-rock that Beck 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EPfmNxKLDG4> mastered back in the late 90s, 
and the bombastic, bar-brawling elements ofJack White 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRbnAxrS3EM>'s new work. Or maybe it's The 
Black Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/02/jack-white-posts-apology-black-keys-meg-white-stripes>
. Same difference. Either way, the two tracks so far leave a lack of clues as 
to what the album will sound like as a whole, which is in no way a bad thing.

Tony Allen - Go Back (feat. Damon Albarn)

This isn't strictly indie, I know, but it does feature indie's Damon Albarn 
and it is fantastic, irrespective of genre barriers. It's not the pair's first 
encounter, of course, with Albarn and former Fela Kuti drummer Allen joining 
forces for the groups The Good, The Bad and The Queen and Rocket Juice and the 
Moon. This time, the Blur frontman appears on the Afrobeat pioneer's 
forthcoming album entitled Film of Life. This beautifully rhythmic track was 
written in tribute toAfrican refugees who arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/06/italy-north-africa-refugees-lampedusa>
 on the Italian island of Lampedusa.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ0xRiRLbbc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ0xRiRLbbc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAZ0xRiRLbbc&media=>
Gwilym Gold - Muscle

It feels fitting to follow Damon's above collaboration with that of Gwilym 
Gold's new music, as Muscle sounds as if it could have been lifted from the
Everyday Robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/24/damon-albarn-everyday-robots-review>
' sessions. In fact, there's something so lugubrious about Gold's music that I 
think it may even linger on the mind for longer than the tracks featured on 
Albarn's latest album – a monochrome melancholy, the song follows Gold's
high-concept Tender Metal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/01/gwilym-gold-tender-metal-bronze> 
project in 2012 and is the first release from HYMN, a new label founded by 
artistEddie Peake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/09/eddie-peake-southend-focal-point-gallery>
 in collaboration with The Vinyl Factory. Also, belated apologies to those of 
you who have opened the below Soundcloud surrounded by work colleagues.
 