
“What you see on the news is a story 150 years in the making,” says the 
scrolling text in the first trailer for Ava DuVernay’s The 13th, a documentary 
about race in America.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV66F3WU2CKk&media=>
The Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> project examines why 
the US has produced the highest rate of incarceration in the world, with the 
majority of those imprisoned being African American. The title of the film 
refers to the 13th amendment to the constitution: “Neither slavery nor 
involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States.”

Beginning with DW Griffith’s technically groundbreaking but profoundly racist 
1915 film The Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/birth-of-a-nation-100-year-anniversary-racism-cinema>
, The 13th is reported to take in the civil rights movement, the1994 Crime Bill 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/05/the-tragic-politics-of-crime/392114/>
, which extended the death penalty and encouraged states to lengthen prison 
sentences, and the surge of theBlack Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
. It makes its debut on Friday at the New York film festival, the first 
non-fiction film to ever do so. The festival director and selection committee 
chair, Kent Jones, has said in a statement that The 13th is a “great film” and 
“an act of true patriotism”.

Ava DuVernay: 'This patriarchy is often shocked when a black film does well'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
The trailer sets up DuVernay’s documentary as a provocative a mix of archival 
footage and testimonies from activists, politicians and historians, including 
Michelle Alexander, Bryan Stevenson, Van Jones, Newt Gingrich, Angela Davis, 
Senator Cory Booker, Grover Norquist, Khalil Muhammad, Craig DeRoche, Shaka 
Senghor, Malkia Cyril and Henry Louis Gates Jr. Hillary Clinton’s controversial 
“super-predators” remark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/25/black-lives-matter-protesters-interrupt-hillary-clinton-south-carolina-event>
 from a 1996 speech also makes an appearance.

The 13th debuts on Netflix and in select theaters on 7 October, DuVernay, best 
known for directing 2014’s Oscar-nominatedSelma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/08/selma-observer-film-review>, had 
kept the project a secret from the public during its production. She is 
currently preparing her first big-budget film for Disney, an adaptation of 
Madeleine L’Engle’s sci-fi classic A Wrinkle in Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/ava-duvernay-los-angeles-film-festival>
, starring Reese Witherspoon and Mindy Kaling.

 * This piece was amended on 26 September 2016; The 13th is not DuVernay’s 
first documentary.  