
THE FUTURE OF THE BLOCKBUSTER 

You can star alongside Leo when cinema enters its ‘karaoke’ phase
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbabdd1c9f56f50495c704adfc7a691eb1e4b47%2F139_0_2652_1592%2F2652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbabdd1c9f56f50495c704adfc7a691eb1e4b47%2F139_0_2652_1592%2F2652.jpg>
 You could be there too. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/20 CENTURY FOX 
The blockbuster era will come to a close in about 2042 with the colossal 
failure of Jedi Transformers V Jurassic Avengers 12: Revenge Of The Minions, an 
expensive crossover epic that bankrupts all the Hollywood studios 
simultaneously. By that time, the idea of “going to the movies” will have 
evolved anyway. Films will no longer involve two hours sitting in a cinema, 
predicted futurologist Faith Popcorn in The Hollywood Reporter: “They’ll be 
gameified and will unfold in real time all around you. You pay for a time slot, 
tune in your technology, and literally become one with the action. Endings and 
events will be changed as you go; smells, tastes, sensations will all be 
experienced live. Casts will be comprised of your own avatars; you will be the 
star.” Something like a cross between Westworld,The Matrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/matrix-wachowskis-science-fiction>
 and karaoke, in other words, without you ever having to leave your couch.

The good, the bad and the cyborgs: Westworld's robot forebears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/oct/11/westworld-robots-on-film-robocop-blade-runner>
The act of going to the movies itself will likely become an expensive, 
high-culture sort of ritual, like the opera. Hollywood classics will be 
digitally retooled as VR environments and shown in restored out-of-town 
multiplexes. And ex-movie stars, desperate for cash, will perform the movies 
live. So, 80-year-old Kate Winslet and Leonardo DiCaprio will reprise their 
roles in Titanic in real time, while the audience strolls around the deck 
watching them. In the same way we talk of Jude Law’s Hamlet, we’ll talk of Adam 
Driver’s Forrest Gump, say, or Jessica Chastain’s Terminator. And they’ll be 
queueing round the block just like old times whenShia LaBeouf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/25/shia-labeouf-embarks-on-digital-road-trip-takemeanywhere>
 takes up a six-month residency playing the shark in Jaws.
Steve Rose

THE FUTURE OF THE ALBUM

The album is dead. Long live the album
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa539d3d0d06f00bcdd65f0f4c221cbe825c1014c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa539d3d0d06f00bcdd65f0f4c221cbe825c1014c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Got her Björk cut out. Photograph: Santiago Felipe 
Fast forward 30 years and music is still in rude health: the Destiny’s Child 
reunion broke a new record for live touring, accompanied by a 500-hour 3D 
documentary, and Kanye has just opened his third clothing outlet Kanyefield. 
But by then the conventional studio album will have become almost extinct. Its 
shapeshifting has already begun: artists such asBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> and Frank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> are playing with the format by 
hybridising it with visual performance and Kanye now seems to view the album as 
a living, breathing work in progress, tinkering with it after its release. More 
dramatically, recent reports state that Calvin Harris will stop releasing 
albums all together, suggesting a not-even-very-distant future where the 
majority of artists will just release single tracks, consumed via multi-artist 
playlists. “We’re increasingly seeing labels and managers embrace the track or 
EP route,” notes music industry adviser Sammy Andrews. “There’s some resistance 
from labels and artists, but the ones who understand the new landscape are 
adapting release strategy accordingly.”

The album won’t die completely: you’ll still get lengthy bodies of work from 
the likes of rhyming funsters Yorke and Björk. But they’ll exist as the 
exception, rather than the rule: a prestige, ultra-fetishised indulgence where 
fan demographic allows. The album of the future, as a concept, will occupy a 
similar semiotic significance to vinyl in 2016. And don’t get too attached to 
curating those playlists. “In the future you won’t even have to think about 
playlists,” suggests Lou Ellerton, brand expert at Mash Strategy. “Spotify will 
anticipate your mood, where you are in the house and what you’re doing. That 
digital learning will create your soundtrack: the equivalent of Hive for your 
music.”
Peter Robinson

THE FUTURE OF GAMING

Forget VR, it’s all about AR
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc96a198cf135e2c3c5acdeb3dd82fffcd347fc6b%2F0_21_1727_1036%2F1727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc96a198cf135e2c3c5acdeb3dd82fffcd347fc6b%2F0_21_1727_1036%2F1727.jpg>
 Augmented reality. Photograph: Jeff Chiu/AP 
In the old days, video games were the preserve of technically inclined early 
adopters, AKA nerds. Games’ current position at the forefront of popular 
culture is mostly to do with the ubiquity of smartphones, but even in a world 
where everyone’s effectively got a games console in their pocket, games 
themselves remain obsessed with shooting, fighting and driving. That’s because 
the artificial intelligence needed to simulate interesting, emotionally 
resonant human conversations is still quite a few years away, but when it does 
arrive, the really interesting stuff will happen when that enhanced 
intelligence meets the other incoming revolution: augmented reality.

Unlike virtual reality, AR overlays digital information on top of the real 
world in a way familiar to millions of Pokémon GO players, their cute, 
colourful prey superimposed on park benches and street corners. Playing his 
cards close to his chest, Techland’s Artur Janik – who worked onzombie-fest 
Dying Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/03/dying-light-review> – says: 
“AR is something we’re all keeping an eye on… all it takes is one 
outside-the-box gaming idea that will blow it all open.” It will also let games 
infiltrate the real world, blending believable fictional characters and in-game 
action with real life in ways you can only currently achieve using strong 
hallucinogens and whisky.
Nick Gillett

THE FUTURE OF CELEBRITY

Get ready for the omnipresent A-Lister
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ff789d9d004b107191d57d19daee46f474712a%2F910_937_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9ff789d9d004b107191d57d19daee46f474712a%2F910_937_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
 Virtual pop star Hatsune Miku. Photograph: Toru Hanai/REUTERS 
In 2016, we are already at the point where the Kardashians have their own 
individual apps, so you can pay to hear about the exact contents of the salads 
they eat for lunch. But futurist Richard Watson says such extreme branding is 
only the beginning. “We have celebrity perfume, food, clothing and cars so why 
not restaurants, hotels and sex toys?” he says. “And how long too before 
lookalike celebrity sex robots or avatars in 3D worlds are here?” That’s right, 
perverts: with the rise of virtual reality (many phones are now VR-ready), 
Watson thinks that we’ll be bonking avatar versions of celebs just by staring 
into handheld devices.

“We’re not far away from seeing the first wholly virtual celebrities arrive,” 
agrees futurologist Ray Hammond. “Interestingly, wholly virtual celebrities 
have the potential to be almost immortal, as avatars in virtual reality come to 
supplement the physical elements of singers and film stars.” So we’ll be sexing 
a forever-young avatarDrake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> while the 
real one ages in an attic, The Picture of Aubrey Graham-style? The future can’t 
come fast enough.
Issy Sampson

THE FUTURE OF VISUAL ART 


It’s set to reunite with its long-lost twin: science
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0fec9a85cbf420401de218b076c28946be595d%2F148_43_6735_4044%2F6735.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b0fec9a85cbf420401de218b076c28946be595d%2F148_43_6735_4044%2F6735.jpg>
 Unfold by Ryoichi Kurokawa. 
Art has long been hardwired to the now and what’s next, but increasingly 
artists and lab boffins are providing new possibilities for the form. The tech 
that artists are currently using, says Mike Stubbs, director of Fact, the 
Foundation for Art and Creative Technologies in Liverpool, “is as new as the 
minute”. Some artists are getting down and dirty with matter itself, such as 
Yunchul Kim, artist-in-residence at theLarge Hadron Collider at Cern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/large-hadron-collider>, whose works 
resembling alien machines explore artificially constructed metamaterials that 
can manipulate light and sound.

PlayStation VR review – if this is the future of virtual reality, sign me up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/10/playstation-vr-virtual-reality-review>
Not futuristic enough for you? How about artist Gina Czarnecki and tissue 
culture expert Professor John Hunt’s collaboration, Heirloom: living portraits 
of Czarnecki’s daughters, where cell samples are grown on glass casts of their 
faces. Another Fact alumnus, Ryoichi Kurokawa, has turned “big data” generated 
by astrophysicists into an audiovisual installation interpreting the galaxy’s 
cosmic history. The possibilities of course are endless, but going by this 
art-science lot, it might not be long before we’ll be seeing DNA selfies 
showcased alongside Goya’s portraits at the National Gallery.
Skye Sherwin

THE FUTURE OF NOSTALGIA

The best and worst decades will be celebrated together
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dedcee4de517a5bc848ac00969c8dc006d591d%2F0_330_5121_3074%2F5121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10dedcee4de517a5bc848ac00969c8dc006d591d%2F0_330_5121_3074%2F5121.jpg>
 Possibly 1985, possibly 2025. Photograph: Homer Sykes Archive / Alamy/Alamy 
Are you ready for the 2014 revival? While Generation X gets high on free 
drinks from Club Tropicana, their children are already borrowing the best bits 
of the 1980s, 90s and 00s. “Experiences are much more important to millennials 
than products,” says brand strategist Lou Ellerton. “And this is the generation 
that lives their lives digitally so there’s no past, present and future.” Soon 
you won’t have to wait 20 years for a trend’s revival because the next 
generation will constantly be looking back, as well as forward, without even 
realising. If the thought of aMeghan Trainor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/meghan-trainor> v Clean Bandit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/15/clean-bandit-alexandra-palace-london-review>
mashup makes you freeze in fear, beware: nostalgia that’s so two years ago is 
coming.
Hannah Verdier

THE FUTURE OF STANDUP PERFORMANCE

Live comedy will come back from the dead
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78be22dc673cd8d0086c4e5cdfc6de247349fcff%2F0_135_2093_1255%2F2093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78be22dc673cd8d0086c4e5cdfc6de247349fcff%2F0_135_2093_1255%2F2093.jpg>
 A future Live At The Apollo star. Photograph: Ian McDonnell/Getty Images 
Whitney Houston hologram to embark on world tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/14/whitney-houston-hologram-embark-world-tour>
If standup comedy clubs are still around in the future, there’s no guarantee 
that audiences will be being entertained by flesh-and-blood performers. 
Holograms are already being used in music; perhaps the same technology could 
one day allow Bill Hicks or Robin Williams to make a comeback, or form a 
virtual reality double act. Or maybe it’ll be robots’ turn for a go behind the 
mic. Will Jackson, director of Engineered Arts, specialists in humanoid robots 
whose RoboThespian performed a standup routine onstage in 2013, thinks machines 
are capable of making us laugh.

“You can’t go wrong using a robot for comedy,” he says. “Because even if it’s 
crap, it’ll be funny.” There are some elements of standup that robots are still 
struggling with: there’s no form of artificial intelligence that can write 
reliably entertaining jokes, and speech-recognition software isn’t yet advanced 
enough to deal with hecklers. However, comedy manager Christian Knowles is open 
to the possibilities. Would he consider booking a robot? “I’d never rule 
anything out. Their time-keeping would probably be better than most comedians.”
James Kettle

THE FUTURE OF NIGHTLIFE

You won’t need to leave the house to go clubbing, says Ian McQuaid
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01ba933ebe022777d4ab6755cdc91b4675d93ee1%2F0_179_4023_2414%2F4023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01ba933ebe022777d4ab6755cdc91b4675d93ee1%2F0_179_4023_2414%2F4023.jpg>
 The raver of the future? Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
Recent club closures have led to bleak predictions of the death of nightlife, 
but VR experts argue that in a decade clubs as music spaces may well be 
irrelevant anyhow. “Virtual reality festivals and clubs aren’t 10 years down 
the line, they’re two years, when internet speed is good enough and VR headsets 
have been widely distributed,” explains Ersin Han Ersin, a designer at
Marshmallow Laser Feast <http://marshmallowlaserfeast.com/>, which specialises 
in creating high-end VR experiences. “In 10 years we probably won’t be going to 
clubs at all.” Streaming platforms have been watching this tech with interest 
and working out ways to introduce it to their field. “People are going to 
increasingly use VR to enter the stream, and what they enter will go beyond 
standard reality, into enhanced reality,” says Raj Chaudhuri, head of music at
Boiler Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/30/boiler-room-blaise-bellville>. 
It means that you could soon strap on a VR headset and enter a virtual 
representation of a club, with visuals overlaid with CGI special effects, 
without having to leave your living room. “But,” he adds, “I don’t think this 
will ever be as good as actually being there.”

So perhaps the predictions of the death of physical clubs are over-egged? Tim 
from streaming siteJust Jam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/06/just-jam-skepta-mobos-diy-gig-curators>
 thinks so. “Clubbing is getting more corporate, with more ‘experience’ events 
that are impressive but also expensive. It’s likely that there’ll eventually be 
a DIY backlash; kids will turn away from massive VR events to underground 
spaces. It’s going to get prog before it gets punk.”
Ian McQuaid

THE FUTURE OF BINGE-WATCHING

TV will know you better than you know yourself
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b732187ef488bb6a3687a9cd3371e6601d9137%2F0_56_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20future%20of%20pop%20culture%3A%20robot%20performers%2C%20an%20avatar%20Drake%20and%20a%20Kanye%20West%20superstore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Ffuture-of-pop-culture-music-film-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b732187ef488bb6a3687a9cd3371e6601d9137%2F0_56_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The end of scrolling through Netflix for two hours before giving up and going 
to bed. Photograph: Mike Blake/REUTERS 
The original concept of TV has already been thrown out the window. The 21st 
century is fully omniscreen, with everyone from toddlers to pensioners 
consuming programmes on phone, tablet or laptop. So surely the next great leap 
will involve some paradigm-smashing tech advance? Not according to Dr Matthew 
Jones, senior lecturer in cinema and TV at Leicester’s De Montfort University. 
“There’s a lot of excitement about hardware, things like 4K and VR, but I’m not 
convinced,” he says. “Any technological shift that is isolating rather than 
inclusive, like having to wear 3D goggles, just goes against the social nature 
of TV. Sooner or later you hit a point where TV stops being TV.”

The really interesting work, he argues, is happening in AI. “Data analytics 
isn’t particularly sexy but the sheer amount of information being harvested by 
providers like Netflix and Amazon is incredible. We might seem to spend a lot 
of time listlessly scrolling through menus but it is possible to imagine an 
automated algorithm or AI that will be able to analyse and predict our personal 
preferences in a much more nuanced way.” Truly optimal results would be 
achieved by obliterating the data and content barriers between rival providers: 
imagine one monolithic telly entity with access to everything. But doesn’t that 
sound like the sort ofevil megacorp you once read about in 2000AD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/24/2000ad-35-future-comic>? “We 
tend to imagine sci-fi futures as dismal but it doesn’t have to be Black Mirror 
or Minority Report,” says Dr Jones. “That does ourselves a disservice. TV is 
all geared toward human taste and I don’t think our individual preferences are 
going anywhere.”
Graeme Virtue
 