
At the risk of channelling Al Murray’s Pub Landlord, the great British boozer 
is brilliantly ethical in some respects. In fact, the New Economics Foundation 
says your local is one of the top places in which to spend money on the high 
street if you want it to stay local. And now, in an effort to make watering 
holes ethical powerhouses, theGreener Retailing Publicans Guide 
<http://www.mmucfe.co.uk/assets/uploads/files/Greener_Retailing_Publicans_Guide_April_2016_-_FINAL.pdf>
 has just launched. The report, which also identifies ways in which pubs, 
restaurants and bars can become more profitable, goes strong on tackling food 
waste, which costs UK pubs £357m a year. It reckons they easily waste at least 
£1,000 each year in spilled pints, too.

This matters not just because it’s waste, but because a lot of water and 
energy is required to convert one gallon of water into one gallon of beer, 
whisky or wine. Brands are looking to do something to address these 
environmental pressures. Heineken recently opened the world’s first “major 
zero-carbon brewery” in Austria, and everyone from whisky makers to cideries is 
trying to curtail their demand for clean water.

With the growing of ingredients making up 39% of the embedded carbon in a can 
of European beer, powdered alcohol – to which you just add water – is big news. 
The makers of Palcohol (yes, really, it’s called that) claim it’s the key to 
slashing emissions.

Getting drunk is, on the whole, not very reponsible. A 2007 University of 
Surrey report 
<http://www.fcrn.org.uk/sites/default/files/ALCOHOL%20final%20version%20TG%20feb%202007.pdf>
 bravely tries to quantify the overall environmental impact of our booze 
consumption, and suggests it accounts for 1.5% of all UK greenhouse gas 
emissions. By dropping our alcohol consumption to levels from the 1970s, it 
estimates emissions could plummet to just 0.9% of the current UK total.

Of course, the non-alcoholic drinks industry has work to do on its footprint, 
too. But let’s face it, the teetotal remain the eco warriors here. Raise a 
(mindful) glass in their direction.

The big picture: a hive of activity
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd95357a3c8dcb2d87e34f9cd56ac8c7b24522cba%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20having%20a%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20having%20a%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd95357a3c8dcb2d87e34f9cd56ac8c7b24522cba%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 What’s the buzz: the Hive installation at Kew Gardens 
The Hive art installation at Kew Gardens is a paean to our principal 
pollinator: out of the 100 crop species that provide 90% of food globally, 70 
are pollinated by bees. Immersing yourself in the 17m high, 40-tonne artwork 
will leave you in no doubt that without these insects we’re nothing. Designed 
by Wolfgang Buttress, its interior provides a soundscape in the key of C - the 
key that bees hum in (kew.org <http://www.kew.org/>).

Well dressed: A Black and White Story (Abaws)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b37e39590327f13f89912f4528e7e88a4acc512%2F0_194_5544_3327%2F5544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20having%20a%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20having%20a%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Feco-guide-to-having-a-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b37e39590327f13f89912f4528e7e88a4acc512%2F0_194_5544_3327%2F5544.jpg>
 The ethical Queen Bee T-shirt from A Black and White Story 
The ethical wardrobe has long been crying out for sophisticated streetwear, so 
the launch of a second collection fromA Black and White Story (Abaws) 
<https://ablackandwhitestory.com/> is great timing. Abaws was set up by two 
escapees from the London business world, Anoo Rehncy and Bip Ahuja – Rehncy 
confesses to doodling designs while on the phone to hedge funders before taking 
the plunge and swapping her job in the City for a career in fashion.

As the name suggests, the outward focus of Abaws is on monochrome, with luxe 
sweats and T-shirts (including the Queen Bee sweatshirt famously sported by 
Beyoncé on Instagram) their stand-out pieces.

But behind the scenes the focus is ethical manufacture. It’s minimalism on all 
levels. “We express this through everything we live, breathe and wear,” they 
say. Now you can, too.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 