
Age Two days

Appearance Straight-talking, swivel-eyed, smart-casual.

That's a very unfair way to talk about (some of) the people of Windsor! I'm 
not. This is the Windsor set. They are a group of MPs – said to include Nadine 
Dorries, Mark Field and Chris Heaton-Harris – who aresupposedly gathering 
support for a new Tory leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/27/adam-afriyie-david-cameron>, 
in case the party loses the next election.

You mean like the Notting Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/jul/28/conservatives.uk1> or 
Chipping Norton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/10/graeme-garden-chipping-norton-set>
 sets that surround David Cameron? Orthe Primrose Hill set, 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/news/whatever-happened-to-the-primrose-hill-set-1877267.html>
 who made films with each other in the 1990s?Kind of, except without the 
glamour or the power.

I see. And who do they want as their new leader? According to reports, 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2269292/Tory-coup-turns-farce-Millionaire-MP-touted-new-leader-forced-declare-loyalty-Cameron.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
 the MP Adam Afriyie.

The MP who? Adam Afriyie <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/adam-afriyie>. 
His constituency is Windsor.

Ah. It's all starting to fit together. And he's good, is he, this guy? Hard to 
say. He chairs some committees, but Cameron still hasn't given him a proper job 
in the government.

Not even Minister for Tidying Up? Sadly not.

But he must have some valuable attributes, right? Oh yes. They include: an 
unprivileged south-London upbringing, a successful career in business, not 
having publicly screwed up yet.

Hey, well, that could just as easily be me! Apart for the successful career in 
business.

Yes, apart from that. And what do Afriyie and the Windsor set want? Oh, the 
usual things. Business-friendliness, fewer wind farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/13/tory-mp-corby-anti-windfarm-film>
, less government interference andbetter-tasting ostrich anuses 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/9676266/Im-A-Celebrity-Nadine-Dorries-eats-a-testicle.html>
 (that one's just Dorries).

Will they get it? It seems unlikely. None of them is exactly what you would 
call a big beast. Although they have certainly had a good start.

How so? Well, their alleged plot has somehow leaked to several national 
newspapers. This had the effect of making Afriyie suddenly more famous, and put 
the idea of him becoming prime minister into people's minds. At the same time, 
however, he gets todeny everything 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/windsor-mp-adam-afriyie-denies-reports-he-is-set-to-stand-against-pm-8468716.html>
, so he doesn't sound too ambitious or disloyal.

Tremendous! You almost couldn't plan it any better if you tried. No, you 
couldn't.

Do say "We are 100% behind David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>."

Don't say "Right now." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/27/adam-afriyie-david-cameron>

Not to be confused with The Sopranos box set, the universal set, a croquet set.
 