
On the eve of the first Test of the Ashes 2010-11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes-2010-11> series, I was taking the last 
few pedal strokes of millions up a short incline a couple of miles from the 
Gabba when a flash convertible pulled up alongside me. The driver leant across 
his female companion to ask if I was the "crazy Pommie bloke" who'd cycled all 
the way from Lord's.

I was. And I'd been called crazy, or a version of it, by almost everyone I had 
met during the past 14 months in 23 countries. But there in Brisbane at the end 
of my journey, having seen so much of our planet from the saddle of a bicycle, 
it seemed that "crazy" would, in fact, have been coming up with the idea of 
cycling to the Ashes and then not giving it a crack.

I'd first thought about it two years earlier. I'd already decided to go on a 
long bicycle journey but I knew needed to aim for an event to keep me motivated 
during long days in the saddle. When a friend told me she was moving to 
Australia I knew my destination could only be the Ashes.

I shut my eyes and imagined rolling up to the Gabba, ordering a cold beer and 
watching the first ball of the series. I could not conceive of a finer ending 
to a bicycle ride.

I left Lord's on 10 October 2009 with 17 friends in tow. They all turned 
around when we reached the ferry at Dover. I spent most of the months that 
followed alone.

I hadn't trained at all, and I nearly had to call the whole thing off after my 
knee gave me trouble at the start. But it improved, helped along by intense 
exercise.

It took me two months to cross my first continent because I stopped every few 
days to wield the bat I was carrying on the cricket fields of Europe. In 
Serbia, Bulgaria and Turkey, Vladimir, Slobodan and Saif got me out, each time 
cheaply. I scored a lone half-century in Vienna before being caught at square 
leg, the seventh victim of a nine-year-old girl. Later, in Syria, I gathered a 
bunch of hippy travellers for a game in Old Damascus; in Sudan I taught cricket 
to a bunch of Nubian nomads dressed for the occasion in white floor-length 
tunics; in Indonesia I played at the Pancawati oval, high amid Java's volcanoes 
and surely one of the world's most beautiful grounds.

After crossing 22 countries, I spent a week on a Danish-owned cattle boat, 
voyaging from Jakarta to Darwin. I hadn't really looked at a map of Australia 
until then and, while I knew it was a pretty sizeable paddock, it came as a 
surprise that it would take me 70 days to pedal across the country.

I didn't find much cricket in Australia; in fact, apart from spiders, grazing 
cattle and handlebar moustaches, I didn't find much at all. In the tiny 
settlement of Roper Bar (population 12), I asked a girl in the shop where I 
might find the next town. "A thousand miles that way," she replied, pointing 
south. I chuckled nervously. She didn't chuckle at all.
 Oli Broom on the road out of Longreach. It took him 70 days to cycle from 
Darwin to Brisbane. Photograph: Oli Broom 
But I did eventually make it to Brisbane and, as I leaned on my brakes and 
came to a halt outside gate two of the Gabba, I was enveloped by a small group 
of friends and family. They had all left London within the past 36 hours; the 
trip had taken me 412 days of turning pedals.

I felt lucky to have survived the Turkish winter, the Sudanese desert, dengue 
fever, Delhi belly and outback headwinds with my health, and my mind, intact. 
But I was not so lucky in Melbourne: representing the MaryleboneCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Club in a game at the MCG on the 
day after the fourth Test, when England had already retained the Ashes, I got a 
reminder that my future lay in adventure rather than in the game that I had 
pedalled so far to watch.

The former England spinner John Emburey threw down a half-tracker that the 
batsman pulled out towards deep mid-wicket, where I was fielding. As I ran in, 
diving forward, I caught my finger on the hallowed turf and it snapped from its 
base. I spent the rest of my time in Australia in a cast, the sorry victim of a 
few blades of grass.

More than two years have passed since I completed my journey to the Ashes and 
still there are times when I long to be on the open road in Sudan or India or 
Australia, hands leaning on a couple of dirty socks wrapped around handlebars, 
legs turning gently and wheels taking me onwards, towards another night's sleep 
in an unfamiliar place. Sometimes I even yearn to feel the bite of a cold 
headwind or the thrill of a winding descent. I'd be crazy not to.

Cycling to the Ashes by Oli Broom 
<http://www.betterread.com.au/book/cycling-to-the-ashes-a-cricketing-odyssey-from-london-to-brisbane.do>
 is published by Yellow Jersey Press, $32.95 (Â£16.99), ebook available
 