
So that was the election that wasn’t 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/11/berlin-philharmonic-imon-rattle-orchestra-vote-chief-conductor>
. After a day offeverish waiting and bating of breath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/11/the-berlin-phil-votes-but-who-might-be-their-next-chief-conductor-is-far-from-clear>
, of fake Spiegel articles and even faker rumours on Twitter (all since 
deleted) that declared an decision had been reached, the result of theBerlin 
Philharmonic’s 
<http://www.berliner-philharmoniker.de/en/titelgeschichten/2014-2015/ballot-2015-05/>
 “conclave” to choose their new principal conductor was a stalemate. None of 
the candidates – not Christian Thielemann, Andris Nelsons, Riccardo Chailly or 
Gustavo Dudamel – was a clear winner.

Told you so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/mar/10/berlin-philharmonic-next-principal-conductor>
. Well, not quite, but I did float the possibility that theBerlin Phil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/11/the-berlin-phil-votes-but-who-might-be-their-next-chief-conductor-is-far-from-clear>
 could end up making a positive creative choice tonot elect a single chief 
conductor while they wait for conducting conditions to change over the next 
year.

“We must continue this process and this election,” said the orchestra’s 
spokesperson, double bassist Peter Riegelbauer, who added it would have to 
happen within a year. “We are very confident we will come to a decision then. 
The process of this election will be continued, and the orchestra assembly will 
meet regularly, we will take the time that is necessary.”

The Berlin Phil votes: but who might be their next chief conductor is far from 
clear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/11/the-berlin-phil-votes-but-who-might-be-their-next-chief-conductor-is-far-from-clear>
More than 120 members of the orchestra met over 11 hours of ultimately 
fruitless voting to attempt to find a candidate who could command a “clear 
majority”. Describing the atmosphere in the Jesus-Christus Kirche Dahlem church 
during the process, the orchestra said it had, in fact, been “very 
constructive, cooperative and friendly”.


What happened at that church? I speculate that the pro-Thielemann faction 
failed to convince enough of their colleagues that he could be a realistic 
candidate. Why? Because the other possibilities – not least Nelsons, Chailly, 
Yannick Nézet-Séguin and even Mariss Jansons (who only three days ago extended 
his contract with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra until 2021) are in such 
strong positions , and have all signed recent contracts or extensions with 
their own great orchestras and opera houses. (Boston, Milan, Philadelphia and 
Jansons in Munich, respectively.) This would make it difficult for them to 
start the job at the Berlin Phil in 2018, when Simon Rattle officially leaves. 
Thielemann, on the other hand, might be tempted from his job at the Dresden 
Staatskapelle if Berlin wanted him badly enough. But they don’t – at least not 
yet. So the Berliners were probably faced with what I call theIain Duncan Smith 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iain_Duncan_Smith> solution: someone nobody 
really wanted but who they could at least have agreed upon. It is a compromise 
I suspect they rejected.
 Time to bite the Christian Thielemann bullet? Photograph: Staatskapelle 
Dresden 
Rightly, in my view. Yet the situation will be no different in a year’s time. 
And so I humbly submit three basic options:


1. The players bite the Thielemann bullet, however much some of them clearly 
don’t want him as their leader.

2. They embark on an unprecedented charm offensive against their chosen 
conductors, and try to prise away Nelsons/Chailly/whoever from their plum jobs.

3. They seriously consider doing without a conductor, or picking conductors to 
work with on a season-by-season or even project-by-project basis, until the 
right person is available, which could be years away.

I wonder – and this is pure speculation – if something else happened during 
voting, something too horrible for the Berliners to consider and too 
impossible, surely, for anyone to sanction: that they did find someone they 
wanted, but that person declined the job. (There is precedent here: Carlos 
Kleiber was offered the role after Herbert von Karajan’s death, but turned down 
the honour.) I stress, I say this based on absolutely no evidence at all – but 
speculation loves a vacuum. Until we hear more, it really is a bit of a 
philharmoni-pickle.

 * Quiz: how much do you know about the Berlin Philharmonic? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/quiz/2015/may/11/the-berlin-philharmonic-quiz> 