
First premiering at the Berlin film festival in February, where it was given a 
four-star review by Andrew Pulver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/06/grand-budapest-hotel-review-berlin-2014-wes-anderson>
, The Grand Budapest Hotel has been acclaimed as one of Wes Anderson's lightest 
and most accessible films, a picaresque romp inspired by the Austrian writer 
Stefan Sweig,who Nicholas Lezard writes about here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/25/stefan-zweig-wes-anderson-praise>
.


The Observer's Tom Lamont interviewed Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/23/wes-anderson-grand-budapest-hotel-director>
, the director characteristically clad in olive-green corduroy, and professing 
himself unconcerned at the thought that his instantly recognisable style has 
closed off options available to less idiosyncratic directors â€“ a new Bond film, 
for instance.

 The Grand Budapest Hotel: its cake-icing pinks and purples contrast with the 
grey of the baddies' uniforms. Photograph: Martin Scali 
So how many of Anderson's famous tropes does The Grand Budapest Hotel feature? 
We played Slate's Wes Anderson bingo here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/25/does-the-grand-budapest-hotel-win-wes-anderson-bingo>
There's alsoa piece about the film's typically meticulous design here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/25/wes-anderson-film-design-grand-budapest-hotel>
. Our fashion team, meanwhile,nominated their fashion heroes from Anderson's 
films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/mar/14/grand-budapest-hotel-wes-anderson-fashion>
, from Margot Tenenbaum (Gwyneth Paltrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gwynethpaltrow>) in The Royal Tenenbaums to 
Alistair Hennessy (Jeff Goldblum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeff-goldblum>) in The Life Aquatic. Art 
critic Jonatham Jones alsomused about the plausibility of Boy With Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/07/grand-budapest-hotel-boy-with-apple>
, the Renaissance painting left to the concierge Gustave H (played by Ralph 
Fiennes), which the film's many villains try to recover.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Fgrand-budapest-hotel-300-rise-empire-invisible-war-video-review&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20The%20Grand%20Budapest%20Hotel%3B%20300%3A%20Rise%20of%20an%20Empire%3B%20The%20Invisible%20War%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Fgrand-budapest-hotel-300-rise-empire-invisible-war-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20The%20Grand%20Budapest%20Hotel%3B%20300%3A%20Rise%20of%20an%20Empire%3B%20The%20Invisible%20War%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Fgrand-budapest-hotel-300-rise-empire-invisible-war-video-review&media=>
You can see our critics reviewing the film above, listen to the review as audio
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2014/mar/07/guardian-film-show-grand-budapest-hotel-300-invisible-war-audio-review>
, or readMark Kermode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/09/the-grand-budapest-hotel-review-wes-anderson>
 andPeter Bradshaw's take 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/the-grand-budapest-hotel-wes-anderson-review>
. We also interviewed two of the film's stars;Adrien Brody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/02/adrien-brody-oscar-roman-polanski-pianist-wes-anderson>
, who Alex Needham met in Bondi, and newcomerTony Revolori, who plays the lobby 
boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/04/grand-budapest-hotel-tony-revolori>
.

Finally, you can click through a collection of images from Wes Anderson's 
previous films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2013/dec/29/wes-anderson-collection-in-pictures>
, andtake our Anderson quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/quiz/2014/feb/04/quiz-are-you-a-wes-anderson-film-expert>
. By which time, naturally, you'll be an expert. If you see the film this 
weekend, don't forget to tell us what you thought of it in the comment thread 
below.

 