
Pippi Longstocking, from Sweden; the Moomins from Finland; that diminutive 
Norwegian, Mrs Pepperpot; or Heidi, fresh from her Swiss mountainside – these 
foreign stars of children’s literature were popular fixtures on British 
bookshelves at the end of the last century. So where are the new international 
children’s stories for tonight’s bedtime reading?

In a push against the complacent view that work first written in English is 
enough for Britain’s children, the country’s foremost early reading charity is 
to launch a campaign to bring over translations of more books from around the 
globe.

“There are so many other written languages on this planet, we know it is not 
feasible that the best books all start in English. We are simply missing out if 
we don’t find them,” said Emma Langley, an international literature expert at 
Arts Council England.

The new BookTrust project, In Other Words 
<http://www.booktrust.org.uk/prizes/23>, is funded by ACE and intends to pay 
for sample translations of 10 “outstanding” foreign works to be shown to 
British publishing houses at theBologna book fair 
<http://10times.com/bologna-children-book-fair> in Italy next spring. From this 
weekend, the trust is inviting literary editors, agents and talent scouts 
working outside Britain to submit their best works for children aged six to 12. 
These will then be judged by a panel of experts, chaired by the critic 
Nicolette Jones and including Langley and the award-winning translators Sarah 
Ardizzone and Daniel Hahn.

The scheme is to be introduced to British publishers next month. Any that go 
on to acquire the rights to publish one of the stories will be given a £1,500 
grant from BookTrust to promote the author and translator and help with 
publicity.

“We want to bring the best art possible to England, so that means the best 
children’s books in translation,” said Langley. “It is bound to broaden your 
horizons, but I was not thinking about that when I enjoyed reading about 
Asterix, and the Moomins, or the Jules Verne adventures as a child. The 
question now is, where are we going to find theAsterix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> and Moomins of today? There are a 
lot of us who bleat about this issue, so it’s great to see something practical 
happening.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhunt-for-new-foreign-stars-pippi-longstocking-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60228eb1c34ed1bd6020888a0e1eb506d8ce44a5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20Pippi%20Longstocking%3F%20Hunt%20for%20new%20foreign%20stars%20of%20children%E2%80%99s%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhunt-for-new-foreign-stars-pippi-longstocking-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20Pippi%20Longstocking%3F%20Hunt%20for%20new%20foreign%20stars%20of%20children%E2%80%99s%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fhunt-for-new-foreign-stars-pippi-longstocking-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60228eb1c34ed1bd6020888a0e1eb506d8ce44a5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Pippi Longstocking, Emil and the Detectives and the Neverending Story 
Evidence suggests that when the right books are made available, a young 
audience is there in numbers. Revered German children’s author Cornelia Funke 
is best known for herInkheart (Tintenherz) fantasy trilogy, made into an 
English language film in 2008 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EsV2Z_il_L4>, 
but her other novels, includingThe Thief Lord, are also popular. French writer 
Daniel Pennac, celebrated across the channel, is better appreciated in Britain 
since his 1984 novel,Eye of the Wolf, was translated by Sarah Ardizzone (née 
Adams) in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/oct/03/buildingachildrenslibrary.booksforchildrenandteenagers6>
, winning her the British Marsh Award for Children’s Literature in Translation.

But it can take a while for the British market to catch on. Last week, 
worldwide fans of German writer Michael Ende’sThe Neverending Story marked the 
story’s 37th birthday, but it wasn’t translated into English until 1983, when 
it became the basis of a well-lovedEnglish-language film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B3DcWtkKeIY>. The Letter for the King, by 
Dutch author Tonke Dragt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/19/tonke-dragt-interview-i-was-born-a-fairytale-teller-letter-for-the-king>
, had to wait still longer to reach English readers. It was written more than 
50 years ago and has had great success all over Europe, but was only translated 
into English in 2014.

“The key is getting samples of text translated and then seen and recommended 
by trusted critics,” said Langley. “[But] you don’t get many British editors 
who can read well in other languages because of the global dominance of 
English. In other countries, editors are more likely to read English books.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeFni9dOv7c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeFni9dOv7c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUeFni9dOv7c&media=>
 The Neverending Story trailer 
For Langley, fostering working relationships with translators is the key to 
success. “This is quite a specialist and important part of this kind of 
publishing, and having the BookTrust grant will be crucial. We are playing a 
very long game, but this is the first step. If we can get the publishers to 
read the samples, that is a great thing. Just having them on their desks will 
make it easier for them because they are now so busy and have so much to read,” 
she said.

While British parents are often happy to accept foreign classics of children’s 
literature, such as Erich Kästner’sEmil and the Detectives or Jean de Brunhoff’s
Babar the Elephant, they are perhaps unaware that other greats works are out 
there. The international dominance of JK Rowling’s Harry Potter series could be 
behind this attitude, although savage cuts in staffing at publishing houses are 
also to blame. Editors rarely have the resources for a foreign fishing trip.

And good foreign books do not have to be classics of the future. An 
entertaining read also has its place. Norwegian crime writer Jo Nesbø’s debut 
children’s book,Doctor Proctor’s Fart Powder, has been a hit. Among those yet 
to emerge in the English market are the acclaimed works of the late Portuguese 
poet and novelist Sophia de Mello Breyner Andresen, and Swedish author Einar 
Norelius’sPetter och hans Fyra Getter (Peter and his Four Goats).
 