



The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK: the full list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list>
After Love


Painful drama of longterm relationship breakup and possession-division from 
Belgian director Joachim Lafosse, featuring Bérénice Bejo and Cédric Kahn as a 
couple no longer able to go through the motions.

What we said: It is about the very important but little discussed power of 
money to poison already difficult situations, by supercharging people with a 
sense of grievance, status and entitlement.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/after-love-review-joachim-lfosse-berenice-bejo>

American Honey

Sex, drugs and magazine subscriptions in Andrea Arnold’s US road trip movie, 
with a star-making turn from debutant Sasha Lane alongside Shia LaBeouf and 
Riley Keogh.

 What we said: Arnold’s ambition and reach are really exciting: the way she 
immerses you in the mood and the moment, letting her characters drift to the 
edge of chaos, capable of investing the least little thing with reportage 
poetry.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>

Anomalisa

Middle-age angst rendered in stop-motion animation from Charlie Kaufman, as a 
depressed self-help author holes up in a hotel during a sales convention and 
becomes fixated on a woman he meets in the bar.

What we said: It is really funny, and incidentally boasts one of the most 
extraordinarily real sex scenes in film history. It also scared me the way a 
top-notch horror or a sci-fi dystopia might.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/anomalisa-review-charlie-kaufman-puppet-masterpiece-about-the-human-condition>

Arabian Nights: Vols 1-3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc988d6a83f550c25da39f5f9bf01860c133b9bbd%2F407_0_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc988d6a83f550c25da39f5f9bf01860c133b9bbd%2F407_0_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
 Photograph: New Wave Films 
A three-film epic from Portuguese auteur Miguel Gomes, which uses the famous 
tale/cycle as a structuring device for Gomes’ anatomy of Portugal’s social and 
economic malaise.

What we said: An opaque compendium of stories – like the ones Scheherazade 
told to stave off her own death – all responding in indirect ways to the 
miseries forced on Portugal by austerity.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/arabian-nights-vol-1-the-restless-one-review-miguel-gomes>

Arrival

Epic, emotional sci-fi tale, with Amy Adams as a linguist called in to help 
communicate with the mysterious aliens whose giant ships hover menacingly over 
Earth.

What we said: The movie skirts the edge of absurdity as anything like this 
must, but a forthright star performance from Amy Adams convinces you that 
something that could be silly is actually fascinating and deeply scary.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>

The Assassin

Taiwanese master director Hou Hsaio-hsien released his first feature since 
2007, featuring Shu Qi as the eponymous killer in an elaborately stylised wuxia 
tale.

What we said: Its moments of sublime gorgeousness are captivating. There is 
such delicacy and artistry inThe Assassin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-assassin>, as if the film is spun from 
some exquisite, evanescent tissue of precious material.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/the-assassin-review-captivatingly-hypnotic-if-impenetrable-wuxia-tale>

The BFG

A whizz-popping ride from Steven Spielberg, with Mark Rylance CGI’d to the 
last nose hair as Roald Dahl’s Big Friendly Giant. Ruby Barnhill plays Sophie, 
the little girl who befriends the giant and recruits the Queen to help him take 
on his child-chewing contemporaries.

What we said: The movie asks us to marvel at how large the world is, and also 
how small. A colossal miniaturism.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/21/the-bfg-review-mark-rylance-towers-over-roald-dahls-classic-tale>

A Bigger Splash
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
A Bigger Splash: a clip featuring Ralph Fiennes and Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/28/a-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Tilda Swinton and Ralph Fiennes star in Luca Guadagnino’s four-handed 
psychodrama based on Jacques Deray’s 1969 psychological thriller La Piscine, in 
which Swinton’s island idyll is invaded by Fiennes’ over-exuberant music 
promoter.

What we said: A terrifically assured switch to English-language film-making 
from Guadagnino … He is surely coming to rival Paolo Sorrentino as an Italian 
auteur on the world stage.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/a-bigger-splash-review-tilda-swinton-ralph-fiennes-luca-guadagnino>

Captain America: Civil War

The third in Marvel’s Captain America series, with two sets of superheroes 
lining up to battle each other over whether the Avengers should retain their 
independence, or give up control.

What we said: Crazily surreal, engaging and funny in the best Marvel 
tradition, building to a whiplash-twist reveal that sports with the 
ever-present idea of duplicity and betrayal within the Avengers’ ranks 
themselves.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/20/captain-america-civil-war-review-an-aspartame-rush>

The Childhood of a Leader

The feature debut of 28-year-old actor-turned-director Brady Corbet, it’s the 
story of a privileged, petulant 10-year-old boy who is fated to end up a 
fascist dictator, loosely based on a 1939 story by Jean-Paul Sartre.

What we said: Steely, sinister and utterly gripping … the film exerts a lethal 
grip. It might be considered arch for a young first-timer to release a movie 
with this title, but Corbet has earned the right to be precocious. What an 
exciting debut.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/the-childhood-of-a-leader-review-brady-corbet>

Chronic
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226104dcc7892f0b4c7b5cf7679f73f1f428e8c6%2F120_149_4015_2410%2F4015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226104dcc7892f0b4c7b5cf7679f73f1f428e8c6%2F120_149_4015_2410%2F4015.jpg>
 Still from Chronic, starring Tim Roth (right). Photograph: Artificial Eye 
Cannes-award winning drama from Mexican director Michel Franco, with Tim Roth 
as a terminal-care nurse who steps in to help take care of patients in their 
final days.

What we said: Tim Roth stars, and gives what may well be the performance of 
his career – calm, studied, mysteriously impassive.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/18/chronic-review-tim-roth-michel-franco>

The Club

Chilean director Pablo Larraín takes on the legacy of the Pinochet 
dictatorship once again in this dark and difficult film about a “retirement 
home” for priests apparently guilty of child abuse.

What we said: The Club is a startling and disturbing film in many ways – and 
replete with ideas … The flavour of fear and disillusionment is all but 
overwhelming.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-club-review-pablo-larrain-catholic-church-chile>

Deadpool
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455209010239%2FKP_1789782_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455209010239%2FKP_1789782_crop_640x360.jpg>
Deadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/11/deadpool-video-review> – 
video review 
Zinger-packed comic book adaptation from Marvel, featuring Ryan Reynolds as 
the pansexual superhero and mutant mercenary assassin taking on Ed Skrein’s 
Ajax.

What we said: A horribly violent, shriekingly self-aware and macabre Marvel 
super-antihero movie, and it’s the funniest Ryan Reynolds film since Van 
Wilder: Party Liaison.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/deadpool-review-marvel-ryan-reynolds-film-superhero>

Dheepan

Jacques Audiard-directed thriller about Tamil refugees struggling to adapt to 
life on a French housing estate, which won the Cannes Palme d’Or in 2015.

What we said: It’s bulging with giant confidence and packed with outbursts of 
that mysterious epiphanic grandeur, like moments of sunlight breaking through 
cloud-cover, with which Audiard endows apparently normal sequences and everyday 
details.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/07/dheepan-review-jacques-audiard-palme-d-or>

Doctor Strange

Benedict Cumberbatch plays the arrogant, egotistical superhero who finds 
himself charged with saving the world in a film that almost stands apart from 
the rest of the Marvel universe.

What we said: A tremendously engaging and likeable superhero ride, in which 
the classiest of casts show they know exactly where to take it seriously – and 
where to inject the fun.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>

Everybody Wants Some!!

Richard Linklater’s semi-sequel to his 1970s high-school comedy Dazed and 
Confused, here following a bunch of college students on baseball scholarships 
in the early 1980s.

What we said: A deceptively subtle comedy, and also a challengingly and almost 
provokingly unironic film intensifying and cartoonifying what it is like to be 
young and male, but quite without the obviously readable drama and poignancy of 
his earlier film Boyhood.

Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them

First in a new series of Harry Potter spin-offs, with Eddie Redmayne as 
“magizoologist” Newt Scamander battling evil supernatural forces in New York.

What we said: It’s a very Rowling universe, dense with fun, but always taking 
its own jeopardy very seriously and effortlessly making you do the same.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>

Fire at Sea
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ded7aed751fb0dcb49a3ee706a53cde0e9443b%2F28_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ded7aed751fb0dcb49a3ee706a53cde0e9443b%2F28_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 New home ... Fire at Sea Photograph: PR company handout 
Over 20 years 400,000 migrants from Africa and the Middle East have used the 
Sicilian island of Lampedusa as a gateway to Europe. Gianfranco Rosi’s 
documentary attempts to convey how their displacements affects both those 
searching for a better life and the locals who have lived with the influx for 
decades.

What we said: The film does not take a view; it does not demand action. It 
simply shows us the details, and I felt I learned more from this film than from 
the nightly TV news.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/fire-at-sea-review-masterly-and-moving-look-at-the-migrant-crisis>

Francofonia

Russian master director Alexander Sokurov follows up his Hermitage meditation 
Russian Ark with this dreamlike installation film about France’s culture 
repository, the Louvre.

What we said: It is a sophisticated, complex film: a cine-prose poem or 
installation tableau, weaving newsreel footage with eerie floating images above 
Paris and dramatised fantasy scenes.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/francofonia-review-alexander-sokurov-louvre>

From Afar

A stylish drama from Venezuela’s Lorenzo Vigas about a lonely man (Alfredo 
Castro), his fascination with a young male prostitute and the relationship 
between the two.

What we said: It’s a movie that balances fiercely explicit moments with 
seductive indirections, off-camera crises and climaxes made all the more 
disturbing for appearing to happen behind the audience’s back … an intriguing, 
emotionally painful and brilliant film.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/from-afar-review-lorenzo-vigas-luis-silva-caracas-venezuela>

Ghostbusters

Who you gonna call? The police, apparently. Paul Feig’s all-female reboot of a 
slightly shonky 80s staple caused such a stir among the troglodytic that cast 
member Leslie Jones was subjected to hate speech on Twitter. The film soldiers 
on regardless. A fast, fun reimagining that leaves the haters in its wake.

What we said: It delivers a really funny and spectacular action comedy that 
pays tribute to the first film with in-jokes, twists and cameos, and yet 
produces a brand new work, as smart as paint.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/everybody-wants-some-review-richard-linklaters-sports-jock-comedy-is-a-winner>

Hail, Caesar!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hail%2C%20Caesar!%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hail%2C%20Caesar%21%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Hail, Caesar! Watch the trailer for the Coen brothers comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/oct/09/hail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video>
Entertaining Hollywood satire from the Coen brothers, featuring Josh Brolin as 
a studio fixer attempting to establish the whereabouts of missing actor Baird 
Whitlock (George Clooney), star of the eponymous Roman epic.

What we said: It’s a crazy, if lugubrious, caper about the golden, post-war 
age of Tinseltown, like a Hollywood tale that PG Wodehouse might have written, 
but with that ominous deadpan, quirky-Coeny quality where the cheeriness would 
otherwise go.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/hail-caesar-review-george-clooney-bigger-broader-zanier-in-classic-coen-caper>

The Hard Stop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2dcfdd11c2085f74ccf327d5e00920198a45029%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2dcfdd11c2085f74ccf327d5e00920198a45029%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Hard time ... The Hard Stop Photograph: Metrodome 
Documentary on two childhood friends of Mark Duggan, the Tottenham man whose 
shooting by the police was thought to have sparked the London riots of 2011. 
One - Marcus Knox-Hooke – was jailed for 32 months for his part in the riots. 
The other - Kurtis Henville – is shown struggling to make any headway in the 
straight world after giving up a life of crime.

What we said: Another grim rotation in the cycle of violence and resentment. 
The film itself recites the litany of gloom: “Money, guns, drugs, power, 
respect.”

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/14/the-hard-stop-review-documentary-mark-duggan-london-riots>

The Hateful Eight

Kurt Russell, Samuel L Jackson and Jennifer Jason Leigh star in Quentin 
Tarantino’s snowbound western, in which copious bloodletting results after a 
motley group of travellers are stranded at a roadhouse.

What we said: A Jacobean western that is also an American epic set mostly in 
just one room: intimate yet gigantic. It is horribly violent, exhilaratingly 
intelligent, discursive and sinewy – brutal and cerebral in this director’s 
signature ludic style.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/the-hateful-eight-review-tarantino-triumphs-with-a-western-of-wonder>

High-Rise
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5691c3f64c815431ccf379340754ec1b53ded528%2F0_234_4668_2801%2F4668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5691c3f64c815431ccf379340754ec1b53ded528%2F0_234_4668_2801%2F4668.jpg>
 Photograph: Supplied by LMK 
Adaptation of JG Ballard’s celebrated fable of alienation and conflict in 
1970s Britain, directed by Ben Wheatley and starring Tom Hiddleston as a doctor 
witnessing the breakdown of law and order.


What we said: I loved its gnomic refusal of normal storytelling and the way it 
approximates the distance of Ballard’s prose. It’s the social-surrealist film 
of the year.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/17/high-rise-review-tom-hiddleston-ben-wheatley-jb-ballard>

I, Daniel Blake

Ken Loach’s immensely powerful, Newcastle-set parable about the flaws in the 
British benefits system, which won the Palme d’Or at Cannes this year.

What we said: Loach avoids smart-alec stuff. This is nothing fancy, but 
conceived with candour, delicacy, and lack of prurience. Loach shows us that 
poverty is not God’s business but ours. We can understand it and do something 
about it.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>

The Jungle Book

A live-action 3D retelling of Kipling’s Mowgli tales, directed by Jon Favreau, 
and retaining much of the celebrated Disney cartoon’s infectious spirit.

What we said: A terrifically enjoyable piece of old-fashioned storytelling and 
a beautiful-looking film: spectacular, exciting, funny and fun.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review>

The Light Between Oceans

Alicia Vikander and Michael Fassbender star in an impassioned melodrama about 
lighthouse keepers who find a baby in an open boat, and decide to raise the 
child as their own.

What we said: Unashamedly and even ruthlessly sentimental, this film tugs away 
at your heartstrings like it’s ringing in the new year. A new Richter scale may 
have to be devised to measure the mass audience lip-trembling.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/the-light-between-oceans-review-michael-fassbender-alicia-vikander>

Little Men

Ira Sachs’s thoughtful drama about two boys whose friendship is tested when 
their parents fall out over money.

What we said: Painful, complex, beautifully acted and inexpressibly sad, 
composed with scrupulous observational intelligence and care. It achieves a 
strangely literary quality, like an exceptionally powerful short story. 
Film-making this intelligent is such a treat.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/little-men-review-greg-kinnear-jennifer-ehle-ira-sachs>

Love & Friendship

Kate Becksinsale reunites with her Last Days of Disco director Whit Stillman 
for an unlikely adaptation of an early Jane Austen novella (which has filched 
its title from a different one).

What we said: A very satisfying archery contest of zingers … a film of 
surfaces and cynicism, in which the romanticism of the more famous stories is 
almost entirely absent.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/26/love-friendship-review-whit-stillmans-austen-drama-is-a-racy-delight>

Maggie’s Plan

Greta Gerwig comedy in which Maggie’s plan (to conceive a baby via sperm 
donated by an old school friend) is disrupted by a chance meeting with a 
unhappily married couple whose misery could be Maggie’s new masterpiece.

What we said: A witty, sharp comedy that moves along at an invigorating clip. 

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/maggies-plan-film-review-metropolitan-comedy-greta-gerwig-julianne-moore-ethan-hawke-rebecca-miller>

Miles Ahead
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8dfd586d8eedfc2854a83b3e7aa4a5e8aca572e%2F0_183_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8dfd586d8eedfc2854a83b3e7aa4a5e8aca572e%2F0_183_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Don Cheadle directs and stars in a biopic of jazz legend Miles Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/miles-davis>, focusing on Davis’s burnout 
years in the late 1970s and his attempt to achieve a comeback.

What we said: This is a labour of requited love for Cheadle, a subject he 
clearly feels passionate about that responds to his touch.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/21/miles-ahead-review-magnificent-mooch-through-the-wilderness-years>

The Neon Demon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff373ec250003d87cc0f6417070d4c68fcb20bf2c%2F0_64_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff373ec250003d87cc0f6417070d4c68fcb20bf2c%2F0_64_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Picture imperfect ... The Neon Demon Photograph: Melbourne international film 
festival 
Nicolas Winding Refn slips into something even more uncomfortable than the 
Thai boxing ring - the LA fashion world. Elle Fanning plays Jessie, a neophyte 
who seduces the scene with her vulnerability, before giving into corruption.

What we said: The flourishes of toxic menace are carried off with the style of 
a matador. For pure technique, Refn approaches the mastery of a PT Anderson or 
a Tarantino.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/neon-demon-review-film-nicolas-winding-refn-elle-fanning-fashion-horror>

The Nice Guys

Ryan Gosling and Russell Crowe, as a private detective and a for-hire heavy 
respectively, team up to solve a gruesome, complex crime in the moral swamp of 
late 70s Los Angeles.

What we said: A comedy hardboiled noir, a plastic Black Dahlia with something 
of PT Anderson’s Boogie Nights, Altman’s version of The Long Goodbye and even 
some weird touches of Lynch.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>

Nocturnal Animals

Tom Ford directs an astute adaptation of Austin Wright’s novel Tony and Susan, 
about a woman disturbed by the manuscript of a novel sent to her by her former 
husband.

What we said: Nocturnal Animals delivers a double shot of horror and 
Nabokovian despair: it’s excessive, outrageous, a story within a story about 
the super-rich and super-poor.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/03/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-amy-adams-jake-gyllenhaal>

Our Little Sister

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Four-little-sister-director-hirokazu-kore-eda-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20Little%20Sister%20director%20Hirokazu%20Kore-eda%3A%20'Lost%20time%20can%20be%20recovered'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Four-little-sister-director-hirokazu-kore-eda-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20Little%20Sister%20director%20Hirokazu%20Kore-eda%3A%20%27Lost%20time%20can%20be%20recovered%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Four-little-sister-director-hirokazu-kore-eda-video-interview&media=>
Our Little Sister director Hirokazu Kore-eda: ‘Lost time can be recovered’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/14/our-little-sister-director-hirokazu-kore-eda-video-interview>
Japanese auteur Hirokazu Kore-eda directs a quiet “family drama” about four 
sisters of varying ages who live together in a large house in the seaside town 
of Kamakura.

What we said: Superbly unforced and unassuming, finding delicate notes of 
affirmation and optimism and discreetly celebrating the beauty of nature and 
family love.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/our-little-sister-review-an-exquisite-portrait-of-family-life>

Paterson

Adam Driver plays a poetry-writing bus driver in Paterson, NJ, in the latest 
idiosyncratic fable from American auteur Jim Jarmusch.

What we said: I can’t remember when I last saw a movie whose adult characters 
had so much simple, unassuming goodness, goodness that breaks everything in the 
modern culture rulebook by going unironised and unpunished.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/paterson-review-adam-driver-jim-jarmusch>

The Revenant

A hallucinatory epic of survival in the old west, about frontiersman Hugh 
Glass who survives bear attacks and the treachery of his fellow travellers, 
which won Oscars for its star Leonardo DiCaprio and director Alejandro González 
Iñárritu.

What we said: What is so distinctive about this Iñárritu picture is its 
unitary control and its fluency: no matter how extended, the film’s tense story 
is under the director’s complete control.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/the-revenant-review-gut-churningly-brutal-beautiful-storytelling>

Room
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Froom-director-lenny-abrahamson-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F5%2F1452012856063%2FKP_1217182_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Room%20director%20Lenny%20Abrahamson%3A%20'I%20find%20kids'%20optimism%20incredibly%20moving'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Froom-director-lenny-abrahamson-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Room%20director%20Lenny%20Abrahamson%3A%20%27I%20find%20kids%27%20optimism%20incredibly%20moving%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Froom-director-lenny-abrahamson-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F5%2F1452012856063%2FKP_1217182_crop_640x360.jpg>
Room director Lenny Abrahamson: ‘I find kids’ optimism incredibly moving’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/13/room-director-lenny-abrahamson-video-interview>
An adaptation of Emma Donoghue’s kidnap-and-imprisonment novel, itself 
inspired by the Kampusch and Fritzl cases in Austria, for which Brie Larson won 
the best actress Oscar.

What we said: This is a disturbing and absorbing film, shrewdly acted, 
particularly by Larson. It lets the audience in; it does not just let the 
nightmare stun them into submission.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/room-review-brie-larson-shines-in-a-dark-dungeon>

Sing Street

Irish director John Carney follows Once and Begin Again with another 
musician-oriented film, this time about Dublin schoolkids who form a band to 
escape their humdrum lives.

What we said: A wish-fulfilment comedy about idealism, aspiration and getting 
off with girls, riffing on that age-old truth that being in a band might just 
give you the cachet that will make up for a lack of money and looks.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/19/sing-street-review>

Son of Saul

Stark and uncompromising account of existence inside a Nazi death camp from 
Hungarian director László Nemes, with Geza Röhrig as the Sonderkommando 
attempting to survive.

What we said: Its good faith and moral and intellectual seriousness are beyond 
doubt. And Röhrig’s performance is transfixing, without ever drifting into the 
realm of actorly pretence.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/28/son-of-saul-review-auschwitz-holocaust>

Spotlight
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd961e271b510121fa3560d70d9bee41ea4b1454%2F0_40_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd961e271b510121fa3560d70d9bee41ea4b1454%2F0_40_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Getting to work ... Spotlight Photograph: Allstar/Open Road Films 
A hardhitting and impassioned Oscar-winning study of the Boston Globe’s 
campaign to expose clerical child abuse in the city, and the Catholic church’s 
ongoing cover-up.

What we said: There are a few journo cliches – but it has the sinew of a 
really good procedural, underpinned by genuine moral outrage.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/spotlight-review-catholic-church-called-to-account-over-child-abuse>

Tale of Tales

Fantastical frippery from Gomorrah director Matteo Garrone, who picks through 
16th-century Neopolitan poet Giambattista Basile’s folk stories for the 
choicest, weirdest fairy tales to fill his freaky portmanteau.

What we said: It is fantastically mad, rigorously imagined and visually 
tremendous: erotic, hilarious, internally consistent.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/17/tale-of-tales-review-matteo-garrone-salam-hayek-john-c-reilly-toby-jones>

Things to Come

Mia Hansen-Løve’s latest, for which she won the Silver Bear at Berlin film 
festival. A philosophy teacher (Isabelle Huppert) is forced to rethink her life 
after her husband leaves her and reexamines her relationship with her favourite 
former student.

What we said: Stylish, elegant, measured and held together with a thread of 
exquisitely reticent sadness … a rigorously intelligent and desperately sad 
movie. Huppert is unimpeachably cast and what a brilliant and commanding 
presence she always is.


Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/things-to-come-review-isabelle-huppert-in-exquisite-agony>

Victoria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b561a309a23265d7c975fc010e09923749a718%2F416_25_4870_2923%2F4870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b561a309a23265d7c975fc010e09923749a718%2F416_25_4870_2923%2F4870.jpg>
 Photograph: Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
Single-take thriller from German director Sebastian Schipper, following a 
Spanish girl who winds up helping out four men she meets in the street to pull 
off a robbery.

What we said: A gripping heist drama set on the streets of Berlin that plays 
out in real time in one continuous, 138-minute camera shot, carried along on a 
giant skittery wave of adrenaline and logistical daring.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/victoria-review-one-take-berlin-schipper-heist-thriller>

Weiner

Former US congressman Anthony Weiner’s double sex scandal gets another airing, 
this time by two film-makers who were there as his political career imploded, 
getting even closer to the snap-happy Weiner than his online messaging buddies.

What we said: The car-crash mayoral candidacy of New York politician Anthony 
Weiner makes horribly compulsive viewing.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/weiner-review-anthony-new-york-mayor-documentary>

Wiener-Dog
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F930611328bfd5853e06b5a1deb0c13a9f4754ce6%2F8_0_4475_2684%2F4475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20films%20of%202016%20so%20far&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fbest-films-of-2016-anomalisa-spotlight-revenant-nice-guys-jungle-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F930611328bfd5853e06b5a1deb0c13a9f4754ce6%2F8_0_4475_2684%2F4475.jpg>
 Photograph: Films/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Todd Solondz’s latest, made up of four interlinked episodes involving a 
dachshund, plus a very funny intermission scene. The movie focuses on a series 
of people who come into contact with the dog, including Greta Gerwig, Julie 
Delpy and Danny DeVito

What we said: A black comedy with the comedy removed, leaving just the black: 
a tarry, sticky, dense residue of bleakness and callousness. It’s as if Solondz 
is angrily reacting against suspicions that he is going soft: suspicions that 
he himself has created. It is a movie with a hard core of disillusionment.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/wiener-dog-review-todd-solondz-daschund-danny-devito>

Zootropolis (aka Zootopia)


Buddy-cop animation from Disney featuring Ginnifer Goodwin as a rabbit called 
Judy Hopps who moves to the big city and ends up solving a major crime despite 
her superiors’ doubts.

What we said: This deft comedy, set in a world in which all the different 
animal species have put aside their natural positions on the food chain to 
coexist in harmony, is the latest in a run of first-rate family films from 
Disney.

Read the full review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/zootropolis-review-elegance-wit-and-first-rate-animation>

 * In our critics’ opinion, these are the highest-rated films of 2016 so far. 
Are we right: are there glaring absences, or inexplicable inclusions? Bear in 
mind these are films released in the UK since January, so if you are in the US 
you might want to speak up forThe Lobster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/the-lobster-review-> or Sunset 
Song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/sunset-song-review-agyness-deyn-roams-a-stunning-landscape>
 (released last year in the UK), orBrooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
 and45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
 if you are in Australia.  