
Something very strange is going on. The chairman of the Equality and Human 
Rights Commission <https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/religion-or-belief> 
feels he must tell employers it is OK to celebrate Christmas, and that this 
will not offend unbelievers. The prime minister announces in parliament that of 
course people should be able tospeak freely about their religious convictions 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/30/christians-should-not-fear-speaking-faith-work-public-places/>
. A thinktank argues that there should be a duty of “reasonable accommodation” 
to religious belief. All these are symptoms of a deep unease and confusion 
about the role of Christianity in British life.

Britain is a country with an established church in England and another 
national church in Scotland, a secular ruling class, and a population largely 
indifferent to distinctively Christian beliefs and overwhelmingly reluctant to 
go to church, which displays a growing hostility to the notion of “religion” at 
all. There are also significant religious minorities, primarily Muslim, who 
have their own arguments with secularism as well as withChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>.

Some churches see their control of schools as a way back towards relevance, 
and the government is tempted by the idea that Christian-based schooling 
produces better results than the purely secular, even though the bestresearch 
suggests 
<http://epi.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Pupil_characteristics_and_performance_at_faith_schools.pdf>
 that faith works in practice simply as a proxy for selection on the basis of 
class and parental wealth.

Much of the noise is based around the tendentious claim that conservative 
Christians who are prevented from discriminating against gay people are thereby 
discriminated against. The argument is hardly convincing. Although there were 
important issues of free speech involved inthe case of Ashers bakery in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/24/born-again-christian-ashers-bakery-lose-court-appeal-in-gay-cake-row>
, and in some other recent cases that did not come to court, Christians are not 
being persecuted if they are prevented from exercising their beliefs in ways 
that harm others. Neither are the followers of any other religion.

These prohibitions are not purely the imposition of secular law on religious 
believers. They are also the imposition of one kind of religious belief on 
another. There are people motivated by equally sincere and (theologically 
speaking) equally well-argued religious convictions on both sides of all these 
debates.

What is more, the conservative Christian case is fundamentally compromised 
when it is pitched in terms of “religious” freedom rather than what is actually 
meant, which is that the law of the land should follow specifically Christian 
principles.Religion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion> is notoriously 
hard to define, as is secularism. Deciding which kinds of belief deserve 
special protection even if none are to be treated as theologically true turns 
out to be very complicated. Unfortunately it is also necessary. It is 
impossible to construct a nation or any community without shared moral values 
and practices, and surprisingly difficult to decide, as it were, from first 
principles, how to move these values beyond platitudes and into action. There 
is in some secularist discussions an unwarranted assumption that all real 
disagreement is political, whereas religious opinions are distinguished by 
being either platitudinous or false. In fact they can be inextricably tangled, 
and the religious aspect can make political disputes much harder to resolve.

Nervousness over Christmas is an absurd expression of a real void at the heart 
of soulless technocracy

And here the Christian critique has something to offer the rest of the 
country. There is a long tradition of religious thought about the development 
of virtues and values. The Christian versionderives ultimately 
<https://www.librarything.com/work/8944> from Socrates and Aristotle, but those 
philosophers thought virtue was entirely compatible with slavery and 
infanticide, so it has been quite heavily modified since then. The central 
insight is that both individuals and societies, or social groups, develop their 
values by living them. Moral questions cannot be answered entirely by 
reasoning: we discover what kind of creatures we are by living; we develop 
virtues, like vices, by practising them. A compassionate society is one that 
treats its members compassionately, not one that makes speeches about the need 
to do so.

More subtly, the values of a society are developed and maintained by its 
institutions. These need not be branches of the state. In factit’s essential 
that many of them aren’t 
<https://medium.com/@lambethpalace/archbishop-of-canterbury-opens-house-of-lords-debate-on-shared-national-values-8902632c9f8c#.6u9hc9bwu>
. Trade unions, food banks, football leagues, even reading groups all qualify, 
but many will always be religious. It would be stupid and self-destructive to 
make such groups feel useless and unwanted. The nervousness over Christmas, or 
even over expressing religious belief, is an absurd expression of a real void 
at the heart of soulless technocracy.
 