
The first thing to know about nutrition is that nobody is certain about very 
much. Data gets painstakingly collected in diaries which don’t give a full 
dietary picture: even if people don’t actually fib, they won’t always be sure 
of everything they’ve consumed, and may eat more thoughtfully when they know 
they’re going to be writing it down. The health consequences show up only 
slowly, which makes it necessary to keep tabs on the same patients for decades, 
which isn’t easy to do. The chemical effect of a particular food may depend on 
how it is prepared, and even the mix of things it is served with.

Thus it is that sunflower oil can be a superfood one decade, and a hidden 
killer the next 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/11981884/Cooking-with-vegetable-oils-releases-toxic-cancer-causing-chemicals-say-experts.html>
;blueberries an elixir 
<http://www.bestherbalhealth.com/blueberries-the-secret-elixir-of-youth-and-health/>
 one minute, but a tooth-rotting irrelevance later. A haze of uncertainty 
surrounds the evolving facts and thickens to fog when it comes to finding the 
right policies. Until you know if fructose is“as bad as” sucrose 
<http://www.healthline.com/health-news/evidence-shows-some-sugars-are-worse-than-others-012915>
, it is hard to know – even in principle – whether a general sugar tax should 
hit apples bred to be sickly sweet as hard as chocolates. Then there is the 
practical danger of manufacturers replacing the one nice-but-nasty ingredient 
that is being targeted with something worse.

If the government were earnestly grappling with such complexities, then the 
latest delay in the childhood obesity strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/26/childhood-obesity-strategy-delayed-sugar-tax-unlikely>
 might be forgivable. With diabetes already consuming 10% of NHS resources and 
one child in every four too heavy, the need to do something is urgent and 
plain. But it might nonetheless be worth taking the time required to get that 
something right. Sadly, there is absolutely no sign that this is what is going 
on.

The latest slip is to the “summer”, whenever Whitehall decides that is. But 
one of the very few certainties in this field is that parents and children 
alike will have to be gripped by, and engage actively with, what the strategy 
says, if it is to do any good at all. Choosing a moment when mouths are full of 
ice creams and more noses are in airport novels than newspapers is not an 
encouraging start.

Worse, the prime minister is reportedly disinclined to pursue 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e5c5fa9e-d16b-11e5-92a1-c5e23ef99c77.html#axzz41lwIddjO>
 one of the very few measures whose efficacy is a “known known”. Glugging 
gallons of sugary soda helped make America fat and sugary drinks – with which 
it is easy to swallow a meal’s worth of calories without taking a bite – are 
every bit as unhealthy on the British side of the Atlantic. That is why the NHS 
England chief, Simon Stevens, recently told the Guardian of his plans fora levy 
on their sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/17/nhs-sugar-tax-hospitals-tackle-uk-obesity-crisis-simon-stevens>
 on hospital estates, a welcome symbolic gesture designed to spur ministers to 
follow with a nationwide tax. But the prime minister would seem to be leaning 
against it – and seemingly for no better reason than an ideological allergy to 
taxation.

The Cameron government has miserable form in kow-towing to vested interest in 
this field, dating back to the time when major health charitieswalked away from 
Andrew Lansley’s “responsibility” partnerships 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-12737200>, because of his refusal to overrule 
the industry on anything much, or even to impose any serious rules on the 
minimal obligation to inform customers clearly about the nutrition in their 
food. The failure to go with a fizzy drink tax is of a piece with this record. 
In this light, the delay in the obesity strategy looks less like a necessary 
pause to give the government time to think, than a crude invitation for the 
industry to lobby again.
 