
This week is the 60th anniversary of one of the bloodiest episodes of the 20th 
century: thepartition of the Indian sub-continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/flash/page/0,,2144256,00.html>. Over 15 million 
people left their homes 
<http://century.theguardian.com/1940-1949/Story/0,,105131,00.html>, the vast 
majority being Muslims leaving India for Pakistan, or Sikhs and Hindus moving 
the other way. In many, if not most, cases the refugees fled due to fear about 
their future as a religious minority in the new countries, or were forced to 
leave by those desiring religiously "pure" states. Up to 1 million may have 
died, making partition one of the greatest causes of human suffering in living 
memory.

Partition was very much a British responsibility, rushed through by Louis 
Mountbatten 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/mountbatten_lord_louis.shtml>, 
the lastviceroy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viceroy>, who had only arrived in 
India five months before. In a classic case of imperial arrogance, the new 
boundaries were drawn up at the last moment byCyril Radcliffe 
<http://www.oxforddnb.com/public/dnb/31576.html>, a lawyer who had never been 
to India before, who only arrived in July and worked in secret. Given the 
disaster that occurred, one would hope it would be a uniquely terrible example. 
It is not. Partitions on the basis of ethnicity or religion, accompanied by 
violence and the creation of thousands of refugees have been all-too common in 
the last century. November will see another anniversary from 1947, of the UN 
vote topartition the British mandate of Palestine 
<http://century.theguardian.com/1940-1949/Story/0,,105143,00.html> into a 
Jewish and an Arab state. Conflicts arising from thepartition of Ireland 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_of_Ireland> in the 1920s are still not 
fully resolved and thepartitions of former Yugoslavia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/eu/story/0,,1196858,00.html> since 1991 have 
brought ethnic cleansing and killings in Europe on a scale not seen in decades.

Disastrous partitions are often those imposed by outsiders, such as departing 
colonial powers, or international mediators, when faced with the problems of 
accommodating different religious and ethnic groups. Partitions may be the 
formal creation of new states, "temporary" divisions that last for decades (as 
inCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/cyprus/story/0,,1147766,00.html>); or 
internal partition into ethnic or religious entities as inBosnia-Herzegovina 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/country_profiles/1066981.stm>, (which 
is now beingproposed <http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/12572371/> by some, such as 
Senator Joseph Biden, in Iraq). Extreme versions are the building ofphysical 
walls <http://www.iht.com/articles/2007/04/25/opinion/ediraq.php>, as some 
Americans have proposed in Baghdad, in the vain hope of ending religious or 
ethnic conflict.

Why then, despite its bloody history, does the idea of partition as a solution 
to conflict remain so common? It is ironic that partition is often imposed and 
proposed by outsiders, including Americans, who fought a civil war against 
partition, and British who have the experience of Ireland close to home. One 
reason for the popularity of partition is that it provides a superficially neat 
solution. Those who consider themselves peacemakers can, like Radcliffe, draw 
lines on the map, dividing complicated states and peoples into apparently 
simple ethnic and religious boxes.

But these views of the world stem from a delusion. The world cannot be split 
into neat ethnically or religiously pure areas. Creating new states simply 
creates new minorities, who often feel second-class and excluded. It is 
scarcely surprising that the creation of new states supposedly based on one 
ethnicity or religion so often leads to mass cleansing of the "wrong" 
minorities.

But those dealing with multi-ethnic and religious states seem condemned to 
repeat history by continuing to ignore it and resorting to partition too 
quickly. It is much better to address the grievances of minorities by ensuring 
adequate and effective guarantees for the equal rights of everyone, including 
their languages and religions. India eventually accommodated the different 
languages of its south, and the threat of violent conflict (and more partition) 
was averted. On the other hand the failure of West Pakistan to accommodate 
Bengalis as equals led to a further partition, and moremass killings 
<http://www.gendercide.org/case_bangladesh.html>, in 1971.

Occasionally partition may be necessary, when it is a genuinely and widespread 
desire of a people in a particular area for self-determination. But where 
partition does occur, it does not necessarily have to lead to violence if 
carefully managed. There are (admittedly few) examples of peaceful splits. A 
year ago, almost forgotten, a peaceful partition in the former Yugoslavia 
occurred with theindependence of Montenegro. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international/story/0,,1780583,00.html> This 
latter case took place with the new state granting clear guarantees of the 
rights of all minorities, including the Serbs.

If partitions are to be handled peacefully, it is important is that the new 
borders are clearly determined and accepted, and disputes are dealt with fairly 
and finally. When people have fled or been forced to leave, their homes and 
property need to be protected and returned to them as quickly as possible. The 
critical moment is the time of the creation of new states. It is vital that 
those in authority ensure that the vulnerable are fully protected at the time 
of change. Mountbatten's handling of partition is a textbook example of what 
not to do - not only the rushing it through, but that the British failed to 
provide protection to vulnerable groups, particularly in the divided Punjab, on 
the days around partition.

But above all, new states should never pretend that they are for one group or 
religion only. All persons must be assured that they will still be able to 
practice their language, religion and culture freely in the new country. This 
is what the UN required of the "Jewish" and "Arab" states, in itspartition 
resolution 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/middle_east/israel_and_the_palestinians/key_documents/1681322.stm>
 60 years ago. It remains the key today to resolving the conflicts caused by 
partitions.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 