
So this is what Theresa May’s new industrial strategy looks like: the UK’s 
most successful technology company of the past 20 years is being sold to a big 
Japanese buyer while the chancellor whistles, on the basis of no detailed 
scrutiny, that the£24.3bn deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 is a fine thing. Apparently it shows that “Britain has lost none of its allure 
to international investors” since the EU referendum.

Philip Hammond’s response to SoftBank’s planned purchase of ARM Holdings was 
ludicrous, or at least grossly superficial. SoftBank is indeed making a big bet 
on a British company. But the gamble is on ARM’s ability to find riches in the “
internet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/what-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank>
”, the idea that cars and buildings will be adorned with more and better 
microchips in the coming years.

The specifically UK angle is different. It is not the post-Brexit vote 
currency factor, which is debatable, since dollar-earning ARM’s share price has 
risen by 17% since the referendum. Rather, it’s the timing of SoftBank’s 
approach, which looks highly suspicious. The Japanese company might simply have 
wanted to get in quickly before May’s government puts in place a national 
interest test for foreign takeovers.

It was, after all, only a week ago that May said she would cut all the 
political platitudes 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
 about “stakeholder societies” and do something radical. The prime minister was 
damning on how David Cameron’s governmentalmost allowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/26/pfizer-abandons-attempt-astrazeneca-pharmaceutical>
 AstraZeneca to be sold to Pfizer, the US pharmaceuticals companythat May 
described 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
 as having a “track record of asset stripping and whose self-confessed 
attraction to the deal was to avoid tax”. She concluded: “A proper industrial 
strategy wouldn’t automatically stop the sale of British firms to foreign ones, 
but it should be capable of stepping in to defend a sector that is as important 
as pharmaceuticals is to Britain.”

ARM Holdings to be sold to Japan's SoftBank for £24bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
For pharmaceuticals, read technology. ARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> and AstraZeneca, in 
different ways, are cornerstones of a vision of Cambridge as a 21st-century 
centre of excellence in research-led, advanced technology. May’s government, 
following her welcome remarks last week, should explain in detail why the 
Pfizer and SoftBank proposals are different in character.

As it happens, a fair argument could be constructed that the SoftBank deal is 
superior. Pfizer had a grim record of cutting research budgets at every turn. 
SoftBank’s history is different. Its founder and chairman, Masayoshi Son, is
long-termist in outlook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/softbank-arm-deal-masayoshi-son-retirement-technology>
 and tends to give his shareholders and bondholders heart attacks with the 
boldness of some of his bets.

In any case, soft-pedalling on investment would probably be self-defeating for 
SoftBank.ARM’s leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
 in designing chips for microprocessors is sustained by big research and 
development budgets, and the recruitment of top-class engineers. SoftBank, 
currently a non-player in the chip market, is also a credible guarantor of 
ARM’s neutrality, another of the British company’s competitive advantages. 
Neutrality, meaning that ARM does not discriminate between customers, is one 
reason why it has been able to grab a 95% share of the chips used in mobile 
phones.

Thus, SoftBank might pass most versions of a credible national interest test. 
There are long-term risks to the UK in allowing ARM to be consumed by a large 
foreign owner with competing claims on its investment resources. On the other 
hand, technology entrepreneurs might be less inclined to launch businesses in 
the UK if they believed that they did not have a free hand when selling. Maybe 
the SoftBank deal would fall on the right side of that tradeoff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde5a25ad8b4c6748c2421ab6a68cfebe9b9073b%2F222_0_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20chancellor's%20reaction%20to%20SoftBank's%20takeover%20of%20ARM%20was%20ludicrous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20chancellor%27s%20reaction%20to%20SoftBank%27s%20takeover%20of%20ARM%20was%20ludicrous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fphilip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde5a25ad8b4c6748c2421ab6a68cfebe9b9073b%2F222_0_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
 ARM and SoftBank branded board displayed at news conference in London on 
Monday. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
But Hammond, before attempting to massage headlines, should demonstrate that 
the government has done some serious work. It is absurd to opine about the 
benefits for Britain before you have heard from people with harder 
intelligence, such as UK technology leaders and investors, many of whom are 
already lamenting the takeover of ARM. Here are two basic questions that the 
chancellor should have answered before tweeting glib soundbites.

First, is SoftBank’s intention to double the number of ARM employees in the UK 
over five years worth the paper it isn’t yet written on? TheTakeover Panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/21/takeover-panel-bear-hug> will 
police the promise, but what penalty would non-adherence bring? The UK courts 
haven’t yet tested this new system. Even a punishment of a few million quid 
wouldn’t hurt a company of SoftBank’s size. In practice, then, SoftBank’s 
pledge seems no more binding than those that Cameron attempted to extract from 
Pfizer. Indeed, SoftBank may be “committing” to do something that ARM would 
have done under its own steam.

Second, what happens if there is a counter-bid for ARM from a less 
long-termist company? Would Hammond be so welcoming if, say, the would-be buyer 
was a consortium of US private equity barons? What about a South Korean 
microchip manufacturer that licenses ARM’s designs? Such an owner might 
jeopardise ARM’s neutrality and damage long-term investment in the UK. Would 
Hammond want to intervene? If so, what would he actually do?

At the very least, May and Hammond should draw an early lesson from the bid 
for ARM: if you are going to abolish or refine the UK’s open doors takeover 
regime, get on with it. SoftBank might pass a light sniff test, but others will 
not. And the grubbier brigade may interpret Hammond’s verbal gymnastics as 
powerlessness.
 