
Over the last two years, I undertook the task of reading as much of the 
British short story as I humanly could. Invited to prepare aPenguin Book of the 
British Short Story on a very substantial scale, I made the point to my 
commissioning editor that anthologies rarely seemed to be the product of much 
rigorous reading. Quite often one had the impression that the anthology 
editor’s choice depended on what authors he already knew. Most anthologies seem 
to have been produced after the editor had read at most 200 stories. In the 
end, I probably read 20,000.

There was something to be gained by assuming that one actually knew very 
little about the British short story. First, the known knowns. I wrote down 300 
or 400 names of writers of fiction from the last 200 years and investigated 
their bibliographies. Next, the known unknowns. Library catalogues are 
peculiarly unhelpful in that they do not often distinguish between a novel and 
a collection of stories; still, the act of typing “and other stories” into the 
catalogues of the British Library and the London Library produced an immense 
number of interesting volumes by authors I knew of, as well as those I did not. 
(The subsequent task of trying to establish whether the author was British or 
not was sometimes rather more difficult.) Finally, I decided to read as much 
short fiction as I could in the context in which it first appeared: in 
magazines, journals, even newspapers.

AS Byatt reads 'At Hiruharama' by Penelope Fitzgerald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2012/dec/29/as-byatt-penelope-fitzgerald-hiruharama>
The quantity of short fiction published in this way is insurmountable. Between 
1890 and the first world war there were at least 34 magazines publishing short 
fiction in Britain alone. Some of them, such as the Strand, had huge 
circulations; others, such as the Yellow Book, have immense literary 
importance. Journals such as these have been looked at by scholars, if not 
always by the general reader. Others languish in the darkness of library 
stacks. The Daily Mail published a large quantity of short fiction in its first 
decades; nothing I saw was worth resuscitating, but it was clear just how much 
pleasure it had given to readers on the day of publication.

The inescapable impression, over the course of decades, was the importance of 
this literary form. Investigation revealed that, before the first world war, 
journals were happy to pay generously for stories – for a popular writer, the 
Strand could pay £350 in 1914. This is at a time when the average annual salary 
of a family doctor was £400, and when (as Arnold Bennett tells us in a 
brilliant story,“The Matador of the Five Towns” 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/12995/12995-h/12995-h.htm#THE_MATADOR_OF_THE_FIVE_TOWNS>
) the weekly wage of a star footballer was fixed at £4 a week. No wonder there 
was eager competition among writers; no wonder the best writers of the day, 
including Rudyard Kipling, DH Lawrence, Bennett, Joseph Conrad and HG Wells, 
placed the form at the very centre of their creative practice.

But, as I read on through the daunting mass of published works, something more 
surprising became apparent. The short story was certainly at the centre of 
literary endeavour, and had marked the spot where great white male writers had 
performed their most astonishing feats of realism, but that was not all. The 
short story often produced voices from the margins of literary endeavour. Often 
a periodical might find space for a short story that was extravagantly 
experimental in style; that was fantastical to the point of the bizarre; that 
tried something out, in short. This made sense. If, as an editor, you had an 
established and popular writer with a crowd-pulling lead at the front of an 
issue, not much would be lost if you also included something truly out of the 
way towards the back. Wells started out as the supplier of bizarre scientific 
trifles; quite quickly, he became the writer whose name would sell an issue of 
a magazine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446738509783%2F5ca077ea-3ae9-45be-acc5-25a7b47b7083-673x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446738509783%2F5ca077ea-3ae9-45be-acc5-25a7b47b7083-673x1020.jpeg>
 Rudyard Kipling placed short stories at the centre of his creative practice … 
Photograph: Culture Club/Getty Images 
So, reading through the periodicals, one comes across a story, published in 
the 1850s byCharles Dickens <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> 
in his editorial capacity, in which a narrator falls through the surface of the 
Earth to land in an underground territory inhabited entirely by murderous 
skeletons. Walter Besant, in the 1890s, wrote a story quite out of his usual 
manner that anticipates the magic realism of Italo Calvino’s The Cloven Viscount
 by half a century. In my anthology there is a wonderfully unpredictable sea 
story from the 1840s by Frederick Marryat in which a midshipman falls 
hopelessly in love with a wind in human form. With the mindset often created by 
these stories, publishers might take a punt on a novel in a similar vein – 
Lewis Carroll’s similar underground world, or George MacDonald’sAt the Back of 
the North Wind. The culture of experimentation and fantasy continued well into 
the 20th century, and you can always find a story about a collision between 
supernatural powers and public transport, about talking dachshunds, about the 
events that take place between a man falling out of a fifth-floor window and 
being killed by the impact, about unreal worlds, about the inner life of a 
heroin addict.

The marginal and experimental stories, however, are only one way in which the 
short story reached out beyond its safe, central territory. For almost the 
entire history of the short story, writers who found themselves disadvantaged 
in society by birth or nature could interest an editor in a piece of short 
fiction. Again, nothing much would be lost if it didn’t work. Female writers 
found that they could be indulged with a short commission, and they took full 
advantage of the opportunity.

The editors who saw the inherent interest of exotic subjects also saw the 
virtues of voices from elsewhere, with London editors indulging explorers of 
Scots and Welsh folktales. Voices that reported with interest and concern on 
urban minorities, such as Elizabeth Gaskell or Dickens, were succeeded, 
surprisingly early, by voices that came from those communities themselves. 
Israel Zangwill and Arthur Morrison, from the 1880s, were publishing sketches 
specifically about the society they came from in the East End, and, in 
Zangwill’s case, about Jewish immigrants. Working-class writers, such as Leslie 
Halward and Jack Common, could also sometimes place a short story; fascinating 
writers, who were only patchily supported by the literary world. Support could 
be quickly withdrawn – I think one of the most wonderful writers in the 
anthology is a Bradford woman, Malachi Whitaker, who published 78 astonishing 
stories between the late 1920s and 1934 before falling silent for 40 years. But 
even irregular support enabled something to emerge from obscurity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446814051946%2Fcf469c9a-3325-4386-bb57-e8d39a382d81-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446814051946%2Fcf469c9a-3325-4386-bb57-e8d39a382d81-1360x2040.jpeg>
 … as did Jean Rhys in the 1920s. Photograph: Bloomsbury 
From time to time, short story editors supported writers from even further 
afield.Jean Rhys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/22/jean-rhys-novelist-yearning-rage-desire>
 was unable to find work as an actor – her Caribbean accent was too strong for 
the London stage – but could publish short fiction in the 1920s. The Windrush 
generation discovered a small paternalistic interest in their experiences of 
London, and what resulted was Samuel Selvon and, on a much grander scale, VS 
Naipaul. (Naipaul turned the experience of the patronised 1950s author of 
Caribbean sketches into fiction in the much laterHalf a Life and Magic Seeds.) 
Those voices from elsewhere, too, could encompass other minorities. An author 
wanting to interest or outrage a readership could always resort to tales of 
sexual minorities – and my anthology includes Henry Fielding’s scandalous 
lesbian story, “The Female Husband”, as well as Ada Leverson’s “Suggestion”, 
the drawling monologue of an unmistakably homosexual teenager from the 1890s. 
Members of sexual minorities, especially gay men and lesbian women, sometimes 
found their most compelling voices in short fiction – W Somerset Maugham, 
Sylvia Townsend Warner, GF Green, Rhys Davies, Francis King, Ali Smith and 
Angus Wilson follow close on each other’s heels in my anthology, and there are 
plenty more, such as EF Benson, EM Forster, CHB Kitchin, Jackie Kay and Ronald 
Firbank.

These voices were aided, perhaps, by a point that hadn’t occurred to me – the 
possibility of immediate topicality.Short stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/short-stories> could address urgent social 
issues, such as immigration, the sexual revolution in the 1960s, the New Woman 
in the 1890s, and what women in the 1920s were to do with their lives. They 
could make immediate use of developments in technology, including trains, the 
wireless and the internet. It could also address current events. This was a 
matter of practicality. A novel took time to write and produce; a short story 
could be written to order, and be in print the same week. Magazines were 
publishing short stories about life on the battlefield in September 1914. The 
first of Mollie Panter-Downes’s short stories about the second world war was 
published a week after war was declared. Literature could be engaged and 
argumentative, and relevant to the front pages. This is not the whole story, 
and the best short stories could be gloriously irrelevant – in fact, one of 
V.S.Pritchett’s greatest short stories, “When My Girl Comes Home” was turned 
down by the New Yorker on the grounds that its postwar setting was, in 1968, 
out of date. Nevertheless, much of the excitement of short fiction springs from 
a shared sense, by writers and the first readers, that this is engaging not 
just with a recent situation but an evolving one. When Alun Lewis’s superb 
“Private Jones” was first published in 1942, nobody knew how its hero’s story 
would end – what his nation’s immediate future held, indeed. The fervour of its 
closing pages is compelling when you realize that the first British readers 
would have had no idea what language their rulers would be speaking in a year’s 
time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142665509&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142665509>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142665509&media=>
Topicality could be more cryptic than the direct description of current 
events. It was striking to see how a particular mood or subject started to 
possess the best short stories. A feeling of deliberate, cruel flippancy comes 
to the forefront soon after the end of the second world war, as in the work of 
Angus Wilson. There is a remarkable run of brilliant feminine two-handers in 
the 1920s and 1930s, not all of them written by women – AE Coppard, an 
underrated name, provides one of my anthology’s most dazzling in “Olive and 
Camilla”. As I read, I found I couldn’t escape the sense of growing hysteria in 
many of the most impressive short stories published before the first world war, 
often with a demonic edge. The sequence I found myself proposing, without 
immediately noticing, forms an appalling crescendo. The devil appears in Max 
Beerbohm, and his servants in MR James; aGK Chesterton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gk-chesterton> story describes exhumation, 
madness, irrationality with a terrible justification; Saki tells, with every 
appearance of good humour, what it might be like to plan the murder of every 
Jew in a country town; and finally Kipling, on the verge of the outbreak of 
war, provides an incomparable story of the howling madness of crowds, 
culminating in the House of Commons plunging into hysteria. You can feel 
something going appallingly wrong, and the writers mapping it all out.

At the end of a systematic period of reading, I had amassed a pile of perhaps 
300 short stories. After reading through the collected stories of all the 
established names, I had forced myself to pick one from each – incredibly hard 
in the case of varied and accomplished writers such as Elizabeth Taylor and VS 
Pritchett. Other well-established names I happily discarded altogether. It was 
amazing how some lazily acclaimed short story writers turned out to be 
mechanical in the highest degree when read in bulk. As well as those, I had 
gathered a very large number of short stories that had seemed interesting, 
startling, absorbing, or simply very beautifully done. It was an unexpected 
pile. The British short story, as far as I could see, was wildly experimental, 
predominantly extrovert, relished humour in the most surprising places, and was 
not very genteel at all. There were moods of trembling, withdrawn sensitivity 
and privation, but also passages of riot, violence, great stomping fury, 
hilarity and even hysteria. It came from writers you wouldn’t expect to be 
allowed to speak, and was often about people that hadn’t been permitted 
visibility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446811486283%2F9d0c235e-8690-4785-bacb-c466eb14ad47-1839x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F6%2F1446811486283%2F9d0c235e-8690-4785-bacb-c466eb14ad47-1839x2040.jpeg>
 Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson in Strand magazine Vol 6.(1893). Photograph: 
Musuem of London Photograph: Musuem of London/Museum of London 
Sometimes, talking to general readers, I was struck by their expectations of 
what short stories were. They seemed to be in two minds. Some appeared to 
expect the short story to be intimate, restrained, domestic and full of hints 
about emotional states running under the surface. It represented an idea of 
Anton Chekhov, Katherine Mansfield andDubliners rather than the reality; 
nevertheless, that seemed to be the impression of the form. Others seemed to 
expect the short story to be an ingenious sort of puzzle, probably culminating 
in something called “a twist in the tail” – some kind of revelation that made 
nonsense of everything up to that point.

By contrast, my idea of the short story was closer to Bennett’s “The Matador 
of the Five Towns”, in which a visitor to Stoke-on-Trent is abandoned by his 
host and taken by an acquaintance, a doctor, to see the local newspaper 
offices, and then to a football match. The star footballer’s wife happens to be 
in labour; the doctor and the narrator are summoned to the pub that the 
footballer runs; a tragedy follows, marked by a conversation of truly 
Shakespearean irony and cruel pettiness. The story contains a huge social 
panorama, and is very informative about any number of things – how much 
footballers earn, how newspaper sellers pay for their copies, how pigeons carry 
the sports results, and so on. It is breathtakingly specific about the world it 
describes – at the football match, “the gentle, mannerly sound of hand-clapping 
was a kind of light froth on the surface of the billowy sea of heartfelt 
applause”.

What I looked for, and what I found in abundance, was a quality of energy. 
That doesn’t mean noisiness; some of the most compelling stories I found were 
nothing more than people talking quietly in a room, showing evidence of patient 
attention, and listening. Nothing much happens in EM Delafield’s “Holiday 
Group”. An impoverished but quite posh vicar decides, after a small legacy, to 
take a summer holiday for the first time in years. His wife, Julia, finds a 
boarding house prepared to take them and their three small children so late in 
the season – it is quite hard.

A novel took time; short stories could be written to order and address current 
events

The children behave pretty well and certainly enjoy themselves; Julia can’t 
stop herself from falling asleep far too early in the evening. At the end, the 
landlady attempts to overcharge them; they have a lengthy, unreported 
discussion, and the matter is resolved to everyone’s satisfaction. That’s it. 
Delafield places the quiet little family so exactly in their social context 
that we read the pianissimo story with total absorption. The final sentence is: 
“Her heart swelled with gratitude at the thought of her kind husband, her 
splendid children, and the wonderful holiday they had all had together.” It is 
absolutely not ironic. They have had a wonderful holiday, and we are completely 
glad on their behalf. The first time I read Delafield’s story, I was astonished 
to find that I had tears in my eyes at the end.

The energy in short stories may come from an understanding of scale. Many of 
the greatest examples appeared to have some subterranean understanding that 
they were going to be done within 8,000 words, and from that occasionally 
sprang a conscious strategy. A writer might decide, like Delafield or Whitaker, 
that this small space could beautifully reflect a quiet, overlooked moment in 
an undistinguished life. Or one might take advantage of the restrictions, and 
strain at the borders of the form in a magnificent story of a political 
tyranny. If you fill your few thousand words with crowds and violent action, 
with any number of characters and sweeping landscapes of humanity, then the 
form will feel pressed, urgent, overpowering – the opposite of leisurely. These 
stories remain closely observed and specific, like all the best writing, but 
the detail presses towards a delirious sense – as Vladimir Nabokov once 
observed with admiration about a John Cheever story – of slightly too much 
happening in it. But in truth writers can do anything they like with those few 
thousand words.

This immense variety and energy was created primarily by a conviction among 
editors that something interesting, unusual and new might find a readership. If 
it succeeded, the journal would take another story by the same writer, and 
nurture a particular talent. This process continued until very recently – 
Horizon encouraged the experimentalist Anna Kavan, and John O’London’s Weekly 
had a sort of relationship with a marvellous miniaturist, Malachi Whitaker. In 
time, a publisher might well take the view that the author merited a collection 
in hard covers. This might not be a very profitable venture in itself. Victor 
Gollancz, one of the most hardheaded of interwar publishers, took the view that 
a collection of short stories sold between a quarter and a sixth of an 
established author’s novels, with a rigid maximum of 4,000. Nevertheless, there 
was a periodical market, and a prestige market for collections which nurtured 
all sorts of writing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142662962&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142662962>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F142662962&media=>
It is fair to say that this very successful structure worked well until very 
recently. These days there are no outlets in the UK that will pay a writer of 
short stories in a way that will sustain a career. There are outlets that pay 
tiny amounts, and mass market publications occasionally take a short story from 
a very well‑established name, paying respectably. The structure of a number of 
well-paying, well-read journals that would adopt a writer of short stories and 
develop his or her career in tandem with an appreciative readership has more or 
less disappeared. The only chance for writers is to be taken up by an American 
magazine, such as the New Yorker, which has strongly supported the short story 
careers of Zadie Smith and Tessa Hadley. There is no British publication now 
that could have done anything comparable – even Granta’s interest in the 
British short story appears to lapse for years on end.

What has replaced it, and what is often acclaimed as heralding a renaissance 
in the British short story, is the establishment of any number of competitions. 
The fledgling writer of short stories no longer submits a piece to an editor 
who may pay for it; he or she puts it in for a competition. The two primary 
short story competitions in the UK are theBBC National short story competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nationalshortstoryprize> and the Sunday 
Times short story competition. The first prize is £15,000 and £30,000 
respectively, which is more than respectable. This benevolent support seems 
like a good idea. Yet the BBC has never been given to a writer from an ethnic 
minority. The Sunday Times has only rewarded Junot Diaz and Yiyun Li. Neither 
prize has ever shortlisted a gay male author, and between them, over the years, 
only three lesbian writers as far as I can see. This is not an unusual blind 
spot for literary prizes, including the supposedly “diverse” Man Booker prize. 
But it contrasts with the vivid and widely acclaimed contribution that sexual, 
social and ethnic minorities were free to make to the form within an apparently 
chaotic market economy, in a period when their lives might even be proscribed 
by law.

Whether or not the blind spots and prejudices of literary juries also result 
in a preference for what people ought to read over what they will read is an 
interesting question. It’s certainly true that, looking at recent competition 
entries, the emphasis changes sharply in comparison to the whole tradition. The 
British short story has always loved comedy, and its greatest practitioners 
greatly value humour, even in the most harrowing contexts. That is not 
something you can expect prize juries to reward, since it’s easier to be 
articulate about a serious topic than about serious literary expertise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446739459897%2F2b471b45-fbab-42bb-a430-a2a1fdc85b94-2060x1967.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20long%20tale%20of%20the%20British%20short%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fbritish-short-story-philip-hensher-anthology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446739459897%2F2b471b45-fbab-42bb-a430-a2a1fdc85b94-2060x1967.jpeg>
 Zadie Smith, whose short story career has been strongly supported by 
magazines. Photograph: AGF/Rex Photograph: AGF s.r.l./REX/Rex 
Some of the warmly humane masterpieces in my anthology include Kipling’s “The 
Village That Voted the Earth Was Flat” 
<http://readbookonline.net/readOnLine/8324/>, both harrowing and profoundly 
interested in the terrible cruelty of comedy; brilliant exercises in comedy by 
Wilkie Collins, PG Wodehouse, Taylor and Elizabeth Bowen and a very 
characteristic story by Pritchett (for my money the greatest of all British 
short story writers) which tells a vividly realised episode from a tiny corner 
of what must be called the human comedy. I wouldn’t have thought any one of 
them would stand the smallest chance of winning a prize. Instead, they came 
into being because editors put their faith in them, and because people wanted 
to read them.

I made a point of telling almost everyone I met that I was working on an 
anthology of short stories. I wanted to hear what they had to say. 
Interestingly, the one question almost everybody asked me was this: “When does 
the short story begin?” It’s difficult to imagine a historian of drama or film 
being asked this, for different reasons – either a literary form seems 
contemporary with the human spirit, or to depend on a technological innovation. 
The short story is rather different, and the question is a good one.

Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> on a small scale is, from 
one point of view, as old as the English language. You could claim that there 
are short stories of a certain sort in the King James Bible andThe Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle; that short Elizabethan prose romances are at the root of the form. 
That’s one way of looking at it. Another is to point out that the phrase “short 
story”, referring to the literary form, dates no further back than the last 
decades of the 19th century. Probably the truth lies somewhere in between.

Undoubted masterpieces were being written by Heinrich von Kleist in Germany by 
the beginning of the 19th century. American writers were seen to start a 
serious practice in the short story by the 1820s at the latest, for a 
particular reason – the American public preferred cheap, copyright-evading 
editions of English novels to indigenous products. In the 1830s, the flood of 
British imports drowned the American novel, and American writers such asEdgar 
Allan Poe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edgarallanpoe> found magazines the 
chief paying outlets for native fiction. In Britain, short fiction had 
maintained an interesting, minor presence for some decades.

If the short story format began at a certain point in history, might it – like 
the epic and the masque – have an end?

The explosion in the popularity of magazines created a hunger for short 
pieces, bringing news about worlds known and unknown; these started to come in 
the form of factual pieces, but also fictional explorations of the real world 
at hand, the remoter parts of the world, and fantastic and incredible worlds 
that never existed. When Chambers’s Journal first appeared in 1832, its editors 
promised its readers “lots of nice little stories about travellers in Asia and 
Africa”. They probably weren’t talking about fiction at that point, but, as one 
quickly sees, the rising public interest in news from abroad gave immense 
energy to short fiction. The answer, then, is that the short story as we know 
it evolved gradually between the 17th century and the middle of the 19th, and 
was at its peak after the founding of the Strand in 1891, and for decades 
afterwards.

But the regularity of the question made me wonder whether it was being asked, 
not about the beginning of a literary form, but about its end. If the short 
story could be said to begin at a certain point in history, might it – like the 
epic, the eclogue and the masque – have an end, too? Might that end be 
approaching?

I hope not. It may simply be that we haven’t fully explored the ways in which 
a short story might, these days, reach a paying audience. It could work 
financially for an established author to publish an individual short story as a 
cheap ebook, but, for a first-time author, publishing a short story as an ebook 
is simply dropping it into a hole.

Nevertheless, changes in publishing could herald a huge range of new 
possibilities for short fiction. I don’t think it’s been widely appreciated 
among authors or editors that, in a world where fiction was published only in 
virtual form, there would be no problems with length. You could publish Ernest 
Hemingway’ssix-word short story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/24/fiction.originalwriting> and 
charge a penny, if you thought anyone would buy it; you could publish a novel 
of 2 million words without worrying about the costs of production or the 
discouraging difficulty of holding the thing. Moreover, the costs of production 
matter much less against the size of the eventual readership.

To cut a long story short
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/mar/24/fiction.originalwriting> 
What seems absolutely clear is that the establishment of a readership of 
whatever size is crucial. Ideally, it should be a paying one. Without that – if 
a literary form relies exclusively on awards handed out by professionals – the 
form has no future. At the end of the marvellous reading task I had set myself, 
I was thrilled by the exuberant, ceaselessly inventive body of work out there. 
I hope the anthology shows some of that quality, and hints at the way that the 
short story encompassed the human comedy. If it is given the chance to find an 
appreciative readership, there is no reason why its energy should be lost.

• Philip Hensher is the editor of The Penguin Book of the British Short Story 
Vols I &II (Penguin Classics). He will be talking with Tessa Hadley, Adam 
Mars-Jones and Shena Mackay on the future of the short story on 12 November at 
Waterstones Piccadilly, London W1J.The Penguin Book of the British Short Story: 
Volume I 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344745/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 andVolume II 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344746/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (Penguin Classics, £25). To order a copy of either for £17.50, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online 
orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.
 