
How do you keep ancient Greek civilisation alive in the 21st-century? Tino 
Sehgal’s new show 
<http://neon.org.gr/en/newsroom/neon-paths-tino-sehgal-exhibition-in-the-roman-agora-athens/>
 – or event, or whatever this artist of social interaction’s work ought to be 
called – isat the Roman agora in Athens 
<http://en.protothema.gr/tino-sehgals-work-to-inaugurate-neon-paths-program-on-september-25/>
. The Berlin-based artist Sehgal has previously got people interacting in the
Turbine Hall at Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jul/23/tino-sehgal-tate-modern-turbine-hall>
 and wasshortlisted for the Turner prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tino-sehgal>. Now he’s bringing his 
state-of-the-art actions to the ancient city whose most famous work of art, up 
to now, was the5th-century BC Parthenon and its missing sculptures. 
<http://www.theacropolismuseum.gr/en/content/parthenon-gallery>

It sounds at first like a raw encounter between old and new. But, actually, 
Sehgal fits in perfectly with Athens and its history. His show there is a 
clever engagement with the very classical heritage of which this city is the 
wellspring.

Sehgal’s intervention in the Roman agora  
<http://odysseus.culture.gr/h/3/eh351.jsp?obj_id=2402> includes “peripatetic 
philosophers” engaging people in dialogue – just like the greatest Athenian of 
all used to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Ftino-sehgal-artist-roman-agora-athens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411574589622%2F1570fa44-ead8-4337-9644-1548ae36904a-2060x1913.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20Socrates%3F%20Artist%20Tino%20Sehgal%20sets%20up%20talking%20shop%20in%20Athens%20agora&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Ftino-sehgal-artist-roman-agora-athens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20Socrates%3F%20Artist%20Tino%20Sehgal%20sets%20up%20talking%20shop%20in%20Athens%20agora&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Ftino-sehgal-artist-roman-agora-athens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411574589622%2F1570fa44-ead8-4337-9644-1548ae36904a-2060x1913.jpeg>
 Artist Tino Sehgal Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris 
Socrates <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/socrates/> died in 399BC after a 
life spent provoking people. This philosopher, as he is portrayed in the books 
of his disciplePlato <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato/>, frequented the 
agora – the market and main public gathering place of Athens – engaging fellow 
citizens in conversation. Pedants might note that the agora he visited was the 
older, Greek one; Sehgal is using the Roman agora, created by the invaders who 
revered Greek culture.

Plato preserved the voice of Socrates for all time. His books are written as 
dramatic dialogues, with Socrates as their most eloquent protagonist. InPlato’s 
Symposium <http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/symposium.html>, Socrates leads a 
debate about the true nature of love at a drunken dinner party. In the 
Republic, a chance encounter near Piraeus, the port of Athens, leads to an epic 
discussion of good society, the best way to govern and the illusions that blind 
us.

So, expect some heavy philosophising if you visit the Roman agora. Sehgal’s 
tribute toSocrates <https://www.theguardian.com/books/socrates> reveals the 
radicalism of ancient Greek thought. It’s amazing that a style of argument 
invented so long ago can fuel hard-hitting art for today.

I just hope it doesn’t lead to the fate that befell Socrates. After all, he 
ended up being condemned to death for his trouble-making. His niggling away at 
everyone’s assumptions got him in serious hot water. He refused to try to 
escape, and instead drank poison, as portrayed inDavid’s great painting The 
Death of Socrates 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/collection/the-collection-online/search/436105>.

That’s the trouble with interactive art. Not everyone wants to be provoked as 
they walk around. But spare Sehgal and his actors. What a great way to keep 
ancient Greece alive.
 