
Returning to parliament today after the summer recess and the party conference 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2009/oct/09/politics-weekly-podcast-conservatives>
, MPs and peers may be surprised to learn that a written constitution has been 
prepared in their absence. There have been vague murmurs from Gordon Brown and 
Jack Straw over the last year or so that some sort of codification might be 
desirable, in light of the constitutional reforms introduced since 1997. And 
for a month or two this summer, when public anger aboutMPs' expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> was at its peak, the case 
for awritten constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/feb/13/constitution> was quite 
possibly being more widely discussed, including at a government level, than at 
any time in British political history. But surely nobody suggested that anyone 
should actually go ahead and draft one?

The written constitution in question is a spoof. Led by my colleague at 
Democratic Audit <http://www.democraticaudit.com/>, Stuart Weir, and in 
association with a wider network of expert contributors, our pamphletThe 
Unspoken Constitution 
<http://www.democraticaudit.eu/download/Unspoken_constitution.pdf> sets out to 
describe our constitutional arrangements as they work in practice. We 
determined early on to adopt a satirical tone, inviting the reader to chuckle 
at the hilarity of it all – the extensive powers of the monarch, which monarchs 
implicitly promise not to use; the even more extensive royal prerogative powers 
granted to prime ministers by the Crown, so that governments can take major 
decisions without recourse to parliament; the myth that parliament is 
sovereign, when its powers have been progressively eroded over decades; and the 
fact that basing constitutional practice on conventions means that governments 
can essentially amend the constitution simply by changing how they go about 
their business.

While we hope the text will be seen as genuinely funny – to political insiders 
at least – our overriding purpose is to offer a serious critique of our 
democratic arrangements. This critique, compressed into 14 constitutional 
articles, aims to expose the rotten character of a political system that blends 
the continuation of ancient pre-democratic practices with modern 
anti-democratic measures designed to maximise the powers of a prime minister 
through the fusion of the executive and legislative branches of government. 
Rather than commencing "we, the people", as the US and other constitutions do, 
our version opens with "we, the elite", in recognition that it is the myth of 
parliamentary sovereignty, rather than the ideal of popular sovereignty, that 
underpins the UK constitutional order. We seek to lay bare the constitutional 
realities our governing elite would go to any lengths to disguise. Hence the 
document's title – ours is an unspoken, rather than an unwritten, constitution.

The case for root-and-branch reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/politics-and-reform> of our 
political system has been made so often, and so convincingly, that there is no 
need to repeat it. The great wave of public anger about expenses reinforces 
that this is not an issue for the chattering classes. However, there is an 
obvious constituency that remains largely oblivious to such demands: returning 
from the recess, most MPs are clearly hoping we can return to political life as 
it was pre-expenses. The virtual absence of debate about the need for urgent 
democratic reform during the party conferences underlines the wider complacency 
of our political parties, who are hoping that we can return to business as 
usual, with an election looming ever closer.

The need to force the debate about reform onto the general election agenda has 
led the two Joseph Rowntree Trusts to re-launch thePower inquiry 
<http://www.powerinquiry.org/> as Power2010 <http://www.power2010.org.uk/>. 
Over the next few months, Power 2010 will be encouraging any UK citizen to 
submit his or her own proposals for political reforms. These proposals will 
ultimately be debated by randomly selected participants and then be put to a 
popular vote to ascertain which five reforms the British public would most like 
to see. Every candidate at the 2010 general election will be invited to endorse 
these popular demands for democratic reform. As yet, we have no idea what those 
demands may be – this is for "we, the people" to determine over the coming 
weeks and months. But in light of what The Unspoken Constitution reveals about 
how we are governed, it would be extraordinarily unwise for our future elected 
representatives to dismiss them out of hand.
 