
What is it? A Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> withdrawal patch, 
with amazing clothes and a wardrobe full of postwar skeletons.

Why you’ll love it: When someone goes to the trouble of meticulously 
embroidering a whole world for you, it would be rude not to at least inspect 
the delicacy of the stitching.

That’s precisely what writer Oliver Goldstick (the man behind Pretty Little 
Liars <http://prettylittleliars.com/> and Ugly Betty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/08/next-box-set-ugly-betty>) 
has done in The Collection, a sumptuous period drama about the Sabines – a 
tight-knit family determined to rebuild their crumbling couture empire in 
postwar Paris.

Set two years after the end of Nazi occupation, the action centres around the 
mysterious Paul Sabine (the always excellent, multi-layered Richard Coyle), who 
is tasked by the French president with reinvigorating the French capital’s 
reputation for world-beating fashion. Partnered with the wealthy but 
uncompromising impresario Monsieur Trouvier (a thunderous James Cosmo), he must 
succeed or lose everything. The stakes are at once arbitrarily global and 
entirely personal, but the people are so compelling, you’ll care from the off.

An impeccable cast of frail ingénues, grandes dames and ruthless players 
determined to make a fast franc people Goldstick’s Paris.Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep>’s daughter, Mamie Gummer, is 
wonderful as Paul’s wife Helen, supportive and fretful in equal measure as her 
husband straps on his wings and heads for the sun.

Step aside Mad Men! The Collection is now the best-dressed show on TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/01/step-aside-mad-men-the-collection-is-now-the-best-dressed-show-on-tv>
The glorious Sarah Parish, meanwhile, appears as Madame Stutter, an old friend 
and customer of Paul’s, now on her third divorce, her proud exterior cracking 
to reveal the tragedy beneath. Parish’s poise and stature are underused in 
early episodes, but what you do see of her is exceptional.

And no one aces “tortured poet” like Tom Riley, cast here as Paul’s brother 
Claude. The true creative genius behind the House of Sabine, he is an emotional 
trainwreck in a leather jacket, filling the void with drink, sex and tender 
regret.

The Returned <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-returned>’s Jenna 
Thiam is another fractured beauty, returning from some “time in the country 
with her aunt” to her job as a seamstress in Sabine’s workroom, until she is 
spotted by experimental photographer Billy, who wants her to model for him. So, 
who was it that caused her to leave Paris for nine months?

It’s also a delight to see Irene Jacob from Three Colours: Red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/09/three-colours-red-review> as 
Nina’s mother Marianne. Another Sabine needlesmith, she is keeping their own 
unspoken secret about a debt the mother and daughter appear to owe their boss.

Best of all is the Sabines’ maman, Yvette – a kohl-eyed powerhouse played with 
quiet glee byFrances de la Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jun/19/frances-de-la-tour-five-best-moments>
 in a series of spectacular Cruella furs. She manipulates and manoeuvres and 
wears her resilience like a big, feathered hat. If years of Nazi oppression 
didn’t break her, the interference of outsiders in her family business won’t 
trouble her, either.

And it all starts with a dead body. The Collection offers pure escapist 
thrills and will make you want to run down the banks of the Seine in a huge 
skirt, brandishing colourful balloons while jumping in the air.Julia Raeside

Where: Amazon Prime.

Length: Eight hour-long episodes, with a new one released every Friday.

Standout episode (so far): Episode two, in which the skirt-twirling decadence 
is horribly countered by a hungry peasant mob and the tension begins to stifle 
like an over-tightened corset.

If you liked The Collection, watch: Mad Men (Amazon Prime), The House of Eliott
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/04/house-of-eliott-george-bush>
 (DVD),The Man in the High Castle 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Man_in_the_High_Castle_(TV_series)> (Amazon 
Prime).
 