
The eco swap is the most bite-sized of all sustainable lifestyle actions. You 
simply replace items in your diet with those that have less impact, in terms of 
CO2 emissions, land use and change of land use – normally deforestation, and, 
critically, lower water consumption.

The Soil Association <https://www.soilassociation.org/> recommends carefully 
pinpointed swaps this month (it’s national awareness month for organic produce 
this September). If 24 million households that buy yogurt swapped to organic 
(even just once), almost 2,000 more cows would be free to range on clover-rich 
organic pastures. (Its standards do not allow cattle to be reared full time in 
giant sheds). And if every carrot buyer switched to organic, that would result 
in 50% more wildlife and 30% more species of wildlife on pesticide-free farms.

Meanwhile the Carbon Trust <https://www.carbontrust.com/home/> has crunched 
data to show that spreading your toast with a margarine is more sustainable 
than block butter. This study factors in supply chain wastage, aggregates the 
use of irrigated farmland and apportions historical responsibility for 
deforestation from vegetable oils.

The upshot is that if everyone was to commit to just one butter-free day a 
week, we could each offset an entire year’s iPhone usage. I find it exciting, 
but then I might have strange tastes. Unfortunately my tastes also dictate that 
I’d rather go without using a smart phone because I really like butter.

That’s always an issue with swaps. However compelling the evidence, sometimes 
you can’t activate the swap. So, think of it as presenting an opportunity to 
rid breakfast time of old staples, like fruit jam in favour of Buko Organic’s
coconut version 
<http://www.fdin.org.uk/2016/01/organic-buko-launches-coconut-jam-range/>.

The big picture: edible insects
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a6ada91c74d5491220363e42b357027cbe87e7%2F0_81_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grocery%20swaps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grocery%20swaps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40a6ada91c74d5491220363e42b357027cbe87e7%2F0_81_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
 Bugging out: Daniel Stott of the Bug Boys. Photograph: David McHugh/Brighton 
Pictures 
The UK has had to wait a while for a response to 2013’s UN report, Edible 
Insects: Future Prospects for Food and Feed Security, but now the Bug Boys have 
set up at FIELD in Brighton producing protein-rich cricket flour. Co-founder 
Daniel Stott used to raise crickets for his pet lizard, now he’s investigating 
their potential to feed the planet and hopes to infiltrate the British diet.

Well dressed: woollen trainers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89f6df822b64dc79dedcf94a303b8304608210c%2F0_151_3150_1891%2F3150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grocery%20swaps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20grocery%20swaps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-eco-guide-togrocery-swapping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd89f6df822b64dc79dedcf94a303b8304608210c%2F0_151_3150_1891%2F3150.jpg>
 Bleat of foot: a woollen trainer. Photograph: Scott Darling 
Let’s not pretend the wool industry is entirely saintly. Peta has published a 
series of troubling reports on the mistreatment of sheep. But the Campaign for 
Wool continues to make a coherent sustainability argument for using wool and 
has upgraded animal welfare standards. Upgrading the fibres in your wardrobe 
from synthetics, especially plastics, delivers an eco hit, but we need enough 
products from responsible supply chains. Look out for wool trainers, offering 
farm-to-foot certification and outpacing plastic and leather pretenders in 
terms of ethics.

These are the best I’ve seen so far: Allbirds wool runners, for men and women 
in cool, soft merino wool. The insoles are made from castor bean oil.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 