
I bought Star magazine <http://www.star-magazine.co.uk/home/> last week for 
its "70 Best and Worst Beach Bodies" and a chance to learn "What Stars Love and 
Hate About Their Bodies." I took it out to lunch with me only to lose it in 
seconds to my disapproving American friends. "This is awful. How can you buy 
this?" soon became "Who isKe$ha <http://www.keshasparty.com/uk/home>? She looks 
terrible," followed by a debate over Kim Kardashian's expert choice of 
swimwear. I can't say the latest New Yorker sparked as lively a discussion.

A few days later, the same people were asking who read the News of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>. Well, they would. Or 
rather, wouldhave. We're good at double standards on both sides of the 
Atlantic, and the scandal at NOTW is highlighting America's ill-deserved 
reputation for a puritan streak.

This has been both a very bad and a very good week for British journalism – 
and a simply awful one for British politics. Theclosing of the News of the World
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/audio/2011/jul/08/media-talk-podcast-news-of-the-world-closes>
 threw talented journalists out of jobs and ended a 167-year-old newspaper. But 
it also proved that investigative journalism pays off and that the rich and 
powerful are not above the law.

As a former "Murdoch minion" myself, I've been asked by many people 
(especially Americans) how corrupt it was inside the evil empire. The answer 
is, not very. I spent a decade working for theSunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> and know a lot of people who 
work on other Murdoch papers. That's not surprising, given that he owns the 
biggest chunk of the UK's press.

News International can be a tough place to work, but nobody ever asked me to 
tap a phone or dress up as an Arab sheikh. Most of the people I worked with 
were highly ethical and extremely professional, and I know they have been 
genuinely shocked by what occurred.

Nor is Britain, as some Americans now seem to be suggesting, a hotbed of 
corruption. Yes, Murdoch has had an outsized influence that now looks likely to 
wane. But there has also always been a vocal opposition. And compared to the 
US, the UK looks positively parochial when it comes to the amount of influence 
Big Business can buy in politics.

The credit crisis, Deepwater Horizon, food safety scandal after food safety 
scandal, all have occurred amid a political culture that seems designed to put 
corporate interests ahead of the public interest. Government records show Hank 
Paulson, US Treasury secretary, was forever on the phone to his old colleagues 
at Goldman Sachs as the world went into financial meltdown – from which only 
Goldman seems to have fully recovered. Michael Taylor, a former Monsanto 
executive and now "food czar" at the Food and Drugs Administration, hasspent a 
career flipping back and forth 
<http://www.grist.org/article/2009-07-08-monsanto-FDA-taylor> between shepherd 
and flock; a mixing of conflicting interests that should leave us all feeling 
queasy.

And the money involved dwarfs anything seen in the UK. Monsanto reportedly 
spent $1.4m lobbying the US governmentin the first quarter of 2011 alone 
<http://www.foodconsumer.org/newsite/Watch-List/gmo-0707111239.html>. I would 
bet my final edition of the "News of the Screws" that there isn't a single US 
regulator not fully stocked by former employees of companies they are supposed 
to regulate and who are now being targeted by lobbyists working with their 
former colleagues.

There's an argument for this working – the poacher turned gamekeeper approach 
– but it often ends in failure and sometimes dramatically so. The Mineral 
Management Service, BP's former regulator was so corrupt, it had to be closed 
down after a sex and drugs and porn scandal that would have made Rebecca 
Brooks, in her old role as a tabloid editor, palpitate.

Conflicts of interest are business as usual in the US, where the system of 
political funding means all politicians owe dues to powerful special interests. 
And it goes all the way to the top.AIG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> was one of Barack Obama's biggest 
campaign donors in the runup to his election.

This is not to belittle the full horror of the News of the World scandal. The 
hacking of celebrities' phones should have been bad enough to trigger an 
inquiry in the first place. Celebrities are people, too. ThatDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> would employ Andy Coulson 
after he was forced to resign as editor shows a lack of judgment that should 
worry us all. We should all breathe a sigh of relief that Murdoch's most brazen 
powerbroking days look numbered. But we are not alone in this shameful episode. 
When it comes to politics, power and corruption, everything is bigger in 
America.
 