
After the hustle and bustle of the 'poverty porn' circuit in Nairobi and 
Kisumu, what could be better than three hundred and fifty square kilometres of 
pristine East African savannah, filled with prancing gazelles and snorting 
zebras and the occasional hungry lion? This particular piece of pristine East 
African savannah had been thoughtfully surrounded by a fuck-off-massive 
electric fence to keep any stray poor people or poachers out, thus ensuring 
rich foreigners could warp from Nairobi to their luxury tent in the outback 
without needing to encounter any tedious Kenyans along the way.

I had travelled to the Ol Pejeta conservancy 
<http://www.olpejetaconservancy.org/> some fifteen years earlier, on my second 
visit to the country. Back then wilderness was wilderness, as my parents and I 
discovered to our cost. Driving into the night on the long road up from 
Nairobi, we took a wrong turn at a town we wrongly assumed was Nyaharuru, 
joining a road that after several miles became not-a-road and then, eventually, 
a bloody great hole in the ground that swallowed our vehicle with a belch of 
dust and panic. We fought to dig ourselves out until the Suzuki's battery died, 
and the weakening glow of our headlights gave way to pitch black darkness.

Exhausted, stranded miles from help without much more than a few boiled sweets 
to keep ourselves going, we were forced to spend the night sheltering in a car 
teetering sideways at forty-five degree angle over the edge of a deep ditch. 
For several hours I lay propped between the rear wheel arches, my back rammed 
against the upper side of the car, legs tensed against what was in danger of 
becoming the floor, terrified that the slightest of false moves would cause the 
car to topple over. As dawn broke and the equatorial sun pierced the morning 
mist, we estimated we would have to make a ten or fifteen mile hike in 
blistering heat to the nearest town, assuming we even knew which way to walk. 
We were in very serious trouble, but we got lucky: moments into our trek a 
group of young men appeared. They had seen our lights fade out the night 
before, and set out at dawn to rescue us.

Back in 2012, Mark Thoma <http://pages.uoregon.edu/mthoma/> had set up a wi-fi 
hotspot with internet access in the god-damned minibus.
 My 'tent' at Sweetwaters Tent. Actually it was supposed to be someone else's 
tent, but I was so ill on checking in that I went to the wrong one by mistake 
and - since none of them can be locked and this one was empty at the time - 
seized it. At that point all I really cared about was getting to the loo. 
Rumour has it that the tent remains sealed to this day. 
Since the nineties - when in some parts a phone of any kind could be hard to 
find - fibre-optic cables had snaked their way across the Indian Ocean to 
Mombasa and inland to Nairobi, forming the back-bone for a cellular network 
developed at a pace that would put many Western providers to shame. Kenya may 
still be a poor country by western standards, but with a swelling metropolitan 
middle class and atech sector <http://ihub.co.ke/pages/home.php> spawning some 
of the world's most innovative new technologies inmobile banking 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-11793290> and communications, I wouldn't 
bet on it staying that way in my life time. We had spent the whole trip looking 
at Kenya's problems; the slums, the poverty, the disease, kidnapped mothers, 
the corruption. Few in the NGO community entrenched here seemed particularly 
interested in showing us Kenya's extraordinary capabilities or solutions.

I had plenty of time to dwell on this as I perched on the toilet at 
Sweetwaters Tented Camp 
<http://www.serenahotels.com/serenasweetwaters/default-en.html>, explosively 
evacuating my bowels with enough force to strip chewing gum from a sidewalk. 
The food hasn't improved a great deal since the mid-nineties, but at least you 
cantweet about how sick you are 
<https://twitter.com/mjrobbins/statuses/216141093572583425>. This seemed like a 
neat way to sum up sixteen years of progress in Kenya, so I wrote it down to 
use in a blog post in case I couldn't think of anything cleverer to say later 
on.
 A precariously positioned wi-fi router at Sweetwaters. Internet access was 
curiously unreliable. We didn't get to see what happens when it rains. 
There was something darker in my thoughts too. I felt it when I saw the 
four-lane highway cutting through the hills north of Nairobi, when I realized 
we had mobile reception out in the wilderness, and when I noticed that the 
gas-powered hurricane lamps I had used at Sweetwaters in 1996 had been replaced 
with energy-saving light-bulbs. On some deep, insanely selfish level, I was 
actuallyannoyed about all this progress. A tiny part of me wanted some corner 
of the world to stay forever dark and wild, regardless of the cost for the 
people who lived there. It would be easy to edit out this paragraph, and I 
wonder how many people do.

During a brief window of continence I made it to the vehicles waiting to take 
us on a trip to a local research station. We were visiting Ol Pejeta to find 
out how the conservancy's owners were managing land conflicts between Kenya's 
wildlife and the rapidly expanding human population in the region. For nearly 
an hour, the group listened to a PowerPoint presentation – surely the most 
destructive Western influence in Africa - while I camped in a nearby outdoor 
toilet and watched ants devour a dead cockroach. Soon, I convinced myself, I 
would meet the same grisly fate.

The talk explained how Ol Pejeta had reached a compromise with local 
communities. As far as I could tell, this compromise seemed to involve asking 
the communities to leave Ol Pejeta's land, and building the aforementioned 
fuck-off-massive fence to make sure that they - and any poachers attracted by 
the localblack rhino sanctuary <http://www.olpejetaconservancy.org/why> - 
stayed there. In return, the displaced villages received financial support from 
the conservancy for various projects around health, education and water. We had 
no way of asking the villages how fair they felt this arrangement was.
 A female ostrich at the edge of Ol Pejeta surveys the mountains beyond the 
fence. 
How generous was this support? The economist Mark Thoma (who unlike me could 
actually stay in the room for more than five minutes at a time)described it in 
scathing terms in a blog post the following day 
<http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2012/06/kenyas-ownership-society-1.html>
. In Kenya, fees are often just one of many costs that prevent children 
attending school:

"...but when they help students, they only pay the fees, they won't pay for 
uniforms or other costs because, they say, parents must take some degree of 
ownership (even though this attitude hurts substantial numbers of children who 
are excluded from the school system). Similar attitudes were applied to 
maternity care; parents must take some degree of ownership or be excluded, even 
when it might hurt unborn children."

The language used was oddly reminiscent of right-wing sound-bites in the US or 
UK, and since our visit I've wondered whose words were being spoken; were these 
entirely local views, or were the community workers of Ol Pejeta reciting lines 
and policies written by foreign NGOs and aid workers, perhaps under pressure to 
talk the right talk? I have no real way of knowing. AsMark pointed out 
<http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2012/06/kenyas-ownership-society-1.html>
, there are plenty of examples where taking ownership through a token payment 
can have a positive effect on outcomes; but preventing children from getting an 
education seemed like a petty and intolerable cost to inflict for the supposed 
'sins' of their parents.

We would return to school uniforms again and again over the course of our 
trip. Even where primary schools were free of charge, young children were 
apparently being turned away in their thousand because their families could not 
afford to buy uniforms. It seems an utterly bizarre situation – why on Earth 
not simply allow children to attend class without them? Yet the requirement 
remains, andNGOs pump in thousands of dollars' worth of aid resources 
<http://www.globalgiving.org/projects/school-uniforms-for-africa/> to sustain 
this mindless adherence to an inane colonial tradition.

The afternoon was drawing on, and we left the research station, taking the 
vehicles out for a game drive. We saw gazelles, zebras, elephants, a buffalo; 
taking photograph after photograph until the sun fell and the animals became 
silhouettes in our viewfinders. As we stared across the savannah at the reds, 
pinks and purples tracing the horizon, it became easy to forget that we were 
roaming a colossal cage, its walls so distant we could no longer see them.
 The sun sets over Ol Pejeta Conservancy on the end of our first day. (Photo 
by Charlott Schönwetter) 
* * *
 A baby at a clinic near Ol Pejeta. This African baby is healthy and happy and 
has no flies crawling over it, and is therefore of little interest to many 
Western editors. 
The following day we embarked on a series of activities laid on for us by the 
very institution we had supposedly come here to scrutinize. We would have no 
opportunity to speak to communities or people who might have had a different 
view on the conservancy's work, or felt negatively affected by it. Dissenting 
voices could not be heard, but the trip's organizers seemed to be so focused on 
the idea that this was an advocacy trip they were oblivious to the enormous 
conflict of interest this represented.

I would have argued more, but I had spent the previous night washing down some 
hard-core prescription drugs with large quantities of Smirnoff vodka (excellent 
for stomach issues according to our colleague from the Daily Mail), in a 
desperate 'kill-or-cure' attempt to thwart whatever hideous plague I was 
carrying. At this point I felt I was more likely to see my last breakfast than 
the next one.

We were directed to a busy and pleasant clinic full of attractive and lively 
young mothers, located conveniently near Ol Pejeta's Rongai gate. Genial 
medical staff specialized in reproductive health tended to the local women, and 
talked knowledgeably about issues like contraception and vaccination. The 
condom machine outside was full - either well-stocked or under-used. I asked a 
group of new mothers whether I could take their photo, only to feel horribly 
awkward when two of them agreed but the third turned her head away.

Outside, Jeff Sharlet <http://jeffsharlet.com/> had split from the group, 
drawing a translator out beyond the clinic's gate and taking advantage of his 
freedom to grill some local youngsters who were fetching water from a nearby 
pump. Sharlet has a knack for drawing out complex stories through questioning 
that seems stupidly obvious in hindsight, and he asked the kids about the herds 
that roamed the wilderness nearby. Afterwards he told me what he had discovered:
"Hey Martin... did you know that some of these kids have never seen a Zebra?"
 Lion food roaming Ol Pejeta conservancy. Thousands of zebras inhabit the 
region, yet some local kids have never seen one. 
We would later learn that Ol Pejeta laid on buses to take local school 
children on trips into the reserve to see the animals for themselves, but with 
tens of thousands of people living in surrounding region, clearly not every 
child could be given access. Kenya's wildlife, one of its greatest natural 
assets, was being diligently preserved... but for who? Not for the first time I 
found myself unsure whether the fence been built to contain the animals, or the 
people.

At the clinic, other stories were unraveling. A young woman had been lined up 
to speak to us about her experience escaping an arranged marriage. We were told 
that she had been forced into this lousy situation, living an unhappy life as a 
teen bride before finding salvation when a plea for help led to Ol Pejeta's 
scholarship program paying for her to go to college. It was a compelling story, 
but we struggled to get clear answers to basic questions. What had happened at 
her wedding? How did she get divorced? Why did the village elders not intervene?

As our confusion grew, so did the laughter of our local guides, to the point 
where they actually goaded us into asking more detailed questions. Later they 
would reveal that she had left home of her own accord, running away to live 
with the man in the hope that it would lead to a better life. No wedding had 
taken place; it was just an informal 'marriage' in the sense that they had 
moved in together. Within days she had come to regret the arrangement, and very 
sensibly found a way out.

Good for her, and she was a bright young woman clearly destined for great 
things; but her story was no different to thousands of kids in the west – young 
girl runs away from a shitty home life, shacks up with an older guy, then 
realizes it's a bad idea and finds a way out. Except this wasAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, the land of the misguided-but-noble 
savage, and the idea that locals would have forced pubescent teens into 
arranged marriages with older men fit so easily with our Western prejudices, 
few of us even thought to question it.
 Local children collecting water at a small community near Ol Pejeta's eastern 
gate. 
Our last visit of the day was supposed to be to a local water collection 
cooperative, which received financial support by Ol Pejeta to compensate for 
the costs inflicted on local communities when land and fresh water sources were 
closed off for the game reserve. Mark Thomadescribed the project in a blog post 
later that day 
<http://economistsview.typepad.com/economistsview/2012/06/the-water-project-at-ol-pejeta-conservatory.html>
:

"The co-op has 250 members, and they pool resources to purchase water 
collection kits for each household in the co-op. So far, 78 families have 
received a kit. The water collection kits allow households to capture and store 
rainwater during the rainy season, treat it to keep it safe, and then use the 
water during the dry season. One of the main causes of child mortality here is 
water borne illnesses, and the use of water collection devices along with water 
treatment has cut infant mortality substantially."

Mark recorded a video of the greeting we received, shot moments after our 
arrival. It shows more than a hundred people dancing and singing for us, giving 
out hand-made bracelets. A number of them seemed to be under the impression 
that we were involved with sponsoring the project, and that our visit would 
help to secure more funding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhEeN3fXfD60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhEeN3fXfD60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhEeN3fXfD60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The whole scene disturbed me greatly. Jeff and I hung back, reluctant to get 
involved and sticking close to the vehicles. I turned to him and sarcastically 
asked:"So, how authentic do you think this is?" 

"I think it's pretty authentic," he replied. "As a demonstration of the power 
dynamic between these poor guys trying to get water, and a bunch of rich 
Westerners, it's about as authentic as you can get."

For the umpteenth time on this trip I felt as if I was taking part in a 
theatrical performance without direction, surrounded by actors and actresses 
who knew their roles so instinctively that they were no longer aware they were 
playing them. Unwell, and increasingly frustrated, the prospect of watching 
these people dance and sing for us in the hope of securing a basic human need 
took me to the limits of my tolerance. Along with several others I asked to be 
excused, and we left immediately in one of the vehicles, returning to the calm 
of our small, tented oasis in the savannah. I had learned a lot of facts about 
the conservancy and its neighbouring communities, but I couldn't shake the 
feeling that I knew nothing more than I had when I arrived.

Ol Pejeta's development continues apace, and its conservation work is truly 
world-class. Sweetwaters camp is expanding at a gradual but steady rate, with 
new buildings under construction, and a row of villas rising from the dusty 
ground on the edge of the lively waterhole that forms the core of the small 
resort. In the evenings the noise of the building work gave way to the calls of 
weird and exotic creatures and the constant chirping of crickets; but - like 
the residents ofKibera 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/01/africa-propaganda-kibera>
, the mothers ofPumwani 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/02/africa-kenya>, 
and the villagers ofNyang'oma Kogelo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/03/africa-obama-administration>
 - the loudest sounds were the deafening silences of the people we could not 
hear.
 Sunset over the watering hole that forms the centrepiece of Sweetwaters 
Tented Camp. (Photo by Charlott Schönwetter) 
Part I: The Missing Millions of Kibera 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/01/africa-propaganda-kibera>
Part II: Kidnapped at birth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/02/africa-kenya>
Part III: Grandma Obama's support for domestic violence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/03/africa-obama-administration>
(Part V – "Return to Kibera" – coming Friday)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Declaration of interest: This trip was organized by the International 
Reporting Project <http://www.internationalreportingproject.org/>, an 
independent journalism organization based in Washington DC. It was funded by the
Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/>, who have had no editorial 
influence over this article.

Follow me on Twitter: @mjrobbins <http://www.twitter.com/mjrobbins>
 