
Which are the 100 best novels ever written in the English language? No list 
could possibly satisfy everyone, as is always the case withlisticles 
<http://www.newyorker.com/humor/daily-shouts/the-hundred-best-lists-of-all-time>
. When writer Robert McCrum completedhis own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
, after developing itover the course of two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/the-100-best-novels>, it was greeted 
with a mix of enthusiasm and criticism. Most of the scepticism centred on the
lack of diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/21/the-best-novels-written-in-english-help-us-come-up-with-a-more-diverse-list>
, though many readers had their own favourite omission. So we asked you to 
nominate the books you thought should have made the list. Here are the novels 
that received the most nominations, in no particular order – we have included 
all that received a minimum of two votes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441203476686%2Fadab5c95-4425-40c9-82ce-df34423702e4-626x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441203476686%2Fadab5c95-4425-40c9-82ce-df34423702e4-626x1020.jpeg>
1. Things Fall Apart 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/things-fall-apart-10.html> by Chinua Achebe 
(1958)

“It’s the ideal postcolonial novel. Its inventive idiomatic prose highlights 
the malleability of the English language: no other writer (or translator) has 
evoked the true essence of another language in English. Period.”Steven Ikeme

“Brilliant, distinctive, thought-provoking and illuminating of a sense of 
place and time. Also quite readable.”Ryan

“This book is a seminal piece of great story telling. Set in the advent of 
colonialism and its implications for the native people, the clash of cultures 
of two different worlds.A story of how a way of life was replaced by another 
culture.”Kinnie Hindowah


“It’s an excellent example of black African writing in English of which I felt 
your list was sadly lacking. Black African novelists are often sorely under 
represented in literary criticism and lists of this kind. In Things Fall Apart, 
Achebe explores the colonial experience by arguably using the tools of 
colonialism itself, ie the English language. The story is told from the African 
perspective and his use of African colloquialisms and proverbs is genuinely 
subversive and innovative.”Nathan Loughran

2. The God of Small Things 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/god-of-small-things.html> by Arundhati Roy 
(1997)

“As a non-native English speaker and someone who grew up in an Asian culture, 
English as a language appears very articulate and clear to me. And most well 
written English literature works, including poems, embody such almost 
straightforward characters, both in their wording and storytelling ... until I 
read Arundhati Roy’s The God of Small Things. I still remember how struck I was 
to see the English words be played in a way that’s mostly familiar to me in 
other Asian literature. The gentle singsong wording and wave-like storytelling 
combined with the vividness of English captured me like a dream. I’ve read many 
more English novels since, some as captivating and clever, but none carries the 
same magic.”Ling

“The God of Small Things – though a fairly recent book – resonates very 
strongly with me. It explores caste, sexism, colonialism and the strange 
unspoken rules that tie Indian families together. Like in most great novels, 
the prose itself is stunning, with imagery fresh and original and at the same 
time, somehow familiar. I’m a girl from a South Indian village and I was raised 
by a single mother and my grandmother. Perhaps it is this coincidence that ties 
me so strongly to the book, to see in tangible words the burden that history 
passes along to Indian women.”Sita


Sign up to our Bookmarks email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
“I have never been so moved by a book as this one. Every character is complete 
and completely human; the plot is intricate and perfectly woven; the sentences 
sparkle with lapidary precision. When common words fail, she creates her own 
lexicon (a device I usually loathe in lesser hands) and creates poetry within 
the prose – ‘Furrywhirring,’ ‘Sariflapping,’ ‘ OrangedrinkLemondrink Man’, 
‘fatly baffled.’ The description of the God of Small Things or mundane 
tragedies as a flippant, skipping boy in short pants is as evocative as it is 
heart breaking. Roy frames tragic personal stories within the context of the 
greater tragedy of Indian social strictures and politics. And the ending made 
me cry for two solid hours. I read the book four years ago and writing this 
critique is making my throat tighten even now, such is its incandescent power 
and brilliance.”Pam Norris
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441203897449%2F35beec5c-c6b0-4dc9-8a46-623cc1ac2542-660x1020.gif>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441203897449%2F35beec5c-c6b0-4dc9-8a46-623cc1ac2542-660x1020.gif>
3. Beloved <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/beloved-6.html> by Toni Morrison 
(1987)

“Brutal, heartbreaking and beautiful.” Tanith

“Beloved is one of the greatest novels ever written – in any language or 
culture, any genre or generation, any time or clime. It is a measure of 
Morrison’s rare and remarkable gift as a writer that one can say of this 
innovative novel: all humanity is here. It is the most extraordinary excavation 
of the bones and ghosts of American history (slavery, lynching, Jim Crow 
segregation), limned in a deeply haunting, profoundly moving multi-layered epic 
tragedy. With compelling candour, courage and conviction, Morrison’s 
imperishable masterpiece distils an eerie evocation of mood, setting, landscape 
and atmosphere, a complex, even complicated deployment of character and 
characterisation, multiple points of view from an interlude of astutely 
individuated voices. [...] Toni Morrison’s Beloved is, as TS Eliot wrote of 
James Joyce’s Ulysses, ‘a book to which we are all indebted, and from which 
none of us can escape.’”Idowu Omoyele

“This novel is important to English literature in three respects. Firstly, it 
not only broaches a significant historical topic (American slavery), but in 
many ways prescribes solutions to our treatment of slavery’s history. The novel 
also uses a beautiful and poetic style to hone in its themes. Lastly, Morrison 
utilises magical realism to enhance the setting and the characters that occupy 
it. Morrison is one of the first American authors to use magical realism as a 
primary stylistic choice.”Sean Fortenberry


4. The Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/handmaid-s-tale-10.html> by Margaret Atwood 
(1985)

“Despite the passage of time, I have not forgotten how prescient The 
Handmaid’s Tale was, and how prescient it felt. She described a future that 
didn’t seem so far-fetched. Living in America gives you a sense, sometimes, 
that the fundamentalist Christians, with their literalist readings of the 
Bible, would be capable of reading the story of an infertile woman who had her 
husband impregnate her handmaid and see that as a solution to infertility in 
the modern age. And Atwood not only gets the reading of the Bible correct, she 
also foresaw that we would wreck the planet at the level of reproduction, too. 
Sometimes, when another “crazy” thing comes to pass in American 
politics/culture, I find myself thinking that we’re moving closer to Atwood’s 
nightmare future. If you combine that prescience with Atwood’s deft handling of 
language – she really is a prose virtuosa – and you have the making of a 
classic.”Lorraine Berry
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204196641%2F49dfb672-62b2-44e0-a24c-1da45742713d-673x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204196641%2F49dfb672-62b2-44e0-a24c-1da45742713d-673x1020.jpeg>
5. Blood Meridian 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316108/> by Cormac 
McCarthy (1985)

“McCarthy is certainly one of the finest living authors in the world today and 
this novel is his best ... A Texan, his dark descriptions of the American West 
are second to none. His voice is unique and unmatched in its originality. This 
is a novel which hypnotises, horrifies and leaves the reader as dazed as man 
who has stood too close to freight-train as it has roared by his head. Jolting 
and vividly spattered with blood, the pages brand themselves deeply into the 
readers memory and imagination: A true American masterpiece crafted by a true 
master.”Mark Hall

“It is the best novel written in the twentieth century. It tells a fascinating 
and complex story with incredible power. It demonstrates McCarthy’s total 
mastery of both language and narrative. It has arguably the greatest villain 
ever written. It shows the utter superfluousness of punctuation. It evokes a 
little-known period in American history with startling beauty and incredible 
realism.”TheMarxOfProgress


“Mccarthy’s novel is a masterpiece with a nihilistic bent and lurid prose. The 
Judge is one of the most sinister characters in the history of literature.”Jay 
Tucker
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204316495%2Fbd862e56-2ef5-4960-b760-5c6e92082c9d-652x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204316495%2Fbd862e56-2ef5-4960-b760-5c6e92082c9d-652x1020.jpeg>
6. A Fine Balance 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/350670/> by Rohinton 
Mistry (1995)

“This is the one book that whisked me away to India. It shows you a world that 
you’ve maybe never thought about before, it makes you feel empathy for the 
struggles of Indian beggars, it shows you what life was like in the countryside 
and in the city. It’s a caleidoscope of people and stories. It educates you 
about Indian politics and history. And it’s a very moving book as well. It can 
bring tears into your eyes (not mine of course, I’m talking about a friend...)”
Isabelle Meyer

“A great and fluid command of the language, an achingly accurate portrayal of 
the complexity of human choices, startling humour in places you least expect, 
tender treatment of the tragedy that is the human condition... This book takes 
you right into the drama of ordinary, seemingly forgettable lives.”Vivian Ligo

“It is a beautifully written, tragic tale of how four characters from 
different backgrounds join together, but how their lives follow different paths 
because of their caste. Even though it’s so very sad, there is so much love and 
humour and the irony that it’s the ‘luckiest’ character who is the most 
miserable!”Kim
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204375602%2Fe31df25f-bf78-45df-8e23-e946a77c1253-671x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204375602%2Fe31df25f-bf78-45df-8e23-e946a77c1253-671x1020.jpeg>
7. Infinite Jest <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/infinite-jest-2.html> by 
David Foster Wallace (1996)

“David Foster Wallace was a creative force that measured the disillusion and 
sadness of a generation of people who felt emptiness that took a shape that 
no-one could really identify or wrestle with. Infinite Jest, his magnum opus, 
represents all of these feelings and more. It is a work that confronts the 
substance of how happiness is truly fleeting. A work over-brimming with 
intelligence, humour, pathos and insight. I can think of few works that capture 
the mood of a time as Infinite Jest does. It is prescient, chilling, hilarious, 
comforting, and all of it simultaneously.”Ben James

“The best writer of his generation has to have a spot on the list. The best 
novel of the past 20 years is hilarious, sad and absurd – often within the same 
page. At over 1,000 pages you’ll struggle through bits of it, and suddenly 
you’ll realise you’ve finished and want to immediately start again.”Jay Tucker

8. Slaughterhouse Five <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/slaughterhouse-5.html>
 by Kurt Vonnegut (1969)

“Slaughterhouse Five is an eclectic telling of a tragedy told by Vonnegut, who 
was there during the Dresden bombing. It brings a unique satire to an otherwise 
terrible event and it is told with poignancy. Vonnegut’s anti-war story was a 
triumph of literature.”Mario Velarde

“Such a short and easy to read book, it takes an interesting, quirky and 
meaningful approach to a horrific event in our history. Very imaginative, 
poignant and at times shocking, it has stayed with me for a long time each time 
I’ve read it.”Ciara Dawson

9. The Lord of the Rings 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lord-of-the-rings-14.html> by JRR Tolkien 
(1954 - 1955)

“Tolkien defined the Fantasy genre with his epic storytelling and world 
building.”Gerd Duerner


“Setting up the genre for the next six decades, there is simply no other work 
of literature this ambitious. Powerful, profound, poignant, and linguistically 
pure.”Jorge

“It is an incredibly well written book by a very talented man. A masterpiece 
that inspired many writers in the genre. To me, it was a book that helped me 
through some dark times. It inspired me with the beauty of the writing (Tolkien 
is a masterful writer), and the great messages within the story.”Kim Anisi

10. I, Lucifer <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-lucifer-2.html> by Glen 
Duncan (2003)

“It makes a protagonist of he who is literature’s all-time ultimate villain 
and simultaneously the personification of all villainy. With this character at 
the book’s heart, the author explores, amongst many other themes, some of 
humanity’s darkest and most dreadful moral transgressions. Duncan manages this 
with unflinching clarity, intelligently devised detail and a craftsman’s weave 
of one-liners, observational humour, hilarious characters and broadly applied 
satire. To me, while first reading it, then returning immediately to the first 
page for another go, it was clear that I may never enjoy a novel so much again. 
That has stuck true for over ten years now.” David Pooley

“It manages to answer the primal questions about the relationship between God 
& the Devil. A reasonably good theologian could probably shoot it down in 
flames, but like Milton’s Satan, he is beautiful, bright and flawed. Duncan 
writes like an angel and Lucifer ... well, you’ll just have to read it.”Laura 
Andrus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204840755%2Ffe33091c-15bd-454d-870c-68b502bcc04f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441204840755%2Ffe33091c-15bd-454d-870c-68b502bcc04f-1360x2040.jpeg>
11. Harry Potter 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-philosopher-s-stone-24.html>
 series by JK Rowling (1997-2007)

“A good novel will leave you a different person than when you began it, and I 
honestly don’t think there are any books that have changed so many people’s 
lives like Harry Potter novels have. While perhaps not the best written books 
when compared to other masterpieces on the list, the detail of theHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> universe and the engaging 
characters and storylines are works of genius. Rowling captures the imagination 
like no other author can, and that is why she deserves to be on the list of 
greatest novels.” Andrew Thornbury

“I have chosen this series because it means something to me both as a reader 
and a teacher. I have seen children that wouldn’t usually choose reading as a 
way to pass the time become completely engrossed in these books. It is also 
true to say that if you enjoy reading something as a young person, there is a 
likelihood that you will also enjoy re-reading the same text. As a child I very 
much enjoyed reading these, and I still do today!”Charlotte Fox

12. Lanark: A Life in Four Books 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275753/> by Alasdair 
Gray (1981)

“This is the key work in contemporary Scottish fiction, which initiates the 
renaissance in Scottish writing. Its influence can also be detected across the 
wider ‘postmodern’ context, by pushing the frontiers of the novel. No Ali 
Smith, David Mitchell, Will Self et al without Lanark.”Edmund Smyth

“The greatest Scottish novel of 20th century: personal and political, 
parochial and universal, it strides across the realist and fantasy genres with 
a playful but urgent post-modernism.”Grant Rintoul

13. Stranger in a Strange Land 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stranger-in-a-strange-land.html> by Robert A 
Heinlein (1961)

“Why no sci-fi? Stranger in a Strange Land, Heinlein’s masterpiece, transcends 
the genre, as it is as much a groundbreaking social, political, religious, and 
sexual commentary on what it is to be human, obliterating taboos of the era. It 
was way ahead of its time. As if that wasn’t enough, Jubal Harshaw has to be 
one of the most memorable characters in all of fiction.”Michael Yaros

“This novel correctly defined ‘love’ for me, as ‘the state in which the 
welfare and happiness of another become essential to your own.’”Spider Robinson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205175441%2Fc210539e-0064-49c8-84b5-b46a8a005623-663x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers'%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20novels%20in%20English%3A%20readers%27%20alternative%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Fthe-best-novels-in-english-readers-alternative-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441205175441%2Fc210539e-0064-49c8-84b5-b46a8a005623-663x1020.jpeg>
14. The Color Purple <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/color-purple.html> by 
Alice Walker (1982)

“As a non-white, non-Western reader of English language fiction since early 
childhood, I had begun to internalise the idea that good fiction needed to meet 
the standards set by dead straight white men. Then when I was 18 I read this 
novel and it blew my mind – the narrative voice, characters and plot sensitised 
me to racism and sexism in ways that I had never encountered (and have yet to 
encounter) in novels authored by straight white men. And though I am not an 
African-American woman, it validated and enlarged my existence, which is what I 
think the best fiction is capable of.”Shanon Shah

“Any list of great books needs to include this, or is simply incomplete. The 
Color Purple was the first book that truly touched me and really forced me to 
think.”Denise Paradise

15. Woman on the Edge of Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/woman-on-the-edge-of-time.html> by Marge 
Piercy (1976)

“This was a life-changing work for me. It totally changed the way I looked at 
time, gender, race, sanity, utopia and dystopia. I first read it in my late 
teens and I’ve reread it frequently. I always find something new, or interpret 
it slightly differently. It questions why we need gender designation, offering 
a gender neutral ‘per’. It offers a three-parent society. It contrasts sexism, 
racism and the chemical coshing of a mental health patient with a utopia that 
doesn’t contain any of these issues. It leaves us with the idea that, in 
interfering with the mind, as the central character’s brain is operated on, we 
change the possible future available to us. It touched on so many issues that 
matter in my life, and in society generally, that the added question of what 
reality means became academic.”Laura Albero

“The book is inspired and is aesthetically superb and socially salvific.” The 
Revd Linda Isiorho

Do you have a book to add to the list? You can still take part by leaving a 
comment below.
 