
Kibera's slums assault the senses like a barbeque in a hot toilet. Raw waste 
carves gullies along the ragged ribbons of bare earth that serve as side 
streets and alleys, where children crawl and play in dirt you wouldn't step in 
unless you had to; for all my cringing, nobody seemed to mind much. Forests of 
twisted aerials sprout from the rooves of shacks raised up from the mud and 
topped with sheets of metal. The main streets are full of the hustle and bustle 
of the ultimate free market, the sort of anarchic community libertarians beg 
for, but would beg to be rescued from. AirTel signs and M-PESA logos compete 
with butchers and charcoal-sellers, bombarding the senses with a barrage of 
colour that still can't quite match that smell.

From time to time celebrities are deposited in the slums by shiny new trucks, 
where they cry at children to appease the gods of television and 
self-promotion. Like the increasing numbers of 'slum tourists', they flaunt 
their privileged ignorance, inspiring bemusement - sometimes contempt - in 
locals who take pride in the thriving, entrepreneurial community they carved 
out of barren earth. Ground long since disowned by Nairobi, a city that 
surrounds Kibera the way a brown paper bag conceals a dirty magazine.
 With no sewerage system, waste runs in gullies along streets and back alleys 
It was a drizzly winter's day in June, and I was visiting my first AIDS 
patient of the day - a fragile-yet-determined single-mother shunned by her 
neighbours. Already I was struggling. There's nothing interesting about AIDS. 
It doesn't turn its victims into eloquent activists or witty raconteurs; it 
just kills relentlessly, day after day, as regular and reliable as a Swiss 
train. One sufferer is like another sufferer is like ten million other 
sufferers, and there are only so many times one can – or should need to - 
retell the same story. Interrogating this woman in the gloom of her tiny, 
windowless shack, perched on tattered old chairs, I felt like a giant bully; an 
intruder in her tragedy without the excuse of journalistic merit to hide behind.

My mind wandered, and I imagined how I would react if I were in her shoes, 
fielding the same inane questions about my own life. "So Martin, what's it like 
being so sick and poor?" "Well Martin, it's pretty fucking miserable." "What 
can people do to help, Martin?" "I need medicine, Martin, and some money." "Is 
there any point to this interview, Martin, or is this just poverty porn?" "Do 
you have a question, Martin?"
 A local butcher's shop in Kibera, selling large chunks of dead cow. 
"Do you have a question, Martin?" My thoughts were interrupted by the IRP 
representative I'd been partnered with for this house visit, an American woman 
whose thousand-watt enthusiasm I rather envied. In contrast I felt crippled by 
a growing concern that we had walked into some sort of living-theatre project. 
Reacting quickly, I managed to pose a question so comprehensively dull I can't 
even remember what it was. The answer caught my interest though, not for its 
content but for the implausible method of its delivery – neat lines of perfect, 
copy-friendly English, delivered in about three words of Swahili.

None of this conversation was 'real'; it took place through translators 
provided by our hosts, a local community project claiming to represent Kibera's 
youth, and yet comprised almost entirely of people in their 20s or older. 
Attractive, bright, and enthusiastic, they had an uncanny talent for taking a 
few mumbled words of Swahili and turning them into the neatly-packaged 
on-message anecdotes beloved by the sort of cynical vultures that film the 
'guilt segments' for telethons.

If you're not careful in these situations you can find yourself interviewing 
the translator instead of the subject; but the heat and the smell of open 
sewers and the close air and the dust and the boredom and the warm sweat 
running between your shoulder-blades wear down your concentration. As the 
minutes wore on our AIDS victim faded into the background, replaced by the 
impression of a helpful NGO worker, a smiling avatar spinning stories to the 
tunes of Coldplay. It was only later, replaying the scene in my head that I 
began to wonder; who exactly were we listening to?

And as I looked more closely at the slum that day, other niggling thoughts 
buried deep in my subconscious begin to trace their way to the surface. Why 
were the members of this 'youth' group so old? Why was everyone who spoke to us 
being paid in cash or food? Why hadn't the sick child we saw earlier been taken 
to the free MSF clinic nearby? Who were the gangs of young men standing 
sentinel by local community facilities? Were we visiting a legitimate aid 
organization, or a lucrative local industry? How many people lived in Kibera 
anyway?
 An M-PESA franchise - against the odds, mobile banking has transformed life 
in urban slums. 
That morning, back in the post-colonial surroundings of our overpriced hotel, 
I had watched an array of speakers try and fail to give a consistent answer to 
that one simple question: how many people live in Kibera? Their figures varied 
but were all measured in millions, one enthusiastic chap claiming as many as 
five – something of a stretch given that Nairobi's entire population isonly 
around three million 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Nairobi+population&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a>
.

A quick search on Google finds page after page of estimates in or around the 
same ball-park. TheWhite House 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:C9vdMoJn4-wJ:www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2010/06/08/audio-slideshow-dr-biden-sees-kibera-kenya+http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2010/06/08/audio-slideshow-dr-biden-sees-slums-kenya&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk&client=firefox-a>
 reckon it's"just about 1.5 million", while the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/newsnight/paulmason/2009/10/kibera_survived_ethnic_violenc.html>
 claim 700,000.Jambo Volunteers 
<http://www.jambovolunteers.org/index.php/projects-in-kibera.html> say "more 
than one million." The rather sickly-sounding Global Angels 
<http://www.globalangels.org/angel-projects/causes/street-kids-orphans/sustainable-development-kenya/kibera-slums/>
 reckon"around 1 million." The Kibera Tours 
<http://kiberatours.com/page/about-kiber> website describes "a population 
estimated at one million." The Kibera Law Centre 
<http://kiberalawcentre.org/facts/> gives "almost 1 million." Shining Hope for 
Communities <http://shininghopeforcommunities.org/about/about-kibera/> reckon 
that Kibera"houses 1.5 million people." The Kibera Foundation 
<http://www.kiberafoundation.org/> talk about "a population of almost a million 
people," as do Kibera UK <http://www.kibera.org.uk/> and about a hundred other 
sites you can find through your friendly neighbourhood search engine.

A week later, Harper's Jeff Sharlet and I returned for our own trip; a 
three-mile hike across the slums with a local fixer we knew. Our mission: to 
see if we could find something that was interesting, or real, or ideally both. 
Walking from thePamoja FM 
<https://indigotrust.wordpress.com/2011/02/08/pamoja-fm-giving-a-voice-to-kibera-slum/>
 studio in the middle-class Ayany district at the west of Kibera, to Lindi in 
the east, we passed through several of Kibera's thirteen villages, and 
confirmed what I already knew from previous visits to Kenya - the idea that 
Kibera holds a million people is completely and utterly absurd.
 A Scottish football fan practises his 'wtf' face. 
That much is obvious if you just visit the place and spend a few days 
wandering around it; actuallylooking at it. Kibera consists of around two 
square miles of densely-clustered, single story shacks. For the White House's 
estimate to be accurate, Kibera's cluttered streets and labyrinthine alleyways 
would have to support a population density thirty times higher than the 
towering skyscrapers of New York. All the crow bars and grease in the world 
could not fit that many people into that small a space.

The mythical million comes from estimates built upon estimates that have 
spread over the years like Chinese whispers through the NGO community and, 
later, the internet. Paul Currion laid out how this works two years ago, in his 
essay"Lies, damned lies and you know the rest 
<http://www.humanitarian.info/2010/09/13/lies-damned-lies-and-you-know-the-rest/>
": 

In the absence of actual data (such as an official census), NGO staff make a 
back-of-envelope estimate in order to plan their projects; a postgraduate 
visiting the NGO staff tweaks that estimate for his thesis research; a 
journalist interviews the researcher and includes the estimate in a newspaper 
article; a UN officer reads the article and copies the estimate into her 
report; a television station picks up the report and the estimate becomes the 
headline; NGO staff see the television report and update their original 
estimate accordingly. All statistical hell breaks loose, and the population of 
Kibera leaps ever higher.

Every actor at every stage has a motive for using the upper end of that 
initial estimate, rather than more conservative figures – planning, funding, 
visibility, and so on – but no single person is responsible for inflating the 
figure progressively further from reality.

Hence the shock when a census by the Kenyan government found only 170,000 
residents, a count probably not much higher than the number of NGOs that have 
swarmed into the area. It isn't easy counting the transient population of an 
informal settlement, and of course the government don't have a fantastic record 
on Kibera – if they did, it wouldn't exist – but their figures fit reasonably 
well with those produced by others. TheMap Kibera Project 
<http://mapkiberaproject.yolasite.com/maps-and-statistics.php> used sampling to 
produce an estimate of 235,000-270,000, whileKeyObs 
<http://www.ifra-nairobi.net/Urbangovernance.html> deployed the cold, hard gaze 
of a satellite to produce an estimate of around 200,000. These more accurate 
figures have suffered the fate that tends to befall most inconvenient truths; 
they have been widely ignored.

Does this matter? Yes, if it means that years of funding and community 
planning are based on figures that are complete and utter bullshit. Kibera 
hosts some of the world's poorest people; residents whose problems are very 
real and immediate, whose scale hardly needs exaggerating. In a community 
estimated to host several hundred NGOs, charities and agencies, sucking in 
millions of dollars in foreign aid, such a fundamental error raises a more 
disturbing question: if so many people are so wrong about something so basic, 
what else isn't true?

Part II – "Kidnapped at birth" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2012/aug/02/africa-kenya>

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Declaration of interest: This trip was organized by the International 
Reporting Project <http://www.internationalreportingproject.org>, an 
independent journalism organization based in Washington DC. It was funded by the
Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/>, who have had no editorial 
influence over this USE BING! article.

Follow me on Twitter: @mjrobbins <http://www.twitter.com/mjrobbins>
 