
Instead of the steaks and pork chops in our fridges, should we be investing in 
clean, green protein? Well, yes. Methane from livestock is responsible for 14% 
of global warming, and the gas is 25 times more potent than CO2. The more meat 
and dairy you eat from ruminants, particularly cows, the more burping and 
farting you are responsible for. The 2014documentary Cowspiracy 
<http://www.cowspiracy.com/> focuses on the idea that this is the great 
neglected greenhouse gas source 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/think-dairy-farming-is-benign-our-rivers-tell-a-different-story>
.

By 2050, experts predict, the demand for meat will have doubled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/population-crisis-farm-animals-laying-waste-to-planet>
, and meat-related emissions will boom at 12bn tonnes of carbon to feed a 
population of 9 billion. Our consumption has to tail off if we are to achieve 
Paris emissions goals.

In 2013 researchers found the carbon footprint of a vegetarian to be half that 
of a meat eater 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/269687511_Flexitarianism_Decarbonising_through_flexible_vegetarianism>
. Comfortingly, they also found that aflexitarian approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/mar/24/why-meat-free-week-wont-work>
 is a close second. By replacing three-quarters of our ruminant budget with 
other forms of protein, we could reduce livestock emissions to 3.1bn tonnes by 
2050. Chicken could play a part, but somenon-meat proteins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/17/move-over-meat-how-the-uk-can-diversify-its-protein-consumption>
 should be included, too.

Not all animals are equal, ethically. Cows raised on species-rich pasture 
produce fewer emissions. But industrialised agriculture focuses on how to raise 
animals indoors in feedlots more efficiently. Low-emissions meat could have a 
big ethical impact in other ways.

Do food retailers have a responsibility to sell less? Riverford’s “How Much 
Meat <http://www.riverford.co.uk/how-much-meat>” campaign explores this idea. 
Riverford sells vegetables, so it has a vested interest, but it also sells 
organic meat. Apparently founder Guy Watson launched the campaign after his 
daughter, having seenCowspiracy, petitioned him to divest from the  livestock 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/25/industrial-farming-one-worst-crimes-history-ethical-question>
.

The big picture: the fungus among us

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c858391fdeb57637c6afd707cce3e96bd1a30fe%2F0_317_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20eating%20meat%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20eating%20meat%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c858391fdeb57637c6afd707cce3e96bd1a30fe%2F0_317_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
Small wonder: a rare image of the obscureMarasmius haematocephali mushroom. 
Photograph: Steve Axford 
Fungi are known as nature’s ultimate recycler, but it is time to acknowledge 
the radical diversity and downright beauty of fungi, slime moulds and lichens. 
Botanist photographer and fungi-obsessive Steve Axford, a native of New South 
Wales, Australia, is on a mission to take pictures of the most obscure 
specimens to be found on the planet, many of which have never been catalogued 
before.

Well dressed: Pembe Club

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2758d3dd9c6753d0cf104c39ca64438d9ac6c99c%2F0_172_4932_2960%2F4932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20eating%20meat%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20eating%20meat%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Feco-guide-to-eating-meat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2758d3dd9c6753d0cf104c39ca64438d9ac6c99c%2F0_172_4932_2960%2F4932.jpg>
 All that glisters: Yasmine Haji’s designs use natural, sustainable materials 
including recycled glass and East African coins. 
Diamonds aren’t our best friends, ethically speaking, which is why I love the 
way the best new jewellery brands are redefining which materials really are 
precious. Pembe Club is a recent member of this club. Yasmine Haji, a 
third-generation jewellery designer, sources natural, sustainable materials 
from Tanzania including wild grass seeds, recycled glass, East African coins, 
harita, ostrich eggs and cowrie shells alongside recycled glass beads, pyrite 
and black onyx. Her mission is to make sure that the materials are readily 
available to the local artisans and villagers she works with – and to convince 
them as well as buyers that these materials can replace ivory. Elephant 
poaching plagues Tanzania. Haji is determined that by replicating shapes and 
techniques in sustainable materials she can make a positive change to this 
desperate situation. (pembeclub.com)

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 