
Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://soundcloud.com/guardianaudioedition/june_4_2013>.

In this week's Audio Edition:

• Whilst the soldiers who killed innocent people remain free, the man who 
exposed them is accused of 'aiding the enemy'. By Gary Younge.Click here to 
read article.
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jun/02/hypocrisy-lies-at-heart-bradley-manning-trial>

• For everyone connected with Machynlleth, the experience has been shattering, 
but with Mark Bridger's conviction, the process of healing can begin. By George 
Monbiot.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/may/30/ukcrime-wales> 

• With fishing policy, as with Italy's attempt to ban plastic bags, our 
government is terrified of appearing to allow the EU to undermine British 
'interests'. By Will Hutton.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jun/02/eu-fishing-policy-british-interests>

• Kowtowing to China has become a reflex for US film studios in search of a 
piece of booming – and lucrative – Chinese market. By Rory Carroll.Click here 
to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/30/hollywood-china-film-industry>

• The spirit of Albion, as conjured in the British pavilion at the Venice 
Biennale, makes for some surprising and dramatic connections. The 
Turner-winning artist Jeremy Deller explains his thinking. By Tim Adams.Click 
here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2013/jun/01/jeremy-deller-venice-biennale-interview>

And in our audiobook review, we examine appetite with Lionel Shriver's novel 
Big Brother, and Jay Rayner's exploration of the food industry, A Greedy Man in 
a Hungry World.

The Guardian Audio Edition is supported by Audible.co.uk 
<http://www.audible.co.uk/>. To listen to the audiobooks reviewed in this 
week's edition go toaudible.co.uk/guardianaudio. 
<http://www.audible.co.uk/t1/GMX-MH-Nov12_at?source_code=GSP30DFT1Bk900VWS021913>
 