
George Sluizer, the feted Dutch film-maker who ran aground in Hollywood, has 
died at the age of 82. The director of The Vanishing and Dark Blood is believed 
to have been in ill-health for several years after suffering a serious aneurysm 
at Christmas 2007. “I went by ambulance as a dead person for five hours,”he 
would later recall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/27/river-phoenix-dark-blood-last-film>
. Ill-starred disasters and unlikely comebacks had always been his stock in 
trade.

Sluizer won the top prize at the Berlin film festival for his 1961 debut, the 
documentary Low Lands. But he remains best remembered for the 1988 thriller The 
Vanishing, a stark, stealthy tale about a man’s three-year search for his 
missing girlfriend that wasdescribed by Stanley Kubrick 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/polls-surveys/stanley-kubrick-cinephile>
 as “the most horrifying film I’ve ever seen”. In the wake of the film’s 
success, Sluizer agreed to direct the flop US remake starring Jeff Bridges and 
Sandra Bullock.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcBg7gjX9xBM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcBg7gjX9xBM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcBg7gjX9xBM&media=>
Sluizer’s run of bad American luck would continue with 1993’s Dark Blood, a 
desert-set saga that was derailed by the sudden death of the actorRiver Phoenix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/river-phoenix>. The director would wait 
nearly 20 years before completing the picture to his own satisfaction. He later 
suggested that this long-running project was what had kept him alive. “I guess 
I am a craftsman in the sense that I don’t like unfinished projects,” he said.

The film-maker’s other credits include the satirical thriller Crimetime and an 
adaptation of the Bruce Chatwin novel Utz. He also served as production manager 
on Werner Herzog’s acclaimed Fitzcarraldo and directed a series of 
documentaries that charted the fortunes of two displaced Palestinian families.

In 2010 Sluizer sparked controversy 
<http://www.haaretz.com/news/diplomacy-defense/i-saw-ariel-sharon-murder-2-palestinian-toddlers-in-lebanon-1.325540>
 with his claims that he had personally witnessed Israel’s defence minister 
Ariel Sharon kill two children during the Sabra-Shatilla massacre of 1982. 
Israeli officials derided his accusation as a “modern blood libel”.
 