 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fthe-ven-peter-bridges-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426265202029%2F0d485b91-259f-42b8-aac6-89cc39e52938-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Ven%20Peter%20Bridges%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fthe-ven-peter-bridges-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Ven%20Peter%20Bridges%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fthe-ven-peter-bridges-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426265202029%2F0d485b91-259f-42b8-aac6-89cc39e52938-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Peter Bridges, both an architect and a priest, changed the traditional view of 
the church, towards being a space for secular as well as sacred use 
My friend Peter Bridges, who has died aged 89, was an architect, a priest and 
three times an archdeacon. His work on ecclesiastical architecture was 
influential in changing the traditional view of the church as wholly for sacred 
use and more towards it being a space also for secular use, seven days a week.


Peter was the son of Winifred and Sidney Bridges and was born in Tooting Bec, 
south London. He went to Raynes Park grammar school, leaving in 1941. He was a 
talented artist, and after his service in the RAF, in 1947 he went to the 
School of Architecture, Kingston-upon-Thames. He worked on prefabricated 
buildings and ecclesiastical designs in Salisbury before becoming a lecturer in 
the Nottingham School ofArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/architecture> in 1954.

What seemed a change in direction in his career led to his training at Lincoln 
for the Anglican priesthood and his appointment as parish priest at Gadebridge 
in Hemel Hempstead. But he did not cease to be a practising architect.

Peter was involved in proposals for church buildings in Hemel and in Welwyn 
Garden City that were too radical to be realised but nonetheless influenced 
others. His design for a Welwyn Garden City church on a square plan with the 
altar on a diagonal axis under a hyperbolic paraboloid roof received a good 
deal of attention from followers of the new liturgical movement. The academic 
focus for changes in the approach to church buildings was the Institute for the 
Study of Worship and ReligiousArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> at Birmingham 
University, where Peter became the first research fellow.

When his Birmingham fellowship and appointment as university chaplain 
concluded, Peter took up a lectureship at Aston University. Frequent requests 
for advice about church buildings led Peter to set up an architectural practice 
with a fellow lecturer at Birmingham, Martin Purdy. Their work involved designs 
for new church buildings and planning proposals for Dawley, Shropshire – later 
Telford new town – for Redditch, Skelmersdale and a Congregational church at St 
Helens. Peter proved adept at dealing with the colossal legal, cultural and 
personality problems associated with ecumenical schemes. Work on 
socio-religious studies elsewhere in Europe and in British new towns led to 
Peter’s role in church planning, including as chair of the New Town Ministers’ 
Association (1966-1972).

A change in career arose in 1972 with the government’s proposals for a third 
London airport and new regional city at Foulness, Essex. The Bishop of 
Chelmsford reacted to these plans by inviting Peter to become archdeacon of 
Southend, with the aim of responding to the large-scale planning proposal. When 
Foulness was cancelled, Peter, stranded, accepted the post of canon theologian 
at Coventry Cathedral, where he worked as archdeacon. He later became 
archdeacon of Warwick.

Peter became chairman of the Painting and Prayer Retreat movement (1984-90) 
and was adviser on spirituality for the Coventry diocese. In his retirement, 
Peter moved with his wife, Joan Penlerick, to Romsey in Hampshire.

He is survived by Joan and their sons, Jonathan and Martin.
 