
The story so far: Writer and translator Felix Mondazy has arrived in Britain 
for the Moving Finger International Literature Festival where he will defend 
the art of literary translations. He is hustled into a waiting bus with 
Virginia, an angry writer he met on the plane, and meets a self-styled witch. 
Later, at their destination, the witch accuses another woman, Miss Rhys, of 
"grave robbery" before Mondazy is ushered to his room by "the homunculus"...


Felix was on his own again. He wasn't sorry. There was a great deal to take 
in, more, indeed, than he'd had to digest since his spell of national service 
with the Experimental Warfare Division on the arctic coast, a posting many 
young men with flat feet or bandy legs had suffered before glasnost and the new 
order put a stop to such things.

He sat on the end of the bed in the room the homunculus had led him to. They 
had ascended six, or possibly seven, flights of stairs, past, he suspected, 
bigger and better rooms, but his own, perched among the battlements of the 
hotel, was not as small as he had feared, no smaller in fact than his room at 
home, where, of course, everyone lived in a small room. It was a country of 
small rooms and the festival organisers had no doubt understood this and made 
their arrangements accordingly.

He blew his nose, dabbed it dry, and looked around. There was a single bed 
with a white iron frame, white sheets and a taut green blanket. There was a 
sink, a wardrobe with no coat hangers in it, a low table with a white tin mug, 
and a telephone, large and black, an object crammed with its own importance. 
Felix stared at it for a minute, then went over and picked up the receiver.

"Yes?"said a man's voice. 

"Ah,"said Felix. "I wonder what it is, the numeral I dial for the outside." 

"The outside?" asked the man. "Already?" It was not an unkind voice. Felix 
felt it was taking an interest in him, though not, perhaps, the right sort of 
interest.

"I arrived today," he said, hoping to establish something definite. "I have an 
event. I am a guest with an event."

Out of the background hissing he heard a voice whisper: "Who is it?" 

He put down the receiver and went back to the bed. He had promised his sister 
Sophia that he would phone her, despite her having asked him not to, even 
shouting to him from the top of the stairs as he was leaving, "For God's sake 
Feli, don't be on the phone to us every 10 minutes!" Still, it would have been 
nice to have heard her voice, even if she had scolded him.

He sighed, then noticed something poking from beneath his pillow, the edge of 
a sheet of paper which he pulled out and carried to the window. It was a 
letter, in green ink, from the festival director. The letter welcomed Felix to 
the Festival of the Moving Finger which it described as "a timeless celebration 
of the literary arts, a bouillabaisse of classics and moderns, a meringue of 
high art and popular entertainment..."

Stapled to the back of the letter was a schedule and at the top of the 
schedule the first event was announced as a dinner where participants would be 
encouraged to "mingle in an informal atmosphere". The key word was Fun.

Felix checked his watch (the brass one he had inherited from mad Great Uncle 
Franz). Allowing for two hours time difference he was... Ah! Already 37 minutes 
late! Should he dress? He froze, then posed the question, mentally, to the 
genius of AJ Cronin, whose opinion in such a matter could be entirely trusted. 
The reply was unequivocal. Of course he must dress!

Luckily, he had at the last moment squeezed in his old dinner jacket, the one 
he used to wear waiting tables at the Leopold IV Cafe in Victory Square during 
his lean years (years, it should be said, very little leaner than the ones he 
now endured). In a frantic rush he stripped to vest and pants, dressed, combed 
his beard, dabbed water on to the rust spots on his lapels, and hurried out of 
the room, descending six, possibly seven flights of stairs, turning left or 
right entirely according to intuition, and at last bursting breathlessly 
through a door twice his own height into the hotel dining room.

All down the length of the room, an enormous room, a hall, were long refectory 
tables with long wooden benches. There were strip-lights overhead, some of them 
flickering; and screwed into a recess on the end wall, a television, 
broadcasting, without sound, some manner of quiz show.

Felix bowed, though there was almost no one to bow to. In the far corner he 
recognised his intimidating travelling companion from the plane. She was sat on 
her own, cutting a lettuce leaf into tiny portions. The other guests were 
gathered at a table in the middle of the hall. On one side were the two women 
who had been arguing by the fire when he first arrived, the short one with the 
big eyes and the other, the witch woman who had been having trouble with her 
friend Mr Mackenzie. Opposite them were two more women, young, with something 
of a family likeness to them. Felix, whose eyes had been weakened by his trade, 
could not quite read the laminated name tags pinned to their bodices, but one 
was an "E" somebody and the other an "A". The "E", a bold-looking creature with 
a hectic complexion, was perched on the knee of a man with hair like the 
springs of a ruined bed, who bounced her up and down and sang in a loud, 
lilting voice "That's me all right! A young dog if ever there was!"

The young woman giggled but she looked as if she were bored with the game. 
Seeing Felix she flashed him a smile and he bowed again, a little too low this 
time, so that for a moment the world shimmered the same blue as his new pyjamas.

A hand gripped his elbow. A rough looking fellow in a yellow cap, a cousin of 
the homunculus perhaps, led him to an uninhabited bench. Obviously it was much 
later than he had thought. Had he underestimated the time difference? Time 
present, time past etc. He hoped very much there would still be some soup.

To cover his embarrassment he began to watch the silent television, imagining 
the quizmaster's questions and imagining they were of a literary character and 
exactly the questions (who wrote Small World? In the name R Tremain, what does 
the initial R stand for?) he would have the answers to. Very soon he was 
several points ahead of the other contestants but his concentration was 
shattered by a terrible scream. Turning sharply, Felix was amazed to see Mrs 
Wolf standing on her bench, a long white trembling finger pointing to the floor.

"A rat!" she cried, doing a little jig of distress. "A rat as big... as big 
as... as big as an elephant!"

Everyone else now, with the exception of Felix, scrambled on to the benches, 
and so readily it was hard not to believe that this had happened before, often.

 "Big as an ele-phant!" sang the man with the wild hair. 

"Big as an elephant, black as sacking ..." He took a long drink from a large 
brown bottle, belched and said "Send for Georgey-boy! George'll shoot it!"

"Oh yes!" chimed the others, beginning to enjoy themselves. "George'll shoot 
it! We'll make him shoot it!"

Tugging at the wings of his bow tie, Felix thought it time to stand on his own 
bench. He must, at all costs, avoid looking as if he had never attended a 
literary festival before. And what a moment it was! What scope for disaster! A 
great British writer, possibly with a rifle, was about to make his entrance, a 
writer who he, Felix Mondazy, had foolishly imagined to be dead for 50 years! 
He ransacked his head for something historical to say, and might have thought 
of something, a really memorable salute, had he not, at this critical juncture, 
been distracted by the young woman with the hectic complexion, Miss "E", who, 
across the empty tables, was plainly mouthing to him the word "Later!"

A blue tide flooded the translator's weary brain. "Champagne!" he roared, 
waving his arms wildly. Everyone stared. The angels of gravity abandoned him. 
Felix began to fall.

Â· The Moving Finger continues tomorrow. The Guardian Hay Festival 2002 runs to 
June 9. For full programme details and tickets please visitwww.hayfestival.co.uk
 <> or call 01497 821 217.
 