
It is the publicly stated opinion of new Arizona Diamondbacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-diamondbacks> general manager Dave 
Stewart that he is running one of the only True Baseball Teams in the business.

Stewart was asked on Tuesday 
<http://www.azcentral.com/story/sports/mlb/diamondbacks/2015/01/13/diamondbacks-still-interested-james-shields-despite-tight-budget/21696949/>
 by Nick Piecoro of AZCentral.com about his team’s interest in free agent 
pitcher James Shields, to which Stewart responded that the Diamondbacks would 
love to have Shields on the roster next year and for years to come. His sales 
pitch, however, requires a bit of unpacking:

“I think James is a throwback guy by the way he goes about his business and 
the innings he pitches,” Stewart said. “I think the fact that Tony [La Russa] 
is here and that we have more baseball people – he probably sees us as a true 
baseball team vs some of the other teams out here that are geared more toward 
analytics and those type of things.

We will ignore for the moment that La Russa spent much of his early managerial 
career being derided and viewed skeptically for not being “baseball people,” 
given his law degree and his frequent experimentation and innovation with 
bullpen roles and batting orders. We will ignore for the moment that this seems 
to be a not-particularly-veiled shot at the new management of the Los Angeles 
Dodgers, who hired new general manager Andrew Friedman away from the Tampa Bay 
Rays – Friedman being a much-lionized executive-hero on the pages of baseball 
blogs across the nation for his analytical approach to the game, the principles 
of which he learned during his days in the New York finance sector. We will 
ignore for the moment that, as those blogs have pointed out, there is not a 
single team in the industry at the moment that does not use analytics of some 
sort --the Arizona Diamondbacks included 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/11/18/ed-lewis-a-former-veterinarian-is-the-diamondbacks-new-director-of-analytics/19229543/>
.

Because Stewart has a point.

It’s a very narrow point, communicated very broadly, and it is addressed 
specifically to Shields and pitchers like Shields. One of the primary spaces 
that baseball analytics has encroached upon over the last decade or so is the 
workload of the major league starting pitcher, and the primary fruit of that 
labor has been an occasionally monomaniacal obsession with pitch counts and 
innings limits.

This has shown up in a variety of ways, the two most famous being pitcher 
abuse points <http://www.baseballprospectus.com/article.php?articleid=148>, an 
early attempt to quantify how abused a pitcher’s arm was by his yearly workload 
(some of the problems with PAP are discussedhere 
<http://www.baseballthinkfactory.org/primate_studies/discussion/forman_2001-03-07_0>
) and the so-called “Verducci Effect” proposed by sportswriter Tom Verducci, 
which essentially held that pitchers 25 years of age or younger should not see 
an increase of workload greater than 30 innings over their previous year, or 
they risk serious injury. The Verducci Effect isdemonstrably unsupported 
<http://www.baseballprospectus.com/article.php?articleid=19497> by actual data.

It’s important to note that both of these flawed models are, in their 
conception, intended for young, developing arms – not the fully established 
arms of major league veterans, and certainly not the arm of Shields, a 
workhorse starter who has thrown over 200 innings each of the past eight 
seasons. This does not mean the underlying principles are entirely without 
merit, of course, but neither has it stopped fans and public-facing analysts 
from applying the lessons of this research (the “100 pitches per start” dictum, 
especially) liberally and without the nuance that always accompanied it: these 
are not one-size-fit-all declarations.

Nowhere recently was this on display more than the chatter surrounding San 
Francisco Giants ace Madison Bumgarner. Bumgarner started games one and five of 
the World Series against the Kansas City Royals, the latter being a complete 
game shutout, throwing 106 and 117 pitches in those starts respectively – and 
then was used out of the pen to close out game seven two days later. The talk 
during game five was especially revealing – mounting worry with each pitch 
Bumgarner threw over 100, as reporters and fans alike wondered if, or indeed 
when, he was going to come out to save his arm. Never mind that Bumgarner was 
dominant; never mind that his delivery was still clean and easy – he was over 
100 pitches, and there was nebulous future baseball to think of. The Giants, of 
course, werehaving none of that 
<http://m.giants.mlb.com/news/article/100046014/giants-were-prepared-to-use-pen-however-necessary>
: “I wasn’t thinking about finishing the game or how many innings I was going 
to go or pitch count,” Bumgarner said. “I was just wanting to get outs.”

“In fact,” Giants manager Bruce Bochy said, “I was staying away from him every 
inning, because I was hoping he wouldn’t go, ‘I’m starting to get a little 
tired.’ There’s no way I would have taken him out unless he would have told me 
that. We just got on his horse and rode it.”

That attitude, right there, is what Stewart appears to be trying to promote 
the Diamondbacks as having: absolute trust in the on-the-field staff and the 
pitcher to work together in establishing and realizing their limits, and then 
doing what is best for the team to win ballgames. And honestly, that’s a very 
good attitude for a team to have.

Is this also a bit deceptive on Stewart’s part? Yes. Perhaps more than a bit. 
Hands on, individualized approaches and modern analytics are not mutually 
exclusive things. While the effects of front office analysis on baseball 
operations varies significantly from team to team, there aren’t any clubs that 
enforce the policy that Stewart is implying exists in contrast to his own – a 
caricature of management where a pitcher is lifted after his 100th pitch 
regardless of context or game situation. Even on the clubs strictest about 
pitch count, there are always exceptions made for context, especially for guys 
like Shields.

But the reason Stewart, a former agent, is framing the conversation so 
unreasonably is probably the same reason he was having it with a reporter, not 
with Shields’s agent – because he wants Shields to sign with Arizona for its 
culture, and he likely hopes to get him to do so for less money than his agent 
might negotiate without his client stating preferences. The most effective, 
tactful way of communicating that? Just happen to talk about how great things 
would be for Shields in Arizona to the beat guys, say something inflammatory 
that might appeal to Shields to get it in the national news, and then hope the 
guy is keeping tabs on his own free agency.

So despite whatever truly-felt disdain Stewart may have for modern analytics, 
it’s unlikely this is a signal of some grand policy reversal in Arizona, or 
that it’s the first shot in a sustained barrage against the very concept of 
sabermetrics by the new Diamondbacks GM. It’s much more plausible that it’s 
just the most public move in a negotiating process that’s still ongoing.

Good luck to Stewart on that; I don’t think there’s a single suitor for 
Shields’s services who wouldn’t give him free rein to pitch to his fullest and 
decide when he’s had enough – the ability to handle a heavy workload in a 
dependable fashion is, after all, the primary attraction of Shields as a 
pitcher. But considering that two of the other teams Shields has been most 
publicly connected to are theColorado Rockies 
<http://www.purplerow.com/2015/1/12/7531581/monday-rockpile-did-the-rockies-make-an-offer-to-james-shields-signs>
 andMiami Marlins 
<http://www.fishstripes.com/2015/1/5/7492231/james-shields-rumors-marlins> – 
and considering the role that the Cubs’ new culture and commitment to winning 
played in the signing of ace Jon Lester – trying to position the Diamondbacks 
as a welcoming family of like-minded true baseball men is an entirely 
understandable strategy.

After all, it’s not important to Stewart whether you or I think the 
Diamondbacks are the only TrueBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> Team remaining in the league. He 
might sound like he’s talking to us, but he’s really talking to Shields. And 
right or wrong, all he wants is for Shields to think that he’s got a point – 
and to start thinking seriously about Arizona.
 