
With a target of 33% reduction in energy consumption by 2015, the Environment 
Agency <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment-agency> decided its 
best bet was to combine two approaches – using some very smart technology, and 
applying some easy-to-understand rules.

It started this process from a good place: by installing good insulation in 
its buildings, optimising boiler times, fitting energy efficient lighting, 
solar panels, solar thermal and biomass boilers, the organisation cut its 
energy consumption by 18% by the end of the 2009-10 financial year from a 
baseline set two years before.

But when the agency set itself the challenging 2015 target, it realised it 
would need to go beyond standard technology but to also make some simple, but 
fundamental changes, to its operating procedures.

The technical solution it chose was voltage optimisation. Now installed in 40 
buildings, this technology carefully reduces incoming electricity supply to 220 
volts, saving energy while allowing all equipment to function normally.

The technology has saved an average of around 8% on energy consumption, with 
some buildings achieving even higher cuts of up to 17%.

The second initiative was labelled "keeping it warm; keeping it simple". A new 
rule has been imposed which means that now none of the agency's buildings is 
heated to more than 19C in winter, or cooled below 26C in summer – a far 
tougher regime than many organisations have set.

In one location, the new rules, combined with the fitting of a new boiler, has 
cut gas use by 34%.

Implementing the two solutions has inevitably involved challenges. Installing 
voltage optimisation in dozens of buildings – many of which have to operate 
24-hour emergency systems like flood warning – meant the roll out had to be 
managed carefully, and allowing each building to be shut down for 12 hours 
while the technology was being fitted.

Staff also worked overtime to make sure disruption was kept to a minimum.

The agency has had to explain new rules on ambient temperature carefully as it 
recognised that not all staff feel the cold or heat in the same way. But 
instead of issuing fan heaters to staff complaining of feeling cold, it has 
made warm fleeces available.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 