
Not too long ago, I was spoon-feeding my nephew baby porridge, when I 
overheard a piece on the breakfast news about libraries. My ears perked up. 
Like every author, I feel a seeing-red-rage rise up inside me each time I hear 
about the library cuts.

I looked up. A spokesperson from the Institute of Economic Affairs began their 
spiel.

Jackie Morris: love for libraries – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/feb/06/jackie-morris-national-libraries-day>
I gave my nephew another a spoonful of porridge.

I listened.

I missed my nephew’s mouth with the spoon.

I started making outrage-noises; they sounded not unlike a snorting pig mixed 
up with a pot of boiling water.

My nephew grabbed his porridge spoon.

I grabbed my laptop and started typing out the words that I was hearing. They 
seemed so ludicrous that I thought I’d heard them wrong.

Why we're occupying the Carnegie library in London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/08/occupying-the-carnegie-library-in-london>
Your average library doesn’t come close to having as much information as the 
Internet.

And coffee shops have the internet.

We don’t need libraries anymore - you can books online instead for literally 
pennies!

 My nephew covered himself in porridge: eyebrows, nose, most of forehead, a 
lot of his fluffy hair too.

 The breakfast news slid onto its next story, in that compartmentalizing way 
it has, and we were left reeling, porridge-splattered and screaming.

 There has been so much written already about the power of libraries, the need 
for them, the magic that so many of us have found within their walls, that I 
won’t repeat that here. Go read what Cathy Cassidy wrote about them on National 
Libraries Day or any of the articles by Malorie Blackman or SF Said’s Twitter 
account.

Cathy Cassidy: we must all speak up for libraries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/05/speak-up-national-libraries-day-cathy-cassidy>
 But that was what I then started stuttering to my now-encrusted nephew. I 
told him how important they were, how they were for everyone.

 EVERYONE, I annunciated. I mean that, I told him. Everyone. Just think about 
it, I said. That’s you, me, your parents, your grandparents, the lads that live 
next door who jump over the garden fence when they get home late, the staff at 
the post office who always smile at you, the girl with the green hair who 
helped us on the bus when your pushchair fell over. Everyone you have ever met. 
And all the people that you have not yet met. All are welcome.

I told him how, growing up, his Mum and I had spent a huge chunk of our 
teendom in our local one. We didn’t have any pennies back then and you know 
what, we didn’t need a single one either.

What libraries do for us – and me | Malorie Blackman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/22/what-libraries-do-for-childrens-literacy>
 I remember those days so clearly. My sister and I burrowing into shelves as 
though we were mining for gold, dreaming about the kind of life that we wanted 
to lead, the jobs we wanted to do, the kind of people that we wanted to be. 
Each book was so much more than the paper it was printed on; they were doors, 
possible pathways into our future, and by just being there in the library, we 
had all the keys.

 My nephew listened silently with an air of almost solemnity, although this 
might have been because I had started feeding him again.

 What I really wanted was something to do with this outrage but I also wanted 
to understand how a person really felt this. How did someone really believe 
that the internet and coffee shops were a replacement for libraries? Could they 
really believe that affording to buy books online was a good substitute? Or 
were they just giving an opposite view, putting on a show, a black to a white, 
to make an annoying bit of telly?

 It made me wonder if this person had ever been into a public library or had 
ever needed one. It seemed that they did not. But could they not imagine 
someone who did? Could they not imagine someone who had not lived their life?

Libraries and schools need free author visits, so I set up YA Shot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/25/libraries-free-author-visits-ya-shot>
A few weeks later, visiting my nephew again, I took him to his local library 
and we registered for his library card, just a few weeks shy of his first 
birthday. It felt like the most important thing that we had done together since 
he arrived in the world. It was a priceless gift I was passing onto him. For 
now, we would enjoy reading through the various ‘That’s not my 
Meerkat/Squirrel/Cow’ titles but one day, when he became a teenager himself, 
there’s a place he can go to find himself, at a time when he’s working out who 
on earth he actually is.

In October 2016, I’m proud to be part of YA Sho <http://www.yashot.co.uk/>t, a 
festival whose existence funds a libraries-schools programme of free author 
events. They will all be hosted in libraries because we want to give all the 
young people who are part of it, the same gift that I gave my nephew that day.


 And we hope that should they ever need it, they will find the doors are still 
open.

All this month (June 2016), I will be visiting a different library every day 
and writing about who I meet, what I see and what I learn. I’ll be tweeting (
@bookhorse <https://twitter.com/bookhorse>) and instragramming about it 
(@iambookhorse) using #30days30libraries so hope you find me there!

Polly Ho-Yen’s The Boy In The Tower 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-tower-270751.html> is available to 
buy from the Guardian bookshop. 

YAShot is a one-day YA and children’s literature festival in Uxbridge, London 
on 22 October that hosts 72 top uk authors and 12 top book-bloggers and 
bloggers in a programme of over 35 panel, in conversation and workshop events. 
Ticket sales to the day raise the money to run a programme of up to 35 free 
author events at local libraries, who then invite in local schools to inspire a 
love of reading, a passion for creative writing and encourage aspirations to 
careers in the Arts. Full info and tickets are available via our website:
www.yashot.co.uk <http://www.yashot.co.uk/>
 