
The war on Libya produced a strange effect in British politics. The majority 
of the public opposed the war, but very little of this opposition was expressed 
on the streets. Nor is the possibility of intervention inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> producing sizeable protests as yet.

The first and most obvious reason for this abstention is that behind a general 
scepticism about war lies a more conflicted sentiment, as people overwhelmingly 
sympathise with the democratic uprisings in both Syria and Libya. In a 
situation like this, the ideological relics of "humanitarian intervention" can 
be reactivated, as they were when the government packaged its bombing ofLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> as a limited venture in support of 
human rights. But this is not the only factor. In the US, the election of 
Barack Obama took tens of thousands of Democrat-supporting activists off the 
streets. It would be mistaken to discount an extension of this effect to the 
UK. The stabilisation of the occupation of Iraq and the subsequent withdrawal 
of troops has also contributed.

Perhaps the government would like to believe that this reflects a death spiral 
for the anti-war movement. But there is a much more interesting story to be 
had. It is absolutely true that the anti-war movement on both sides of the 
Atlantic has been in abeyance in recent years. Yet, the fact that opinion was 
so against intervention in Libya is a product of the anti-war movement, its 
social depth and durability. And while the situation created by the Middle East 
revolutions has raised critical debates among anti-war campaigners, these 
issues are not entirely new. It would be far from the first time that the US 
military has been deployed ostensibly on the side of a revolutionary movement – 
a tradition that goes back to theSpanish-American war 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish%E2%80%93American_War>. Ironically, one of 
the best retorts to such posturing was supplied by the founder of "liberal 
internationalism", Woodrow Wilson, on the occasion of US intervention into the 
Mexican revolution: "I challenge you,"he said 
<http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1499&dat=19140521&id=AmAxAAAAIBAJ&sjid=xiAEAAAAIBAJ&pg=6243,2193307>
, "to cite me an instance in all the history of the world where liberty was 
handed down from above. Liberty is always attained by the forces working from 
below, underneath."

Indeed, while researching the history of anti-imperialist movements in the US, 
I found that many of the same strategic issues affecting the anti-war movement 
today have consistently reappeared. From this historical perspective, it is 
easier to see why it is wrong to write off the anti-war movement.

To help the debate about where to go from here, I would submit three broad 
strategic arguments. The first is that one has to evaluate the possibilities 
for a movement in reference not just to the immediate issue involved, but to 
the whole social formation and its antagonisms. So, for example, one of the 
main reasons why the Libyan intervention did not produce a movement in 
opposition is because of the relative brevity of the war, and the comparatively 
low-key nature of the bombing. Yet it would be extremely naive to think that 
every war could be as brief and inexpensive for those prosecuting it, or that 
public acquiescence would follow.

The current global situation is characterised by deep, "organic crisis". 
Multiple problems at various levels of the system – recession, phone hacking, 
EU crisis, the riots, etc – are combined in a single, prolonged convulsion. The 
result is that public passivity cannot be taken for granted: one crisis, and 
the movement it generates, is likely to flow into others. For example,Israel's 
2009 assault on Gaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/04/israel-assault-troops-gaza> 
provoked very large, militant protests. It sparked a wave of student 
occupations, itself a tributary of thestudent protests in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/nov/10/students-streets-protest-tuition-fees>
. This is historically typical. Social movements tend to be mutually 
reinforcing, the tactics learned in one cause quickly redeployed in another 
context. The classic instance is the role of the civil rights struggle in 
preparing the ground for the anti-Vietnam war movement.

Second, these struggles are not just won or lost in the cut and thrust of 
tactical manoeuvres. There are valid debates, partly raised by the successes of 
the Occupy movement, over how much emphasis to place on disruptive action, and 
how much on communicative action. This is a good argument to have as long as 
tactics aren't fetishised. What is important is the strategic orientation that 
these tactical repertoires are embedded in.

Third, anti-war activism is a long game, its veterans often lasting through 
several cycles of upsurge and dissipation. States certainly take the long view, 
working hard to prepare the political, cultural and ideological terrain for 
war. To take one example, in the runup to the1991 Gulf war 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/2754103.stm> much of the US media 
began to regurgitate long-standing rightist claims that Vietnam veterans were 
spat on by anti-war activists. So successful was this campaign that many 
anti-war activists who were interviewed actually "remembered" the abuse of 
veterans and felt compelled to distance themselves from it. This left them on 
the defensive, and the famous "yellow ribbon" campaign was a soft sell aimed at 
leveraging that advantage for the government.

Today in the UK, one can see an attempt to create a basis for pro-war 
sentiment in two ways. The first is the low-key revival of "humanitarian 
intervention" among some liberals. The second, perhaps more important in the 
long run, is the investment by the Ministry of Defence in implanting the 
military into the daily life of communities, as a popular institution. The 
Defence Schools Initiative was one example of this. Arguably, the phenomenon of 
theMilitary Wives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/20/the-choir-military-wives-reality-tv>
, supported by the MoD, is another. The specifics in each case vary, but the 
constant factor is that the popular "common sense" has to be worked on and 
constructed over time.

This means that even where there are not mass protests, there are still things 
to do. At moments like this, there is a premium not just on preparing for 
future action, and sustained ideological work, but above all on analysis and 
open debate. The reason why this is so crucial is because of the conflicted 
sentiment I mentioned earlier. People sympathetic to the uprisings, but also 
sceptical of war, are looking to the anti-war movement for a clear analysis and 
direction. Amid a certain fragmentation of opinion on Libya and Syria, the 
centre of gravity on the left seems to favour something like the following 
"line": the democratic revolutions in the Middle East are overwhelmingly a 
positive phenomenon, fatally weakening a chain of pro-US dictatorships; but 
interventions led by the US, Britain and France, whether in Yemen or Libya, or 
indirectly in Bahrain, constitute attempts to contain this process and must be 
opposed. However, there are important differences of emphasis and analysis 
within that, which are grounds for urgent debate. For, how one evaluates Libya 
or Syria today will shape how one understands and acts on future wars – not to 
mention how many people will be willing to listen.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/uk-edition>
 