
James Hamblin, senior editor of the Atlantic, recently joined the unwashed 
masses. As part of his series If Our Bodies Could Talk, Hamblin, a relatively 
sane-looking man, took on ano-showering  
<http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2016/06/i-stopped-showering-and-life-continued/486314/>
challenge to examine the effect of overcleansing the body. He reduced the 
number of showers he took and eliminated shampoo and soap when he did.

In doing so, he discovered what thousands of others have: the more we 
fervently try to clean ourselves with soaps, body washes, and those silly 
little body poufs, the harder our skin works to restore equilibrium, cueing us 
to begin the whole bewildering process again. Showering strips the skin of its 
own oil and bacteria – which, many would argue, is the wholepoint of showering 
– but apparently this sometimes works a little too well, especially when you 
add hot water and cleansing products to the mix.

How to throw an eco-friendly party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/24/eco-friendly-ideas-party-supplies-summer-invites-barbecue-drinks-recipes>
You know that feeling after a shower when you feel like you’re stuck in a skin 
suit two sizes too small? That’s because much of your skin’s natural moisture 
has been washed down the drain. Additionally, our skin, much like our gut, 
plays host to millions of beneficial bacteria. Showering destroys these happy 
bacterial colonies; they’re completely wiped out by all of our frequent rubbing 
and scrubbing. And when the bacteria washed off by soap repopulate, they tend 
to favour microbes which produce an odor – yes, too-frequent showering may 
actually make you smellmore. When you stop showering and using soap, however, 
your skin goes through an initial (likely gross) adjustment period, after which 
the skin typically restores balance, oil production slows, and healthy bacteria 
flourish.

After everything was said and done, Hamblin realised what other 
no-soap/no-shower devotees have known for years: that the human body, 
functioning on its own, is actually quite lovely.

It’s not just scent or aesthetics, either – although dermatologists 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-3279422/Why-showering-soap-HARMING-health-Chemicals-strip-away-bacteria-free-acne-eczema-expert-claims.html>
 suggest that slowing down on soap use can improve acne and eczema. Reducing 
the frequency of showers (and the number of cleansing products used) has very 
real implications for our environment. The average shower lasts seven minutes 
and uses 65 litres of water.

That’s 65 litres of clean, potable water that we’re infusing with suds and 
washing down the drain each and every day – sometimes more than once.

The vital importance of clean water is becoming harder and harder to ignore, 
as California enters another summer gripped by drought. It’s becoming clear 
that clean water is one of the world’s most valuable commodities, and one that 
will soon be in short supply. Add in the environmental toll of all those body 
wash bottles, and you’ve got yourself a handful of very compelling reasons to 
let your body go au naturel.

Inequality of environmentalism: is green movement exclusionary by nature?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/26/environmentalism-inequality-farmers-market-go-green>
If this whole thing is giving you the heebie-jeebies as you recall the last 
time you were pressed cheek to jowl with those who evidentlyalready skimp on 
the showers – and have clearly not reached the hallowed scent-free stage yet – 
relax. Many cleansing-reduction enthusiasts still use deodorant if they find it 
necessary (everyone’s natural scent varies in, er, intensity, and can be 
affected by a host of factors including diet, hydration and exercise) and 
hand-washing with soap is still recommended as a vital way cut down on the 
spread of infectious diseases.

You don’t need to go cold turkey, as Hamblin did, but in between thrice-daily 
disinfecting sessions and swearing off showers altogether there lies room for 
our familiar, simple edits.Reduce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/15/secret-to-spring-cleaning-better-mental-health>
. Skip a few showers, put down the soap, and let those lovely little bacteria 
biomes flourish a little, would you?

 