
'We're all in this together" sounds more hollow the more you tap it. Back in 
March, the chancellor George Osborne announced that passengers on private jets 
would have to pay the same air passenger duty (APD) the rest of us do. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/feedarticle/9558051> "The wealthiest should not 
escape the tax the ordinary holidaymaker has to pay," trumpeted Osborne through 
a rolled-up copy of the Socialist Worker. Except that now Osborne has announced 
this week that the so-called "Learjet tax", expected to start next year, won't 
kick in until 2013.

Why the delay? A Treasury spokesperson says: "We had a consultation and one of 
the things that came out of it was there wasn't enough time for the industry to 
make the transition." According to the Treasury, the predicted revenue from the 
estimated 80,000 private flights is just £5m a year, and as Adam Twidell, CEO 
of PrivateFly, a booking network for private planes, points out, it will be 
difficult to collect APD from thousands of small jet companies and individuals.

Of course, we know about the benefits private jet travel affords its owners: 
no hanging around at airports, no having to sit next to poor people, and,
according to leaked UK Border Agency emails 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/nov/14/passport-checks-travellers-private-jets>
 earlier this month, sometimes no need to go through passport control.Johnny 
Depp travels by private plane 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/nov/06/johnny-depp-interview-rum-diary> so 
he can smoke; Simon Cowell says "the champagne's better". You can live in tax 
havens and commute to the UK in little over an hour, as several Monaco 
residents do. You can use them to ferry child stars to perform for you – as 
Charlotte Church revealed at the Leveson inquiry this week, she was flown to 
New York on Rupert Murdoch's private plane to sing at his wedding in 1999. 
Before January this year, jet owners didn't even have to pay VAT on their 
purchases in this country.

The extravagance of private aviation soared to new heights recently when a 
Saudi prince reportedly bought a £190m Airbus A380, and converted at a cost of 
more than £100m to include a garage, pool and concert hall. Presumably the 
Treasury's new APD shouldn't concern him too much.
 