
Here’s a true story that you’ll possibly relate to. Girl goes to school. 
Girl’s friends all wear the same ultra light, silvery pink tinted lip balm. 
Girl tries it, but winds up looking like an extra from Dawn of the Dead. 
(Please note: part-dismembered corpse was not the desired end result.) Girl is 
now scared of tinted lip balm – for ever.

But things have changed, time has passed and like everything else in beauty, 
tinted lip balms have upped their game. We’re talking high-SPF, intense colour 
saturation and multi-use balms that have anti-ageing benefits too. And, they 
aren’t just the usual “natural” tones we’ve been urged to think “suit all”. 
These are genuinely beautiful, nourishing shades that are perfect post gym, on 
a lazy weekend or just because the thought of lining your lips and 
painstakingly applying lipstick is too much of a chore to comprehend the 
morning after you’ve mainlined six espresso martinis in a row (true story, 
goodbye sleep). Enter the reimagined beauty essential – and it has come a long 
long way since your school days.

The ultimate tinted balm edit for darker skin tones
 Burt’s Bees lip balm 
Burt’s Bees Lip Shimmer in Plum, £5.99, burtsbees.co.uk 
<http://burtsbees.co.uk/>

This shimmery berry shade is supremely pretty, with more depth of colour than 
most tinted balms. And, it’s 100% natural too.

Fresh Tinted Lip Treatment SPF15 in Sugar Coral, £18


A beautiful hit of creamy, matte long-lasting peach with an SPF 15? Dreams can 
come true. This shade is flattering alternative to reds and berry shades.
Balance Me Tinted Lip Salve in Ruby Red, £12, balanceme.co.uk 
<http://balanceme.co.uk>

Take a glossy red balm, infuse it with antioxidants and add a smattering if 
finely milled golden shimmer and what do you have? The perfect night-time low 
maintenance lip colour. Done.

Lanolips Lip Ointment With Colour, SPF 15 in Sunshine £8.16, lanolips.com 
<http://lanolips.com>

All the shades of this lanolin-based balm suit darker skins, but like a beauty 
flirt, Sunshine is an easy way to give this season’s orange a try without fully 
committing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F15%2Fthe-best-tinted-lip-balms-for-darker-skin-tones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F15%2F1408099329064%2F6ddca192-1a10-4417-93c6-b23582dd1082-994x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20tinted%20lip%20balms%20for%20darker%20skin%20tones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F15%2Fthe-best-tinted-lip-balms-for-darker-skin-tones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20tinted%20lip%20balms%20for%20darker%20skin%20tones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Ffashion-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F15%2Fthe-best-tinted-lip-balms-for-darker-skin-tones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F15%2F1408099329064%2F6ddca192-1a10-4417-93c6-b23582dd1082-994x2040.jpeg>
 Maybelline Baby Lips balm 
Maybelline Babylips in Pink Punch, £2.99, Superdrug <http://superdrug.com>

Ultra-cool packaging aside, this gentle balm departs a kiss of neon pink for 
days when hardcore makeup isway too much effort.

Clarins Lip Balm Crayon in Soft Coffee, £18, Boots <http://boots.com>
Dual toned lips should be celebrated, and this reddish-brown balm blends 
beautifully on all lip tones.

Clinique Chubby Stick Intense Moisturizing Lip Colour Balm in Curviest 
Caramel, £17,Clinique <http://www.clinique.co.uk/>

Looking for a suit-all, dusky pink that suits darker skin tones? It does 
exist, and here it is.

Hurraw Black Cherry Tinted Lip Balm, £3.99

Looking for just the slightest hint of colour? This divine-smelling tinted 
vegan balm is just the ticket, departing no more than a hint of colour.

Anita is the beauty and health editor at Women’s Health
 