
Steve Waugh, the Australian cricket captain, is absolutely right: his 
conquering heroes should take the Ashes back with them to Australia. They 
deserve to. In completing a seventh successive successful Ashes campaign, they 
have cemented a period of domination unprecedented in modern times.

Waugh's team have given us a summer of fantastic cricket, scoring their runs 
at speed and with great style, and relying on a quartet of outstanding 
attacking bowlers backed up by brilliant fielding. More importantly, they have 
played the game in the right spirit, epitomised by the declaration at 
Headingley by Adam Gilchrist, standing in for Waugh for the match. While most 
captains would have batted the match to death, Gilchrist kept it pulsatingly 
alive, and the congratulations showered on Mark Butcher showed how much the 
Australians appreciated England's heroic response to the challenge. Surely none 
of the Yorkshiremen, Vikings and Elvis-lookalikes crammed into Headingley for 
the last day would deny Waugh's team their just reward?

But what exactly is it the Australians crave so desperately? The famous urn 
sits in its snug, smug niche at Lord's, its solitary splendour shrouded in near 
numinous solemnity. But a glance back at its origins suggests we have got it 
all hilariously wrong.

In 1882 Australia beat England in a nail-bitingly close match at the Oval. 
This reverse came as a shock. Despite having two of the best bowlers in the 
world, the Australians were not considered quite a match for the full England 
team containing WG Grace. The response was typically British: a joke. The 
famous spoof obituary of English cricket appeared in the Sporting Times, with 
its momentous postscript: "NB - The body will be cremated and the ashes taken 
to Australia."

Before the year was out, the Hon Ivo Bligh was off in pursuit of the 
vanquishers, leading an England team (without WG) in pursuit of glory down 
under. Travel was more leisurely then, and the enforced idleness of a sea 
voyage was a positive spur to dalliance. The Hon Ivo duly dallied, entranced by 
the beauty of one Florence Rose Morphy, companion to the wife of William John 
Clarke (another Hon), the president of the Melbourne cricket club.

Their acquaintance was renewed when Clarke invited the entire team to spend 
Christmas at his baronial pile. A knock-about game was got up on Christmas eve, 
well attended by the ladies of the cricket court, including the incomparable 
Florence. And it was this atmosphere, reminiscent perhaps of Love's Labour's 
Lost, that produced the urn and its companion piece, the velvet bag emblazoned 
with the victor's bays.

There's a certain Cluedo-like element to the story. The initial urn was made 
of wood; the current one is pottery, for instance, and there are some who claim 
it all happened later somewhere else. But the most likely sequence of events is 
that Lady Clarke burnt a bail and presented the ashes, along with some creaking 
doggerel, to the visiting English aristocrat, who had clearly conquered all 
hearts.

Bligh went home with his bride, the charming keepsake went on to his 
mantelpiece and little more was thought about the Ashes for some time. WG Grace 
never referred to them at all. He must have known the story, but obviously 
considered the whole thing a country-house frivolity. He simply got on with the 
job of ensuring English victory for eight successive campaigns.

It was Plum - later Sir Pelham - Warner who talked so devoutly of packing the 
Ashes in his baggage when he won the series of 1903-4. But of course, he did no 
such thing. They were still parked on Ivo Bligh's mantelpiece. When Bligh, the 
eighth Earl of Darnley as he was by then, died in 1927, his widow gave the urn 
and the bag to the MCC, and they were placed in the memorial gallery where they 
have remained ever since. Well, almost. As a very special favour, the 
Australians were allowed a glimpse of the Ashes when Prince Charles took them 
with him as a contribution to the bicentenary celebrations.

The status implicitly conferred of holy relic so sacred it can only be removed 
from the high altar by royal hands is as unfortunate as it is ludicrous. What 
started as a very English joke has turned into something equally typical: an 
occasion for English snootiness.

While there's no doubting the MCC's title to the urn, it is surely time for a 
new and more generous perspective on who should hold it. Steve Waugh is right. 
The Ashes should return to Australia. Anything else simply wouldn't be cricket.

Â• Simon Rae's It's Not Cricket: Skulduggering, Sharp Practice and Downright 
Cheating in the Noble Game will be published by Faber in the autumn

<A HREF="mailto:comment@theguardian.com".comment@theguardian.com
 