
1) Marv Marinovich

 There are many stories of pushy, obsessive, overbearing sports parents who 
manipulate their child’s athletic lives and then there is Marv Marinovich. At a 
time when sports training camps, travel teams and nutritionists weren’t almost 
mandatory for blooming young sports stars he was all of these things for his 
son Todd. Perhaps unfairly, he has become the template for the modern, 
overzealous athlete father.

 Marv Marinovich, you see, had a dream. He was going to take his son Todd and 
make him the perfect quarterback. Marv was a lineman and captain on USC’s 1962 
national championship team and hoped he could deliver the player who would lead 
his alma mater to another title in the late 1980s. He forbade Todd from eating 
sweets, transferred the rigorous training methods he used as a strength coach 
for the NFL’s Oakland Raiders and set about molding his son into a star.

When Sports Illustrated’s Douglas Looney encountered the Marinovich family in 
1988 he called Todd“the first test tube quarterback” 
<http://www.si.com/vault/1988/02/22/117185/bred-to-be-a-superstar-todd-marinovich-was-groomed-from-infancy-to-be-a-top-notch-quarterback>
. After he described Marv’s methods, others preferred the nickname “Robo QB”. 
The name stuck. But Marv was determined to build Todd to win. He had his boy 
doing pushups before he could walk and dragged him along to teams of 
specialists who fine-tuned his flexibility, endurance, vision and psychology 
among other things. After Looney’s story came out, people were stunned. No one 
had heard of parents doing such things. At least not outside of the Soviet bloc.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEBYcDcJUn4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEBYcDcJUn4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKEBYcDcJUn4&media=>
Predictably, Todd did not become the perfect quarterback. He did go to USC 
like his father and started at quarterback as a freshman, winning the Rose 
Bowl. Two years later, he was arrested for cocaine possession and seemed to 
crumble under the pressure of being Robo QB. A brief NFL career with the 
Raiders fell apart too. He kicked around the Canadian Football League and had 
repeated drug problems. His relationship with his father frayed. Eventually, in 
his late 30s Todd found a new passion. Painting.

Later in life Marv and Todd have bonded in a way never imaginable in the 
1990s. They are closer than they ever were in those wild days. Marv has 
embraced Todd’s artwork and both seem better for it.A 30 For 30 on their 
relationship <https://vimeo.com/90829218> ends with father and son at one of 
Todd’s art shows, with a sculpture the two had done together, connected at last 
by something other than the drive to make the next great football player.

2) Carl and Bonnie Lindros

 Who knows how great Eric Lindros could have been as a hockey player. For 
years he was awfully good – tall, strong and bruising with a beautiful shot – 
he might have been one of the best ever if concussions hadn’t cut his career 
short. But his biggest problem might have been the parents who tried to manage 
every aspect of his career, relentlessly hounding grizzled hockey men into 
bending to their will.

Lindros biographer Daniel Poulin once told the Los Angeles Times 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1993-04-11/magazine/tm-21436_1_eric-lindros>: “The 
problem with the Lindroses is that they think they are above the rules and 
regulations and laws affecting the rest of us.” No line might have summed up 
the relationship between Lindros’s parents and their son’s career than that. 
Not content to simply manipulate their son’s life from the background like most 
aggressive parents, they also ran it in public. Carl, the father, was Eric’s 
agent. Bonnie was the voice in the background bludgeoning reporters, team 
executives and seemingly anyone else who crossed her son’s path. The same Los 
Angeles Times story tells of how she introduced herself to a reporter covering 
Eric’s first NHL team the Philadelphia Flyers, by saying men were jealous of 
her hockey knowledge. “Everytime I talk to male reporters they look between 
their legs after they’re finished,” she boasted.

 By then hockey was well aware of Lindros’s parents. When he was 16 and 
eligible to be drafted to the juniors Ontario Hockey League they told Sault St 
Marie, the team with the No1 pick, to pass on their son. Sault St Marie’s 
general manager Angelo Bumbacco ignored them, however, eventually trading 
Lindros to Oshawa. In 1991 they demanded the same of the Quebec Nordiques, who 
held the NHL’s top choice. Quebec traded Lindros to Philadelphia, receiving 
pieces of a eventual Stanley Cup champion to placate Lindros’s parents.

“Looking back, the greatest thing that could ever happened to Eric Lindros was 
coming to play in Sault St Marie, just to get the hell away from those 
parents,” Bumbaccolater said. 
<http://espn.go.com/columns/wojnarowski/1241108.html> “It would’ve been like 
when you send a kid away to university to give him a chance a chance to grow 
up. I’ll tell you: that kid has never grown up.”

While Lindros played in Philadelphia, his parents accused the team of 
mismanaging his concussions and even alleged the Flyerstried to kill him 
<http://articles.philly.com/2000-06-06/sports/25600356_1_lindros-family-gordon-kirke-carl-lindros>
 when he suffered a collapsed lung. Reports surfaced that Carl and Bonnie kept 
track of which players passed the puck to their son the most and urged general 
manager Bobby Clarke to pursue players they thought they would fit with Eric. 
Eventually, he was traded to New York and retired in 2007, ridding the NHL of 
his parents forever.

3) Mike Agassi
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-pushy-parents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb530b8a81832bafea0c9324951d9812487c911d0%2F0_18_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20athletes'%20pushy%20parents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-pushy-parents%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Joy%20of%20Six%3A%20athletes%27%20pushy%20parents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-joy-of-six-athletes-pushy-parents%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb530b8a81832bafea0c9324951d9812487c911d0%2F0_18_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 A six-year old Andre Agassi (second left), with his father Mike, sister Rita 
and brother Phil in 1976. Photograph: John Russell/Getty Images 
Perhaps all you need to know about the father of Andre Agassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andre-agassi> is that he was a boxer. He was 
also an immigrant from Iran who settled in Las Vegas and longed for his 
children to have a better life. The controlled violence of boxing and the fake 
glow of Las Vegas made the perfect combination for an obsessive father.

Years later, in his autobiography, Andre wrote of his father rustling up 
matches for his son all over Las Vegas, often getting action on the contests. 
Once, Mike bet former NFL star Jim Brown $5,000 that his then nine-year-old boy 
could beat the running back in tennis. Andre won. It was good that he did 
because Mike could be intimidating.A 2002 Sports Illustrated story 
<http://www.si.com/vault/2002/06/24/8095953/the-lone-wolf-pancho-gonzalez-may-have-been-the-best-tennis-player-of-all-time-but-his-fits-of-rage-offended-almost-everyone-in-the-game-cost-him-six-marriages-and-alienated-him-from-all-but-the-last-of-his-eight>
 on Pancho Gonzales describes how Mike, working as a greeter at a Las Vegas 
casino hated Gonzalez and planned to have him killed. “He’d have the 
satisfaction of seeing the man dead,” the story said of the elder Agassi.

Mike was impossible for Andre to please. In his book, Andre wrote of how he 
won Wimbledon in 1992 only to have his father say:“You had no business losing 
that fourth set.” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/sport/tennis/my-violent-father-and-why-i-hated-tennis-agassi-opens-up-in-newbook/2009/10/29/1256405460314.html?page=2>
 At times, Andre seemed overwhelmed by tennis and looked as if he hated the 
game. Many wondered if this was because he had been pushed so hard so young. 
But eight grand slam titles prove that Mike’s demands may have been worth it.

“Maybe I was a tyrant hard and severe” he later told the Italian newspaper La 
Repubblica, in remarkslater reprinted by Tennis World 
<http://www.tennisworldusa.org/Mike-Agassi-My-son-had-to-be-necessarily-a-champion-articolo23626.html>
. “But I repeat, its better to have a father beside his son in the sport than 
his coach.”

 Fittingly, Andre would marry fellow superstar Steffi Graf whose own father, 
Peter, was even more demanding and controlling. Accused of misappropriating his 
daughter’s funds, he was eventually convicted of tax evasion and spent two 
years in prison.

4) Roy Jones Sr

Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> fathers have long been a 
world in their own; domineering, eccentric presences in their children’s lives. 
Often they are the reason their sons are great fighters and often those 
relationships are complicated and fractured as evidenced by the drama that 
unfolds between Floyd Mayweather Jr and his father before each of his fights.

Roy Jones Jr interview: 'Why be hateful to a guy you're going to make a 
fortune with?'
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/04/boxing-joecalzaghe> 
But even by boxing standards Roy Jones Sr was extreme. He built a platform in 
the back of the small farm he had in Pensacola, Florida, and loaded it with a 
heavy bag and speed bag and then he began driving his son to be the best. When 
Roy Jr was little the father woulddrop to his knees and spar with his son, 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1994-11-17/sports/sp-63896_1_roy-jones-jr> testing 
the boy’s will to fight. Other times he chased Roy Jrwith a plastic pipe 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/03/01/sports/boxing-a-boxer-s-father-who-won-t-let-go.html?pagewanted=all>
, hitting the boy hard enough to leave marks.

 Both men have said Roy Jr would flee in tears only to return the next day for 
more sparring and more smacks with the pipe. When it came time for real fights, 
Roy Sr was in his son’s corner, constantly screaming instructions.

 “Was I harder on him?” Roy Sr once told the New York Times. “Naturally. The 
reason was I knew what it was going to take. I asked Roy: ‘What do you want to 
be? A participant or a kingpin?’ He said kingpin. To be a kingpin it takes 
being hard. I made them train under pressure. Constant pressure.”

Yet by the time Roy Jr was known as the best pound-for-pound fighter in the 
world, father and son had split. Everyone said it was because Roy Sr didn’t 
know how to let up. He insisted on controlling everything about his son’s 
career – eventually that became an impediment. The father was too much. Some 
alleged that the overbearing Roy Sr wasdamaging his son’s career. 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1994-11-17/sports/sp-63896_1_roy-jones-jr> 

 Then again, Roy Jr, is still fighting at 46 recently became a Russian citizen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/27/roy-jones-jr-officially-becomes-russian-citizen-with-moscow-passport-ceremony>
, how much damage could Roy Sr do that Roy Jr hasn’t inflicted on himself?

5) Jim Pierce

Women’s tennis is filled with overbearing fathers who have manipulated their 
daughters’ careers. Who can forget Stefano Capriati pushing his 14-year-old 
daughter Jennifer into the pro circuit because he wanted her to maximize the 
best years of her career? Or how about Damir Dokic, father of Jelena, who 
threatened the Australian ambassador to Belgradewith a hand grenade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/23/wimbledon-2011-parents-dokic-tomic>
 and was kicked out of several tournaments for various physical and verbal 
abuses?

But the American father of French star Mary Pierce might have been the worst 
of the bunch. He started coaching his daughter when she showed an interest in 
tennis at a young age and soon demanded perfection, exploding when it didn’t 
come. The incidents of an outraged Jim Pierce screaming at his daughter became 
legend around the tennis circuit. She left the court in tears during a match at 
the 1992 Olympics as he screamed at her from the stands. He slapped her for 
losing matches, attacked her cousin for laughing with her after a match and 
threatened to kill her. He once “encouraged” Mary by yelling“kill the bitch,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/23/wimbledon-2011-parents-dokic-tomic>
 from the stands during a match.

“You never know what he is capable of,” she told Sports Illustrated. 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1993-08-19/sports/sp-25269_1_mary-pierce>“One 
reason I hesitated to break away is that you just don’t know what he might do.”

In 1993 the Women’s Tennis Council banned Jim from attending tournaments. 
<http://www.si.com/vault/1993/08/23/129145/persona-non-grata-because-of-his-abuse-of-his-daughter-mary-jim-pierce-isnt-welcome-on-the-tour>
 Mary was given a bodyguard and her father’s picture was given to guards and 
posted in ticket booths at tennis stadiums. Finally rid of her father, Mary won 
the Australian and French Opens and reached four other grand slam finals.

6) The Great Santini
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D06KmezV_1ns&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D06KmezV_1ns>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D06KmezV_1ns&media=>
Bull Meechum was the literary 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Santini_(novel)> and later Hollywood 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0079239/> embodiment of a swaggering fighter pilot 
consumed with rage, determined to run over anyone in his way. In the 1979 film 
The Great Santini, Meechum (played by Robert Duvall) dominates his son Ben – a 
budding basketball star – in one-on-one games in the driveway. He taunts Ben, 
throws the ball at him and even orders him to knock out an opponent who fouled 
him in a game. In the years after the movie, many overzealous sports fathers 
would be compared to The Great Santini.

But Bull Meechum was real. His name was Don Conroy and he was the father of 
The Great Santini’s author, Pat Conroy. Pat based the novel on his own broken 
childhood. Like the fictional Ben, Pat Conroy was a basketball star who 
eventually played at The Citadel.This story about Pat and The Citadel by ESPN’s 
Wright Thompson <http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/eticket/story?page=santini> 
describes the regular beatings Pat took from his father after his high school 
games.

Nothing Pat did as a player was good enough. Don demanded more. Even when Pat 
went to college and played well his father scorned him. Thompson describes one 
incidenet when Pat scored 25 points in a game, went to see his father afterward 
expecting congratulations and instead was told how badly he played before being 
shoved to the wall. “You couldn’t hold my jock as a ballplayer,” the father 
said.

 After college, Pat extracted the ultimate revenge by writing The Great 
Santini, killing off the abusive, fictional father in a plane crash. The real 
Don was wounded by the book and worked to build new relationships with his 
children, something Pat wrote about in later years. Much like Marv Marinovich, 
he proved that not all pushy parents are irredeemable.
 