
The Office for National Statistics has reported that the unpaid economy is 
growing faster than the paid economy 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/blog/entry/unpaid-work-is-worth-so-much-to-our-economy>
. That won’t surprise anyone who is a carer or does domestic work. Or anyone 
trying to forge a career as an arts journalist or, indeed, anyone working in 
theatre. Arts graduates face alifetime of low wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/degree-graduates-low-pay-high-debt-students>
. Even those who do find paid employment in theatre often put in many more 
hours than they are contracted to.

Love your arts job? It doesn’t mean you shouldn’t be properly paid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/13/love-your-arts-job-it-doesnt-mean-you-shouldnt-be-properly-paid>
A recent Flyman column in the Stage 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/flyman-low-pay-common-gripe-least-together/>
, commenting on the top earners in 20 major funded theatre companies, made the 
point that while the salaries may seem munificent to those in the industry who 
are not artistic directors or chief executives, when set alongside the wages of 
a CEO in the private sector, a £185,000 salary for leading the National Theatre 
is not exactly generous.

But subsidised theatre is not banking, and while the Stage’s figures were 
illuminating in many ways (particularly the pay of female arts leads compared 
withtheir male counterparts 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/revealed-29k-gender-pay-gap-at-top-theatres/>
), they don’t necessarily tell the whole story. There’s staff costs to be 
considered, the low-pay contracts front-of-house staff often operate under and 
indeed the fees being paid to artists.

Most artists are not on the payroll but are contracted job by job, and just as 
the rest of the paid economy is bolstered by those (often women)doing unpaid 
work at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/12/caring-home-family-real-work>
, so the work shown in funded theatres is often underpinned by those who 
self-exploit. If the admin time involved in completing aGrants for the Arts 
application <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/applying-grants-arts> was 
accounted for, it would send the cost of applying through the funding ceilings, 
so people just wouldn’t bother. But then those shows tour to paying venues. 
Yes, the actors will be paid for that gig but it doesn’t take into account the 
unpaid work that went into creating the show and getting the gig in the first 
place. On paper everything looks hunky dory, fulfilling the safeguards put in 
place by unions and funders. The reality is rather different.

Half of theatre directors in Britain earning less than £5,000 a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/08/theatre-directors-survey-low-wages-britain>
Of course you can argue that all theatre is underfunded and those working in 
the industry are prone to self-exploitation. Many other industries undermine 
their ethics when, in times of austerity, they reward those on staff while
exploiting freelancers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/may/11/work-in-the-arts-stop-working-for-free>
 and those on contracts.National Portfolio Organisations 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/about-us/how-and-where-we-invest-public-money> 
need to take care not to offer bum deals either to companies or those employed 
to do one-off jobs.

It’s not a question of setting those in salaried positions against those who 
work as freelances. Or indeed those who work in different areas of theatre. 
Those in administration, stage management and the technical side of theatre may 
be in a position where, if they don’t like the contract, they can refuse the 
job because their skills are in demand. But that won’t be the case for many 
artists and companies in a theatre ecology over-saturated with talent, facing 
funding cuts and looking to make savings wherever they can. At the recentAll 
Tomorrow’s Theatre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/41099/to_archive/all_tomorrows_theatre> event, 
the refrain was of artists feeling they had to be grateful and not complain 
about the deals they are offered for fear of not being asked by a venue again. 
This is “performing gratitude” as Chris Goode described it. “We spend our lives 
trying not to be too demanding and it doesn’t change anything.”

The secret of theatre directing? Finding another job to pay for it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/15/theatre-directing-job-pay> 
Back in April, Bunny Christie pointed out how hard it is to make a living as a 
theatre designer 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/bunny-christie-difficult-cuts-are-harming-regional-stage-design/>
 and how budget cuts are having an adverse effect on design in regional 
theatres. In the same weekStage Directors UK argued 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/directors-unpaid-seven-weeks-per-project-new-research-reveals/>
 that in many cases directors were putting in up to seven weeks unpaid work on 
each of their projects. Get any group of independent artists and companies 
together and the decreasing fees and splits offered by funded organisations is 
a subject of conversation. It’s a pity that theI’ll Show You Mine campaign 
<http://www.artsadmin.co.uk/artsonline/198/let-s-talk-about-the-money-artsfunding>
 that initiated a public conversation around artists’ fees seems to have lost 
impetus.

Changing this situation is not going to be easy, and harder still at a time of 
arts cuts. But it can’t be right that when so much theatre highlights injustice 
and inequalities on its stages, the very means by which that work is created 
involves time and financial exploitation, immediately excluding those who 
simply cannot afford to work for little or no money.
 