
The newborn universe may have glowed with light beams moving much faster than 
they do today, according to a theory that overturns Einstein’s century-old 
claim that the speed of light is a constant.


João Magueijo, of Imperial College London, and Niayesh Afshordi, of the 
University of Waterloo in Canada, propose that light tore along at infinite 
speed at the birth of the universe when the temperature of the cosmos was a 
staggering ten thousand trillion trillion celsius.


Whether it is cricket or physics, imagined scenarios can expand the limits of 
our understanding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2016/may/29/whether-it-is-cricket-or-physics-imagined-scenarios-can-expand-the-limits-of-our-understanding>
It is a theory Magueijo has being developing since the late 1990s, but in a 
paper published on Monday he and Afshordi describe for the first time how 
scientists can finally test the controversial idea. If right, the theory would 
leave a signature on the ancient radiation left over from the big bang, the 
so-called cosmic microwave background that cosmologists have observed with 
satellites.


“We can say what the fluctuations in the early universe would have looked 
like, and these are the fluctuations that grow to form planets, stars and 
galaxies,” Afshordi told the Guardian.


The speed of light in a vacuum is considered to be one of the fundamental 
constants of nature. Thanks to Einstein’s theory of general relativity, it was 
stamped in the annals of physics more than a century ago at about 1bn km/h. But 
while general relativity is one of the cornerstones of modern physics, 
scientists know that the rules of today did not hold at the birth of the 
universe.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftheory-challenging-einsteins-view-on-speed-of-light-could-soon-be-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9d8f177f28f32606cc053d3ab72c79622a5f48%2F281_0_4052_2432%2F4052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theory%20challenging%20Einstein's%20view%20on%20speed%20of%20light%20could%20soon%20be%20tested&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftheory-challenging-einsteins-view-on-speed-of-light-could-soon-be-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theory%20challenging%20Einstein%27s%20view%20on%20speed%20of%20light%20could%20soon%20be%20tested&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ftheory-challenging-einsteins-view-on-speed-of-light-could-soon-be-tested%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d9d8f177f28f32606cc053d3ab72c79622a5f48%2F281_0_4052_2432%2F4052.jpg>
 Thanks to Einstein’s theory of general relativity, the speed of light in a 
vacuum is considered to be one of the fundamental constants of nature. 
Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
Magueijo and Afshordi came up with their theory to explain why the cosmos 
looks much the same over vast distances. To be so uniform, light rays must have 
reached every corner of the cosmos, otherwise some regions would be cooler and 
more dense than others. But even moving at 1bn km/h, light was not travelling 
fast enough to spread so far and even out the universe’s temperature 
differences.


To overcome the conundrum, cosmologists including Stephen Hawking have 
proposed a theory called inflation, in which the fledgling universe underwent 
the briefest spell of the most tremendous expansion. According to inflation, 
the temperature of the cosmos evened out before it exploded to an enormous 
size. But there is no solid proof that inflation is right, and if so, what 
sparked such a massive period of expansion, and what brought it to an end.


Magueijo and Afshordi’s theory does away with inflation and replaces it with a 
variable speed of light. According to their calculations, the heat of universe 
in its first moments was so intense that light and other particles moved at 
infinite speed. Under these conditions, light reached the most distant pockets 
of the universe and made it look as uniform as we see it today. “In our theory, 
if you go back to the early universe, there’s a temperature when everything 
becomes faster. The speed of light goes to infinity and propagates much faster 
than gravity,” Afshordi said. “It’s a phase transition in the same way that 
water turns into steam.”


New simulation could shed light on dark energy and expansion of the universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/07/new-simulation-dark-energy-expansion-of-universe-einstein>
Scientists could soon find out whether light really did outpace gravity in the 
early universe. The theory predicts a clear pattern in the density variations 
of the early universe, a feature measured by what is called the “spectral 
index”. Writing in the journalPhysical Review 
<https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.94.101301>, the 
scientists predict a very precise spectral index of 0.96478, which is close to 
the latest, though somewhat rough, measurement of 0.968.

Science can never prove the theory right. But Afshordi said that if 
measurements over the next five years shifted the spectral index away from 
their prediction, it would rule out their own theory. “If we are right then 
inflation is wrong. But the problem with inflation is that you can always fine 
tune it to fit anything you want,” he said.

David Marsh, of the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at Cambridge University, 
is not giving up on inflation yet. “The predictions of inflation developed by 
Stephen Hawking and others more than 30 years ago have been tested by 
cosmological observations and faced those tests remarkably well. Many 
scientists regard inflation as a simple and elegant explanation of the origin 
of galaxies in the universe,” he said.

And while other theories might also look promising, Marsh said there were 
elements of Afshordi and Magueijo’s that were not well understood. “It remains 
to be seen how robust the predictions are when all the theoretical issues have 
been addressed,” he said.
 