
Dear David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>

I’m writing on behalf of all British activists who fight for justice against 
dictators around the world. Your government’s decision to not punish Vladimir 
Putin and senior members of his regimefor the murder of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/litvinenko-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law>
 will put the lives of many UK activists and regular citizens at risk.

Bill Browder: the Kremlin threatened to kill me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin>
Putin and others like him look for weakness wherever they can find it. Putting 
diplomatic and business relations withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> above criminal justice and public 
safety is a sign of weakness that will surely lead to more killings on British 
soil.

The independent inquiry by Sir Robert Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/litvinenko-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law>
 leaves little doubt that the Russian secret police carried out the murder of 
Litvinenko. The Russian government approved these types of murders abroad 
against “enemies of the state” and have been carrying out assassinations ever 
since. This can only be described as state-sanctioned terrorism.


Had this attack been perpetrated by Isis or al-Qaida there would be bombing 
runs, huge intelligence operations and pledges to never let it happen again. 
However, because this was done by Putin’s Russia, the only response will be a 
strongly worded communication of disappointment.

You have argued that you can’t take more action because you need to deal with 
Russia on theissue of Syria 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2015/oct/02/russia-in-syria-what-damage-will-it-do>
. That assumes there are only two choices: doing nothing or breaking relations. 
But there are actions which would send Putin a stern message and allow you to 
continue to talk to Russia on important geopolitical issues.

The main tool you have is imposing visa sanctions and assets freezes on top 
Russian government officials who bear responsibility for the Litvinenko attack. 
This would strike at the achilles’ heel of the Putin system.


Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
While these people commit crimes at home, many of them keep their ill-gotten 
gains in London. By taking away that privilege it strikes right at the heart of 
their corrupt system and makes them pay a real price for their crimes.

This is not a hypothetical suggestion. After the torture and murder of my 
lawyer,Sergei Magnitsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
, in 2009, I worked with US congress in 2012 to pass theMagnitsky act, which 
imposed US visa sanctions and asset freezes 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/innokenty-kes-grekov/magnitsky-list-sanctions_b_5073889.html>
 on the Russians involved in his murder.

This piece of legislation was so powerful that Putin declared it his top 
foreign policy goal to stop it. As it made its way through congress, he huffed 
and puffed about how the law was going to destroy relations between the two 
countries. When it finally passed, Putin did indeed lash out bybanning the 
adoption of Russian 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/russia-united-states-adoptions-orphans-taboo-ban/26771310.html>
children by American families, but his broader threats of breaking relations 
never came to pass.

Most importantly, the Magnitsky act breathed fear into every official in 
Putin’s regime, warning them that they could be made international financial 
pariahs for their abuses in Russia. As a result, the feeling of impunity has 
been destroyed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Flitvinenko-report-punish-russia-cameron-bill-browder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ebf261fed94e283d78cd80b0fb23c06c8d4aae%2F179_185_2990_1728%2F2990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There%20is%20a%20way%20to%20punish%20Russia%20for%20Litvinenko's%20murder.%20So%20why%20not%20act%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Flitvinenko-report-punish-russia-cameron-bill-browder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%20is%20a%20way%20to%20punish%20Russia%20for%20Litvinenko%27s%20murder.%20So%20why%20not%20act%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Flitvinenko-report-punish-russia-cameron-bill-browder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ebf261fed94e283d78cd80b0fb23c06c8d4aae%2F179_185_2990_1728%2F2990.jpg>
 Marina Litvinenko holds a copy of the inquiry report on 21 January. 
Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
In debates in parliament on the day the report was released a number of MPs 
suggested that the government impose the Magnitsky sanctions, but your home 
secretaryTheresa May argued they don’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/21/theresa-may-pulls-all-punches-with-putin-over-litvinenko-killing>
. Based on my experience, she is wrong. If you ask any Russian what the top 
people in the Putin regime are afraid of, it is being added to the Magnitsky 
list. They are desperately afraid of losing their ability to travel and keep 
their money in the west.

Furthermore, they know that the Putin regime won’t last forever and there’s 
nothing more terrifying than knowing when it all comes down they can’t run 
because no country will take them.

You can’t undo an act of state-sponsored terrorism on British soil from 2006, 
but for the long-term safety and security of everyone in Britain you must act 
in a way that leaves no doubt that the UK government will not be cowed.

You must stand firm and ensure serious consequences for anyone who dares to 
repeat such an atrocious act on British soil.

Regards, Bill Browder

Browder lived and worked in Russia for more than decade, but in 2005, he was 
deported and his fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin>
, Hermitage Capital, was expropriated by corrupt officials. In 2009, the lawyer 
Browder hired to investigate the case was beaten to death in jail
 