
Theresa May, as prime minister, had her first conversation with Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/may-and-putins-first-phone-conversation-hints-at-thawing-tensions>
 on Tuesday. Meanwhile, UK defence chiefs have been muttering thatRussian 
troops could outgun the British army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/10/russian-army-can-outgun-british-according-to-leaked-report>
; and over in the Olympic pool US swimmers weretaunting their Russian rivals on 
their doping record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympic-swimming-yulia-efimova-fina-fallout>
.

Yulia Efimova met with boos, but it is Fina who deserve opprobrium | Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/olympic-swimming-yulia-efimova-fina-fallout>
According to the Kremlin, the May-Putin chat went well. “Both sides expressed 
dissatisfaction with the current state of cooperation,” it said. Downing Street 
seemingly agreed. British and Russian citizens “face common threats from 
terrorism”, it stated. May and Putin will now meet next month at the G20 summit 
in China.

All the signs suggest that May is willing to try to “reset” relations with 
Moscow, a policy pursued – without any palpable results – by her predecessor, 
David Cameron. For nearly a decade relations between Russia and the UK have 
been frosty, ever since the murder in November 2006 of the dissident and Putin 
criticAlexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
.

One of Gordon Brown’s early acts as prime minister was to expel four Russian 
diplomats from London, in protest at Putin’s refusal to extradite the two men,
Dmitry Kovtun and Andrei Lugovoi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/feb/26/cctv-andrei-lugovoi-dmitry-kovtun-millennium-hotel>
, who slipped radioactive polonium into Litvinenko’s tea. Brown refused to meet 
Putin. The government’s private view was that this was a Russian state plot.

In 2010, however, Cameron signalled a fresh approach and indicated that the 
Litvinenko affair could be “negotiated” around. Cameron’s foreign policy 
priority was mercantilist: to sell stuff to foreigners. As part of his reset, 
Cameron invited Putin to watch the judo with him at the 2012 London Olympics. 
It was agruesome moment <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qQb9_5XFDPw>, with the 
two sitting awkwardly as contestants rolled around a yellow mat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fvladimir-putin-theresa-may-cooperation-litvinenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368710f379ed32f09d50e83a689f673c5ee82d9d%2F0_85_4536_2721%2F4536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20should%20beware%20Putin%3A%20he%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20do%20%E2%80%98cooperation%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Luke%20Harding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fvladimir-putin-theresa-may-cooperation-litvinenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20should%20beware%20Putin%3A%20he%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20do%20%E2%80%98cooperation%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Luke%20Harding&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fvladimir-putin-theresa-may-cooperation-litvinenko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F368710f379ed32f09d50e83a689f673c5ee82d9d%2F0_85_4536_2721%2F4536.jpg>
 David Cameron and Vladimir Putin watch judo at the London Olympics. ‘A 
gruesome moment, with the two sitting awkwardly as contestants rolled around a 
yellow mat.’ Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
May’s own record on Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> shows 
the same depressingly accommodationist instincts. As home secretary, she turned 
down a request by Litvinenko’s widow, Marina, to hold a public inquiry into her 
husband’s death. She admitted that “international relations” were a factor in 
her decision – in other words, it might annoy Putin.

This was shameful stuff. As Marina Litvinenko put it: “As one woman to 
another, I ask her [May] to consider how she would feel in my position. If her 
husband had been murdered in this horrible way, wouldn’t she want to get to the 
truth?” The high court overturned May’s ruling, and a public inquiry opened 
last year. Theevidence presented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
 to a retired judge, Robert Owen, was sensational. The two assassins brought 
polonium to London several times, we learned, only poisoning their target on 
the third attempt. They left an extraordinary radioactive trail: in their hotel 
rooms (theychucked the polonium down the U-bend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/06/alexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history>
), restaurants and a gentleman’s nightclub in Jermyn Street.

Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder>
Owen’s report <https://www.litvinenkoinquiry.org/report> in January went 
further than anyone had imagined. Based in part on secret UK intelligence 
reports, it concluded thatPutin had “probably approved” Litvinenko’s murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
, together with his spy chief, Nikolai Patrushev (then head of theFSB, the 
successor to the KGB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/06/fsb-putins-modern-day-kgb>). 
Afterwards, May met with Marina but politely declined her request to ban from 
the UK those involved in the murder, including Putin.

Russia’s president, then, is “probably” a murderer, who wipes out his personal 
enemies in spectacularly vindictive fashion.Putin’s critics at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/29/boris-nemtsov-investigators-name-chechen-mastermind>
 have an uncanny habit of ending up dead. What made the Litvinenko case unusual 
was its target (a British citizen) and its location outside Russia (which meant 
an evidence-led Scotland Yard investigation).

As May knows perfectly well, there are many forms of terrorism, including the 
state variety. According to Downing Street she and Putin agreed that 
“cooperation on aviation security in particular was a vital part of the 
international counter-terrorism effort”. She seems to forget that Litvinenko’s 
killers flew from Moscow with British Airways; polonium was discovered on 
Lugovoi’s seat, 23D.

And what of Malaysian Airlines MH17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/flight-mh17-two-years-on-putin-killed-my-son-richard-mayne-ukraine>
, shot down two years ago over eastern Ukraine? According to Dutch 
investigators, pro-Russian rebels – or Russian soldiers – downed the jet by 
mistake, using a Buk missile system smuggled across the Russian border. Ten 
British citizens were killed. Their families are demanding justice.

Putin views western leaders such as May as weak and ephemeral. He’s not 
greatly interested in notions of “cooperation”. Rather he has a concrete goal: 
to end EU sanctions against Russia, imposed after his2014 annexation of Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
. Meanwhile,Russian troop buildups in Crimea this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/russia-accuses-ukraine-of-armed-crimea-incursion>
 have raised fears of further military moves against Ukraine.

Brexit opens up new political possibilities for Moscow, and badly undermines 
European unity at a time of multiple global crises. May needs to emulate 
another leader to whom she’s superficially compared: Angela Merkel. The 
chancellor grew up in East Germany, speaks Russian, and understands Putin’s 
dark KGB world-view perfectly.
 