
An angry exchange of texts between former minister Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> and one of Theresa May’s 
top aides has been leaked, threatening to reignite a row over the prime 
minister’s £995 leather trousers.

On Friday, the Guardian reported that Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
, the former education secretary and leading advocate for a less harsh Brexit, 
had been cut from a list of moderate Conservative MPs due to meet May at 
Downing Street.

Morgan had been included in a group comprising Alistair Burt, Nicholas Soames, 
Nick Herbert and Anna Soubry, who were to see the prime minister to discuss the 
strategy for handling the upcoming article 50 negotiations.

However, Morgan had her invitation rescinded after she raised doubts about 
May’s decision to be photographed in the leather trousers, fellow backbenchers 
said.

“I don’t have leather trousers. I don’t think I’ve ever spent that much on 
anything apart from my wedding dress,” Morgan had said.

Theresa May sidesteps question about £995 leather trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
According to the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4020918/The-Trousergate-Texts-Vitriolic-messages-reveal-Theresa-s-fixer-banned-MP-Nicky-Morgan-Downing-Street-sniped-PM-s-995-leather-strides.html>
, the invitation was rescinded after May’s joint chief of staff, Fiona Hill, 
who had held initial talks with Morgan and Burt at Downing Street to discuss 
Brexit, was enraged at the trouser comments.

“Don’t bring that woman to Downing Street again,” Hill texted Burt, the paper 
said.


This prompted an equally furious reply direct to Hill from Morgan: “If you 
don’t like something I have said or done, please tell me directly,” she wrote. 
“No man brings me to any meeting. Your team invites me. If you don’t want my 
views in future meetings you need to tell them.”

Hill’s response in turn was: “Well, he just did. So there!” – seemingly to 
indicate that Burt had, indeed, brought her to the earlier meeting. It was 
three days later, the Mail reported, that Downing Street staff officially told 
Morgan that she was not invited to see May.

Downing Street has refused to discuss the issue, saying only that May “meets 
and engages with colleagues all the time”.

The publication of the texts risk prompting more mutterings among some Tory 
MPs about the perceived tendency of May and her staff to exert rigid and 
occasionally very public discipline over her ministers and MPs.

Boris Johnson was also dressed down by May last week. She very publicly 
distanced herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/boris-johnson-allies-line-up-to-defend-him-over-saudi-arabia-comments>
 from the foreign secretary’s comments about Saudi Arabia leading “proxy wars” 
across the Middle East.

While Johnson’s comments were a breach of the standard government line over 
Saudi Arabia,some of his fellow MPs felt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/theresa-may-put-downs-some-muttering-darkly-anti-boris-johnson-plot>
 the open put-down illustrated an over-controlling tendency within Downing 
Street, with miscreants slapped down too publicly.
 