
The England cricket team is on course to become not only the worst side to 
visit Australia for an Ashes series but also the least successful ever to leave 
these shores for anywhere. And that, as they say, is official.

England have played 11 matches on their current, disastrous tour and are still 
looking for their first win. Their latest defeat, against the Prime Minister's 
XI in Canberra, was their seventh and worst of all.

England must avoid eight more defeats on this tour if they are not to provide 
the Australians with another belly-laugh by becoming the worst Ashes side in 
history. They have a minimum of 11 and a maximum of 14 matches remaining, 
depending on progress in the triangular one-day series against Australia and 
Sri Lanka starting on Friday.

England's worst tour party to Oz, according to the records, was Graham Gooch's 
bunch of white flag-wavers in 1990-91. They lost the Ashes series 3-0 but, even 
worse, were beaten in 14 of their 28 tour matches before they fled to New 
Zealand.

This was the infamous "Tiger Moth tour" in which David Gower and John Morris 
did their Biggles bit and buzzed their team-mates in the match against 
Queensland at Carrara. It was much more memorable than anything that happened 
on the ground.

Everyone enjoyed the incident apart from Gooch and the tour manager Peter 
Lush. England actually won that match - by 10 wickets - but Morris's 132 was 
his last innings for England.

In the Tests Australia, led by Allan Border, had better luck as well as 
superior players. Gooch missed the first Test, Allan Lamb the second and third 
and Angus Fraser, their best bowler, was out for the third and fifth. David 
Boon, Bruce Reid and Craig McDermott did the rest.

This was regarded as a joyless as well as unsuccessful tour and one that 
defined, more than any other, the very different approaches of Gooch and Gower. 
But at least these were great players, whom the Australians respected. There is 
no one of similar class capable of turning the form book upside down for 
England this time.

The second-biggest number of defeats England have suffered in Australia is 12 
(from 28 matches) in 1998-99, when Alec Stewart was captain and Michael 
Atherton and Graham Thorpe had only sore backs to place against the wall. But 
England were beaten only 3-1 in the series and enjoyed a dramatic win in the 
fourth Test that even the Australians cheered. They hardly look capable of that 
now.

That is followed by the 11 defeats (from 24) on the previous tour, under 
Atherton in 1994-95, when England were demoralised by Stewart's bro ken index 
finger and Shane Warne's fizzing leg-breaks. But England, beaten 3-1, won 
praise all round for their performance.

The Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> tours of 1990-91 and 
1994-95 were the ones where there were more defeats than wins. But Nasser 
Hussain's team are fast bearing down on that record.

The dubious record for the fewest number of wins in Australia is held by 
probably England's greatest ever cricketer, Wally Hammond. At 43, Hammond was 
well past his prime and also a rather cold, withdrawn figure when he led 
England to Australia in 1946-47. That team of mostly pre-war players won only 
four of their 25 fixtures.

Hammond's side is considered by many wise judges to have been the weakest sent 
by England to Australia. But even they were beaten only three times, so they 
returned from their tour in credit, even though they lost the Tests 3-0. Don 
Bradman, unlike Hammond, had not lost his form in the war years.

England's heaviest Ashes hammering was in Australia in 1920-21, when Warwick 
Armstrong led a 5-0 whitewash. Armstrong was so bored in England the following 
year (series won 3-0) that he was photographed reading a newspaper in the Oval 
outfield during play.

But even that tour was more fun for England, under JWHT ("Johnny Won't Hit 
Today") Douglas than the current, bleak journey. England might have lost that 
series 5-0 but on the tour overall they won nine matches and lost only six.

But the most unsuccessful tour by England to date was to the West Indies in 
1947-48. The hosts won the series 2-0 and England did not win a single match 
out of 11 on tour.

Hussain already knows that, if his side fail to win either of the remaining 
Tests, they will become the first England side in 125 years to return from 
Australia without a first-class win.

Right now, any old win would suit him. But at least he can draw inspiration 
from the most ridiculed England team to visit Australia.

"Can't bat, can't bowl, can't field," was the headline after the indifferent 
start made by Mike Gatting's side in 1986-87 - and that became England's most 
succesful in touring history, with 19 wins from 30 matches.
 