
With its sparky, battle-of-the-sexes storyline and spiffy tailoring, 
Boomerang, the 1992Eddie Murphy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddiemurphy> 
comedy, seemed cut from the same cloth as Howard Hawks’s 1940 classic, His Girl 
Friday. At the time, however, some critics were reminded of genres other than 
screwball comedy, derisively labelling the film “fantasy” and “science fiction” 
for its portrayal of upscale black professionals living and loving in a world 
where white characters were largely sidelined.

Twenty-two years on, the black romcom may seem less futuristic (movies such as 
Jumping the Broom andBaggage Claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/13/baggage-claim-review-david-talbert>
 having gone far less boldly where Boomerang went before), but when executed 
successfully, they are – in a marketing sense, at least – still comparable to 
Hollywood’s latest CGI showcases, with African-American audiences as excited to 
see relatable black characters battle bedroom disasters and embarrassing 
parents as they are superheroes facing giant lizards or alien invaders.

Think Like a Man Too – the sequel to the 2012 hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147090/think-like-a-man>, whose 
likeable ensemble included Michael Ealy, Regina Hall, Taraji P Henson, 
Gabrielle Union and omnipresent funnyman Kevin Hart – was released in June in 
the US (and arrives in the UK later this month), its backers clearly confident 
that an under-serviced black audience would be awaiting it as fervently as any 
encores for Captain America or Optimus Prime. It can’t have hurt their 
confidence when Ealy, Hall and Hartscored on Valentine’s Day weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/17/robocop-about-last-night-us-box-office>
 with About Last Night, which, by serving up a raunchy, all-black remake of the 
1986 Brat Pack staple, was both a rare instance of a remake done right and a 
sad indictment of black American’s long march to romcom equality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthink-like-a-franchise-the-on-off-affair-between-black-romcoms-and-the-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F18%2F1411045840988%2Fe9caf383-8c00-4209-935e-21514b25f53c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Think%20like%20a%20franchise%20%E2%80%93%20the%20on-off%20affair%20between%20black%20romcoms%20and%20the%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthink-like-a-franchise-the-on-off-affair-between-black-romcoms-and-the-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Think%20like%20a%20franchise%20%E2%80%93%20the%20on-off%20affair%20between%20black%20romcoms%20and%20the%20box%20office&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthink-like-a-franchise-the-on-off-affair-between-black-romcoms-and-the-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F18%2F1411045840988%2Fe9caf383-8c00-4209-935e-21514b25f53c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Robin Givens and Eddie Murphy in Boomerang. Photograph: Allstar Picture Library
And while the Vegas-set Think like a Man Too failed to outstrip its predecessor
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/30/transformers-4-box-office-fault-in-our-stars-jersey-boys>
 ($65m compared with $91m), there are still signs that the black romcom is as 
worthy of tent-pole status as Hollywood’s more traditionally fantastic fare. 
This summer’sSin City: A Dame to Kill For 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/sin-city-2-a-dame-to-kill-for-review-robert-rodriguez-frank-miller>
, in which Robert Rodriguez and Frank Miller revisited the original’s bloody, 
hyper-stylised comic book universe after a nine-year break, was completely 
ignored by audiences. By contrast, the African-American ensemble of 2001’s 
nuptials comedy The Best Man reunited last year for festive sequelThe Best Man 
Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/01/the-best-man-holiday-review>, 
which doubled the original’s $35m domestic take.

In fact, never mind sci-fi or comic book movies: showcasing its nine gorgeous 
fortysomething stars, the poster for The Best Man Holiday looks like a black 
romcom version of anExpendables one-sheet 
<http://buzzhub.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/expendables3bannerlarge.jpg?w=350&h=200&crop=1>
; a constellation of African-American stars who, while not handed the 
blockbusters like the Washingtons (Denzel or Kerry), have remained stalwarts of 
the type of rom§com exemplified by the original movie. Sanaa Lathan (Brown 
Sugar, The Wood, Love & Basketball) is the movement’s Meg Ryan, which probably 
makes Taye Diggs, her love interest here and in Brown Sugar, its Tom Hanks. 
Then there’s Nia Long (Love Jones) and Think Like a Man alums Hall and Morris 
Chestnut.

It’s not just the hard-grafting leads that connect these two sequels, either. 
Playing to their audiences with a focus that would make Michael Bay proud, both 
films ensure that even their white cast members have pedigree in black movies:
The Best Man Holiday <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-best-man-holiday> 
hooks Long up with Eddie Cibrian, who starred alongside Union in Tyler Perry’s 
Good Deeds and Chestnut, Henson and Hart in Not Easily Broken (he re-teamed 
with Perry and Long this Spring in The Single Moms Club), while Think Like a 
Man Too complements the returning Jerry Ferrara and Gary Owen – a white standup 
beloved by black audiences – with Baggage Claim’s Adam Brody and The Single 
Moms Club’s Wendi McLendon-Covey.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9suSyIakT0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9suSyIakT0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De9suSyIakT0&media=>
And, of course, like the biggest action blockbusters, the Best Man movies 
strive to one-up each other in the set-piece stakes. Where The Best Man Holiday 
had the fellas entertaining the ladies by lip-synching to New Edition’s Can You 
Stand the Rain, Think Like a Man Too has theladies recreating Poison 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lBu2GUtpKLs> by New Edition spin-off group 
Bell Biv Devoe, complete with a cameo from Ronnie DeVoe. Still, The Best Man 
franchise will have a chance to fire back when The Best Man Wedding opens in 
2016.

Almost inevitably, Hart and Union also appear in Top Five, the Chris Rock 
comedy thatrecently romanced the Toronto international film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/top-five-review-chris-rock-toronto-movie>
 (for which Paramount ponied up a Tiff-record $12.5m for worldwide distribution 
rights). In Top Five, writer-director Rock plays a disillusioned comedy 
superstar who, bracing for his wedding to a reality star (Union), wanders New 
York with Rosario Dawson’s charming profile-writer. If Top Five ostensibly 
evokes Judd Apatow’s Funny People, it’s also indebted to vintage Woody Allen, 
specifically the fame-gone-rancid ruminations of Stardust Memories and, in the 
building flirtation between Rock and Dawson, Annie Hall.
 Chris Rock and Rosario Dawson in Top Five. Photograph: Paramount Pictures 
It’s not the first time that Rock, an avowed Allen fan, has channelled his 
idol – his remake of Eric Rohmer’s 1972 French film Love in the Afternoon in 
the self-directed 2007 rom com I Think I Love My Wife was distinctly Allenesque 
– but the fact that he now seems to have nailed Annie Hall while essentially 
playing himself – as opposed to a ghost or accidental presidential candidate as 
per the ill-fitting, high-concept comedies that followed his late 90s stand-up 
breakthrough – again speaks to the effectiveness of recognisable black 
characters negotiating matters of the heart.

Adding to the authenticity is Top Five’s use of hip-hop. Whether dispensing 
rap nerd one-liners (Charlie Chaplin as “The KRS-One of comedy”) or 
crowd-pleasing cameos (rabble rousing rapper DMX is employed as affectionately 
as rabble rousing rocker Billy Idol was in The Wedding Singer), Top Five is 
giddy in its reverence for the culture. The sight ofRock’s pal Jerry Seinfeld 
<http://comediansincarsgettingcoffee.com/chris-rock-kids-need-bullying> making 
it rain to Future’s Same Damn Time provides an apt, if unintentional, metaphor 
for the way in which Rock’s movie makes the white mainstream meet it on its own 
terms. Only Rock and Seinfeld themselves can tell us whether that particular 
scene is the stuff of fantasy.
 