
Over at the Guardian Music Tumblr <http://guardianmusic.tumblr.com/> we're 
working hard (aka surfing the web) to bring you all the best in new tracks, 
album streams, videos, gifs and music news. Here is a round up of the best 
things we've stumbled upon this week. Leave tips and comments in the thread 
below, and tell us what you've enjoyed this week.

Best new track â€“ Shades of Cool by Lana Del Rey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KuX_xwghhsw#t=77>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuX_xwghhsw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuX_xwghhsw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuX_xwghhsw&media=>
Not long after the brilliantly funky West Coat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o3SqUUoJjW8>, Lana del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lana-del-rey> has served up this sultry, 
dark new track which would sound at home over the opening credits to aBond film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond>. 


Best new video â€“ Strange Weather by Anna Calvi & David Byrne 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9_1aUmeQu8>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ9_1aUmeQu8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ9_1aUmeQu8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ9_1aUmeQu8&media=>
Anna Calvi <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anna-calvi> is releasing an EP 
of covers, and thisKeren Ann <http://en.kerenann.com/> cover with David Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/david-byrne> has a video as beautiful as it 
is creepy. FeaturingKate Lyn Sheil <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3338354/> (from 
House of Cards <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>) as a 
spurned lover wandering the streets of NY, it follows her pining for a girl she 
is infatuated with. During which time she: buys flowers, passes out after a 
heavy night drinking (we've all been there), takes a hot shower and burns 
photographs. It's all shot in a deep red â€“ withLynchian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidlynch> moodiness â€“ by Alan Del Rio Ortiz 
<http://alandelrio.net/>.

Cher is still the best thing about Twitter <https://twitter.com/cher>

Cher (@cher) 
Whoever sent pic of polar bear in distress ... Please send it again ! Thanx in 
advanceðŸ’–
 <https://twitter.com/cher/statuses/470265709730467840> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/cher/statuses/470265709730467840> Cher (@cher) 
Thanx ChickadeesðŸ’‹ This is a HardðŸŽ‚ 4 meðŸ˜¥I Feel like 25,So The Real # comes 
as quite a little ShockðŸ˜±Guess 67 wasn't enough of a CLUE 4 MY ASSðŸ‘»
 <https://twitter.com/cher/statuses/468644298942992385> May 20, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/cher/statuses/468644298942992385> 
These very cute otters playing the keyboard 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wsRlO4dQJGI>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwsRlO4dQJGI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwsRlO4dQJGI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwsRlO4dQJGI&media=>
Some Asian small-clawed otters got the chance to play the keyboard as part of 
the Zoo Enrichment scheme at the Smithsonian National Zoo. They seemed to enjoy 
it; and we definitely did.

Foxes is going to be in Doctor Who 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-27619790>


It all came about from a chance meeting," said the singer, 25. "I was playing 
a gig and got chatting to the show's production team.

I was telling them how much I loved Doctor Who and next thing they invited me 
to be on it!

To celebrate, here is a gif of Foxes <http://www.iamfoxes.com/> backstage 
getting really to perform:

Pharrell vs Krishnan Guru-Murthy 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/pharrell-williams-interview-happy-blurred-lines-girl-video>


The singer-slash-producer dropped in to Channel 4 News this week and had a 
rather cringe-making discussion with Krishnan, demanding to know whether his 
interviewer ever has "naughty thoughts." The video's up on the Channel 4 site 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/pharrell-williams-interview-happy-blurred-lines-girl-video>
.


Robyn & RÃ¶yksopp's new EP dropped and it is amazing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pJ-7T9uHilk>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpJ-7T9uHilk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpJ-7T9uHilk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpJ-7T9uHilk&media=>
The new collaboration EP, Do It Again 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Do_It_Again_%28R%C3%B6yksopp_and_Robyn_album%29>, 
betweenRobyn <https://www.theguardian.com/music/robyn> and RÃ¶yksopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/royksopp> is an excellent mix of pop, 
electro and house. Monument, the first haunting single, is sure to be 
everywhere soon.


One Direction got in trouble for allegedly smoking marijuana 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2641634/One-Direction-video-apparently-shows-Louis-Tomlinson-using-version-N-word.html>

The internet got very excited about a video that was leaked to the Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2641634/One-Direction-video-apparently-shows-Louis-Tomlinson-using-version-N-word.html>
, reportedly shot byLouis Tomlinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> and reportedly showing Zayn 
Malik <https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> smoking marijuna in the 
back of a car in Peru, with viewers speculating that Tomlinson used a racial 
slur. The band are yet to put out a statement addressing the issue.


Bye!

 