
First they came for the art historians. And then got stuck into the 
archaeologists and the classicists before most of us had time to draw breath (
Burying A-level archaeology is barbarism, says Tony Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/17/scrapping-archeology-classics-a-levels-barbaric-tony-robinson>
, 18 October). And what for? Well, apparently because it’s difficult to set the 
examination grade boundaries on small-scale subjects. So those responsible for 
deciding what the brains of future Britons will contain definitively believe 
that carts come before horses.

Ditching classics at A-level is little short of a tragedy | Natalie Haynes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/aqa-classics-classical-civilisation-a-level-exam-archaeology>
As a teacher of both classics and drama I have to tell you that a working 
knowledge of classics might have given pause before we enter into this act of 
national cultural denial. One ignores the realm and relevance of Dionysus at 
one’s peril, as thefate of Pentheus 
<http://www.greekmythology.com/Myths/Mortals/Pentheus/pentheus.html>, one-time 
king of Thebes, so graphically demonstrates. But it seems we are now going to 
be denied the opportunity to read and learn from his story, and so in 10 years’ 
time that reference will make sense to even fewer people than it does now.
Sarah McCormack
Bristol

• Further to the decision of the AQA exam board to discontinue the history of 
art A-level from 2018 (History of art A-level axed by last board offering 
subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/12/last-art-history-a-level-axed-after-michael-gove-cull-of-soft-subjects>
, 13 October), I wanted to express concern and disappointment that history of 
art will no longer be an examined part of the school curriculum.

The National Gallery has recently been working in close association with AQA 
to develop a new history of art A-level syllabus, and paintings from the 
national collections were to provide a significant focus for parts of the 
course. The study of history of art offers young people a particularly incisive 
approach to the understanding of both history and of contemporary culture, 
which is increasingly image-led. It also equips students for potential future 
careers in the arts, in galleries and museums, and in the creative industries 
in which the UK currently excels.

We must assume that fewer people will now study history of art at university 
and I am concerned at the impact this will have on recruiting the high-level 
skills required in our institutions.

Over three and a half decades ago, I took up history of art A-level aged 16. 
It was most certainly not a “soft” option, but rather a stimulating and 
challenging one that taught me to think and look critically, to analyse and to 
reflect. It also set me on my own particular career path.

I would urge AQA to look hard at options for continuing with the art history 
A-level. The National Gallery will be there to help.
Dr Gabriele Finaldi
Director, The National Gallery

• I can’t agree that “burying A-level archaeology is barbarism”. Archaeology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/archaeology> makes great use of the basic 
sciences: maths, physics and chemistry. Anyone wanting to study archaeology is 
in a much better position to tackle the subject at degree level with an extra 
A-level in one of the sciences.

Most degree studies with a science base start from scratch to cater for people 
who have not studied the subject at A-level. I tookA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> in maths and physics at school, 
and A-level geology 10 years later as a mature student, after which I went back 
to university to study geology. I was one of the few students with an A-level 
qualification and we were told by one of our lecturers that the course would 
“soon catch up”, a claim that was fully justified. My knowledge of the basic 
sciences was of far more use in my studies than my A grade A-level geology that 
was soon left far behind.
Ken Vines
Yelverton, Devon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8815009ac9c7f06387c9b08359055480ba77bb89%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20bonfire%20of%20the%20A-levels%20is%20torching%20our%20culture%20and%20history%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20bonfire%20of%20the%20A-levels%20is%20torching%20our%20culture%20and%20history%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8815009ac9c7f06387c9b08359055480ba77bb89%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Archaeologists dig at the site of the Bedlam burial ground, London. 
Photograph: Crossrail 
• You report the examination board AQA as justifying its decisions to drop 
A-levels in history of art and archaeology on the grounds that its “number one 
priority is making sure every student gets the result they deserve” and that 
this can’t be guaranteed with these A-levels. What a give-away. My own 
discipline, history of art, demands imagination, determined looking and 
multidisciplinarity, and cannot be broken down into pre-digested nuggets. The 
A-level will tax students, and those who do best will be the best (before we 
complain about elites, ask if it would be acceptable to select the England 
football team randomly from people in the street, even though it can look that 
way). AQA clearly prefers the kind of examination where content can be learned 
and the efficiency with which this has been done is all that is tested. This 
rather goes with a polity in which parliament is neutralised, and dissent 
shouted down. Granted that the English have always hated intellect – where else 
would you find the threat that you’re “too clever for your own good” – the fact 
that examination boards are now colluding in a general dumbing-down is 
regrettable, if hardly surprising.
Michael Rosenthal
Banbury, Oxfordshire

• The loss of archaeology A-level may affect fewer than 500 students, but it 
will have a disproportionate impact on the nation’s prosperity. Most of these 
students are so enthused by the subject that they go on to study archaeology at 
university. My own experience is that these same students are among the highest 
achieving and enthusiastic in their cohort, and many then go on to postgraduate 
study and become committed professional archaeologists. At the same time, 
university departments have seen a significant decline in applications to read 
archaeology over the last 10 years, so we can expect the number of qualified 
graduates to further decline. But the nation is planning large infrastructure 
projects – and all need large numbers of archaeologists to satisfy all the 
planning conditions. It is estimated that HS2 alone could employ every 
archaeology graduate and still be short of labour. Let’s please have some 
joined-up thinking.
Prof Mark Horton
University of Bristol

• Your readers may remember that the same exam board that is inflicting this 
assault, AQA, last year proposed shutting down A-level citizenship and actually 
did close downA-level anthropology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/08/anthropology-a-level-axed-cultural-barbarism>
, a vital subject that colleagues and I spent 10 years developing for this 
board. AQA argues that it’s all about numbers of candidates and money, but at a 
wider consideration it amounts to intellectual vandalism and a serious erosion 
of the educational offer in schools, quite apart from the loss to our society 
and culture.

Along with the decline and lowered status in the school curriculum of the arts 
and performing arts, including music, we may end up going to school just to 
learn English, maths, science and computers – how strange, and how dull.
Dr Barry Dufour 
De Montfort University, Leicester
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff241009e5b9ba92c6534ca99fc6ba5303c0d8922%2F0_71_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20bonfire%20of%20the%20A-levels%20is%20torching%20our%20culture%20and%20history%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20bonfire%20of%20the%20A-levels%20is%20torching%20our%20culture%20and%20history%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fthis-bonfire-of-the-a-levels-is-torching-our-culture-and-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff241009e5b9ba92c6534ca99fc6ba5303c0d8922%2F0_71_3504_2104%2F3504.jpg>
 ‘My thanks to the work of John Berger,’ writes David Cockayne. Photograph: Ulf 
Andersen/Getty Images 
• In your report (Banks need early clarity over Brexit deal, warns thinktank, 
17 October) the photograph of Priti Patel occupies 60% of the whole article 
space while her quoted remarks take up 1.2%. Alongside it, in another report (
I was against EU before and after I was for it, says Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/secret-boris-johnson-column-favoured-uk-remaining-in-eu>
, 17 October), Boris Johnson’s photo takes up 3% of the article and his quoted 
remarks 48%. The photographs are distinct in different and important ways – 
Discuss.

This is the sort of question that employs mathematics and geometry along with 
the disciplines of journalism, literature, art theory and art history. My 
thanks to the work of John Berger and Richard Hoggart, among others. My studies 
were combined with art A-level, forming an excellent basis for art school, and 
the following 49 years of work as a designer, educationist and artist. We need 
to understand the world that we see, and we need history of art to be studied 
at A-level.
David Cockayne
Lymm, Cheshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 