
Fans of Atoms for Peace can't listen to their albums on Spotify and other 
streaming music services, after Thom Yorke'sother band withdrew their back 
catalogue earlier in the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/15/thom-yorke-spotify-twitter> 
in protest at payouts to musicians.

Other digital music services are more to the band's liking though. Next week, 
Atoms for Peace will be selling audio and video of two gigs at London's 
Roundhouse venue during the performances, making each song available shortly 
after its performance.

The band have teamed up with British startup Soundhalo <http://soundhalo.com/>
, which launched earlier this year with a similar partnership with Mercury 
Music Prize-winning band Alt-J.

Fans will be able to download and play the Atoms for Peace live tracks and 
videos through Soundhalo's website, or its apps for iPhone, iPad and Android 
devices.

It costs £9.99 to pre-order an entire set from one of the two sold-out gigs 
through Soundhalo, compared with the £49.50 (plus booking fees) it would have 
cost to buy a ticket to one of the concerts.

Band-member and producer Nigel Godrich – whose tweets ignited the row over 
Spotify payouts earlier in the week – claimed that selling official audio and 
video of gigs provides an alternative to user-generated footage elsewhere on 
the web.

"Part of the reason soundhalo was interesting to me was that I found myself 
wondering why, whenever you go to a gig, the next day there are a million 
shaky, horrible sounding YouTube videos already online," he said.

"But you go and look because you want to see something of your experience. 
Soundhalo provides something really functional – an experience that you want to 
remember in front of you as soon as the concert has happened. To be able to 
relive that is a really great thing."

Godrich and Yorke have continued to respond to criticism and questions of 
their stance on Spotify and its streaming-music rivals over the course of this 
week.

"Not enjoyed being target for facile mudslinging we've the right to discuss 
and optout of #Spotify. debate is important,"tweeted Yorke on Wednesday 
<https://twitter.com/thomyorke/status/357462083912216577>, with a link to 
fellow artist Sam Duckworth's article for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/jul/16/thom-yorke-spotify-ban-right-sam-duckworth>
 criticising Spotify.

Godrich has focused more on retweeting supportive comments and links to 
articles backing the band's stance, even as Spotify execs have been retweeting 
messages of support and articles backing them.

Spotify has also published a report by its director of economics Will Page 
<http://press.spotify.com/uk/2013/07/17/adventures-in-netherlands/> using the 
Netherlands as a case study to prove that streaming music services have eaten 
into piracy much more than they have cannibalised legal sales there.

The company remains embroiled in the debate sparked by Atoms for Peace around 
its value for new artists, but the band's Soundhalo partnership may provide 
inspiration for those peers in two other ways.

First, it's a reminder that there are more opportunities than ever for bands 
to work directly with technology startups, rather than purely leaving these 
kinds of deals to their labels.

Second, that while sales (and streams) of recorded music remain the biggest 
source of income for most musicians, there are a growing number of other ways 
to make money from their music.

Selling digital access to concerts isn't a new trend, from pay-per-view 
webcasts and subscription-based services likeConcert Vault 
<http://www.wolfgangsvault.com/concerts/>, through to websites like Nugs.net 
<http://nugs.net/> where bands including Metallica, Pearl Jam and the Black 
Crowes sell MP3s of their concerts.
 