
Ah yes, April Fool's Day – how much more fun it is now that the internet 
allows these japes to be beamed across the world via every social connectivity 
service imaginable. And now that we have Wikipedia to tell us thatspaghetti 
trees 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/1/newsid_2819000/2819261.stm>
 don't really exist (ha ha ha, it's a classic), we demand more sophisticated 
japery. We don't always get it, but we do at least demand it.

Anyway, the video game industry is not immune to the charms of this annual 
attack on the gullible and confused. Here are three examples from yesterday 
that actually worked, if only because they're lampooning games themselves, 
rather than the people who tend to fall for April-orientated pranks.

Here goes:


Assassin's Creed
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7NufHsmITjM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7NufHsmITjM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7NufHsmITjM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It's been viewed over a million times, so the chances are you've seen this 
spoof trailer for a Kinect version of athletic action adventure, Assassin's 
Creed. It has exactly the right atmosphere of po-faced sincerity usually 
conjured by game trailers – but look at the moves that players have to pull off 
to control the onscreen character. Really quite amusing.
Best bit: The woman diving through her coffee table.

Thomas Was Alone
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9Un9cX_OBfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9Un9cX_OBfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9Un9cX_OBfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This is Mike Bithell the creator of the excellent indie platformer, Thomas Was 
Alone <http://www.thomaswasalone.com/>, trying to convince us that he had the 
game's simple shapes motion captured for extra realism. Everyone, including the 
owner of mo-cap specialist Audiomotion, plays it dead straight, but it's 
extremely silly.
Best bit: When the actor in the box gets stuck on the stairs.

Retro City Rampage
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHv0O6oHeVzE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHv0O6oHeVzE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHv0O6oHeVzE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This is so meta! Retro City Rampage <http://www.retrocityrampage.com/> is a 
retro-stylised take on Grand Theft Auto, re-imagined as a blocky 8bit home 
computer game. So this April Fool video not only pretends that the game has 
been turned into a breakfast cereal, it's also designed to resemble aneighties 
TV commercial, recorded and played back on adodgy VCR! Frankly, there are so 
many layers of post-structuralist representation here, even Derrida would be 
baffled. Or you can just laugh at the excellent rendition of poor retro video 
effects.
Best bit:  "You can really taste the graphics!"
 