
The Fall 
9pm, BBC2

Things are picking up for The Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall> after a somewhat languid 
start. With Paul Spector now awake, and DSI Stella Gibson in possession of the 
lurid journals from his lockup, she can start building the case against him. 
There’s also the disturbing possibility that the journals might point to a 
string of other murders. But with Spector suffering severe memory loss – unless 
it’s a cunning ploy, of course – how the case will proceed is thrown into doubt.
 Ben Arnold

Paranoid 
9pm, ITV

The team’s investigations into the apparently random stabbing in the park 
continue, impeded only by emotional dramas: will Bobby connect with Lucy in 
spite of his visit with the high-spirited German detectives? Can Nina make it 
work with Alec? They’re enticingly close to tracking down the “ghost 
detective”. Key to it all, however, seems to be creepy Chris Crowley, the 
psychiatrist. A climactic episode; it’s hard to see this ending tidily for 
anyone.John Robinson

The Night Of 
9pm, Sky Atlantic

This superb, bleakly realist, series reaches its penultimate episode tonight, 
with Naz looking so hardened by his brief incarceration that even if found 
innocent, he might find it hard to return to normality. Tonight, he’s involved 
in a bloody prison incident. Meanwhile, Box faces cross-examination by Chandra, 
very much at the centre of this episode, who questions how sure he is of Naz’s 
guilt, while Naz’s parents continue to suffer in the fallout from his arrest.
David Stubbs

Exposure: Islam’s Non-Believers 
10.40pm, ITV

Led by Maryam Namazie, the Council of Ex-Muslims of Britain offers support to 
those who have turned their backs on Islam. As Deeyah Khan’s austere 
documentary unfolds, it’s clear that many need such support. Not only do those 
who declare atheism find themselves “shunned and ostracised”, they may also 
face violence. A report from Bangladesh, including the aftermath of a machete 
attack, is especially disturbing.Jonathan Wright

Nature’s Weirdest Events 
8pm, BBC2

The final part of Chris Packham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chris-packham>’s surprisingly gonzo nature 
show, which sees the crusading birder presenting from a gothic bunker full of 
bubbling beakers and yellowing animal skulls. Up for scrutiny under Packham’s 
antique tabletop magnifier this week: inexplicable lights in the sky in Norway, 
a violent dolphin in Ireland and the discovery of a dead parrot in Australia 
that represents “the birdwatching equivalent of a supernova”.Graeme Virtue

The Apprentice 
9pm, BBC1

This year’s apprenti seem to be turning everything up to 11. In this episode, 
the teams plot an advertising campaign for designer jeans. And everything about 
it, from the near-breakdown of one project manager to the toe-curling pitches, 
is excruciating yet horribly compelling. As ever, it’s a goldmine for people 
who enjoy watching nightmarish business-bots shouting over the top of each 
other but the usual slim pickings for lovers of charm, wit and humility.Phil 
Harrison

Scream Queens 
10pm, E4

Season two of the horror-com by Ryan Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/10/ryan-murphy-people-vs-oj-simpson-hurricane-katrina>
 and his Glee/American Horror Story co-creators. It aims to marry the sass of 
one with the gore of the other, but ends up splashing about annoyingly in a 
shallow middle ground. Munsch (Jamie Lee Curtis) now runs a hospital, with John 
Stamos and Taylor Lautner as hunky surgeons. The zany plot is just another peg 
on which to hang Murphy’s tired snark about pop culture (Snapchat, Netflix) and 
fat or ugly people.Jack Seale

Film choice

Suzanne, (Katell Quillévéré, 2013), 1.35am, Film4

Young French director Quillévéré’s follow-up to Love Like Poison is another 
sensitive, deeply moving portrayal of turbulent youth. Sara Forestier is the 
passionate, spirited Suzanne, who grows up in Languedoc with her lorry-driver 
dad (François Damiens) and sister Maria (Adèle Haenel) after the death of her 
mother. It’s a loving little family, but teenage pregnancy and her relationship 
with young chancer Nicolas (Paul Hamy) create a world of trouble. Subtle, 
perceptive and gripping.Paul Howlett

Sport choice

Golf: British Masters Coverage of the opening day at the Grove in 
Hertfordshire. 9am, Sky Sports 4

Rugby Challenge Cup: Harlequins v Stade Français Coverage of the contest in 
the opening round of fixtures, which takes place at the Stoop (kick-off 
7.45pm). 7pm, Sky Sports 1

NFL: San Diego Chargers v Denver Broncos All the action from the AFC West game 
at Qualcomm Stadium. 1am, Sky Sports 1
 