
The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
government has appointed an expert panel to examine the state’s child 
protection system in light of the arrest of schoolgirl Tiahleigh Palmer’s 
foster father over her murder.

The Queensland family and child commissioner, Cheryl Vardon, and Bravehearts 
founder Hetty Johnston will join the Foster Care Queensland executive director, 
Bryan Smith, on the panel.

“The panel will help develop and support the implementation of recommendations 
to improve foster care and blue card systems,” the premier,Annastacia Palaszczuk
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk>, said on 
Sunday.

“We do have a vigorous system to approve foster careers and blue card holders 
but where we can make improvements, we absolutely will.”

Vardon said the panel would implement changes as it identified problems.

“In this examination, we want to make sure that Queensland’s children are more 
than safe,” she said. “That’s an important things for us to remember.”

The government has been facing mounting pressure since Rick Thorburn, the 
56-year-old foster father of schoolgirl Tiahleigh Palmer, was this week charged 
with the 12-year-old’s murder.

Tiahleigh Palmer's foster brother feared she was pregnant before murder, court 
told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/tiahleigh-palmers-foster-brother-feared-she-was-pregnant-before-court-told>
Thorburn’s youngest son Trent, 19, is facing charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/tiahleigh-palmers-foster-brother-feared-she-was-pregnant-before-court-told>
 of incest, perjury and attempting to pervert the course of justice amid 
allegations he had sex with Tiahleigh.

Thorburn’s partner Julene, 54, and his other son Josh, 20, are also facing 
charges but were granted bail after court appearances.


Queensland’s Liberal National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-national-party> on Saturday 
called for a “rapid response investigation” into the department as a 
41-year-old Cairns man, who was reportedly a foster carer, faced charges of 
indecently dealing with a child under 16 and child pornography offences.

The LNP child safety spokesman, Ros Bates, said the situation had become 
urgent.

Several reviews are already under way, including a six-month investigation of 
the state’s blue card system and an investigation into the assessment and 
approval processes for foster carers and information-sharing between government 
and non-government bodies.

Forensic officers remain at the Thorburns’ Chambers Flat property, where an 
excavator has been used to dig up the acreage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/24/police-dig-up-property-in-hunt-for-tiahleigh-palmers-backpack-and-uniform>
, searching for evidence linked to Tiahleigh’s death including her school 
uniform and backpack.
 