
Our No 4 film of the year is the fourth collaboration between Luca Guadagnino 
and Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/01/tilda-swinton-luca-guadagnino-interview>
, after The Protagonists (1999), The Love Factory (2002) andI Am Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/08/i-am-love-review> (2010). A 
shimmering erotic thriller, A Bigger Splash stars Swinton as a near-mute 
rockstar recuperating from throat surgery in a luxury villa on a remote Italian 
island with her boyfriend (Matthias Schoenaerts). They are then invaded by her 
ex, a roistering, hard-dancing record producer played by Ralph Fiennes, and his 
sultry daughter (Dakota Johnson). Swinton, 56, is currently shooting a fourth 
film with Guadagnino, Suspiria – a horror set in a 1977 ballet school in Berlin 
– and so replied to questions by email.

The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK: No 4 A Bigger Splash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/13/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-4-a-bigger-splash>
What are your feelings about A Bigger Splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-bigger-splash> at this distance?

We are proud of it. We made it in a kind of fever, very fast – in the eye of 
the wind – and now that the dust has settled, it’s good to see that chaos 
bottled in the film from a safe distance. Quicksilver was its material … 
getting a cork on it was the task.

What did playing such a non-vocal character tell you about communication? 

That words aren’t the half of it.

Should people embrace muteness more? Do we say too much? 

No comment.

The film touches on the refugee crisis. Have you been surprised at the lack of 
progress on that front since you made the film?

The refugee crisis on Pantelleria [where A Bigger Splash is set and was shot] 
has been a reality for generations. Further, slaves were “processed” there 
centuries ago. Both facts form the bedrock of setting A Bigger Splash on this 
particular island. The film we made was about a kind of solipsistic bubble-life 
lived by those that choose to edit out certain realities in an effort to 
fantasise the conceit of a “perfect”-ly self-centred narrative.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bigger%20Splash%3A%20exclusive%20clip%20featuring%20Ralph%20Fiennes%20and%20Tilda%20Swinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fa-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453978965425%2FKP_1520713_crop_640x360.jpg>
A Bigger Splash: exclusive clip featuring Ralph Fiennes and Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/28/a-bigger-splash-ralph-fiennes-tilda-swinton-video>
This bubble-capacity has certainly had a – startlingly – strong year: our film 
started life as a kind of sick satire about different ways of carrying that 
bubble-commitment: the overbearing and incessant babbling of the narcissist, 
the disengagement of the bereaved and disenchanted, the resentful cowering of 
tamed (suppressed) violence and the lethal allure of the undereducated, 
surface-sampling, oversaturated young. Looking at it now, it’s all of a sudden 
– and somewhat dispiritingly – a darker and more recognisable portrait of a 
human landscape less rarified than we had thought when we made it, even 18 
months ago.

As Ralph Fiennes’s character claims – is Europe a grave? Is everyone obscene? 

Certainly. The entire planet is a grave. We walk on – and with – the dead. But 
we also live forward, in a continually renewable birthplace. Just as we are all 
capable of obscene cruelty and barbaric selfishness, at the same time, we – all 
– have within us the generosity of unconditional kindness and the wisdom and 
courage of fearless fairness. It’s all about choices.

Does wealth and a certain kind of success naturally risk conceit? 

Conceit and delusion are not the exclusive province of the rich, nor is it 
inevitable that wealth and what is called worldly success necessarily makes for 
monstrous or arseholic behaviour and attitudes. People are people and all of us 
have the opportunity to play into those tired old stereotypes just as we are 
free to ignore them. See above re making choices.

Was Marianne modelled in part on Bowie’s Aladdin Sane?

Actually, this is a misunderstanding. We weren’t particularly pitching 
ourselves in Ziggy’s direction – although it had to be admitted that anyone 
opting for an onstage sequin jumpsuit until the end of time will be somehow 
seen as quoting him ... fair enough …pace Marc Bolan, pace Freddy Mercury et al 
… Marianne’s public persona is certainly just as influenced by Bowie as anybody 
of my generation, but also by many others – Chrissie Hynde, Siouxsie Sioux, 
Nick Cave …

What have you learned from Luca Guadagnino that you haven’t learned from other 
collaborators?

That I’m not the only one who prefers the quiet treasure of lengthy pre- and 
post- production to the whip-crack of shooting, however much fun we make it.

Has A Bigger Splash changed your dancing? 

Put it this way, I’ve yet to sign up for lessons at the Fiennes fine dance 
academy and weekly Jazzercise Jamboree. But never say never.

A Bigger Splash is available now on DVD and Blu-ray
 