
Tim Rogers of You Am I <> fame met Lance Ferguson from Australia's great 
funk-soul exportsthe Bamboos <> backstage at the Big Day Out in 2011, and the 
result was one of the biggest songs in the country last year,I Got Burned 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZEN_l4j6mY>. Now they've toured Australia 
together, climaxing in a performance on the second stage atWOMADelaide 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/mar/08/adelaide-festival-blog-week-two1>
 on Sunday night, immediately after which the pair talked about their unlikely 
coupling and future plans.

Lance Ferguson: That just now …. perception is a weird thing, but I reckon it 
was one of the best gigs we've ever done. The crowd were great, it felt good on 
stage, we knew it was the last time we'd be playing this set together in this 
incarnation, so it was sentimental, too ...

Tim and I met hanging out at the Big Day Out a few years ago, and we just 
started talking about music that we loved. And then when we working on the new 
Bamboos album, he came along and sang on I Got Burned, and it turned out to be 
our biggest song ever. It just seemed natural for us to expand on that - there 
seemed to be a vibe. So now, yes, we're talking about doing a whole album 
together. There seems to be a rapport and a feeling of excitement.

Tim Rogers: You've got to be realistic about these things, but yes, I hope I 
can can get a gig with them now! Lance and I are looking forward to working on 
new songs. We get along because we're always thinking about the next thing. 
It's an endless audition!

Lance: To have a frontman of the calibre of this man in front of our band … 
when he's not there, we're gong to have to step up our game because he's taken 
us to another level..

Tim: I just want to be a part of it, as a fan. I've got a limited vocal range 
but maybe I've got some different ideas, and that's where the interest lies. We 
didn't grow up together but we're both in our early forties and we want to try 
new things. The Bamboos are very much musicians, and I know that I'm there to 
bring a bit of chutzpah, but I want to be a musician too … so it' a bit of a 
tradeoff all the time, whether to bring in a bit of bombast or to make it very 
musical.

Lance: I've worked with stars who spend their name talking mainly about mousse 
and hairspray and what jacket they're weating but the thing about TR is that 
he's always just talking about music and records, the detail of the 
arrangements ... We've thought a lot about the set for this tour, and I was 
struck by the fact that Tim was really focused on all that. And he doesn't roll 
with a big entourage … it's really refreshing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhZEN_l4j6mY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhZEN_l4j6mY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhZEN_l4j6mY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Tim: I travel pretty light - but I've got a big schtick [stick?]! I've been 
makig music for 25 years and I've got a lot of enthusiasm still. I just want to 
try to do my best and doing this has made me think about what Ive got. And as a 
frontman and not having to play guitar ... it's the most fun you can have with 
your clothes on. It's like a teenage dream.
In fact, we were dancing to Teenage Dream <> by Katy Perry in the tour van 
last night!
Lance: Womadelaide has been great. I don't own a lute like Sting does, I just 
want to play my guitar, but the audience really embraced us tonight.

Tim: There's none of the posturing that you'll set at a rock festival with 
guys fooling with their hair and trying to cop. It's just a bunch of great 
musicians.
 