


The public relations news monitor Meltwater <http://meltwater.com/mnews/>, 
which is still refusing topay 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-newspapers-warn-aggregators-sign-our-new-licence-or-we-may-sue/>
 UK newspapers for crawling their websites, has now been blocked from indexing
Times Online <http://www.timesonline.co.uk/>, the most serious of Rupert 
Murdoch's UK newspapers.

The news site, which is due to go behind a paywall this spring 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-clarified-times-online-charges-to-start-in-spring-for-weekdays-and-sund/>
 and which had alreadyblocked the NewsNow news monitor 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-the-pay-wall-will-be-built-times-blocks-aggregator-newsnow/>
 in January, enacted the block via the standard robots.txt protocol on Tuesday. 
It means thousands of Meltwater customers around the world won't be able to 
inform clients when their company is mentioned in the Times.



The move stems from an increasing desire, from both Murdoch's News 
International and the rest of the UK press, that commercial crawlers pay them 
to crawl their sites.

In January, the Newspaper Licensing Agency <http://www.nla.co.uk/> (NLA) – 
which is owned by eight leading UK national news publishers and, for years, had 
charged clippings agencies to photocopy their pages – introduced two new 
licences requiring (1) that agencies pay between £5,000 and £10,000 per year to 
crawl online papers and (2) that agencies' clients pay £58 a year to receive 
that intelligence.

Most companies complied. The news aggregator NewsNow 
<http://www.newsnow.co.uk/> tried to make the issue a matter of broad web 
principle with itsRight2Link <http://www.right2link.org/> campaign. But it 
complied by removing NLA members' stories from its pay-for service, leaving 
Meltwater – formerly called Magenta News – the only non-compliant agency.

The way the NLA sees it, news monitors are in effect making a copy of articles 
when they process articles to provide the categorisation and alerts that are so 
valuable to PR clients.

Meltwater, seeing differently, in December went to the UK's Copyright Tribunal 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-uk-newspapers-link-tax-referred-to-copyright-tribunal/>
 to challenge the fairness of the NLA's new licenses – a ruling is still 
awaited, though the tribunal on Monday, a day before Times Online's blockruled 
<http://www.prca.org.uk/default.asp?pid=557&sid=8#i_895> that Meltwater can go 
ahead with itschallenge 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-uk-newspapers-disputing-meltwaters-appeal-against-their-web-charges/>
. The NLA is only charging crawlers that charge for a service, so Google is off 
the hook.

Murdoch's News International is not exercising the NLA's new licences despite 
being an NLA member. But News Corp has, of course, been very keen of late to 
stress that users of its content, such as search sites, should be paying it. It 
is unclear how much News International is asking for, compared with the NLA's 
£5,000-£10,000-a-year demand.
 