
As India looks back on 60 years of independence 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/matt_seaton/2007/08/after_the_raj.html>, 
it has much to be proud of, but much to regret and, in some cases, much to be 
ashamed of. India can justly take pride in its obviousachievements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2007/aug/15/india?picture=330567113>
 : democracy (especially the empowerment of the former untouchables and other 
traditionally deprived casts), belated economic success and growing 
international recognition. It does regret the poverty of the millions of 
Indians who are not enjoying the economic boom, many of whom go to bed hungry 
every night. It should be ashamed of the corrupt and inefficient administration 
that steals the resources the government allocates to relieve poverty.

I still believe the balance sheet of India's democracy is in credit, but I 
would say there is a large debit to be entered when we consider India's 
relations withPakistan 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/yasmin_khan/2007/08/a_difficult_birth.html>
. The healing of the wounds of partition seems as far away as ever and I firmly 
believe that this hostility will never end until India recognises that it has 
to bear the burden of generosity. Pakistan is the smaller country; Pakistan has 
suffered the trauma of a second partition, a partition in which India played a 
significant role, and India is in possession of all the territory it actually 
wants in the disputed state of Kashmir. India's position is that the status quo 
there should be accepted as the final solution. But that can never be accepted 
inPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/g2/story/0,,2148170,00.html>.

India's record of generosity to its other neighbours is no better. Attitude is 
part of the problem. Recently an official of the Asian Development Bank said to 
me: "India is not good at downsizing with its neighbours". What he meant was 
that India looks down its nose at those neighbours. I have often noticed a 
certain arrogance in the attitude of Indian diplomats posted in the 
neighbourhood, and one of India's most distinguished former diplomats commented 
on this in his recent book. But this lack of generosity goes beyond attitude. 
One ofBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/g2/story/0,,2148169,00.html>'s 
leading economists recently pointed out to me the goodwill India could win in 
his country if it offered really generous terms for trade. It is not as though 
that would be any threat to India's burgeoning economy. So one wish I would 
have for India is that as it moves on to become a bigger and bigger player in 
global affairs it should become a generous, not a petty power, in its own 
neighbourhood.

Read more about India and Pakistan 60 years after partition here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/after_the_raj/>
 