
The indomitable Gaul Asterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> is 
set to go head-to-head with quiffed cub reporter Tintin in what is being 
described as a “clash of the titans” at the Lakes international comic art 
festival.

Tintin expert Benoît Peeters, Lancaster University’s new visiting professor in 
graphic fiction and comic art, will be putting the case for creator Hergé, 
while Peter Kessler, the Bafta award-winning producer and author of The 
Complete Guide to Asterix, will be speaking up for René Goscinny and Albert 
Uderzo atthe festival in Kendal <http://www.comicartfestival.com/>, Cumbria, on 
Friday evening. With anonline poll 
<https://poll.fbapp.io/asterix-vs-tintin-clash-of-the-toon-titans> currently 
giving Asterix 63% of the vote and Tintin 31% (6% of respondents were 
apparently unable to decide between the characters), the Lakes festival’s 
organisers were clear that “you’re either an Asterix or a Tintin fan. You 
cannot sit on the fence. You have to choose. This is the biggie.”

Asterix interview: 'it’s definitely more ambitious and topical'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/22/asterix-jean-yves-ferri-didier-conrad-interview-its-definitely-more-ambitious-and-topical>
Kessler said: “On a personal level I do feel that over the years there has 
been a kind of assumption among the cognoscenti that Tintin is ‘great art’, 
while Asterix is ‘just for kids’. Certainly there have been more ‘grown-up’ 
books onTintin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tintin> than Asterix. I 
really don’t think that is a justifiable state of affairs and in the interest 
of rebalancing public opinion, I’m sure each side will really go out there and 
try to win the debate.”

Kessler added that he learned to read with Asterix, recalling trying to read 
the name of the Roman architect inThe Mansions of the Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/asterix-the-mansions-of-the-gods-review-jim-broadbent-animation>
 – Squaronthehypotenus – and “giving up repeatedly”, but “in every child’s life 
there comes a point when you have to choose your path, and mine was with the 
Gauls, not the Belgians”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a8bf793dd9a1adcec7e8f05162b66f9738d579b%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tintin%20v%20Asterix%3A%20titans%20go%20head-to-head%20in%20comic%20festival%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tintin%20v%20Asterix%3A%20titans%20go%20head-to-head%20in%20comic%20festival%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a8bf793dd9a1adcec7e8f05162b66f9738d579b%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A still from Asterix and the Vikings (2006). Photograph: Allstar/M6 FILMS 
The choice is between “the glacial perfection of Hergé” and the “rough-edged 
menhir of Uderzo”, Kessler added. “The rounded, sketchy drawing style, the 
humour, the inadequacies and foibles of the characters ... these were what I 
could relate to.”

Peeters, meanwhile, was clear that Tintin should emerge on top. “Tintin is 
unique and will remain so,” he said. “With amovie adaptation by Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/oct/27/the-adventures-of-tintin-review>
 and an exhibition at the Grand Palais in Paris, Hergé’s work reaches into 
every generation. Forty years after Tintin and the Picaros, the last volume, 
was completed, people are still reading The Adventures of Tintin all over the 
world, and especially in China.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4091c35f1e01d76986455dbad204cf85f648b7%2F0_0_2492_1949%2F2492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tintin%20v%20Asterix%3A%20titans%20go%20head-to-head%20in%20comic%20festival%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tintin%20v%20Asterix%3A%20titans%20go%20head-to-head%20in%20comic%20festival%20showdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Ftintin-asterix-head-to-head-comic-festival-showdown-lakes-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4091c35f1e01d76986455dbad204cf85f648b7%2F0_0_2492_1949%2F2492.jpg>
 A still from Tintin and the Temple of the Sun (1969). Photograph: 
Allstar/Belvision 
The character, published for the first time in 1929, has “evolved 
significantly”, according to Peeters. “The drawing gained in elegance but 
remained immediately relatable. The stories became more complex without losing 
their whimsical and funny touch. Hergé created unforgettable characters such as 
Haddock, Calculus, Bianca Castafiore (who served as models for Obelix, Getafix 
and Cacofonix). Tintin made us travel the world. He set foot on the moon before 
Neil Armstrong did,” he said. “Hergé never considered comics as a minor art. He 
meant to express everything he could in Tintin: his curiosity, his passions and 
his dreams. A couple of weeks before he passed away, he said his entire life 
was in it.”

Original Tintin comic artwork sells for more than €1m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/01/original-tintin-comic-artwork-sells-for-more-than-1m>
Kessler and Peeters will be joined on stage by names including The Walking 
Dead artist Charlie Adlard, comic book writer Leah Moore, Australian comics 
scholar and creator Stuart Medley and Viz artist Graham Dury.
 