
The big picture

The election campaign has taken a back seat to devastating floods in New South 
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>, the ACT and 
Tasmania. There are fears the death toll could rise as high as seven. Among the 
worst-hit areas is the north-west Tasmanian town of Latrobe, which is under 
water.
Kathryn Bermingham (@KatBermingham) 
Tas Police have released this image of Latrobe, taken from the Westpac Rescue 
Helicopter today.pic.twitter.com/HbsyShrpyC <https://t.co/HbsyShrpyC>
 <https://twitter.com/KatBermingham/status/739733498580238336> June 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KatBermingham/status/739733498580238336> 
In political matters, the industrial dispute over the Country Fire Authority 
in Victoria continues to provide fuel forMalcolm Turnbull, who is using it to 
discuss new legislation restricting union powers. The Australian reports that 
Turnbull will block unions from striking “secret deals”, whatever that means.

Australian election 2016: firefighters' dispute provides fuel for Malcolm 
Turnbull – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/07/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live>
I’ll let the Oz’s David Crowe and Rick Wallace explain 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-pm-fires-up-attack-on-union-powers/news-story/90d5f5f27efc4502e9cc3cb55eba86e4>
:

Employment Minister Michaelia Cash told the Australian the government was 
considering changes to the Fair Work Act to shield the Victorian volunteers 
from the union’s attempts to extend its power over the firefighting authority.

“We are considering a number of possible amendments to the Fair Work Act that 
would address this issue,” Senator Cash said. “There is a clear pattern of 
behaviour when it comes to secret deals between unions and Labor governments 
which only benefits unions at the expense of all others. Whether it is 
destroying the livelihoods of truck drivers at the behest of the TWU, locking 
contractors out of the construction industry at the behest of the CFMEU or 
destroying the volunteer CFA at the behest of the UFU, Labor’s utter weakness 
in the face of greedy union bosses comes at an enormous cost to the community.”

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, appeared to back down on the deal last 
night, with his government now saying they will help the CFA and continue 
negotiations with the United Firefighters Union.

I wrote an explainer about the dispute here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/07/pay-disputes-pits-victorias-volunteer-firefighters-against-professionals>
.

On the campaign trail

Malcolm Turnbull has suspended his campaign for the day to tour flood-affected 
areas in New South Wales. Three people have beenconfirmed dead in the floods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/jun/06/northern-tasmania-faces-worst-flooding-in-decades-as-storm-heads-south>
: two in New South Wales and one in the ACT. In Tasmania four people are 
missing, feared dead.

Bill Shorten is in South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, where he plans to 
talk about apprenticeships. He has offered to suspend his campaign and join 
Turnbull touring flood zones – no word yet on Turnbull’s response but I think 
we can expect Shorten in flood areas soon.

The campaign you should be watching

Labor is reportedly concerned about the affect the CFA industrial dispute 
could have on its campaign for marginal Victorian seats, particularly McEwan, 
held by Labor’sRob Mitchell, and Corangamite, held by Liberal MP Sarah Henderson
.

The Age’s Richard Willingham writes 
<http://www.theage.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/cfa-crisis-pain-looms-for-federal-labor-in-marginal-fireaffected-seats-20160606-gpcr12.html#ixzz4ApZ6Wv4M>
 that both seats are in high-risk bushfire zones. McEwan and Shorten are hoping 
voters quarantine the dispute as a state issue.

Q&A: Barnaby Joyce and Tony Windsor trade blows on mining and national 
broadband network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/07/qa-barnaby-joyce-and-tony-windsor-trade-blows-on-mining-and-national-broadband-network>
And another thing(s)


It appeared viewers weren’t the only people terribly bored during the National 
Press Club leaders debate.Malcolm Turnbull says that if he’s to participate in 
another debate, he wants it to include questions from Facebook, which is a very 
on-brand demand.

Gareth Hutchens has more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/06/malcolm-turnbull-next-leaders-debate-could-include-facebook-questions>
:

The prime minister’s office believes the format of the first debate suited the 
opposition because few of the audience questions were about the economy and it 
thinks the format of the second debate was too boring for the public to engage 
with it.

Turnbull would like the format of the next debate to be more attractive for 
voters, particularly disengaged voters in marginal electorates.

With that goal in mind, he would like voters who will not be able to attend 
the event to still have the chance to engage directly with it. That means 
having some kind of system that allows questions to be submitted live via 
Facebook and answered by the prime minister and opposition leader.

But the details of such a plan remain vague. Labor headquarters say there have 
been no negotiations over a third debate yet.

In another display of modernity, Turnbull has declared that he is a feminist. 
Twice.

But he also used the word “Robogals” 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-declares-himself-a-feminist-and-chokes-up-over-his-family-history-20160606-gpcp73.html>
 at a women in STEM event in Melbourne yesterday, so points off for that.

You’re changing the world one girl at a time. Think about it
 