
Tom Cruise is to follow up the blockbuster opening for dystopian tale Oblivion 
at the weekend with yet another science-fiction project, theJapanese saga 
Yukikaze 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/tom-cruise-attached-star-yukikaze-439822>
.

Studio Warner Brothers has optioned the rights to a series of novels by Ch≈çhel 
Kamayashi <http://collider.com/tom-cruise-yukikaze/> which have already been 
adapted into five acclaimedanime <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anime> 
films for the home video market, according to the Hollywood Reporter. The saga 
centres on a planetary defence force which fights back against alien invasion 
by setting up bases on the extra-terrestrials' home world, using a wormhole 
over Antarctica. Yukikaze is the name of the advance reconnaissance fighter 
plane used by the series' hero on many of his missions.

Science-fiction films are becoming a feature of the current Cruise era. Joseph 
Kosinski'sOblivion <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/133030/oblivion>, in 
which he plays a drone repairman patrolling a long-abandoned Earth, opened with 
a spectacular $61m worldwide at the weekend and has not yet made its US bow. 
The film, which co-stars Olga Kurylenko and Andrea Riseborough, has proven a 
box-office hit despitemiddling reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/10/oblivion-review>.

Next up for the 50-year-old actor is the Doug Liman sci-fi action piece All 
You Need Is Kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/26/tom-cruise-filming-halts-trafalgar-square>
, in which he stars as a rookie lieutenant colonel forced to fight the same 
losing battle against alien invaders again and again, experiencing horrifying 
death countless times. Emily Blunt co-stars as a special forces veteran who has 
taken out more of the extra terrestrial "mimics" than anyone else. The film is 
due to arrive in cinemas on both sides of the Atlantic on 7 March.
 