
Demonstrators who joined an anti-war protest in Walthamstow have expressed 
anger at Tom Watson’s comments that anyLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members who were present should 
be removed from the party.

Labour MPs including Stella Creasy, whose office was targeted in Tuesday’s 
demonstration, as well as Diana Johnson and Liz Kendall,hit out this week at 
abuse and threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/02/labour-mps-deselection-threats-syria-vote-stella-creasy-diana-johnson>
of deselection over the vote on airstrikes in Syria.

Watson told the Today programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/labour-split-exposed-tom-watson-momentum-rabble-livingstone>
: “To use an issue of such importance to try to divide the Labour party is 
reprehensible. I have seen those TV images of what went on in Stella Creasy’s 
constituency and I can only say if there were Labour party members on that 
demonstration, intimidating staff members of an MP like that, then I think they 
should be removed from the party. It’s simply unacceptable that people conduct 
themselves in that way.”

A spokesman for Watson subsequently made it clear he had not realised there 
were no staff members present in Creasy’s constituency office when the march 
took place.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftom-watson-criticises-labour-mps-anti-war-protest-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449250150285%2FKP_661263_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Watson%20criticises%20Labour%20MPs%20who%20demonstrated%20in%20anti-war%20protest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftom-watson-criticises-labour-mps-anti-war-protest-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Watson%20criticises%20Labour%20MPs%20who%20demonstrated%20in%20anti-war%20protest%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftom-watson-criticises-labour-mps-anti-war-protest-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F4%2F1449250150285%2FKP_661263_crop_640x360.jpg>
Tom Watson criticises Labour members who demonstrated in anti-war protest – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/04/tom-watson-criticises-labour-mps-anti-war-protest-video>
Labour split exposed as Tom Watson describes Momentum as a 'rabble'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/labour-split-exposed-tom-watson-momentum-rabble-livingstone>
Steven Saxby, a local vicar and member of the Labour party who took part in 
the Walthamstow demonstration, accused Watson of his own form of intimidation. 
In a statementon Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/teamSaxby/posts/1494706757502043>, Saxby said: “I am 
shocked by Tom Watson’s statement. At the same time as I condemn intimidation 
of MPs, I reiterate that the vigil was not intimidation, and condemn those who 
seek to portray democratic, peaceful actions as such. This is also a form of 
intimidation.

“For my part, I shall not be intimidated into not speaking on issues about 
which I am passionate and alongside others within and beyond the Labour party.”

Saxby denied that the vigil outside Creasy’s office was part of a wider 
campaign to deselect the MP, adding: “Stella has been an excellent MP, works 
hard for her constituents and has led some brilliant campaigns.

“I disagree with her decision to support the bombing of Syria, but defend her 
freedom to have come to that decision and admire her courage in making it even 
in the face of opposition from many in her constituency. I totally condemn any 
abuse that she and her staff received.”

Christopher Ford, a Labour member and trade union liaison officer who was also 
at the protest, said: “The protest was entirely dignified and respectful, there 
were many families there with candles. I don’t recognise the event from Tom’s 
statement. There is no connection between the vile abuse that Stella and her 
team have received and the peaceful protest we had. I spoke, we had town 
councillors who spoke, we had several priests and imams.”

How your MP voted on airstrikes in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/03/how-every-mp-voted-on-syria-airstrikes>
Ford said Watson’s comments were disappointing and that the deputy leader of 
the Labour party “should have checked his facts”. He added: “At the present 
time myself and a whole number of members feel bullied and scared to express 
our opinions. This hysteria should not be reflected inside the Labour party.”

On Friday, it transpired that reports demonstrators had rallied outside 
Creasy’s housewere untrue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/dec/04/stella-creasy-crushes-story-about-protest-outside-her-house>
. The reports had followed a Facebook posting in which a man who identified 
himself as Paul S Jakubovic wrote “Outside Labour MP Stella Creasy’s house in 
Walthamstow tonight”.

Creasy, who has published a blog 
<https://medium.com/@stellacreasy/the-decision-to-extend-air-strikes-against-daesh-from-iraq-into-syria-why-did-i-vote-yes-349036bd00ba#.5sa8yoqfa>
 detailing the motivations behind her vote for airstrikes, took to Facebook to 
dispute the reports.She wrote 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10156191974500562&id=589620561>
: “For avoidance of doubt I have no reason to believe Tuesday’s protest in 
Walthamstow went past my house, or that those involved also were the same 
people who rang my office to harass my staff or who have been the ones sending 
me threats of violence or abusive messages on here.

“The right to protest is an important and powerful political tool which I 
defend, and I have no reason to think those who took part on Tuesday were not 
peaceful in their conduct.”

Labour MPs criticise abuse and deselection threats over Syria vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/02/labour-mps-deselection-threats-syria-vote-stella-creasy-diana-johnson>
Sue Wheat, a Walthamstow resident who was at the demonstration, and who wrote 
a blog to“set the record straight” 
<https://www.facebook.com/sue.wheat2/posts/10153836948554744?pnref=story> about 
the evening, told the Guardian: “The peace vigil was for everybody, it wasn’t 
organised by any political party. Our community is labelled as bullying and 
terrorist sympathisers. We are not. There are thousands of people in our 
community who believe in peace.

“I went to the vigil with my daughter. In fact I had the idea of writing 
messages of peace on Post-It notes and putting them on Creasy’s office window. 
News reports since have said Stella’s office was defaced, it wasn’t.”


Rebecca Tully, a member of the Green party, said it was unfortunate that the 
story had become one of divisions in the Labour party. “If there were abusive 
phone calls and tweets made to Stella’s office, that’s a matter for the 
police,” she said. “Stella Creasy is my representative. A whole range of 
different people gathered peacefully, it was not a party political thing. The 
message is ‘don’t bomb Syria’. We wanted to make it as clear as we could, 
peacefully. It is a perfectly legal, perfectly calm message that we used.

“Our voting persuasions, or our positions within the Labour party, are nothing 
to do with what happened that night and the next day when what we asked for 
didn’t happen. I understand democracy. Our demonstration has been used as a 
springboard to talk about other harassment. Our demonstration was not 
harassment.”

She said there was no reason for anyone to be removed from a political party. 
“We were 200 residents, imams, vicars, the elderly, children, a range of 
residents that took three hours out of our busy lives to go and stand and make 
our case as strongly and as peacefully as we could.”
 