
Fashion designer turned film-maker Tom Ford asserted his credentials as an 
auteur at the Venice film festival, as his second feature film (after 2009’sA 
Single Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/11/a-single-man-review>) 
received its world premiere. Speaking at a press conference before the gala 
screening, Ford said: “Style always has to serve substance. Believe it or not, 
I am not just about style, especially in film-making. It has to be part of the 
storytelling ... Stylistically, I never made a decision that didn’t relate to 
the story.”

“When you start any project,” he continued, “you have to think: what am I 
trying to communicate? For me, this story is about finding the people in your 
life that mean something to you, and holding on to them.”

Nocturnal Animals review – Tom Ford returns with wildly gripping revenge tale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
Nocturnal Animals is based on the 1993 novel Tony and Susan by Austin Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright>, 
which details the memories and impressions of a woman after she is sent a 
manuscript by her former husband. In Ford’s film,Amy Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy-adams> plays Susan and Jake Gyllenhall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> plays both Edward, the 
ex-husband, and Tony, the central character of the novel (also called Nocturnal 
Animals) in which Edward channels his feelings.

Ford, who also wrote the screenplay, has kept the double structure of the 
source material, but has made some significant changes, including the location: 
Tony and Susan is set in the northeast US, while the disturbing incident that 
opens Ford’s film takes place in west Texas. Ford said: “This was because the 
book was written in 1993. In today’s world, you would lock the doors in your 
car, call for help on your cellphone, and it would be done. So I had to move it 
to somewhere where theoretically there would be no cellphone service.

“Also, I believe in that old line ‘Write what you know’, and west Texas is a 
place I know very well. I grew up in Texas but I was not the traditional strong 
guy; I was the sensitive one who got a lot of teasing.”

Tom Ford: a single man and his address book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/28/tom-ford-a-single-man> 
Ford lived in Austin and Houston until he was 11, and then New Mexico. He 
moved to New York to study and begin his career as an actor and fashion 
designer. By 1999 he had risen to become creative director of Gucci and Saint 
Laurent, before leaving in 2004 to set up his own brand company. His first film 
– adapted from Christopher Isherwood’s 1964 novel, and starring Colin Firth – 
also premiered at Venice.

Ford was asked to comment on his new film’s elaborate and eye-catching opening 
sequence, which comprises a series of near-naked, plus-size women go-go dancing 
– later revealed to be an installation at an art gallery owned by Susan.

“I wanted to set the story in the contemporary world, and I wanted to 
emphasise its absurdity. All the art in the film is real – artists created it – 
and that piece in the opening scene is art I had to create. I put my head 
inside an imaginary European artist commenting on America: exaggerated, 
overfed, ageing. When I shot the scene, I fell in love with these women: they 
were so beautiful and free. It’s because they’ve let go of the conventions of 
what our culture tells us people should look like. That’s also the theme of the 
film: letting go of what you think you are supposed to be.”

But Ford reminded everyone he was still a consummate showman. “I also wanted 
to grab your attention and pull you into the film!”

The Venice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> 
continues until 10 September.
 