
It's hard to explain this to electronic bands today but you had a very good 
chance of being beaten upwhen we started out in the late 70s <>. I've kept 
little pieces of paper from people saying things like "This isn't music" and 
"I'm going to kill you after the show". It wasn't a fight like feminism, but it 
was necessary.

The promise of electronic music was always that you could very directly 
articulate what you wanted to say. Synthesis at its highest level is a very 
direct thing: you turn this and push that and you can go where you needed to go 
very fluently. When we started out we all were driven to be very direct and 
blunt. The promise was one of purity of expression – a purity that gets this 
shit out of your head. We used tapes and synthesisers and machinery that had 
been derided and discarded. Learning how to play guitar would have been like 
learning a second language – although now I understand that guitars can be 
articulate in that way.

Bands like Sonic Youth treated guitars like a noise system they could use. It 
was their solution to the same problem.

When everything went digitial with CDs and DAT tapes in the mid-80s it was a 
real learning curve for everyone. We were sold this Platonic idea of 
perfection: you could make everything perfect. The engineers loved it. It took 
the musicans and the poets to say it's not really working. It took 10 years for 
everyone to realise that being digital meant you could really mess with and 
distort and rearrange things.

On stage now, we use iPads like we used to use tape machines – you can put the 
music through the tape heads and scratch it. People are nostalgic for the old 
technology but we constantly struggle not to be embedded in the past. The 
question is: what do we want? We want to grab a sound and stretch it – and what 
will do that best? It's the iPad. We're not interested in the artefact, we're 
interested in the result.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkLIi_ZMBfQs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkLIi_ZMBfQs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkLIi_ZMBfQs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Other people get hung up on using old Moogs. But it doesn't make their music 
any more authentic. There's no such thing as authentic or inauthentic music. A 
Negro spiritual is only authentic if it's sung by the original slave.

You can disappear up your arse if you don't constantly reassess what you do. 
People always want us to play live and to play the old hits. They're deeply 
offended if you change anything. But I don't even see the need for us to be 
there on stage, standing there pushing things around. I don't want to be looked 
at. I'm not an interesting person – it's just that I'm able to create these 
things that are interesting. I'm the box that the toy comes in. The visuals 
that we create for the show support and sustain the music, and vice versa.

I'm much more interested in the computer game I've created for the Adelaide 
festival,Hauntology House 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/online/hauntology_house>. It's what 
musical albums are in 2013. There's enough vinyl in the world.

There are the blockbuster computer games like Halo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halo_%28series%29>, which are made by big 
companies, with hundreds of people involved, and then there is the independent 
industry, particularly in places like Japan, which is where everything that is 
interesting is happening. There is a whole class of indie games where it 
doesn't matter if you win or lose, full of bizarre ideas.

I've seen these guys start to refer to their games as albums, so why can't I 
as a musician make a game myself? There's a lot to explore, there's a lot of 
pleasure for any musician there.
 Severed Heads live at the Adelaide festival. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Guardian 
It is hard. Making electronic music used to be really hard. When we started 
out, we'd read the NME, which would reach us in Australia by ship. We'd read 
about a gig that happened three months ago, and think, "I like the sound of 
that, I'll try and make something that sounds like it" - and we'd end up with 
something that sounded unique.

Making music today is much easier, thanks to programs like Ableton <> or 
FruityLoops <>. But you've got to get out of the mentality that says "if I just 
push this button, I'll get a result". You have to really bend things as hard as 
you can. And designing games is helpful like that. Something might take 12 
months to make, not 12 minutes, and that for some people can be very valuable.

I had the idea for my game in 1994; I sketched it out in 1999; I built the 
prototypes in 2000-2002; then I had to do things like work out how to feed 
myself and get a job; and the game is only finished now.

When technology is exciting, it's exciting. When it's not, it's not. Facebook 
is boring. Twitter is just likeCB radio <>. There's nothing new there. There 
are underlying principles of creativity that go beyond the technology that was 
available to you at the time. Certain things are beautiful and there are 
certain things that will always comfort you - and all these things will be kept 
over the years, whether it gets delivered by Google or Facebook or whoever. The 
names come and go.

Tom Ellard of Severed Heads was talking to Caspar Llewelyn Smith. The band 
played at the Queen's Theatre as part of theAdelaide Festival 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/music> on 13 March. You can play 
Hauntology House 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/online/hauntology_house> online.
 