
In the rush to embrace genius it is easy to ignore the contribution of the 
supposed artisan. And, while Tomas Berdych's consistency over the past year 
entitles him to be regarded more highly than a dancing partner for the stars, 
he fell short when confronted by the overpowering presence ofNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> only after making the most 
artistic contribution.

Monday night's win at the O2 Arena puts the world No1 in line for his second 
match in theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> on Wednesday with 
David Ferrer, who gave Andy Murray nightmares. If Murray is fit, not exactly a 
given, he faces Berdych.

This was not one of Djokovic's best wins; it might have been one of Berdych's 
best defeats. Djokovic clinched it after 2hr 39min, 3-6, 6-3, 7-6, a scoreline 
that accurately reflected the closeness of the contest but not the final gulf 
in class.

That could be appreciated only at crucial moments. When Berdych had match 
point in the third set and double-faulted, there was a universal intake of 
breath among the 17,500 fans who had packed the arena on the second evening of 
the tournament â€“ but none of that breath emanated from the man on the other 
side of the net.

What separated them was not six places in the world rankings but an 
appreciation of pressure. The genius sucked it up; the artisan did not.

Cruel? So is sport at this level and, for all the wonderful skills Berdych 
brought to an enthralling match, he stalled near the finish line. And how 
brilliantly he had looked on the grid. Before the fans had quite settled in 
their seats, the Czech had raced to a 4-0 lead in the first set. It looked as 
if he were about to upset not just the applecart but the entire market.

Djokovic, showing no signs that his shoulder would let him down, gave full 
vent to the comeback and, after ceding the first set, piled into the action in 
the second as the tempo rose appreciably. The quality, certainly, was a level 
above that of the afternoon match between Murray and Ferrer.

The Serb loosened up to dominate Berdych in the second and, when it came down 
to it in the third, the fight was always going to be one of wills. It was then 
that genius kicked in and the weight of an upset told.

Berdych's first-serve percentage went down to 46 and Djokovic pounced. His 
returns, previously safe, now strayed towards the white lines.

Good. But no cigar.
 