
The winner

Still no serious competition for Marvel’s superhero partypack Avengers: Age of 
Ultron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, with 
Tomorrowland flopping (see below) andMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> – perhaps because of its 
adult rating – not comporting itself exactly like a global blockbuster. Ultron 
hasn’t had the seismic US box-office impact of the first film, but has been 
holding well for a CGI action spectacle nonetheless: it dropped a commendable 
46.1% on this particular frame, benefiting from the Memorial Day crowd who 
weren’t fired up by Tomorrowland. A take of $1.27bn (£849m) sees it insixth 
place on the all-time list <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>, just 
belowFrozen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen>, and it’s not running on 
empty just yet: Japan, the last major territory to open, releases on 4 July. If 
it at least matches the original’s $45.2m there, that’s one more fingerhold 
further up the global box office cliff-face.

Future imperfect

Tomorrowland review - George Clooney is Mr Incredible in world-saver adventure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/tomorrowland-review-george-clooney-turns-mr-incredible-as-a-man-genius-world-saver>
Director Brad Bird won us over to the concept of the superhero family unit in 
The Incredibles <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-incredibles> and a 
gourmet Parisian rodent inRatatouille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/oct/12/animation.bradbird>. But a 
parallel-dimension scientific utopia drawing on the retro-futuristic charms of
one of the zones at the original Anaheim Disneyland 
<http://disney.wikia.com/wiki/Tomorrowland_%28Disneyland%29> seems to have 
proved beyond him, with his $175m fantasiaTomorrowland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomorrowland> managing a limp $32.9m 
three-day US debut and an alarming $27.5m from 65 overseas territories – just 
over half of its rollout. Bird’s past sleight-of-hand with outlandish story 
concepts is at full stretch in this awkward mish-mash ofWizard of Oz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wizard-of-oz> escapism, ironic vintage 
stylings and doomyInterstellar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar>
-esque prognostications; so it’s no surprise that the trailers for the film, 
which trip over themselves trying to define “Tomorrowland” and why we should 
care, don’t do any better. It was never really clear what the film was actually 
about.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432655706206%2Fd2fb2045-4099-4000-9724-ccf26aa8f779-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tomorrowland's%20flop%20recalls%20past%20Disney%20disaster%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tomorrowland%27s%20flop%20recalls%20past%20Disney%20disaster%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432655706206%2Fd2fb2045-4099-4000-9724-ccf26aa8f779-2060x1236.jpeg>
Tomorrowland: how Walt Disney’s strange utopia shaped the world of tomorrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/tomorrowland-disney-strange-utopia-shaped-world-tomorrow>
The fudged heart of the material put pressure on other elements – especially 
the choice of George Clooney, playing a jaded former child genius guarding the 
secret of Tomorrowland, as the film’s star. Even if he was dynamically leading 
the line in the film, and not a glorified sidekick, his late 90s/early 
noughties days of serious A-list leverage – which produced openings likeBatman 
& Robin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/68388>’s $42.8m in 1997 ($63.1m 
inflation-corrected) andThe Perfect Storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/84443/perfect.storm>’s $41.3m in 2000 
($56.7m) – are over. It seems strange to say it, but he could be perceived as a 
risk on a budget of this magnitude. Having said that, $175m is large, but the 
not the largest – so the comparisons currently springing up to recent Disney 
disastersJohn Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142787/john-carter>
 ($263m budget/$30.2m opening) andThe Lone Ranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-lone-ranger> ($225m/$29.3m) need putting 
into perspective. But there’s no doubt Disney have failed to impose themselves 
on this Memorial Day weekend; a shame for a relatively original blockbuster 
project and one – carried for long stretches by young leads Britt Robertson and 
Raffey Cassidy – that’s also quietly woman-centric.


True idol
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432655867842%2Fafefc738-5d83-465a-8f1d-22c84e68ed8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tomorrowland's%20flop%20recalls%20past%20Disney%20disaster%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tomorrowland%27s%20flop%20recalls%20past%20Disney%20disaster%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F27%2Ftomorrowland-disney-brad-bird-george-clooney-pitch-perfect-2-global-box-office%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432655867842%2Fafefc738-5d83-465a-8f1d-22c84e68ed8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Aamir Khan speaks during a press conference for PK in Beijing, China. 
Photograph: Imaginechina/Corbis 
A few months back, we saw Aamir Khan break the worldwide Bollywood record for 
the fourth time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/07/global-box-office-pk-the-hobbit-big-hero-6-unbroken>
 with his cheeky religious satire PK. Coda to that story was this weekend’s 
belated China release, where Khan has very strong form. Rentrak’s three-day 
estimate, $4.5m, varies from other reports, which place it at $5.3m, but either 
way it’s a new lifetime record for a Bollywood work there – beating the actor’s 
ownDhoom 3 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yeF_b8EQcK0> ($3.2m) in 2014 and 3 
Idiots <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xvszmNXdM4w> ($2m) in 2011. Again, the 
film’s global total is disputed, perhaps because of the local currency 
fluctuations against the dollar that have affected many recent blockbusters: 
Rentrak has it at $95.6m, but others think it has crossed the $100m threshold 
that would be a Bollywood landmark. As well as Khan’s clout in China, his 
thoughtful film had strong word-of-mouth, a large release (4,600 screens – 
close to the scale of its Indian release) and arrived on the back of last 
year’s Indian-Chinese co-production treaty that is generating a bit of buzz 
around certain projects, including anow-aborted teamup between the actor and 
Jackie Chan 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/entertainment/report-aamir-khan-walks-out-of-kung-fu-yoga-starring-jackie-chan-2088695>
.


The new Streisand?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20'We're%20performing%20oral%20magic'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20%27We%27re%20performing%20oral%20magic%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/94449/chicago>’s 2003 Oscars 
sweep ushered in a mini-revival for the film musical. But the genre’s novelty 
status in the 21st century has meant that – a far cry from MGM’s constellation 
of “more stars than in heaven” during its hoofing heyday – there are no big 
names consistently associated with it. Could Anna Kendrick be getting there, 
though? A cappella girl-group sequelPitch Perfect 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2> has reached $179.5m after 
three weeks in play, so it looks a strong contender for the yearly top 20. She 
fronted the original film in 2012 – also supplying vocals forCups 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmSbXsFE3l8>, which became a sleeper top 10 
Billboard the following year – and further bolstered her musical credentials 
this year appearing as Cinderella in the $212.9m-grossingInto the Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/into-the-woods>, as well as in well-reviewed 
indie hopefulThe Last Five Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/last-five-years>, based on Jason Robert 
Brown’s off-Broadway piece. It doesn’t make Kendrick Babs Streisand yet, but 
the 29-year-old actor, who broke through with the Twilight franchise, seems to 
be banking on her vocal talents as another way of marking herself out from the 
twentysomething talent parade – in addition to intelligently spiky performances 
in conventional dramas likeUp in the Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/up-in-the-air>. To date, Kendrick has almost 
always thrived as part of an ensemble, but if her musical hot streak continues, 
it could be time to place her unequivocally at the head of the bill.


The rest of the world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMPssohHXyXw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMPssohHXyXw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMPssohHXyXw&media=>
In terms of non-Hollywood offerings this week, the two South Korean entries on 
Rentrak’s chart were kept at bay by Fury Road and the new Melissa McCarthy 
comedy Spy, which has just started its global rollout (of which more next 
week). The thwarted local boys, in third and fourth place in the Korean 
rankings, were murder thrillerChronicles of Evil 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uocs8Nsv3FU>, discussed last week, and period 
dramaThe Treacherous <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MPssohHXyXw>, from Min 
Kyu-dong, whose 1999 film Memento Mori got bundled in with the clamour over 
“extreme” Asian horror. Just behind those on the global chart in 13th pace was 
the BBC and DNA’sFar from the Madding Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/far-from-the-madding-crowd> adaptation, which 
tripled its US screen count to nearly 900, bringing in $2.3m – encouraging for
Carey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>’s leading-lady 
prospects, as it’s much improved on An Education’s $763K opening in 2009.


The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUN1G4BSyIos&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUN1G4BSyIos>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUN1G4BSyIos&media=>
It’s one of life’s eternal mysteries why Dwayne Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dwayne-johnson>, who must surely have quaffed 
the charisma supplements in equal ratio to the protein ones, isn’t a bona fide, 
chest-beating A-lister already. He’s helped revitalise the Fast & Furious 
franchise in recent years, but doubts over his ability to open a movie solo are 
to be resurrected with this week’s release of disaster flickSan Andreas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UN1G4BSyIos>. Warner’s $100m film is getting a 
frontloaded 50-country dumping this week, including in the US, and Johnson will 
be hoping that he can advance on the $243m worldwide earned by his slyly 
revisionistHercules <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hercules> last year. 
Melissa McCarthy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/melissa-mccarthy>, whom no 
one betted on to open a film but clearly can, brings her 007 takedownSpy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/16/spy-review-paul-feig-melissa-mccarthy-jude-law>
 to seven more countries after releasing in most of south-east Asia this time; 
Bond spoofage is clearly a growth industry afterKingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service> earlier this 
year, and Paul Feig’s (Bridesmaids; The Heat) looks far sharper and less 
self-satisfied.


And it’s not quite a 30-year Mad-Max hiatus , but 2001’s Korean comedy My 
Sassy Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sUZbp7myCQo> – a runaway hit there 
that broke out across the whole east-Asian region and spawned several remakes – 
gets a belated sequel in the shape of the revolutionarily namedMy New Sassy Girl
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_New_Sassy_Girl>, out in China this week. It 
stars the original’s Cha Tae-hyun, who in the new film is struggling with the 
loss of said sassy lady and marries his Chinese childhood sweetheart instead. 
But the true romance here is between the South Korean and Chinese industries, 
co-operating on the project in the hope of a sweaty box-office love-in.


Top 10 global box office, 22-24 May

1. Avengers: Age of Ultron, $67.3m from 92 territories. $1.27bn cumulative – 
67.6% international; 32.4% US
2. Mad Max: Fury Road, $62.1m from 71 territories. $211.6m cum – 58.7% int; 
41.3% US
3. (New) Tomorrowland, $60.5m from 66 territories – 45.5% int; 54.5% US
4. Pitch Perfect 2, $45.5m from 38 territories. $179.5m cum – 34.3% int; 65.7% 
US
5. (New) Poltergeist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/poltergeist-2015-review>, $31.3m 
from 36 territories – 26.5% int; 73.5% US
6. (New) Spy, $12.5m from 10 territories – 100% int
7. Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/19/home-review-rihanna-kids-animation>
, $6.1m from 27 territories. $360.6m cum – 53.4% int; 46.6% US
8. Furious 7, $5.1m from 61 territories. $1.49bn cum – 76.9% int; 23.1% US
9. PK, $4.5m from one territory. $95.6m cum – 88.9% int; 11.1% US
10. Hot Pursuit <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hot-pursuit>, $3.5m from one 
territory. $29.9m cum – 3.3% int; 96.7% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. Some of this week’s figures are 
based on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 