
Further changes are expected to BBC1's consumer affairs show Watchdog 
following the appointment of a new editor, Jeff Anderson, formerly of ITV1's 
Tonight.

Anderson's new role sees him follow in the footsteps of his brother, Steve, 
who edited Watchdog in the late 1990s.

The Anne Robinson-fronted series will leave the BBC's Media Centre in Wood 
Lane, west London, and move into a new studio atBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Television Centre, it has been 
confirmed.

Anderson, who will take up his new role next week, replaces Rob Unsworth, who 
is moving to the BBC's editorial policy unit.

Anderson launched Tonight with Trevor McDonald in 1999, when it replaced World 
in Action as ITV's flagship current affairs strand. He edited it for three 
years.

He rose to become ITV's controller of current affairs and documentaries, and 
then left last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/21/jeff-anderson-leave-itv ends>, 
becoming head of factual for independent production company Lion TV in Scotland.

Watchdog is in the process of being revamped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/17/bbc1-watchdog-live> after a 
relaunch last year as an hour-long show with Robinson in the presenter's chair 
saw ratings suffer.

Its return has been delayed while the format is rethought and it is expected 
to be back on air in the spring.

Unsworth oversaw the last four series of Watchdog. In his new role at the 
BBC's editorial policy unit he will be lead advisor on all in-house factual 
programmes.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 