
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> and the 
Coalition government will this morning be sworn in by the governor-general 
Quentin Bryce at Government house in Canberra more than a week after the nation 
voted them in.

The prime minister elect Tony Abbott and his 41 Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> MPs will take the oath 
(or affirmation) of office. Extra oaths will be taken by Abbott, the nine 
cabinet ministers, 11 outer ministry members and 12 parliamentary secretaries.

Abbott has faced criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/bishop-vanstone-defend-abbott-women-cabinet>
 since announcinghis cabinet team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/sep/16/tony-abbott-first-coalition-government-ministry-full>
 as it contains just one woman - foreign minister Julie Bishop. Of two other 
expected female inclusions, Bronwyn Bishop was appointed speaker of the house 
and Sophie Mirabella withdrew her name from consideration as a tight race in 
her electorate could see her ousted from parliament altogether.

Abbott said in a statement that as soon as the swearing in ceremony was over, 
he would be getting to work running the country and making good on key election 
promises.

"Today is not just a ceremonial day, it's an action day. The Australian people 
expect us to get straight down to business, and that's exactly what this 
government will do,'' Abbott said.

''As soon as I return to Parliament House from the swearing-in ceremony, I 
will instruct the department of prime minister and cabinet to prepare the 
carbon tax repeal legislation.''

He also said they would immediately begin enacting Operation sovereign borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/operation-sovereign-borders-begins-wednesday>
, their asylum seeker policy which sees operations headed by a three star 
general.

"It's so important that we send a message to the people smugglers that, from 
today, their business model is coming to an end," Abbott said.

He is expected to name deputy chief of Army Angus Campbell as head of the 
operation, who would be promoted to the three-star rank of lieutenant-general.
 