
Tony Abbott has lashed out after reports that the green army will be scrapped 
in the looming midyear budget update, declaring that he is “dismayed” by the 
development and accusingMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> of dancing to the 
tune of the Greens.


The former prime minister took to social media on Monday to defend the program 
he launched after reports it would be axed to helpfund the government’s 
parliamentary deal with the Greens to restore $100m to Landcare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
.

Abbott said the program was good for grassroots conservation and “got 
unemployed people working too”.

“It’s a bad principle to axe your own policy for the Greens policy because it 
means that their priorities are more important than ours,” Abbott said. “That 
would hardly be a smart move for a centre-right government.”

Earlier on Monday Turnbull refused to say if the government would axe the 
program in the midyear budget update, due on 19 December.

The prime minister said he wouldn’t engage with media speculation, and he told 
reporters in Melbourne that the government had a strong commitment to 
environmental programs.

“Landcare is a very good program,” he said. “It is very much admired and very 
effective. It is a very effective use of funds. It has enormous community 
support.”

As to the future of the green army, Turnbull said: “We will have to wait until 
Myefo.”

The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, told ABC’s 7.30 he would not 
pre-empt Myefo but the $100m offered for Landcare was a “great decision”.

When asked about Abbott’s comments, Joyce said the former prime minister knew 
“as well as all of us” about the need to turn the budget around.

The environment and energy minister, Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, also ducked the 
issue. “The green army has been a very successful program of the Coalition,” he 
told ABC Radio on Monday.

“We’ve had more than 1,000 projects right around the country, whether it’s 
planting 2m trees as a result of the green army or ridding 90,000 hectares of 
weeds, but these are issues that have to be looked at in the context of the 
overall budget situation.”

Frydenberg said the government would have to find savings across the board in 
MYEFO but he didn’t intend to speculate in advance.

Tony Abbott's 'green army' expected to be abolished in budget update
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbotts-green-army-expected-to-be-abolished-in-budget-update>
Abbott set up the green army program after commitments made in 2010 and before 
the election he won in 2013. His government allocated $300m over four years to 
the green army, funded by a $484m cut to Landcare.

As part of the deal to pass the backpackers tax in the final parliamentary 
sitting week, the Greens required the government to allocate $100m to Landcare.

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, said on Monday 
his party had never supported the green army program.

“We always opposed the green army,” he said. “It was not an environmental 
program, it was an employment program and a bad one at that.”
 