
Britain's Andy Murray may now feel a little better about his first round 
Australian Open defeat by Juan Ignacio Chela after the Argentinian beat Lleyton 
Hewitt 6-4, 6-4, 6-7, 6-2 to reach the last 32. On the other hand the young 
Scot may look on this result and think it might have been him in the Rod Laver 
arena beating last year's runner-up.

Many believed that, if Murray got past Chela, he would have a good chance of 
taking out Hewitt, the No3 seed, who has been struggling for form after a virus 
and has continued to rail against the slowness of the courts in his home grand 
slam event. Against Chela his left ankle was strapped during the match and, 
despite a determined effort in the third set, he had nothing to give in the 
fourth.

Chela was almost out on his feet at the close and took time out to have a 
massage, not because he was injured but because he was cramping. This rule 
needs to be changed quickly. If a player's general conditioning is not good 
enough to allow further participation, he or she should forfeit the match. Not 
that Chela deserved to lose. As against Murray he served wonderfully well and 
hit his ground-strokes with great depth, accuracy and venom.

This second-round match had been ridiculously hyped because of the 
considerable antagonism when the two met here last year, with Chela afterwards 
fined around Â£1,000 for spitting in Hewitt's direction. There was also a rumpus 
in the locker room, coupled with further bad feeling when Australia played 
Argentina in the Davis Cup. But on this occasion the match was played in 
perfect spirit with Hewitt's stentorian cries of "Come on" that had so 
frustrated Chela last year almost totally absent.

The Australian had struggled to get through the opening round against Robin 
Vik of the Czech Republic, needing five sets, and the intensity that has been 
his trademark over the years was largely lacking. No Australian has won this 
title since Mark Edmondson in 1976 and the pressure once again told on Hewitt 
who, despite having won the US Open and Wimbledon titles, has only once gone 
beyond the last 16 here in 10 attempts.

As the temperatures soared into the 30s, with a blast of greater heat forecast 
for the weekend, Roger Federer had earlier eased around the centre court as if 
the word cool had been coined for him. Germany's Florian Mayer was a decidedly 
florid Mayer by the close of their second-round match that the world No1 won 
6-1, 6-4, 6-0.

After winning the title two years ago for the first time, Federer was beaten 
in the semi-finals last year by the subsequent winner Marat Safin, who is now 
injured, as is the world No2 Rafael Nadal of Spain. Hewitt's defeat has left 
the main threat as Andy Roddick, the No 2 seed, and Federer has won 10 of his 
11 matches against the American. Small wonder he exudes confidence.

Mayer tried his level best to unbalance the Swiss, principally by attempting 
to force the issue at the net, as will Max Mirnyi, the giant from Belarus, in 
the next round tomorrow. "It was good preparation," said Federer, who took no 
more out of himself than he might flicking crumbs off a tablecloth.

Tony Roche, his Australian coach, believes Federer could do even more damage 
more quickly if he came to the net more often. "In a couple of years when I'm 
maybe a little slower around the court it might be good to come to the net a 
little more but at the moment I don't really need to change my game," said 
Federer. Why muck about with perfection?

Aside from Hewitt, the other main casualty of the fourth day was France's Mary 
Pierce, the No5 seed, who was beaten 6-3, 7-5 by the 22-year-old Czech Republic 
left-hander Iveta Benesova, who had previously won only four matches at this 
level. A third-round match between Pierce and Martina Hingis had been keenly 
anticipated but now the former Swiss world No1 will play Benesova after winning 
6-1, 6-1 against Emma Laine of Finland. "She can be very dangerous," said 
Hingis, although she did not sound unduly perturbed at the prospect.
 