
The women were there from the beginning of course, whether in America, in Asia 
or Africa, whether as settlers or soldiers’ wives, as part ofthe “fishing 
fleet” to India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/13/fishing-fleet-anne-de-courcy-review>
 or convicts in New South Wales. Like the men, they sailed across the world in 
cramped and dangerous conditions in order to live in often punishing 
conditions. Mostly, though, they were too busy surviving to write about it.


 Among the splendid exceptions was Lady Anne Barnard, an early traveller in 
Africa. But then, as I discovered in researching her adventurous and 
bewilderingly eventful life, Anne wrote a great deal about everything. We were 
just unaware of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2018c67fed304d07f560403b1f5ff6ff6954e7%2F46_24_801_986%2F801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20women%20in%20the%20British%20empire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20women%20in%20the%20British%20empire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2018c67fed304d07f560403b1f5ff6ff6954e7%2F46_24_801_986%2F801.jpg>
 Miniature portrait of the young Lady Anne Barnard by Richard Cosway RA 
(1742-1821) . Photograph: African Image Pipeline 
 Her Cape diaries and journals from 1797 to 1802 have been published and mined 
by historians for the light they cast on life in the early colony, for her 
visions of a land of plenty at a time when imperial ambitions were confined to 
the east. An ardent advocate of settlement in Africa, she was yet an 
egalitarian, with notions of a universal humanity that jarred with those of her 
fellow colonists.

 Exploring her vast and otherwise unpublished papers, I found that she 
illuminated much more besides. Living at the centre of Georgian society, she 
set down her observations in sparkling prose on contemporaries while playing a 
key role in the Prince of Wales’s secret marriage and visiting France during 
the revolution. Though born into the Scottish aristocracy, Anne defied 
convention, rejected at least 12 proposals and lived independently as a poet 
and musician, artist and hostess, before marrying an army officer 12 years her 
junior.

 Their years together in Africa were her happiest. Travelling by wagon into 
the interior in 1798, she wrote of a new Canaan: “Hereis scarcity but here will 
be plenty”; and of her love for her husband and their shared landscape: “Both 
gay, attached to each other, blessing the Great Lord who form’d the wonder 
before us … Let no one despair, let no heart sink with despondency: Here I am, 
said I again, I never thought I should have been here at all! Africa – Africa!”

These are my 10 choices of books about the remarkable lives of women in the 
British Empire.

1. Original Letters from India by Eliza Fay 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/31/travel/31armchair.html?_r=0>
Thanks to EM Forster, who described Mrs Fay as a work of art and arranged the 
publication of her letters, this indefatigable character remains as vivid today 
as when recounting her first journey to India in 1779, across the desert in 
Egypt and the Indian Ocean. She was unknown, unconnected and suffered 
misfortune upon misfortune, including imprisonment underHyder Ali 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyder_Ali>, but still made no fewer than four 
voyages to the east – one was quite enough for most travellers – where she died 
penniless. No extract can do justice to her sharp eye and sharper pen. Mrs Fay 
must be read.

2. Journal of the Disasters in Affghanistan by Florentia Sale 
<https://archive.org/details/ajournaldisaste01dickgoog>
Harry Flashman, who had plenty to say about women and empire, called Lady Sale 
a vinegary old dragon with a tongue like a carving knife. Well, what else would 
one expect from a cad who quailed before spirited women as fast as he fled the 
catastrophe of Afghanistan in 1842?

Sale was, in fact, cultured as well as tough. Her diary of life in Kabul 
records the pleasure of sharing her geraniums and cauliflowers with “Affghan 
gentlemen”. Even after they turned hostile, Florentia thought them “a fine, 
manly-looking set”. The British commanders, on the other hand, she perceived as 
a pathetic lot, from the hapless General Elphinstone to various “reprehensible 
croakers”. Her own mettle was visible during the massacre that followed, her 
wound being quickly dismissed: “I had fortunately onlyone ball in my arm; three 
others passed through my poshteen near the shoulder”. During nine months of 
captivity she endured filth, fever and cold while writing a compelling record 
of the entire calamity.

3. The Ordeal of Elizabeth Marsh by Linda Colley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/26/featuresreviews.guardianreview4>
A striking feature about women who wrote about the early days of empire is how 
many experienced captivity: their tales from dungeons run by brutes made for a 
publishing sensation. Elizabeth Marsh did her time in Morocco in the 1760s, 
when Britons really could be slaves. Colley, however, has gone far beyond The 
Female Captive in producing this extraordinarily rich biography of an 
adventurer who did not stop at preserving her virginity from the harem, but 
remained “in motion for most of her life”, which she reshaped, as did so many, 
in India.

4. Travels in West Africa by Mary Kingsley 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/travels-in-west-africa-2.html>
Even among this indomitable breed of women, Mary stands out for her daring. 
She came to Africa almost a century after Anne Barnard with a keen interest in 
natural history and the eye of an early anthropologist, recording impressions 
from Sierra Leone to Angola, Congo and Niger. She was barely less bold as a 
standard bearer for African culture, challenging perceptions about the colonial 
mission before dying as nobly as she had lived, nursing Boer prisoners of war 
at the Cape in 1900.

5. White Mughals by William Dalrymple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/oct/05/highereducation.books1>
Dalrymple’s wonderful book is a saga of the enduring love affair – cultural, 
aesthetic, imaginative – that a certain kind of Briton enjoyed with India. At 
the heart of it, though, lies the tragic figure of Khair un-Nissa, a Mughal 
princess who won the heart and soul of James Kirkpatrick, the resident at 
Hyderabad. She bore him two children, yet her life in dissipated European 
society was short and tough. She died, aged 27, in 1813.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f737926d662cb425b05d0e6218d69db0ccc7805%2F0_168_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20women%20in%20the%20British%20empire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20women%20in%20the%20British%20empire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftop-10-books-about-women-in-the-british-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f737926d662cb425b05d0e6218d69db0ccc7805%2F0_168_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
 ‘A taste for things foreign and incongruous’ … Jan Morris in 2008. Photograph: 
Mike Segar/Reuters 
6. Domestic Manners of the Americans by Fanny Trollope 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/domestic-manners-of-the-americans.html>
The travel book by Anthony Trollope’s mother is actually postcolonial, having 
been published a half century after the war of independence. But it brings to 
transatlantic observations all the prim disapproval to be expected from a 
mother country of such American habits as spitting and slavery. Many readers 
were offended, but Mark Twain rose coolly above the outcry, proclaiming his 
enthusiasm for “Dame Trollope” who, he said, “knew her subject well and … set 
it forth fairly and squarely”.

7. Out of Africa by Karen Blixen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/out-of-africa.html>
She had a farm in Africa, in the Ngong Hills, and wrote about that landscape, 
its people and wildlife with a passion and lyricism that seem a world away from 
a decadent colonial Kenya. The reality is that her aristocratic Swedish husband 
could have stepped straight out of White Mischief and her lover, Denys 
Finch-Hatton, was forever taking to the air. But in Blixen’s Africa, beauty 
prevails.

8. My Brilliant Career by Miles Franklin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-brilliant-career-2.html>
An Australian novel, born in the outback to a writer who was a teenager when 
she set down her dream of escaping Possum Gully for a more refined world. So 
she did, while retaining the independence an upbringing in the bush inspired: 
“To me,” she wrote (in 1895), “the Prince of Wales will be no more than a 
shearer, unless when I meet him he displays some personality apart from his 
princeship – otherwise he can go hang.”

9. The Grass Is Singing by Doris Lessing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/grass-is-singing.html>
A novel out of Africa, and one that anticipated the end of empire with relish. 
Although raised on a farm in southern Rhodesia, Lessing was always a rebel and 
her debut work took an astonishingly bold line in exploring the doomed 
relationship between a white farmer’s wife and a black servant – she vindictive 
and racist, yet ultimately a helplessly dependent victim. I spoke to Lessing 
once, long after its publication in 1950, in the light of Mugabe’s Zimbabwe. It 
was as if she had anticipated it all.

10. The Empire Triptych by Jan Morris 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/1251/the-art-of-the-essay-no-2-jan-morris>
I read Pax Britannica when Jan was still James, I was still in my 20s and 
empire seemed still within reach. Along with its companions, Heaven’s Command 
and Farewell the Trumpets, it may feel dated to a later generation, not to say 
insufficiently infused with guilt. But it remains a literary landmark, honest 
and quite beautifully written, of our past and ourselves when we had “a taste 
for things foreign and incongruous, a recurrent yearning to break out of our 
gentle northern setting, all greens and greys, into more vivid places where 
fortunes can be made, outrageous enterprises undertaken, and the restrictive 
rules of scale and conduct flamboyantly disregarded.”

 * Defiance: The Life and Choices of Lady Anne Barnard by Stephen Taylor is 
published by Faber, priced £20.It is available from the Guardian bookshop for 
£16.40, including free UK p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/defiance-465747.html>.
 