
Old Welsh myths have informed and inspired writers, poets, musicians and 
painters. They were born in fireside storytelling in the Welsh language and 
contain all human emotion and great poetic beauty. The adventures I’ve selected 
are woven into the dramatic landscape of Wales: its mountains, rivers, valleys 
and ancient trees. Some of the novels I have chosen are “expressions” or 
interpretations of the myths, but others depict the mischief and humour in 
present dayWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>.

1.The Owl Servic <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/owl-service.html>e by Alan 
Garner

The Owl Service is a set of dinner-plates found in the attic of an isolated 
house in Wales. Roger and Alison, step-brother and sister, are spending a few 
weeks in the old house, with their recently remarried parents. The discovery of 
the dinner plates with their strange pattern of flowers that can be read as 
owls, when upside down, set in motion an extraordinary and dangerous train of 
events. They seem to lead back to the ancient myth of a girl conjured out of 
flowers; a girl whose treacherous infidelity causes the magicians to turn her 
into an owl.

2. The Grey King <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Grey_King> (from The Dark 
is Rising series) by Susan Cooper

When the final battle of Light and Dark approaches, Will Stanton, the last 
born of the Old Ones, sets out to find help. He must wake the Sleepers, six 
noble riders who have slept for centuries. In order to do this Will must find a 
magic harp hidden in the Welsh hills. But his quest will bring him into the 
presence of the leader of the Dark – the Grey King, who holds the harp. Will 
must summon a force strong enough to wrench the harp from the Grey king’s grasp.

3. The Red Judge <http://paulinefisk.squarespace.com/books-the-red-judge/> by 
Pauline Fisk

When Zed’s innocent prank causes his sister to be struck by a car, his 
adoptive family send him back to his old home in the Welsh hills. Once there, 
Zed is haunted by the Red Judge of Plynlimon mountain who, Zed knows, comes to 
get you if you are bad. So Zed embarks on a wild adventure by dogsled, 
desperate to find safety and somewhere to belong, but the Red Judge seems 
always to be behind him.

4. Megan and the Pantomime Thief 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/megan-and-the-pantomime-thief.html> by 
Frances Thomas

This is the second book about Megan and her friends in the village of Nantglas 
in Radnorshire. The script for the village pantomime is missing and strange 
carved heads are appearing all over the village. Who is responsible? Megan 
turns detective. She must find out what is going on, but she also has to deal 
with the new girl, Zoe, who is becoming quite a problem.

5. Playing Twm 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/lifestyle/playing-twm-by-ruth-morgan-2326524> by 
Ruth Morgan

When Midge moves from London to Mid-Wales, she is teased relentlessly by the 
other children at her new school. However, she is cheered up by the news that a 
Hollywood Movie Star – Dylan Blane, is also Welsh. Midge begins to live in her 
own dream-world, and then Dylan Blane arrives to make a film in the Welsh 
Hills. Midge manages to get a walk-on part in the movie, but when she meets the 
great Dylan Blane himself, her dreams turn to nightmares.

6. Incarceron  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/incarceron.html>by Catherine 
Fisher

Incarceron is a huge futuristic prison that contains metal forests, 
dilapidated cities and even a wilderness. Finn, a prisoner, feels that he once 
lived on the Outside, but he can’t remember it. Claudia lives Outside, in a 
replica world of the 17th Century. She is determined to find Incarceron as she 
believes the heir to the throne has been imprisoned there. Finn and Claudia are 
destined to meet.

7. The Magic Apostrophe <http://www.robsullivan.clara.net/> by Jenny Sullivan

When Tanith Williams learns that she is a witch she is frightened and 
astonished. She is welcomed by into the world of magic by her six weird aunts, 
but, just as Tanith is getting used to her strange life of witchery, she meets 
Astarte Perkins, a new girl at school, and things take an unexpected turn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caad617c14b05e2f54f1b35adae7331f5b12670%2F0_0_8276_4962%2F8276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20adventure%20stories%20inspired%20by%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20adventure%20stories%20inspired%20by%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9caad617c14b05e2f54f1b35adae7331f5b12670%2F0_0_8276_4962%2F8276.jpg>
 Roald Dahl is famed for living in Great Missenden (and here he is outside his 
writing shed), but he was born and bred in Wales and the landscape continued to 
inspire him throughout his career. Photograph: Ian Cook/Time Life 
Pictures/Getty Images 
8. A String in the Harp <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_String_in_the_Harp> 
by Nancy Bond

An American family, the Morgans, come to spend a year in Wales, hoping to 
recover from the death of their mother. Angry and miserable, Pete wanders the 
seashore and finds a strange object washed up by the tide. It is a harp key 
that shows him scenes from the life of Talieson, the great Welsh bard. The 
key’s discovery begins to heal the bereaved family, but then the curator of a 
museum threatens to take the key and lock it away forever.

9. James and the Giant Peach 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/james-and-the-giant-peach-5.html> by Roald 
Dahl

Poor James Trotter’s parents are eaten by an enormous rhinoceros that escapes 
from the London Zoo. James, now an orphan, is sent to live with his awful aunts 
who call him a “disgusting little beast”. A huge peach appears on a peach tree 
in the garden. James is forbidden to go near it, but, of course, he does. In 
fact he goes right into the peach; there he meets some delightful insects, and 
his life becomes a whole lot better. The Welsh connection?Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl> was born in Wales and often spoke 
of the impact of its landscape on his books and imagination.

10. Northern Lights <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/northern-lights-7.html> 
(the first book in His Dark Materials Trilogy) by Phillip Pullman

Twelve-year-old Lyra lives in an Oxford College with her daemon, Pantalaimon. 
Her daemon can take the form of any creature he chooses. When Lyra’s friend, 
Roger, disappears, Lyra and Pantalaimon set out to find him. They travel North, 
hoping to see the Northern Lights, and to discover something about the 
mysterious ‘dust’ Lyra has heard about. Their quest leads them to a land of 
armoured bears and witch queens, and to a group of scientists conducting 
experiments almost too dreadful to contemplate. The majority of Philip 
Pullman’s childhood was spent inLlanbedr 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Llanbedr> in Ardudwy, north Wales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127df783de7f34c50e2c29fadbf89936bde394b4%2F0_0_711_1092%2F711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20adventure%20stories%20inspired%20by%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20adventure%20stories%20inspired%20by%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftop-10-adventure-stories-inspired-by-wales-st-davids-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127df783de7f34c50e2c29fadbf89936bde394b4%2F0_0_711_1092%2F711.jpg>
Jenny Nimmo is the author of The Snow Spider, the story of how a modern Welsh 
boy discovers he is a magician, inspired by Welsh myths and legends. A 30th 
anniversary edition of the book is published in October 2016. A new look for 
her best-sellingCharlie Bone series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlie-bone-and-the-red-knight.html> is 
launching in August, and her new book Henry and the Guardians of the Lost is 
published in September 2016. To find out more about Welsh literary adventures 
or to book your own, go tohttp://www.visitwales.com/explore/literature 
<http://www.visitwales.com/explore/literature>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTIDXeZhq6II&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTIDXeZhq6II>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTIDXeZhq6II&media=>
 Check out this video about Jenny Nimmo’s The Snow Spider!  