
When my second novel, Hope Farm 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hope-farm.html>, was published, I was 
surprised to find I’d created a divisive character in Ishtar, the hippie 
mother. I knew Ishtar was difficult, and made mistakes, but I wasn’t prepared 
for the outrage some readers felt at her behaviour. It occurred to me that it 
wasn’t her making mistakes in general that upset them so – it was her making 
mistakes in her job as a mother. Mothers, it would seem, are not allowed to get 
away with much.


What is it that causes us to judge them so harshly? I suspect there’s 
something very basic in it, to do with the exquisite vulnerability of children, 
the likelihood of life holding disappointment, difficulty and possibly worse 
for them, and the mother’s place in this equation as the deliverer of the child 
into the world, the responsible party.

Hope Farm by Peggy Frew review – a painful tale of mother and daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/14/hope-farm-by-peggy-frew-review-a-painful-tale-of-mother-and-daughter>
But there’s much more to the matter, too much to discuss here. Suffice it to 
say there’s great writing material to be had in the question of maternal 
responsibility, and in the messy intersection of the mother’s actual self with 
her role in the lives of her children.

1. Lives of Girls and Women by Alice Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/24/lives-of-girls-and-women-by-alice-munro-review>
Munro immerses us in 1940s and 50s rural Canada, where Del Jordan’s mother 
Addie looms large, restlessly intellectual and proud. It’s Aggie who speaks 
presciently of “a change coming … in the lives of girls and women”, urging Del 
to use her brains. Del is circumspect: “Her concern about my life, which I 
needed and took for granted, I could not bear to have expressed.” Their 
relationship, both participants too close to be afforded a clear view, is 
masterfully lifelike. When the book closes with Del leaving small-town life 
behind to become a writer, I want to cheer for Aggie.

2. The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>
In a world in which the few still-fertile women are kept as slaves by wealthy 
families, their only function to breed, at once the most powerless and most 
valuable members of society, motherhood becomes acutely political. Atwood’s 
narrator Offred is irresistible – whip-smart and drily funny, cracking open her 
careful exterior from time to judiciously chosen time to allow us heartbreaking 
glimpses of what’s underneath.

3. Motherhood and Creativity: The Divided Heart by Rachel Power 
<http://affirmpress.com.au/publishing/motherhood-creativity/>
Power, herself a writer, artist and mother, interviews Australian women on the 
fraught matter of pursuing one’s creative work while also raising children. 
This is by no means a self-help book – if you’re expecting a guide to “having 
it all” you’ll be disappointed. Instead, Power and her interviewees conduct a 
series of honest conversations that I find in equal measure fascinating, useful 
and galvanising.

4. Gilgamesh by Joan London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
In this wonderful novel, a young woman in remote Western Australia becomes 
accidentally pregnant to a visitor, has the baby and sets off to find the 
father – travelling to Europe and, eventually, Armenia under the approaching 
shadow of the second world war. What I love about Gilgamesh – apart from 
London’s concise, poetic prose – is the realistic depiction of Edith changing 
over time, motherhood being a major but not the only element of this.

5. Why Be Happy When You Could Be Normal by Jeanette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/04/why-be-happy-jeanette-winterson-review>
This could so easily have been a “misery memoir”, but Winterson writes with 
extraordinary compassion and generosity about her adoptive mother. There is 
misery, sure – Winterson doesn’t leave out the abuse she suffered at the hands 
of the woman she refers to throughout as “Mrs Winterson”, nor its legacy – but 
there’s also a determination to make sense of a relationship many would lack 
the courage to consider, let alone thoroughly examine. Winterson does her best; 
the result is brilliant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftop-10-books-about-bad-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ff131997ec50f049cdca467f3d255bcd49c9ee%2F0_636_2521_1512%2F2521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20mothers%2C%20'bad'%20and%20otherwise%2C%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftop-10-books-about-bad-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20mothers%2C%20%27bad%27%20and%20otherwise%2C%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Ftop-10-books-about-bad-mothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ff131997ec50f049cdca467f3d255bcd49c9ee%2F0_636_2521_1512%2F2521.jpg>
 A very difficult relationship ... a still from the BBC’s 1990 adaptation of 
Jeanette Winterson’s autobiographical novel, Oranges are Not the Only Fruit. 
Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
6. Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant by Anne Tyler 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/04/19/specials/tyler-dinner.html>
Pearl Tull is the matriarch of this family drama, a marvellous character – 
full of pride and disappointment, tragically lonely yet so abrasive she’s hard 
to like. When abandoned by her husband she tells their children that he’s away 
on business, extending the deadline as months, then years, pass. She 
congratulates herself on successfully fooling everyone, which, as we later 
learn, she didn’t do at all. Tyler’s folding back of the story from different 
angles – as she gives each child a voice – shines light on the missed 
connections of one family, at the centre of which Pearl remains slightly 
inscrutable, as a mother so often is to her children.

7. The Mint Lawn by Gillian Mears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/20/gillian-mears-wry-poetic-unmistakably-australian-and-gone-too-soon>
This is the book that made me want to write. It’s the story of Clementine, 25 
years old and still living in the town of her childhood on the east coast of 
Australia, a lush landscape of purple-flowered trees and warm brown rivers. 
Mears, who died aged just 51 in May, had a talent for embedding emotion in her 
descriptions. This novel is like a living organism, anchored in the senses – 
and at its heart is Clementine’s yearning for her lost mother, whose charisma 
and appetite for life, burning so brightly in her daughter’s memory, were also 
what took her away.

Top 10 books about long marriages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/17/top-10-books-about-long-marriages>
8. A Life’s Work: On Becoming a Mother by Rachel Cusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/09/biography.features>
There’s an “arm’s length” quality to Cusk’s writing that I find slightly 
frustrating, but that’s a minor complaint. Mostly, I’m filled with admiration 
for this “personal record of a period of transition”. She writes of how 
becoming a mother altered her sense of self, elucidating what for me had been 
only partly understood experience.

9. Salvage the Bones by Jesmyn Ward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/11/salvage-bones-jesmyn-ward-review>
Ward’s prose, graphic and vital, confronting and uplifting, transforms her 
dirt-poor Mississippi setting into something grand and mythic. Mothers, as with 
many myths, are central. There’s China the pit bull, birthing her puppies in 
primal, bloody glory in the opening scenes; Esch, the 15-year-old narrator, 
whose own mother is dead, and whose own pregnancy is unwanted and mostly 
unacknowledged; and there is Hurricane Katrina, “the murderous mother who cut 
us to the bone but left us alive, left us naked and bewildered as wrinkled 
newborn babies”.

10. Monkey Grip by Helen Garner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/monkey-grip.html>
This Australian classic, set in 1970s Melbourne, concerns single mother Nora 
and her world of group houses, free love, drugs, and children sleeping bundled 
in coats on the floor. Books have been written – I wrote one myself – about the 
negative effect of such social experimentation on children But it must be 
recognised that few parents set out to do damage, and in Monkey Grip I hear a 
love song for the optimism of the 70s, for the gameness of people like Nora, 
trying out different ways of living.

 * The title of this article was changed on Friday 23 September at the request 
of the author. 
 * Hope Farm by Peggy Frew is published by Scribe, priced £12.99. It is 
available from the Guardian bookshop for £10.65 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hope-farm.html>.
 