
A fox has been stalking me for more than a decade.


 He slid into my world through the tangled brambles on the far side of the 
stream at the bottom of our garden, his tail straight and his snout high. This 
may be a real memory. But around this time Dax Jones slid into my mind through 
the tangled brambles on the far side of my imagination.

 Dax was an average kid who one day shapeshifted into a fox. Soon after, my 
imaginings shapeshifted into afive-part adventure series 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395737/> for Oxford 
Children’s Books. Dax Jones has roamed my mental thicket ever since.

 I love foxes but not everyone’s with me on this. Foxes get a bad press. Here 
is my top 10 foxy fables - in which the fox gets represented in every light. If 
you read them all you can make your own mind up…

1. The Gingerbread Man – folk tale

Cast as a villain for early readers, our cunning fox offers Gingerbread Man a 
ride across the river on his tail, back, snout and – oops – in his snappy jaws. 
(Yum!) But if you ask me, that freshly-baked delinquent had it coming.

2. Fox In Sox by Dr Seuss

In gloriously weird illustration, the fox in Dr Seuss’s superb tongue twisting 
tale is once again represented as a clever sweet-talker. Poor Mr Knox hasn’t a 
hope of escaping the Fox In Socks’s increasingly bonkers word games… or has he?

3. The Adventures of Pinocchio by Carlo Collodi

Fox reputation takes a battering again in this classic, when the little wooden 
puppet boy is conned by a fox and a cat, both faking disability. The pair are 
after Pinnochio’s five gold coins and try to murder him.

4. The Fantastic Mr Fox by Roald Dahl

Roald Dahl's greatest philosophical quotes ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/27/roald-dahls-greatest-philosophical-quotes-ever>
This time we get the lupine point of view as Mr Fox outsmarts odious farmers 
Boggis, Bunce and Bean when they try to trap and murder his family. True – in 
real life, some of the animals befriended by the Fox familywould end up as 
dinner, rather than dinnerguests – but this anthropomorphic romp is great fun.

5. Flambards by KM Peyton

KM Peyton: 'You're never too young to start writing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/feb/04/km-peyton-youre-never-too-young-to-start-writing>
Never read this if you love foxes. The hunting scenes are graphically 
unpleasant. And yet I confess, as a child, Iloved the Flambards books, in which 
a teenage girl finds herself through horse riding… and hunting (ugh!). It 
partly inspired the blood-thirsty fox-hunting chapter in The Shapeshifter: 
Running The Risk.

6. Little Foxes by Michael Morpurgo

I met Michael Morpurgo a while back and told him he always makes me cry. This 
story is no exception as lonely foundling Billy Bunch finds love in the 
wilderness by adopting some orphan foxes. Very beautifully told and never 
sentimental. Yeah, I cried again.

 7. Aesop’s Fables

The fox gets many outings in these ancient stories – mocking the crane by 
offering him soup in a shallow bowl, flattering a cheesy windfall from a crow’s 
beak and convincing a daft goat to jump down a well so he can use it as a 
ladder. The fox is sneaky, false and callous. I suspect Aesop kept chickens.

 8. The Fox & The Star by Coralie Bickford-Smith

The Fox and the Star – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/dec/01/the-fox-and-the-star-waterstones-book-of-the-year-2015>
This is a picture book you’ll want to rip apart… and frame all around your 
house. Then you’ll have to buy another. The fox can’t find the star which 
guides it through the dark woods. Here, in exquisite illustrations and short, 
perfectly sculpted sentences, is a story of loss and resilience. You’ll cry 
into your children’s hair.

9. The Fox & The Hound by Daniel P Mannix

Full of grim realism, this is a kind of land-based Moby Dick story as a master 
of the hounds becomes obsessed with hunting a single fox – Tod – with a single 
foxhound – Copper. Disney’s movie was very loosely based on this but with less 
death and mutilation. Not one for bedtime reading.

10. The Thought Fox by Ted Hughes

This is the title poem in a collection by the former poet laureate, in which 
he describes nature at its wildest.The Thought Fox is a wonderful piece of 
writing… about writing. The fox’s tracks through the snow mimic the writer’s 
first hesitant words across white typewriter paper. Means more to me than I can 
say.

Dax’s sixth adventure – The Shapeshifter: Feather & Fang by Ali Sparkes is out 
now.Buy it at the Guardian bookshop. 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395737/> 


 

 