
The lion might be considered the King of Beasts but it’s the tiger that has 
always captured my imagination, perhaps as a result of a childhood spent with a 
particularly silly tabby-cat? Or an early encounter with Judith Kerr’s hungry 
house-guest? The tiger has often been a subject in my illustrations, and was an 
obvious subject when it came to writing and illustrating a picture book.


There’s something in the feline-slink of a tiger’s movements, the simple 
graphic appeal of those black and orange stripes, the inviting symmetry of 
their faces; tigers just make great story characters! Hungry, friendly, fierce 
or playful, there are all kinds of tigers to be found in children’s books, but 
these are my absolute favourites...

1. The Tiger Who Came to Tea 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/346062/> by Judith 
Kerr

My hero: Judith Kerr by Michael Rosen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/07/my-hero-judith-kerr-rosen> 
Judith Kerr’s Tiger takes the top spot in my all-time-top-10-desert-island 
tiger list. Sporting a benevolent smile throughout; the Tiger tucks into pretty 
much everything in Sophie’s house and washes it all down with a pot of tea. I 
think the key to the Tiger’s charm is his sweetness, perched like a house-cat 
at the dining table he seems so gentle that it’s hard not to wish he’d popped 
round to your house instead!

2. Winnie the Pooh  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-6.html>
by AA Milne

The story of how Winnie the Pooh was inspired by a real bear – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/nov/24/winnie-the-pooh-inspired-by-a-real-bear>
Tigger has been a childhood staple since he first appeared in the Winnie the 
Pooh stories in the late 1920s. I have vivid memories of my Dad singing “the 
wonderful thing about Tiggers” to me when I was small, and as a result Tigger 
and my Dad have become forever linked.

Whilst the Disney version is fun and lively, its EH Shephard’s original Tigger 
drawings that really capture the raggedy, stumbling, bounciness of Tigger. His 
excitable personality and endless energy make him easy to relate to as a small 
child.

3. The Tyger <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/305012/>
 by William Blake

William Blake’s Tyger isn’t, strictly, a children’s book character , but he is 
indelibly etched in the memory of any child who studies literature. Whilst only 
the first four lines of the poem remain in my head it is the illustration that 
endures. Blake’s watercolour Tyger is stocky and still, wide eyed and slightly 
anxious looking, he doesn’t seem to possess much of the “fearful symmetry” 
Blake writes of, poor chap!

4. Augustus and his Smile 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/augustus-and-his-smile-2.html> by Catherine 
Rayner

Catherine Rayner’s Augustus and his Smile is a contemporary classic already 
thanks to Catherine’s beautiful, energetic illustrations. Augustus is playful 
and curious and delightfully feline: prowling around on the hunt for his 
missing smile. The image of Augustus swimming along with a shoal of colourful 
fish is joy embodied, I think!

5. Tiger by Michael Rosen, illustrated by Kevin Waldron 

Re-illustrating The Jungle Book: a paper Shere Khan by Kevin Waldron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/picture/2016/apr/13/reillustrating-the-jungle-book-shere-khan-by-kevin-waldron>
Kevin Waldron’s Tiger for Michael Rosen’s Tiny Little Fly is a giant, slightly 
disgruntled cat attempting to swat away the “tiny little fly” of the title. I 
could look at Waldron’s delightful Tiger all day long, she’s so charming 
looking! Her big, round face looms over the irritating fly, ready to swat it 
away, but will she succeed where the Elephant and the Hippo have failed?

6. The Tiger Who Would Be King 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/340650/> by James 
Thurber

Recently republished with fantastic illustrations from Yoo Hee Yoon; James 
Thurber’s 1927 parable The Tiger Who Would Be King is the story of an 
ego-maniac Tiger who sets out to become King of the Jungle, tearing the forest 
apart in the process. Few children’s books so neatly explain the futility and 
monstrousness of war in such a concise, manageable way, and Yoon’s bold, two 
colour illustrations are truly exciting and filled with chaotic and frightful 
energy!

7. Tiger on a Tree <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tiger-on-a-tree.html> by 
Anushka Ravishankar

It follows a playful tiger who wanders into an Indian village, much to the 
alarm of the locals. This simple story presents a dilemma in black, white and 
orange - what do you do with a tiger once you’ve caught it?

8. The Jungle Book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/330492/s/the-jungle-book/>
 by Rudyard Kipling

Top 10 unlikely friendships in children’s books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/10/top-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books>
The Shere Khan of Rudyard Kipling’s The Jungle Book is a complex character. 
Probably the most tigery tiger of them all, Kahn is a fierce hunter, and proud 
and arrogant too. Khan is on a mission to hunt, and young Mowgli is about to 
cross his path! Where Khan is a scary beast and a reminder that, although 
picture book tigers are often friendly and fun, the real things is made of much 
tougher stuff!

9. Gracie Grabbit and the Tiger 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/339376/> by Helen 
Stephens

The tiger in Gracie Grabbit and the Tiger plays a key role in foiling a crime 
happening at a city zoo. Helen Stephens is well know for How to hide a Lion, 
but her big cat magic isn’t only limited to those massively-maned-mammals. Her 
tiger in this book is wide eyed and friendly, and clearly has a strong moral 
compass, setting Bobby Grabbit on a new, less illegal path in life!

10. Life of Pi <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-of-pi-3.html> by Yann 
Martel

Janis MacKay top 10 books set on the ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/mar/05/janis-mackay-accidental-time-traveller-scottish-childrens-books-award>
This one isn’t exclusively for children, but the illustrated edition with 
pictures by Tomislav Torianic is impossible to resist. Here, Martel’s 
sea-faring tiger “Richard Parker” is brought to life in bright, vivid oil 
paint. The images are as dramatic as the story and Torianic manages to capture 
Richard Parker as both a fearsome carnivore and a wide-eyed kitten (when faced 
with a tasty fish), with a deft swish of the paintbrush.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ftop-10-tigers-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F254a57a59ed2354f6bc70468c3ab97abfb098078%2F0_0_2671_3614%2F2671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20tigers%20in%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ftop-10-tigers-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20tigers%20in%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Ftop-10-tigers-in-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F254a57a59ed2354f6bc70468c3ab97abfb098078%2F0_0_2671_3614%2F2671.jpg>
Lizzy Stewart is the author of There’s a Tiger in the Garden, which you can 
buy at theGuardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/397033/s/there-s-a-tiger-in-the-garden/>
.
 