
The world took one giant step towards robot equality recently, with our canine 
friends showing us that it’s possible to coexist with machines without killing 
each other.


When dog met robot it wasn’t quite love at first sight, but the two seemed to 
come to appreciate each other’s turf. Trotting, bounding, chasing and posturing.

The dog, Cosmo, is Android creator and one-time chief of Google’s robotics 
effortsAndy Rubin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/andy-rubin>’s. The 
robot isSpot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/10/spot-the-dog-boston-dynamics-cutest-robot-google>
, which is apparently the only model in civilian hands. The whole thing was 
shot by venture capitalist Steve Jurvetson,who said 
<http://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/military-robots/two-of-googles-most-famous-dogs-really-dont-get-along>
: “The tradition of the uncanny valley continues ... to the un-canine valley!” 
Quite.

Spot, and its larger brother LS3 aka “Alpha Dog”, were designed and built by 
Alphabet’sBoston Dynamics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/17/google-boston-dynamics-robots-atlas-bigdog-cheetah>
 for the US military as robotic pack mules able to carry equipment over rough 
terrain. While they can and do do that, they’re also not very quiet and are not 
autonomous, with Spot requiring a human driver to point it in the right 
direction.

For the US military, that wasn’t enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/30/us-marines-reject-bigdog-robot-boston-dynamics-ls3-too-noisy>
, forcing the project to be shelved – what’s the point of a packhorse that 
gives your position away to the enemy because it’s so loud? – but the 
military’s loss could be a canine robot’s gain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gehrAhflQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gehrAhflQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gehrAhflQ&media=>
 Trot, march, step and conquer. 
Perhaps now they’re free to roam the wilds, and sow the seeds of the eventual 
robot uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/27/elon-musk-artificial-intelligence-ai-biggest-existential-threat>
.

 * The MacBook Selfie Stick is the art project Apple lovers deserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/26/macbook-selfie-stick-apple>

 * Jeff Bezos 1-0 Elon Musk: Blue Origin New Shepard lands successfully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/24/jeff-bezos-1-0-elon-musk-blue-origin-new-shepard-lands-successfully>
 