
Legendary translator Anthea Bell began translating Asterix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> in 1969, eight years after the 
books first appeared in French.

Anthea is responsible for some of Asterix's finest puns and it was she who 
changed the name of Obelix's small, evil-tempered dog from Idéfix to Dogmatix, 
and transformed Panoramix into Getafix.

Here Anthea Bell shares her top 10 favourite books in translation that she 
would recommend for children.

1. Children's and Household Tales by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm

This is the 200th anniversary year of the first edition of the famous tales 
collected by the Brothers Grimm, and where better to start? The traditional 
tales are for everyone, and lend themselves to retellings like Philip 
Pullman's, or variations like Angela Carter's The Bloody Chamber, and in 
Germany novelist Karen Duve's Grrrimm (sic).

2. The King James Bible 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007414062>

I mean that seriously. Religion needn't come into it. Good readers of 10 
onwards can enjoy the rousing stories; what they don't fully understand now 
they will later. Aged nine, I had no idea what profession Rahab the harlot 
practised, only that she was the heroine of her own story, and spared when she 
let Joshua's men into Jericho. If those young readers also have imagination, it 
will be caught by the cadences of the Authorized Version, a great glory of 
English literature. But it must be the AV; nothing else will do.

3. Fairy Tales of Hans Andersen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840221732>

I prefer Grimm, but I must not neglect Denmark's national treasure, whose 
stories are the first of the "art fairy tales". Andersen is best where he comes 
closest to the traditional roots; he took 'The Tinderbox' from the Grimms' 
group of soldiers' tales. And it's only the ending of 'The Little Mermaid' 
that's kitschy. He usually stays on the right side of the sentimentality line.

4. Heidi 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853261251>
 by Johanna Spyri

I read Heidi when I was eight, and was fascinated. I hardly even understood 
what a translation was, but Heidi and I were both country children, I in the 
flat East Anglian farming countryside, she in the high Alpine meadows – and 
what a difference. Without knowing it, I had seen the power of translation to 
open your eyes to other worlds.


5. Old Peter's Russian Tales by Arthur Ransome

I'm not playing quite fair, since this is not so much a translation as a 
retelling from the collection of the Russian folklorist Alexander Afanasyev. 
Ransome wrote it during his years in Russia. Most people who have read it in 
childhood greatly prefer it to all those Swallows and Amazons – and it is with 
a pleasurable shock in later life that one finds references to the same tales 
in Russian music.

6. Emil and the Detectives 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099572848>
 by Erich Kästner

A classic, set in Berlin before the Second World War. The enterprising Emil 
and his friends live in their own boys' microcosm. As a Jewish writer, Kästner 
had his books burnt and watched the immolation himself. But the story goes that 
even Hitler said Emil should be spared the bonfire, on the grounds of sheer 
popularity.

7. Fattypuffs and Thinifers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099582922>
, André Maurois

The title itself is a brilliant rendering of the original Patapoufs et 
Filifers. This fantasy, written between the two World Wars, has references to 
the politics of the time if you care to look for them, but does not depend on 
that for continued enjoyment today.

8. Pippi Longstocking 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780192733061>
, Astrid Lindgren

The first of Lindgren's famous books about the little girl with superhuman 
strength. Alison Lurie has described children's literature as the last refuge 
of the politically incorrect, and Pippi with her provocative, gleeful 
naughtiness is surely the supreme example.

9. Tintin albums 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781405206310>
 Hergé

The French and Belgians can and do present anything (even Proust) in bande 
dessinée or comic strip format, but only two out of many series have ever 
caught on in the English-speaking world. As I am involved in the second series, 
I will cite the first, the adventures of boy reporter Tintin. While there have 
been a number of recent spin-offs, the original albums are as popular as ever.

10. Reckless 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908435606>
 by Cornelia Funke

And here we come full circle to the Grimms' influence again. Funke's fertile 
imagination, as translated here by Oliver Latsch, both plays on traditional 
themes like shape-changing and others of her own invention. The hero of this 
story and its sequel, Fearless, is even called Jacob Reckless and has a brother 
called Will. Funke has done much to persuade modern publishers that foreign 
children's literature is worth translating.
 