
I’ve always been a worrier. My earliest memories are of worrying about things 
– whether I would ever be able to get my dummy out from behind the radiator 
where I had hidden it, whether I would be all right if I wasn’t wearing my 
favourite yellow jumper, whether giving my cuddly monkey a radical haircut had 
been a mistake, whether God could see me on my potty.

 I remember having a sleepless night during my first week at school and when 
my mum came to see what was wrong, I sobbed “Tomorrow I’ve got to write my name 
AND stick it on my tray – I just don’t know how I’m going to get it all done!”

 Life can be overwhelming, but you are not alone. There are plenty of 
characters in children’s literature who worry and who fret but who also manage 
to conquer their fears.

 1. Piglet in AA Milne’s Winnie the Pooh 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-6.html> books

 I adore Piglet. He is Pooh’s best friend and is a small, timid, squeaky 
voiced creature who is scared of heffalumps and woozles amongst many other 
things.

“’Supposing a tree fell down, Pooh, when we were underneath it?’

‘Supposing it didn’t,’ said Pooh after careful thought.

Piglet was comforted by this.”

We all need a friend like Pooh.

Emily Gravett's animals – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/feb/22/emily-gravett-in-pictures>
2. Little Mouse in Little Mouse’s Big Book of Fears 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-mouse-s-big-book-of-fears.html> by 
Emily Gravett

 This is a fabulous book with maps and newspaper cuttings and photos and 
postcards and all sorts of surprises inside (all of which Little Mouse has had 
an anxious nibble on). Little Mouse is scared of lots and lots of things and 
marvels over the fact that even though he is very small and very scared, there 
are people who are scared of him.

Mick and Chloe Inkpen’s top 10 author/illustrator pairings in picture books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/17/mick-and-chloe-inkpens-top-10-authorillustrator-pairings-in-picture-books>
3. The Thing in Emily Brown and the Thing 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/emily-brown-and-the-thing.html> by Cressida 
Cowell, illustrated by Neal Layton

 This is a wonderful story about a small girl dealing with a very high 
maintenance monster called the Thing. It’s funny, it’s got twists and turns and 
shows us, among other things, that we can spend far too much time nurturing our 
fears rather than trying to conquer them.

4. The Rabbit in The Black Rabbit 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-rabbit.html> by Phillipa Leathers

The Black Rabbit is a fantastic book about a rabbit who is scared of his own 
shadow. He does everything he can to escape from his shadow (running away, 
jumping into the river etc) but it is always right behind him. The 
illustrations are stunning and the story has a wonderful ending.

Lola Rose by Jacqueline Wilson - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/oct/27/review-lola-rose-jacqueline-wilson>
5. Lola Rose in Lola Rose <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lola-rose.html> by 
Jacqueline Wilson

I could really have picked any Jacqueline Wilson character although I have a 
particular fondness for Lola. There is no other writer who tackles such 
difficult subjects with her characters facing genuinely frightening and 
difficult situations – and yet she does so with such warmth and reassurance. 
I’m sure she has done more to help anxious and frightened children than any 
other author.

Six of the best picture books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2012/feb/14/waterstones-childrens-book-prize-picture>
6. The Owl in A Bit Lost <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bit-lost-2.html> by 
Chris Haughton

 A Bit Lost is a book that covers the familiar ground of an animal who has 
(temporarily) lost his mother. But Chris Haughton does it with remarkably few 
words, terrific illustrations and great humour.

7. The Owl in The Owl Who was Afraid of the Dark 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/owl-who-was-afraid-of-the-dark.html> by Jill 
Tomlinson, illustrated by Paul Howard

Plop is scared of the dark, which isn’t ideal when you’re an owl. But then he 
meets a sequence of people who convince him that dark is exciting, kind, fun, 
necessary, fascinating, wonderful and beautiful. By the end, Plop has changed 
his mind - so much so that when his father reminds him of his fear of the dark, 
he says “That was a long time ago!”

Lucy Coats's top 10 bear picture books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/mar/21/lucy-coats-top-10-bear-picture-books>
8. Little Bear in Can’t You Sleep, Little Bear? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/can-t-you-sleep-little-bear.html> By Martin 
Waddell, illustrated by Barbara Firth

Little Bear is another creature who is scared of the dark. Big Bear does 
everything he can to help Little Bear get to sleep. He lights lantern after 
lantern but Little Bear is still scared and still cannot sleep. Finally Big 
Bear realises the answer is not to try to escape from or remove the dark – but 
to carry Little Bear right out into it.

9. The Squirrel in Scaredy Squirrel 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/scaredy-squirrel.html> by Melanie Watts

Scaredy Squirrel is scared of the unknown and Martians and killer bees and 
especially germs. Melanie Watt’s drawings are absolutely magnificent and the 
squirrel is a wonderful creation who discovers that hiding and avoiding your 
fears often brings more trouble than facing them.

10. Wilson in Whiffy Wilson 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/whiffy-wilson.html> by Caryl Hart, illustrated 
by Leonie Lord

This is one of my favourite books. It is about a Wolf who is scared of baths. 
I read it to my stinky children a lot. It is a rhyming story, skilfully written 
and with superb illustrations. I hope Scaredy Squirrel never meets Whiffy 
Wilson because

“His fur was full of beasties

He had fungus on his toes

He ate his dinner with his paws

Then wiped them on his clothes”

Luckily his friend Dotty has a solution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftop-10-worriers-in-childrens-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548ccb96be5305794547a5e7928b6eae9405afad%2F0_0_1600_2185%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20worriers%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftop-10-worriers-in-childrens-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20worriers%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20literature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Ftop-10-worriers-in-childrens-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548ccb96be5305794547a5e7928b6eae9405afad%2F0_0_1600_2185%2F1600.jpg>
 Wilf Battles a Pirate by Georgia Pritchett 
So those are some of my fellow worriers that I have enjoyed reading about. Of 
course, being a worrier I am very worried that I have missed one out. In fact 
I’m sure I have. Maybe other readers can help…

Georgia Pritchett is a TV comedy writer and the author of the Wilf series of 
books. The latest Wilf book is Wilf the Mighty Worrier: Battles a Pirate.Buy it 
at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/342827/>.
 