
When most people go on holiday, they sightsee or relax. They work on their tan 
or search for souvenirs. Not me. I love to travel, and when on holiday 
recently, my thoughts have turned to murder and mayhem. The first book in the
Chasing Danger series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387512/> was inspired 
by my trip to the Maldives a few years ago. This beautiful and secluded 
location offered the perfect setting for action and adventure. I’m currently 
writing the second book in the series – Mystery at the Ice Hotel. While on 
holiday at an amazing winter wonderland, I was imagining snowmobile chases, ice 
daggers and dead bodies in blocks of ice.

Creating any top 10 is difficult – especially when it comes to books. I could 
list so many more titles. But I’ve narrowed down a much longer list to only 10. 
These books offer settings ripe for adventure – and these stories definitely 
deliver.

Robin Stevens's top 10 crime capers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/20/robin-stevenss-top-10-capers>
1. First Class Murder: A Murder Most Unladylike Mystery 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408235/> by Robin 
Stevens

This is the third book in Stevens’s lovely whodunit series. Young detectives 
Daisy Wells and Hazel Wong follow in the footsteps of Agatha Christie’s Hercule 
Poirot and must solve a mystery while on a three-day journey across Europe on 
the Orient Express.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmar%2F28%2Fanthony-horowitz-alex-rider-villains-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Horowitz's%20top%20five%20Alex%20Rider%20villains%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmar%2F28%2Fanthony-horowitz-alex-rider-villains-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Horowitz%27s%20top%20five%20Alex%20Rider%20villains%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmar%2F28%2Fanthony-horowitz-alex-rider-villains-video&media=>
Anthony Horowitz’s top five Alex Rider villains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2012/mar/28/anthony-horowitz-alex-rider-villains-video>
2. The Alex Rider series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/276571/> by Anthony 
Horowitz

The book covers proclaim: action, adrenaline and adventure. Although 
Stormbreaker, the first book in the series, starts closer to home, the rest of 
the books are a whirlwind of assassins and espionage from many thrilling 
locations, including the French Alps, Venice, Australia, Africa and Cairo.

Louis Sachar: 'I make up the story as I go along, but a lot of it is really 
bad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/07/louis-sachar-interview-fuzzy-mud>
3. Holes <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280828/> by 
Louis Sachar

“There is no lake at Camp Green Lake.” Not an enticing slogan for a travel 
brochure but a great opening line for one of my favourite books. I don’t 
recommend this sweltering Texas wasteland full of rattlesnakes, scorpions and 
yellow-spotted lizards as a holiday destination, but it’s an incredible 
backdrop for Sachar’s intricate plot puzzle that twists two stories together 
and manages to be funny, tense and heart-warming.

4. Rift  
<https://www.hachettechildrens.co.uk/authors/detail.page?id=FimgX/aJ68PATbEsPYSoTsWk8D3IrNK4Ykwasg03n3pTxOXkx1WRiXD9O0Qq>
by Beverley Birch

Atmospheric. The perfect word to describe this thriller set in Africa. Three 
English schoolchildren, one local boy and a journalist vanish without a trace. 
Readers are immersed in the location but also engaged by a mystery that unfolds 
through newspaper articles, diary entries, letters, interview transcripts, and 
some good old-fashioned snooping.

Katherine Rundell's top 10 descriptions of food in fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/jul/23/katherine-rundell-top-10-descriptions-food-fiction>
5. Rooftoppers <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rooftoppers.html> by 
Katherine Rundell

On Sophie’s first birthday, she’s found floating in a cello case in the 
English Channel. This beautifully written tale takes flight from the rooftops 
of Victorian Paris. This book offers a unique perspective on one of the top 
tourist destinations of all time. “Clocks below her began to strike four, and 
Paris was waking. Its sound was like the hum of a hundred secrets, she thought: 
it was the mutter of a dozen soothsaysers.”

6. Hatchet  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hatchet.html>by Gary Paulsen

From city rooftops to the deepest Canadian wilderness. When 13-year-old 
Brian’s plane crashes, he’s the only survivor. This city boy must learn to 
thrive in the great outdoors with only his wits and trusty hatchet.

Marcus Sedgwick: 'There is almost nothing you can't tackle in a teenage novel'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/16/marcus-sedgwick-teenage-novel> 
7. Revolver <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/revolver.html> by Marcus Sedgwick

The Arctic Circle in 1910 offers the perfect eerie setting for Sedgwick’s 
psychological thriller. Young Sig Andersson is alone with his father’s frozen 
corpse and a Colt revolver hidden in the storeroom. What a premise!

Helen Moss: people must wonder why I'm staring at them and muttering under my 
breath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/21/helen-moss-interview-secrets-of-the-tomb>
8. The Phoenix Code series <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/phoenix-code.html>
 by Helen Moss

This new series combines exciting locations such as Egypt’s Valley of the 
Kings and an archaeological site in China with unbelievable action and 
adventure, including ancient murder mysteries, deadly secrets, treasure, 
fire-breathing dragons, and terracotta warriors. I can’t wait to see where Moss 
will take us next.

9. Going Bovine <http://libbabray.com/books/title/going-bovine> by Libba Bray

I love this book because it’s absolutely bonkers. A kid with mad-cow disease, 
a punk angel, a dwarf and a yard gnome go on a madcap quest through a wacky 
America. The story begins and ends in the most magical place of all. Bray opens 
her story – and I dare you not to continue – with an opening line like this: 
“The best day of my life happened when I was five and almost died at Disney 
World.”

10. The Secret Garden <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-garden-33.html> 
by Frances Hodgson Burnett

This British classic is not an obvious choice to end a top 10 list about 
thrilling locations. The book is set at an old manor house in Yorkshire. For 
British readers, Yorkshire won’t be consider exotic or thrilling, but I grew up 
in a small town in the United States. I checked out and read my elementary 
school’s copy of The Secret Garden countless times. For this young reader, 
England was a magical far-away place with kings and queens and secret gardens.

Wishing you many safe travels and exciting adventures!

Sara Grant is the author of the new action-adventure series Chasing Danger. 
She has also written a YA novel, Dark Parties, and writes a funny magical 
series for young readers, titled Magic Trix. Find out more about Sara 
at www.sara-grant.com.Buy Chasing Danger at the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387512/>. 
 