
1. The Jungle Book <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jungle-book-19.html> by 
Rudyard Kipling (1894)

Unlikely friendships between humans and animals are staples of both children’s 
literature and cinema. Kipling’s tale of a child, Mowgli, growing up in the 
jungle alongside Baloo the Bear and Bagheera the Panther while taking care to 
avoid the attentions of the tiger Shere Khan – because he might, you know, eat 
him – presents this as an entirely natural state of affairs. The stories are 
fables, the animals offering moral lessons, particularly in the three stories 
featuring the “man-cub” himself. Adapted so often and into so many different 
shapes, it’s best to go back to the source, to the jungle, and read it as 
Kipling intended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8e84674bf062db3897713e0dc3366db3e8ba9b%2F0_1450_2731_2550%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20unlikely%20friendships%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20unlikely%20friendships%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf8e84674bf062db3897713e0dc3366db3e8ba9b%2F0_1450_2731_2550%2F2731.jpg>
 Winnie the Pooh playing Poohsticks with Piglet and Christopher Robin, in an 
illustration by EH Shepard.
 Photograph: Philip Toscano/PA 
2. The House At Pooh Corner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/house-at-pooh-corner-4.html> by AA Milne 
(1928)

No childhood would be complete without a little time spent in Ashdown Forest 
alongside Pooh, Piglet, Eeyore, Tigger and Roo. Pooh, of course, has no brain 
(according to his friends) but I daresay we’ve all had this accusation flung at 
us from time to time, which makes it so easy to relate to him. The little bear 
remains at the centre of all his friends’ activities, usually through his 
misdeeds, but the manner in which each looks out for the other is as charming 
as it is believable. Unusually for a book of this sort, there are no villains, 
no one trying to upset the status quo of the forest, just lots of fun and games 
and to read them again, as an adult, is to lose oneself in an almost unbearable 
level of nostalgia.

3. Of Mice And Men <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/of-mice-and-men-12.html> 
by John Steinbeck (1937)

Not strictly speaking a children’s book but as many of us read it as part of a 
school curriculum it seems to recall that time vividly, almost reeking of 
school dinners, puberty and unprovoked beatings. George and Lennie’s 
intellectual and physically variances suggest they might form an unlikely 
alliance and yet they see a shared future together in the acquisition of that 
great aspiration of the migrant worker, land. The small protects the big here, 
the weak protects the strong. The story’s resolution manages to combine an act 
of violence with one of great compassion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e6e7f37cd460c3dda9df33ef0cc9fbc0a5366d%2F0_86_3089_1854%2F3089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20unlikely%20friendships%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20unlikely%20friendships%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftop-10-unlikely-friendships-in-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e6e7f37cd460c3dda9df33ef0cc9fbc0a5366d%2F0_86_3089_1854%2F3089.jpg>
 Dakota Fanning and Wilbur in the film adaptation of Charlotte’s Web. 
Photograph: Allstar/PARAMOUNT/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
4. Charlotte’s Web <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlotte-s-web-7.html> 
by EB White (1952)

Who’s to say that pigs and spiders can’t be friends? There’s something magical 
about even the concept of this novel, a spider, Charlotte, spinning words of 
support in her web for her friend Wilbur, when it looks like the latter is 
about to be turned into sausages. Charming and funny, White plays with other 
concepts of friendships between humans and animals in his earlier novel Stuart 
Little.

How Goodnight Mister Tom was turned from book to stage play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/dec/04/goodnight-mister-tom-book-play-michelle-margorian>
5. Goodnight Mister Tom 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/goodnight-mister-tom-5.html> by Michelle 
Magorian (1981)


 There’s an unwritten rule in children’s literature that friendships between 
old and young people are boring, sentimental and that kids just don’t want to 
read them. Magorian’s classic novel puts a lie to this theory in her story of 
Willie Beech, both physically and mentally scarred by his violent mother, as he 
is evacuated to the home of Tom Oakley during the second world war. Delving 
into issues of religion and anti-semitism, the effect that the two central 
characters have on each other is what prevents this from being simply a “wise 
old man educating an innocent child” story.

Roald Dahl's greatest philosophical quotes ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/27/roald-dahls-greatest-philosophical-quotes-ever>
6. The BFG <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bfg-8.html> by Roald Dahl (1982)

 Despite being one of the most beloved children’s writers ever, it always felt 
like a rebellious act to read a Roald Dahl book, considering how dark and 
unconventional their storylines could be, particularly with regard to the 
author’s treatment of parents. (Like Dickens, “Who needs ‘em?” might have been 
his mantra.) Not that there are any here, of course, as Sophie is an orphan 
brought to Giant Country by the Big Friendly Giant and, while there, has to 
evade the child-eating tendencies of the other giants. Hats off to Queen 
Elizabeth II, who plays a central role in marshalling her troops to sort out 
the bad guys. Can that woman donothing wrong?

Children's books podcast: Eoin Colfer and Oliver Jeffers on their picture 
book, Imaginary Fred
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2015/nov/11/podcast-childrens-books-imaginary-fred-eoin-colfer-oliver-jeffers>
7. Lost and Found <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lost-and-found-10.html> by 
Oliver Jeffers (2005)

It’s hard to think of a writer who manages to encapsulate heartfelt emotion in 
so few words while never sinking into sentimentality as easily as Oliver 
Jeffers. In his wonderful picture books, kindness, humanity and friendship are 
always on display, along with more than a little cheerful eccentricity, and 
never more so than in this tale of a little boy who finds an unhappy penguin on 
his front door and decides to row him back to the South Pole.

How to draw... a boy and a bear in a boat - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2013/jul/18/how-to-draw-boy-bear-boat-dave-shelton>
8. A Boy And A Bear And A Boat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293734/> by Dave 
Shelton (2012)

Shelton’s profound and hugely entertaining tale of a boy and a bear sailing 
nowhere in particular is full of wonderful jokes and sarcastic asides, not to 
mention illustrations that you end up staring at for ridiculously long periods 
of time. We don’t know why the boy is running away, we don’t know why the bear 
is rowing a boat. And yet it all feels entirely rational and important and that 
if the boy didn’t have the bear to speak to, then he would have no one. From 
such simple needs, great friendships are made.

Why we're glad Bunker Diary won the Carnegie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/25/carnegie-the-bunker-diary-unsuitable>
9. The Bunker Diary <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bunker-diary.html> by 
Kevin Brooks (2013)

My own favourite YA book of the 21st century, this extraordinary tale of 
resilience in the face of inexplicable cruelty makes a hero of the young 
protagonist – Linus Weems – while the adults trapped alongside him in an 
underground bunker display varying degrees of violence and selfishness. The 
friendship that Linus forms with Russell, the oldest inmate, avoids any type of 
Morgan Freeman-type voiceover and is an essential and ultimately tragic part of 
the story. Ignore the why-must-we-throw-this-filth-at-our-kids brigade; this is 
contemporary literature at its finest.

10. Two Wolves by Tristan Bancks (2014)

It’s more unusual than you might think for siblings to be friends in YA books 
– they’re usually at each others’ throats – so the bond between Ben Silver and 
younger sister Olive in Australian writer Bancks’ novel of escape and parental 
misdeeds is a welcome respite for that alone. But this is also a tale of 
morality and personal responsibility, of looking after yourself while taking 
care of the person you love the most. With writing tighter than a bowman’s 
string,Two Wolves echoes the classic wilderness fiction of Jack London, 
revealing Bancks, a heroic champion of children’s literature Down Under, as a 
great 21st century storyteller.

John Boyne: 'You can't sit there weeping over your own stories'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/01/john-boyne-you-cant-sit-there-weeping-over-your-own-stories>
John Boyne is the author of nine novels, including the bestselling The Boy in 
the Striped Pyjamas. His latest book is The Boy at the Top of the Mountain. Buy
The Boy at the Top of the Mountain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/339255/s/the-boy-at-the-top-of-the-mountain/>
 at the Guardian bookshop and find out more about John Boyne on hiswebsite 
<http://johnboyne.com/>. 
 