
When writing for adults, every character, however malevolent, has to have a 
nuanced motivation behind the choices they make. Only when writing for children 
can you give full rein to pure, unadulterated wickedness. Children’s literature 
is filled with preposterously nasty people who are motivated by greed, sadism, 
vengeance and hatred.

Funny books for children seem to offer a particularly rich supply of appalling 
behaviour. MyCircus of Thieves 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/circus-of-thieves-on-the-rampage.html> series 
is entirely dependent on the character of Armitage Shank, the burgling 
ringmaster who is vain, pompous, selfish, cruel, jealous, greedy, impatient, 
immoral, and has hideous teeth. These attributes, however, don’t make the cut 
in my top 10 ways to be evil in children’s books.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431701374322%2F3f1953b0-9171-4b2a-9e9f-3b3d74c55f80-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20ways%20to%20be%20evil%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20ways%20to%20be%20evil%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431701374322%2F3f1953b0-9171-4b2a-9e9f-3b3d74c55f80-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jim Carrey plays the horrid Count Olaf in the movie version of Lemony 
Snicket’s A Series of Unfortunate Events. But Count Olaf in the book is far 
more sinister. So read the book! Photograph: Moviestore/REX 
1. Kidnap 

In children’s books, people are always trying to steal kids. From the Pied 
Piper to Neil Gaiman’s Coraline, via the extravagantly mendacious Count Olaf in 
theSeries of Unfortunate Events 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bad-beginning-2.html>, children are never 
safe. A moment’s lack of vigilance from a parent or guardian, and before you 
know it, your offspring will be following a flautist into a cave or 
disappearing through a mysterious portal to be brought up by button-eyed 
interlopers. Do variations on this story have perennial appeal because this is 
every parent’s worst fear, or every child’s? Or both? Either way, it is clear 
that we are paradoxically attracted to books that make us think about the 
things we least want to contemplate.

2. Hating children 

The greatest children’s writer of our age is Road Dahl. His books have sold in 
their millions around the world and are loved by more or less everyone who has 
every tried to entertain a child by reading to them. Yet almost every adult in 
his books loathes children. Worst of all are probably Aunt Sponge and Aunt 
Spiker inJames and the Giant Peach 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/james-and-the-giant-peach-6.html> who subject 
poor James to a childcare regimen that is heartless, cruel and vicious. If 
James hadn’t found his way into that peach but had instead grown up and gone 
into therapy, he would have had the material for a bestselling misery memoir.

3. Killing the protagonist 

If you are the child protagonist of an adventure story, it’s a fair bet the 
someone will be trying to kill you. A few years ago, in a second hand bookshop, 
I came across a rare book about a boy wizard called Harry (or it might have 
been Barry). I can’t quite remember, and unfortunately I melted my only copy in 
an accident with some hydrochloric acid, but I distinctly recall a character by 
the name of Voldesomething who was constantly trying to kill him, and who 
seemed to crystallise all the traits of a classic adventure story nemesis.

4. Eating the protagonist


If you are the animal protagonist of a children’s book, it’s a fair bet that 
someone will be trying to eat you. If you had to sum up the entirety of 
literature for the under eights in a sentence, you wouldn’t be doing too badly 
if you described the whole lot as a manifesto against carnivorousness. This 
certainly covers more or less everything by Beatrix Potter, with everyone from 
the Foxy Gentleman to Samuel Whiskers to Mr McGregor getting a very bad press 
simply for following their natural dietary predilections. My three children 
have all loved Beatrix Potter, but they also all like nothing more than 
troughing steak, so it would appear that the propaganda doesn’t always hit home.

5. Skinning the protagonists


If you are the dog protagonist of a chidren’s book, someone probably wants to 
skin you. I am referring, of course, to Cruella de Vil, and her plans for those 
pesky hordes ofDalmatians 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hundred-and-one-dalmatians.html>. Cruella de 
Vil is the best proof that can you get away with being quite spectacularly 
nasty in stories for children, and also that your malevolence can be 
gob-smackingly obvious from the minute you appear on the page.
 Bad. Mr. Gum. Photograph: Andy Stanton 
6. Anarchism 

What does Mr Gum 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/what-s-for-dinner-mr-gum-2.html> really want? 
This could be one of the great literary questions of our era. My theory is 
this: he just wants everything to go wrong. Theft is just the start. He is in 
fact an anarchist, in the rich tradition that runs back through the Cat in the 
Hat all the way to the Mad Hatter. Where children’s books have an antagonist 
who represents the spirit of anarchy, the question of who is the hero and who 
is the anti-hero is often up for debate. In these books, children identify far 
more closely with the forces of chaos than the forces of order. Mine certainly 
do, anyway, as you would know if you saw the state of my living room. Though 
these characters are nominally “bad”, they also qualify as the great heroes of 
children’s literature.
 So mean! Edmund meets the White White in the movie version of The Lion, The 
Witch and the Wardrobe. Photograph: theguardian.com 
7. Disliking Christmas

The White Witch in The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lion-the-witch-and-the-wardrobe-10.html> has 
sent Narnia into a hundred year winter, but she never allows Christmas to 
arrive. Boo! The Grinch also tries to prevent the solstice gift-giving bonanza 
from taking place. Ebenezer Scrooge doesn’t have to powers to prevent the 
festival taking place, but simply by being grumpy about it he casts himself as 
a baddie. In real life, not liking Christmas possibly means that you are not a 
Christian and/or hate buying piles of stuff that nobody really wants. In 
fiction, anti-Christmas sentiment is a shorthand for evil.

8. Sending children to bed with no dinner 

Evil comes in many extravagant and baroque forms in children’s books, but 
sometimes the bad guys are both ordinary and close to home. As every child 
knows, few things in life are more annoying than parents. Mostly, parents are 
simply dull, which is why they don’t often appear in children’s fiction. 
Parents have to be got rid of for interesting stories to take place, where the 
child has agency over his or her fate. Hence the classic device most memorably 
used inWhere The Wild Things Are 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/where-the-wild-things-are-4.html>. Max’s 
adventure/dream in this story is a metaphorical acting-out of the desire every 
child has to get away from their parents, culminating in the inevitable 
realisation that however angry or upset you are, you’re still better off at 
home.

9. Dictatorial tendencies 

Politics (or perhaps that should be politix) is at the heart of Asterix 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/asterix-omnibus-21.html>. It is a story of 
conquerors and the conquered – of Gaulish resistance against the incoming Roman 
empire. The Asterix series is the perfect exemplar of what you might have to 
characterise as “comedic evil”, by which I mean that the Romans are without 
exception not just malevolent, but also stupid and incompetent. The plucky 
underdogs always win. The YA genre these days is dominated by dystopian 
fiction, in which the primary antagonist is likely to be whoever is in charge. 
The plucky underdogs in dystopian YA may be fighting a similar fight to that of 
Asterix, but they are certain to face a rather grimmer fate.

10. Being spoilt 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431701722500%2Fff189fe5-eeac-41e2-a5a8-98865c50a172-1485x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20ways%20to%20be%20evil%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20ways%20to%20be%20evil%20in%20children%E2%80%99s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Ftop-10-ways-to-be-evil-in-childrens-books-william-sutcliffe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431701722500%2Fff189fe5-eeac-41e2-a5a8-98865c50a172-1485x2040.jpeg>
The baddie in children’s books is not always an adult. Sometimes it is a 
child, and the most common sin manifested by child-baddies is that of being 
spoilt. From Violet Elisabeth to Veruca Salt and Perfect Peter, if you are 
doted upon by your parents and you are given a pony when you ask for one, you 
are unlikely to be the hero of whatever story you find yourself in. By 
contrast, if you are a grimy, rejected orphan, you are almost certainly the 
character the author is rooting for.

Circus of Thieves on the Rampage 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/circus-of-thieves-on-the-rampage.html> by 
William Sutcliffe, the second book in the Circus of Thieves series, is 
available at the Guardian bookshop.

 