
Swapna Haddow has perused the library shelves and picked her favourite 
underdogs, underpigs, underflies and underrodents to celebrate the less 
glamorous animal heroes in children’s fiction.


Television talent shows have led us to believe that it is only dogs that can 
dance. Sporting events have mistakenly blinkered us to thinking only horses can 
walk sideways. But thereare other remarkable animals, probably dancing 
sideways, who don’t make the news. Like the extraordinary ants who can carry 
five thousand times their own weight. And the cows with their incredible four 
stomachs, a stomach for every course.

 And then there are wonders of the bird kingdom that are the pigeons. Did you 
know pigeons can be taught to read the alphabet? And that they can fly at 
incredible speeds of up to 100 mph? That’s when they are not busy making 
excellent passengers on the train. There is one sitting in my carriage right 
now as I type this on the underground and he hasn’t once read over my shoulder, 
dropped his wet umbrella on my leg or stuck his smelly armpit in my face.

 Animal fiction is littered with gallant horses, loyal owls and the bravest of 
big cats but I’m here to champion diversity in the animal kingdom. There is an 
entire army of unappreciated animal heroes who need to be celebrated: the pigs, 
the flies, the rodents and the farting fish and here are my top 10.

Dick King-Smith unseen treasures and photographs – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/may/01/dick-king-smith-unseen-treasures-and-photographs-in-pictures>
1. Babe from The Sheep-Pig <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sheep-pig-3.html> 
by Dick King Smith and Ann Kronheimer

I don’t think it is possible to write a top 10 of animal stories without 
starting off with the godfather of brilliant animal fiction: Dick King Smith.

 Babe couldn’t be further from the stereotype of pigs as the grotty, greedy, 
gruel-hogging farmyard bottom feeders. This orphaned piglet not only wins the 
hearts of Farmer Hogget and the animals on the farm and of course us, the 
readers, he perfects the art of shepherding proving that a pig can be so much 
more than just a swine.

2. Templeton from Charlotte’s Web 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charlotte-s-web-7.html> by EB White and Garth 
Williams

I’m sure many of you will be surprised that I didn’t choose Charlotte from 
Charlotte’s Web as my unappreciated hero. Charlotte is a kindly spider who, 
despite the spider typecast, saves Wilbur and her babies at the sacrifice of 
her own life. And don’t get me wrong, she is most definitely a hero but for 
this top 10, I chose Templeton as his character goes on so much more of a 
journey to heroism in this story. Stick with me and you’ll see.

 Templeton is a grumpy rat and he is most definitely not a likeable character. 
He’s bad-tempered and selfish and even EB White describes him as having “no 
morals”. He needs so much coaxing to get on board to help save Wilbur’s life 
but despite that Templeton eventually proves himself a true hero when he 
abandons his ratty ways and helps save Charlotte’s babies.

 See? What did I tell you? It’s all about Templeton’s journey.

3. Fly Guy from Hi, Fly Guy <http://www.teddarnoldbooks.com/> by Tedd Arnold

There just aren’t enough books out there that cast a fly as the hero. Well 
done Tedd Arnold, from me and all those of the Dipteran kingdom. Thanks to you 
my swatter is well and truly retired.

 When a little boy called Buzz goes for a walk, trying to find a pet he can 
take to the Amazing Pet Show, he comes across a fly he names Fly Guy. Despite 
the pet show judges mocking Buzz’s tiny petand being up against a giraffe and 
an octopus, Fly Guy proves that flies should be appreciated as pets and not 
pests by so brilliantly demonstrating his incredible dive-bombing aerobatics.

How to draw… evil chickens and nice ducks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2014/apr/04/how-to-draw-evil-chickens-ducks-emer-stamp>
4. The Sheep from The Unbelievable Top Secret Diary of Pig 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/unbelievable-top-secret-diary-of-pig.html> by 
Emer Stamp

Pig’s hilarious diary documents his time in the yard as he comes to the 
realisation that he’s being fattened up by the hungry farmer he adores.

 It takes poor Pig so long to understand that he’s going to be added to the 
dinner menu that he is running out of time when he starts to plan his escape. 
It is the sheep that step in with their wool to provide a fantastic and 
believable sheep disguise for Pig, though they don’t realise at the time what 
they have done for Pig and quite, frankly, never get the recognition they 
deserve. The disguise might not have fooled the evil chickens but it fooled me.

 I love Pig’s diary so much it almost converted me to vegetarianism. Almost.

5. Despereaux from The Tale of Despereaux 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tale-of-despereaux.html> by Kate DiCamillo 
and Timothy B Ering

Despereaux’s story is that of surviving against the odds. Despite being the 
runt of the mouse world this tiny mouse proves to be the bravest and most 
daring of rodents. He doesn’t fit in with the other castle mice to the point of 
which he is exiled to the dungeon to fend for himself against the unscrupulous 
rats.

 When the princess is in danger Despereaux courageously stops at nothing to 
save her, despite being rejected by his father and then attacked by Mig. He 
shows his family and the other mice that his size and eccentricities can’t stop 
him from being the most noble of the rodent kingdom.

 I love that Despereaux refuses to conform, proving to us all not to judge a 
hero by it’s miniature, nonconforming whiskers.

6. The newt from Matilda 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/353663/> by Roald 
Dahl and Quentin Blake

Miss Trunchbull has to go down in history as one of the most evil fictional 
members of the children’s literature school staff. I have to remind myself she 
is fictional because this character gave me nightmares as a child. She’s feared 
by both the staff and pupils at Crunchem Hall (and me) so nothing gave me more 
joy than Lavender’s classroom prank with the newt.

 Lavender drops said newt into Miss Trunchbull’s drinking water and all hell 
breaks loose when this demon headmistress’ steely persona shatters and she 
screeches in fear when she spots the newt. It’s so pleasurable to see Miss 
Trunchbull freak out at the sight of a tiny amphibian. Though the little newt 
is quickly batted away and forgotten about let’s never overlook what he did for 
putting a mean bully in her place.

 Hurrah for newts!

Green Drops and Moonsquirters
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2008/jun/18/laurenchild>
7. Brown Rat (That Pesky Rat) from That Pesky Rat 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/that-pesky-rat-2.html> by Lauren Child

Pesky Rat is a street rat who wants nothing more than to be a pet. I adore 
this rat. Who wouldn’t? He sleeps in a crisp packet. Lauren Child has us 
rooting for an animal that is considered vermin all the way through this 
gorgeous collage-style picture book.

 This poor rat watches his animal friends go home with their owners one by one 
whilst he is left alone. Even the pet shop owner tells him no one wants a rat 
as a pet, but Brown Rat (that Pesky Rat) still hangs his notice in the shop 
window hoping to find an owner one day.

 When a customer comes in and confuses the rat for a cat, it’s just delightful 
that he finally gets his happy ever after and more so because he is content to 
play a cat for his new loving owner.

Roald Dahl's greatest philosophical quotes ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/27/roald-dahls-greatest-philosophical-quotes-ever>
8. Mr Fox from Fantastic Mr Fox 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fantastic-mr-fox.html> by Roald Dahl and 
Quentin Blake

Thanks to fables and folktales, foxes have long been cast as evil and cunning. 
Granted, Mr Fox is cunning but he is so much more. He’s also brave and kind and 
would do anything to bring back food for his family, using his cunning only to 
protect his wife and children.

 In a world were humans are masters it’s so good to see Mr Fox show us who is 
boss. At one point he has three humans hunting him with huge diggers and the 
odds are clearly stacked against him but Mr Fox outwits the farmers and 
masterminds an entire operation to bring home enough food to feed the entire 
underground animal neighbourhood. The first time I read this book, I don’t 
think I’d quite appreciated how many times he put himself in danger to provide 
for his family.

 This book has so many incredible quotes and I love using this one:

“I understand what you’re saying, and your comments are valuable, but I’m 
gonna ignore your advice.”

9. Badger from The Disgusting Sandwich 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/disgusting-sandwich.html> by Gareth Edwards 
and Hannah Shaw

Badger is a true champion of the five-second-rule. Well, more like the half an 
hour rule, because it took that long to get through this side-splittingly funny 
picture book, with my son rolling around on the floor in hysterics. OK. It was 
me. I was rolling around on the floor in hysterics. Hannah Shaw’s illustrations 
are beyond hilarious.

 Badger is the underdog in this story but he is persistent. At some points we 
think he willnever get his hands on the sandwich, as the other park animals are 
far too quick and crafty but Badger proves us readers wrong. Despite being the 
last one to get his paws on the sandpit sandwich in the final pages of the 
book, it doesn’t matter if he eats it or not because he persisted and it’s his.

Michael Rosen's Bear Hunt, Chocolate Cake and Bad Things - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/oct/19/michael-rosen-bear-hunt-chocolate-cake-bad-things-discover>
10. Fluff from Fluff the Farting Fish 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fluff-the-farting-fish.html> by Michael Rosen 
and Tony Ross

Fluff is a fish. That farts. And the book is written by Michael Rosen and 
illustrated by Tony Ross. Need I say more?

 Elvie is desperate for a puppy and when her mother returns from the pet store 
with a fish, Elvie is nothing short of disappointed. See Elvie wants a pet she 
can train, especially with a TV talent show on the horizon, and well, fish, 
they are just fish.

 But Fluff the fish proves Elvie and the world wrong when Elvie manages to 
train her to blow bubbles out of your bottom. Fluff even manages to sing farts 
out of her fishy derriere. She simply blows all the other contestants out of 
the water with her remarkable talent. All puns intended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ftop-10-unappreciated-animal-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b62b7ae6caea55cba05384850559c20b149c9ec%2F0_0_830_1280%2F830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20unappreciated%20animal%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ftop-10-unappreciated-animal-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20unappreciated%20animal%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Ftop-10-unappreciated-animal-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b62b7ae6caea55cba05384850559c20b149c9ec%2F0_0_830_1280%2F830.jpg>
Swapna Haddow is the author of Dave Pigeon: How to Deal with Bad Cats and Keep 
(Most of) Your Feathers, illustrated by Sheena Dempsey. It is a book that 
champions pigeons as the true heroes of the animal kingdom. Swapna is 
constantly inspired by the braveness of lazy London pigeons but her writing 
muse is her son’s pet hamster, Gary, who likes to eat posh cheese.Buy Dave 
Pigeon at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385803/>.
 