
I was a reluctant reader when I was at school. I think if most of these books 
this top 10 had been given to me at the right time they would have helped me 
become a more confident reader. And also to enjoy reading more. Perhaps not 
Rainbow Fairies. But the rest, certainly.

All these books are all great for encouraging a lifelong love of reading to a 
child, if introduced at the right time. It is knowing when to read what that is 
the trick. So I hope you enjoy his list!


 * Ruby the Red Fairy  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ruby-the-red-fairy-2.html>by Daisy Meadows 
There is a lot of snobbishness about the Rainbow Fairy series and other series 
like it, such asBeast Quest. 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/beast-quest-early-reader-vedra-krimon-twin-beasts-of-avan.html>
 Yes, they are formulaic, but when I read aloud 10 of them to my daughter and 
she went on to read 40 more by herself, she took to them with real pleasure and 
joy. They were brilliant for building her reading-for-pleasure stamina. Second 
only to Enid Blyton in that regard.

2. Horrid Henry Robs the Bank 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/horrid-henry-robs-the-bank.html> by Francesca 
Simon

When I do school and library events I ask most of the children what their 
favourite book is. Horrid Henry is always in the top five. That is partly down 
to the endearingly corrupting character, Henry, who is horrid indeed. Therefore 
extremely funny. But, also, that each book has not one medium length, but three 
shorter and heavily-illustrated stories in them. To finish a story like this 
gives struggling readers real sense of pride. They did it. They can read a 
book. They didn’t fail to finish it.

3. Diary of a Wimpy Kid 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-wimpy-kid-book-1.html> by Jeff 
Kinney

I think the Wimpy Kid books have had a huge impact on engaging children to 
read. They are written in a chunked-up diary style. Lots illustrations that 
aren’t that far off what we could draw ourselves. Funny. Modern. Almost comic 
book style. These books tear down many of the barriers that put children off 
reading. And ultra-confident readers love them just as much as struggling 
readers. Ask a hall full of 120 kids who has read Wimpy Kid and 110 hands will 
go up. With smiling faces on the end of them.


4. Dork Diaries <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dork-diaries.html> by Rachel 
Renee Russell

Dork Diaries are written in the style of Wimpy Kid, but they feature an older, 
more sophisticated girl character. I’ve read two of these. My daughter has read 
them all. Several times. They work because they are accessible, but also 
because they are not for younger children. Some of the issues – about friends 
and boys and parents – are pretty close to the bone. Great from 9+ right up to 
age 14 or 15 from what older girls in schools and librarians tell me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421848816648%2F56d16f52-cc5e-4b3b-8e65-47f88e954c7b-745x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20for%20%20reluctant%20and%20dyslexic%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20for%20%20reluctant%20and%20dyslexic%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421848816648%2F56d16f52-cc5e-4b3b-8e65-47f88e954c7b-745x1020.jpeg>
5. Goth Girl  <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goth-girl.html>by Chris Riddell

Chris Riddell’s books are something else. Before the Goth Girl books it was the
Ottoline <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ottoline-and-the-yellow-cat.html> 
series. Beautiful, quite haunting novels, that have been illustrated as 
beautifully as any picture book. The stories are outstanding, but, in addition, 
the way the pictures break up the text make theGoth Girl books one of the few 
series that successfully break the taboo that 9+ kids’ books shouldn’t have 
pictures in them. They should.

6. Stormbreaker <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/stormbreaker-5.html> by 
Anthony Horowitz

When I started writing my Foul Play 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/foul-play-3.html> books (about a boy who 
solves crimes in the world of contemporary football) I wanted to read the best 
fast-paced thrillers for children. To learn from the masters. In Anthony 
Horowitz I found the master. The Alex Rider series – of which Stormbreaker is 
the first of 10 – are relentlessly what-happens-next plot driven. Skilfully 
drawn characters and not too much description or emotional depth, these books 
are fantastic for children who are not comfortable solo-reading the richer 
flavours and stronger feelings in books by other legendary authors, like 
Michael Morpurgo.

7. Brock <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brock.html> by Anthony McGowan

Anthony McGowan is one of the best children’s authors writing today. His range 
and skill are off the scale. Brock is a beautiful story about two boys who take 
on a gang of badger baiters. It’s funny, disturbing and sad. The perfect short 
novel for older children who may struggle to read, but need a stronger 
storyline. Published byBarrington Stoke <http://www.barringtonstoke.co.uk/> who 
edit and design their books to help overcome some of the problems dyslexic 
children face when reading a book.

8. Percy Jackson & the Lightning Thief 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/percy-jackson-and-the-lightning-thief-3.html> 
by Rick Riordan

The Percy Jackson books are fantastic, but you need a bit of stamina to read 
them. They are long for reluctant readers, but perfect for when someone who has 
not been a big reader until now, but is ready to have a go at longer books. The 
storylines – weaving modern children with Greek Myths – are awesome. A 
brilliant idea, brilliantly written. Lots of action. The eponymous hero is 
dyslexic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421849056365%2Fb54f3fc2-ee83-4ea3-ad7a-c219fb6f4e09-665x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20for%20%20reluctant%20and%20dyslexic%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20for%20%20reluctant%20and%20dyslexic%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftop-10-books-for-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421849056365%2Fb54f3fc2-ee83-4ea3-ad7a-c219fb6f4e09-665x1020.jpeg>
9. The Recruit  <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/recruit-2.html>by Robert 
Muchamore

I have read and enjoyed several of, this, the Cherub series. They are pacey 
action stories that often feature more violence and boy-girl references than 
some adults want children to read. That is one of the things that makes 
children like them so much. They see them as honest, not redacted. Publishers 
in the past have edited out of my books things that Muchamore is allowed to do. 
Boys and girls over the age of 11 recommend them to me more than any other 
author. Solid storylines about children recruited into a secret training camp 
to fight villains on behalf of the UK.

10. The Enemy <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/enemy.html> by Charlie Higson 

These books in this series are very dark. They are about zombies and death: a 
frightening world where, for instance, a boy’s undead parents might try to 
break into his room and eat him. But… they are hugely popular and superbly 
conceived and written. The Enemy is the first in the series.

The books in this top 10 are highlighted in Dive In, a book guide for 
reluctant and dyslexic readers by Dyslexia Action 
<http://www.dyslexiaaction.org.uk/book-guide-reluctant-and-dyslexic-readers> so 
do check out the others too! Happy reading!

Tom Palmer is the author of books series Foul Play 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/foul-play-3.html>, Football Academy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/football-academy-free-kick.html> and The Squad 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/squad-white-fear.html> books series. His new 
Rugby Academy series has just launched withCombat Zone. 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rugby-academy-combat-zone.html>
 