
Toronto beware: in early September, your city will be awash with middle-aged 
men in crisis. The first wave of programming for the 39th annual film festival 
has been released and it’s crammed with Hollywood veterans in various stages of 
reinvention. Richard Gere plays a homeless man in Manhattan, Michael Douglas a 
big-game hunter who turns to murder, Chris Rock directs himself in the story of 
a comic turned actor struggling to prove his dramatic chops, and Adam Sander 
makes his first break from mainstream in 10 years to play a porn-addicted 
father.

Melting down with them are Ethan Hawke as a soldier questioning his work 
dispatching drones to Afghanistan (in Good Kill), Jason Bateman juggling 
bereavement and infidelity (in ensemble comedy This Is Where I Leave You), 
Robert Downey Jr trying to clear his father of homicide in The Judge and Kevin 
Costner concerned about being labelled racist in a custody battle with Octavia 
Spencer over their grandson in Black and White.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfH0cEP0mvlU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfH0cEP0mvlU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfH0cEP0mvlU&media=>
Jake Gyllenhaal’s passion project, Nightcrawler, a crime-drama set in LA, gets 
a screening, likewise Pawn Sacrifice, with Tobey Maguire as chess master Bobby 
Fischer.

In recent years, Toronto has been seen as a key indicator of Oscar success, 
with previous winners of their audience award frequently progressing to best 
picture. Last year12 Years a Slave trod this path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/15/12-years-a-slave-toronto-film-festival-people-s-choice-winner>
; in the past Slumdog Millionaire,The King’s Speech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/sep/20/toronto-film-festival-roundup-kings-speech>
and Argo (which was runner-up to Silver Linings Playbook at Toronto) also 
followed suit. This year the titles to place very early bets on are trickier to 
pick out from a packed programme that includes Beach Boys biopic Love & Mercy 
(with Paul Dano as Brian Wilson), Liv Ullman’s adaptation of the Strindberg 
play Miss Julie (with Colin Farrell and Jessica Chastain) and reunions for 
Training Day director Antoine Fuqua and star Denzel Washington (for kidnap 
drama The Equalizer), as well as Ben Stiller and his Greenberg director Noah 
Baumbach (for While We’re Young).

One fixture of Toronto slightly less in evidence for the 2014 edition is 
British films, which historically have been expansively showcased in the 
festival (last year there were 30 with British involvement. This year, there 
are, so far, just four major British premieres: The Riot Club, Lone Scherfig’s 
adaptation of hit play Posh; Stephen Hawking biopic The Theory of Everything 
starring Eddie Redmayne and Alan Rickman’s period drama A Little Chaos, with 
Rickman as King Louis XIV and support from Stanley Tucci andKate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet>, which has been named 
closing-night film.
 Winslet in A Little Chaos. Photograph: Tiff 
The Imitation Game <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game>, 
starring Benedict Cumberbatch as enigma codebreaker Alan Turing, is set for a 
Canadian premiere, suggesting it may debut elsewhere beforehand. The film had 
previously been announced as the opening-night film at the London film 
festival, in October.

The French, however, maintain their strong presence at the festival: this year 
François Ozon and Catherine Deneuve follow Potiche with the Ruth Rendell 
adaptation The New Girlfriend, while Charlotte Gainsbourg, Tahir Rahim and Omar 
Sy star in Senegal-set Samba. Mia Hansen-Løve’s Eden also screens, as do new 
films from countrymen David Oelhoffen and Regis Wargnier.

But it’s Hollywood leading men who look set to dominate the headlines. Gere’s 
transformation into a boozing hobo for Time Out of Mind attracted attention 
earlier this year when passers by clocked him stumbling round the city with
underwear on his head 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2590451/Richard-Gere-chugs-beer-Manhattan-park-bench-just-homeless-role-Time-Out-Mind.html>
 (one tourist donated her pizza 
<http://www.today.com/entertainment/tourist-gives-homeless-richard-gere-her-leftover-pizza-2D79591395>
). Chris Rock follows the acclaim of his documentary Good Hair With Top Five, a 
meta-comedy about a one-time standup with acting aspirations who is unhappily 
engaged to a reality TV star.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2014-programme-release-kicks-off-2015-oscar-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F22%2F1406039213839%2F2efe871f-b725-4b93-890c-1878d62ae9c6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toronto%20film%20festival%202014%20programme%20release%20kicks%20off%202015%20Oscar%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2014-programme-release-kicks-off-2015-oscar-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toronto%20film%20festival%202014%20programme%20release%20kicks%20off%202015%20Oscar%20race&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fjul%2F22%2Ftoronto-film-festival-2014-programme-release-kicks-off-2015-oscar-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F22%2F1406039213839%2F2efe871f-b725-4b93-890c-1878d62ae9c6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Stiller and Rock in 2008 at the Madagascar 2 premiere. Photograph: Jon 
Furniss/WireImage 
Douglas, whose career reinvention following rave reviews for Liberace biopic 
Behind the Candelabra was interrupted by iffy farce Last Vegas produces and 
stars in The Reach, a thriller about a ruthless businessman who tries to cover 
up a homicide while on safari. Sandler, meanwhile, is a sexually frustrated 
father in Jason Reitman’s internet-age relationship drama Men, Women and 
Children, which also features Emma Thompson andAnsel Elgort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/12/ansel-elgort-the-fault-in-our-stars-interview-im-happy-to-be-a-role-model>
.


Female vehicles are slightly fewer on the ground. Reese Witherspoon stars in 
as hiking novelistCheryl Strayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/06/wild-cheryl-strayed-review> in 
Wild, directed by Jean-Marc Vallée, whose previous feature, Dallas Buyers Club 
began its journey at the festival last year. She also stars as a 
straight-talking mid-western who takes in a Sudanese refugee in The Good Lie. 
Christian Petzold’s followup to Berlin film festival-winner Barbara also 
screens; Phoenix is the story of a Holocaust survivor, presumed dead, who 
returns to her home town to see if her husband has betrayed her.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2tI5zW3IU8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2tI5zW3IU8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2tI5zW3IU8&media=>
There are also several comedy-dramas featuring age-gap friendships between 
women apparently triggered by medical crisis. In Still Alice, Kristen Stewart 
helps Julianne Moore deal with early onset Alzheimer’s, while in Cake, Jennifer 
Aniston and Anna Kendrick connect as part of a chronic pain support group. 
Kendrick also stars in what may be this year’s Begin Again – The Last Five 
Years, a shuffled-chronology musical romance, adapted from a Broadway stage hit.

James Gandolfini’s penultimate film, Nicole Holofcener’s Enough Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/enough-said>, screened to great warmth at the 
festival last year; this year, there’s a premiere for his final film,The Drop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/23/james-gandolfini-final-film-trailer-the-drop>
, co-starring Tom Hardy and Noomi Rapace and shot just beforehis death in June 
2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jun/20/james-gandolfini-dies-aged-51>
.
 James Gandolfini in The Drop 
Today’s announcement, with almost three-dozen major world premieres, can be 
seen as a victory for the Toronto programmers, whoearlier this year introduced 
a rule <http://www.thewrap.com/toronto-film-fest-studios-telluride-us/> forcing 
directors to choose between debuting their films in Toronto or at the boutique 
Telluride film festival, which takes place the weekend before. Last year, 
Reitman’sLabor Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/labor-day> followed this 
course, as did Steve McQueen’s 12 Years a Slave, and other film-makers – such 
as Werner Herzog and Alexander Payne – have also been keen to double up. This 
year, a screening in Colorado would preclude another during the crucial first 
five days of Toronto.


Telluride doesn’t release its lineup until a few days before it begins, while 
theVenice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> – 
which takes place a week before Toronto and also competes for the major 
premieres – reveals its first round of offerings on 24 July. However, the 
selection of North American premieres billed to take place at Toronto suggests 
films such as Abel Ferrara’s Pasolini, starring Willem Dafoe, Laurent Cantet’s 
Return to Ithaca, plus two Al Pacino films – David Gordon Green’s Mangelhorn 
and Philip Roth adaptation The Humbling – will open in Venice before 
transferring to Toronto. Jon Stewart's directorial debut, Rosewater, is also 
set for a Canadian premiere. The film is the true story of Iranian-Canadian 
journalist Maziar Bahari (Gael GarcÌa Bernal), whose appearance on Stewart's 
show in 2009 led to a his five-month imprisonment.

 Set for Venice? … Al Pacino in Mangelhorn. Photograph: Tiff 
But many premieres are still to be announced – in North America as well as in 
Italy (Toronto drip-feeds its lineup in three batches).Much-awaited titles not 
yet accounted for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/17/venice-toronto-telluride-film-festival-2014-predictions>
 include Tim Burton’s Big Eyes, Stephen Daldry’s Trash, second world war movie 
Fury, Sondheim musical Into the Woods, JC Chandor’s A Most Violent Year, 
Angelina Jolie’s Unbroken, David Foster Wallace biopic The End of the Tour and 
period adaptations Suite Francaise, Far from the Madding Crowd and Carol.

Meanwhile the New York film festival already appears to have claimed a scalp 
in bagging world premieres ofPaul Thomas Anderson’s Inherent Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/21/inherent-vice-joaquin-phoenix-new-york-film-festival>
 andDavid Fincher’s Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/17/gone-girl-opening-slot-new-york-film-festival>
, while Venice has previously announced its opening night title to be Birdman, 
starring Michael Keaton.

The 2014 Toronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> runs 4-14 September. 


• Our predictions of the films to premiere at Toronto, Telluride and Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/17/venice-toronto-telluride-film-festival-2014-predictions>

• Full lineup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/22/toronto-film-festival-2014-full-line-up>
 