
Zenit St Petersburg’s coach André Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> branded Torpedo Moscow 
fans a “disgrace” for racial abuse aimed at his striker Hulk during the 1-1 
draw in the Russian Premier League on Sunday.

The league leaders’ Brazilian striker, who scored in the match, was the victim 
of monkey chants from the home fans. In response, Hulk blew a kiss at the 
stands.

“The game was a disgrace. There was bad football, bad supporters because of 
the insults to Hulk,” Villas-Boas said in televised comments, adding that it 
would damage the image of the 2018World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> host nation. “The 
insults, the racist insults to Hulk, they go around the world and this is the 
image of the Russian Premier League.”

It is the second time Hulk has been targeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/06/russian-referee-cleared-racially-abusing-hulk>
 by Russian fans this season. Spartak Moscow’s supporters were banned from one 
game over monkey chants directed at the Brazilian in September.

Torpedo itself has twice been forced to close part of its stadium this season 
as punishment for racist behaviour by fans. Both cases involved monkey chants, 
withDynamo Moscow’s Christopher Samba the victim in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/26/christopher-samba-charged-racist-abuse-russia>
 and FC Rostov’s African players targeted two months later.

Sunday’s incident came less than a month after a report by two 
anti-discrimination organisations which found more than 200 cases of racist and 
discriminatory behaviour linked to Russian football over two seasons.

Villas-Boas was also sharply critical of the playing surface at the Saturn 
Stadium near Moscow, saying its worn and muddy condition risked player injury 
ahead of Zenit’s Europa League match against Torino on Thursday.

Zenit had looked set for victory against relegation-threatened Torpedo after 
Hulk blasted in a 35th-minute opener with a 25-yard free kick. Torpedo’s new 
signing, the Iceland striker Arnor Smarason, equalised with a scissor kick into 
the top corner in stoppage time.

Zenit’s lead at the top dropped from seven to five points after the defending 
champion CSKA easily beat 10-man Mordovia Saransk 4-0 Saturday.
 