
André Villas-Boas has been sacked by Tottenham Hotspur in the wake of Sunday's 
humiliating home defeat to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/15/luis-suarez-tottenham-hotspur-liverpool>
, the manager departing White Hart Lane after barely 18 months in charge with 
faith that he was capable of securing Champions League qualification having 
been eroded within the club's hierarchy.

The Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, and the technical director Franco Baldini had 
spoken briefly with Villas-Boas in the aftermath of the harrowing 5-0 defeat, 
with Villas-Boas emerging toinsist he would not resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/15/tottenham-andre-villas-boas-liverpool>
. There were further talks on Monday, before the club issued a statement 
confirming his departure was "by mutual consent and in the interests of all 
parties". The club's technical co-ordinator, Tim Sherwood, will oversee 
Wednesday's Capital One Cup quarter-final against West Ham United and could yet 
be placed in caretaker charge until the end of the season.

Villas-Boas' position had been severely undermined by his team's toils this 
season, despite Spurs'comfortable progress out of their Europa League group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/07/tottenham-hotspur-sheriff-europa-league>
 and seventh place in the Premier League. They are only five points adrift of 
Manchester City in fourth, and eight from Arsenal at the top, yet the nature of 
their defeats in direct confrontation with the title contenders had a profound 
effect on the manager's standing.City had beaten Spurs 6-0 at the Etihad Stadium
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/24/manchester-city-tottenham-hotspur>
 a little over three weeks ago and, while the comprehensive nature of that 
defeat had been shocking, it actually merely served to expose deeper concerns 
within the club's boardroom over the manager's position.

Levy and the club's owner, Joe Lewis, had been angered initially by a 3-0 home 
defeat to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/06/tottenham-west-ham-premier-league>
 in the first week of October, a result which prompted an intense examination 
of Villas-Boas' suitability to fulfil Spurs' longer-term ambitions. The 
hierarchy had sanctioned around £109m of spending over the summer on seven 
players, including three club record fees, reinvesting the money raised by
Gareth Bale's sale to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/gareth-bale-real-madrid-tottenham>
. Yet the new personnel, while boasting reputations on paper, have taken time 
to adapt to the Premier League with the team's rather stodgy and conservative 
play having failed to enthuse those in the boardroom.
 How the Guardian reported Villas-Boas being on the brink at White Hart Lane 
last month. Photograph: Guardian 
Home matches have not been particularly enjoyable, with some players having 
wanted to see Villas-Boas adapt his favoured 4-2-3-1 formation and play with 
two strikers to increase the side's attacking potential. The whole fit has 
appeared rather awkward in recent weeks and, while the manager survived the 
defeat to City and recovered seven points from games against Manchester United, 
Fulham and Sunderland, the thrashing instigated by Liverpool was the last straw.

Spurs have managed three points, at home to Chelsea and United and away at 
Everton, from six games against last season's top seven clubs, with Villas-Boas 
having admitted on Sunday that the "excessive" nature of the last two defeats 
had hurt his side psychologically.

The loss of Bale, such a match-winner last season, should not be 
underestimated as a contributory factor, but the inability to manage the 
transition since the forward's sale and coax more coherent attacking displays 
from a lavishly revamped side – they have scored 15 goals in 16 league games – 
has prompted Levy and Lewis to act. The likes of Roberto Soldado and Erik 
Lamela, in particular, have failed to justify their fees of £26m and £30m 
respectively, with Villas-Boas having hinted in his post-match briefing on 
Sunday that the personnel at his disposal, recruited by Baldini on his and the 
board's behalf, may not have been his choice.

The manager had appeared to lose the support of the Tottenham crowd as well, 
perhaps a legacy of his claim in the way of the1-0 win over Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/27/tottenham-hotspur-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on 27 October that White Hart Lane offered a "very tense, difficult 
atmosphere". He said it was "like it drags the ball into our goal, instead of 
the opponent's goal", adding: "This is something that is felt within the squad. 
It's a feeling that invades us in fixtures like this."

There were veiled criticisms, too, of the club's medical department after Hugo 
Lloris suffered a head injury in the goalless draw at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/03/tottenham-villas-boas-goal-record-everton>
 which served to reinforce the impression, perhaps unfairly, that he was 
shifting the blame for the team's toils elsewhere.

Villas-Boas was contracted until the summer of 2015 and, following a brief and 
unhappy tenure at Chelsea which hadended abruptly in March 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2012/mar/04/andre-villas-boas-chelsea-gallery>
, may now seek to re-establish his reputation,forged brilliantly at Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/may/18/porto-braga-europa-league-final-match-report>
, abroad. "The club can announce that agreement has been reached with head 
coach, André Villas-Boas, for the termination of his services," read the club's 
statement. "The decision was by mutual consent and in the interests of all 
parties."
 