
Tottenham Hotspur's caretaker manager, Tim Sherwood, has declared his desire 
to fill the position on a permanent basis.The 44-year-old has been assigned 
control of the first-team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/andre-villas-boas-tottenham-sack-tim-sherwood>
 sinceMonday's dismissal of André Villas-Boas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/16/tottenham-sack-andre-villas-boas>
 and will take charge for Sunday's Premier League trip to Southampton. He is 
determined to use the opportunity to launch a managerial career. Sherwood 
played for Spurs between 1999 and 2003 and has been on the club's coaching 
staff since being hired by Harry Redknapp in 2008.

He was serving as technical co-ordinator until his sudden promotion following 
Villas-Boas's departure and led a senior team for the first time inWednesday's 
Capital Cup defeat to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/18/tottenham-west-ham-united-capital-one-cup>
. The club's chairman, Daniel Levy, has not yet given Sherwood any indication 
as to the likely duration of his caretaker assignment, nor confirmed that he is 
in contention for a permanent appointment.

Sherwood is in no doubt that he would relish a chance to discuss the job and 
his potential role in the club's future. He is undaunted by the fact that 
Tottenham have beenlinked with an array of managers 
<http://www.oddschecker.com/football/football-specials/tottenham/next-permanent-manager>
 with far more glittering CVs.

"They are all good guys, all good managers," he said. "It has got to fit, the 
club and the manager, to be compatible. It's not always about the biggest name. 
He might have done well at another club but he might not do well at this one. 
It is up to the chairman and the board to make the correct decision which is 
right for the long-term future of the club.

"It's not right to keep changing managers … I know all about the football 
club. I played here, it's my club. I know what the supporters want. I know what 
they demand. I know the players we have got here and I know the good young 
talent that is coming through the club. I need to talk about philosophies, what 
we are looking to do: buy players or bring them through?"

The Ajax manager, Frank de Boer, has reportedly rejected overtures from Spurs, 
Michael Laudrup has announced that he does not wish to leave Swansea City and 
Southampton's Mauricio Pochettino has denied that he has had contact from Spurs 
and insisted he is happy at St Mary's, where he enjoys a positive relationship 
with the chairman, Nicola Cortese.

"As a manager what's really important is that the sporting aspect is under my 
control, in terms of signings," Pochettino said. "Without my agreement no 
signings go through, and those two basic things are very important for any 
manager."

That might not be the case at White Hart Lane, where the technical director, 
Franco Baldini, is the biggest influence on transfer policy.

Sherwood says that would not deter him from accepting the job of manager and 
suggested that is one way in which his inexperience could be an advantage: 
"I've never known anything different as I've never managed without one. I'm 
open-minded to it. My style of management would just have to evolve."

Sherwood, who said he would not accept serving as a No2 to another manager, 
intimated that he could have a similar effect on Tottenham to the one that 
Brendan Rodgers has had at Liverpool, the club whose5-0 triumph at White Hart 
Lane last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/15/luis-suarez-tottenham-hotspur-liverpool>
 triggered the ejector seat under Villas-Boas.

"From what I've been doing and my experience, I think I'd be a long-term 
appointment but I'm realistic enough to know that you can't just lose games," 
he said. "I don't want to insult the intelligence of the punters by saying: 
'Don't worry, I'll turn it around in a minute.' They ain't got time for that. 
It's about the club sticking with you. I think Brendan [Rodgers] is a good 
example of that. He's done it at Liverpool. The sun wasn't always shining there 
but it seems like he's turned it around now and is doing very well.

"I'm just getting on with the job and trying to enjoy it as much as I can. We 
will have to speak about long-term with the chairman – it is his decision. If 
it was down to me I'd be getting a 10-year contract now but football doesn't 
work like that. It is all about getting results. I listen to managers all the 
time talk about 'the project'. The project is you win games or you get sacked – 
end of story."
 