
Alberto Contador

Strengths Experience and attitude. Contador probably does not have the pure 
climbing ability of the others but he has a peerless record at three-week stage 
races, knowing just how to manage his effort day by day and just when to make a 
move. He has an almost quixotic attitude to racing, preferring to try to die in 
the attempt rather than opting for safety – so he will seize any opening, 
anywhere, any time
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftour-de-france-team-sky-chris-froome-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925806472%2FKP_340187_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%202015%3A%20Team%20Sky's%20Chris%20Froome%20hoping%20to%20avoid%20injury%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftour-de-france-team-sky-chris-froome-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%202015%3A%20Team%20Sky%27s%20Chris%20Froome%20hoping%20to%20avoid%20injury%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftour-de-france-team-sky-chris-froome-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925806472%2FKP_340187_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Team Sky’s Chris Froome says his crash during last year’s Tour de France was 
bad luck but is confident he will stay injury-free this time 
Weaknesses His age – 32 – is not on his side but the thorn in his flesh may be 
his team, who overreached themselves early in the Giro, then went missing. The 
question is whether they can handle the first nine stages and how they will 
hold up at the team time trial (stage nine). Dropping time there will put him 
on the back foot

We couldn't be more ready, says first African team to enter Tour de France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/tour-de-france-african-team-mtn-qhubeka>
Target stages The tricky descent into Gap (stage 16) and the day over the 
Glandon and Montvernier to Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne (stage 18) suit Contador’s 
talent for springing a surprise. The point is, however, he can do it almost 
anywhere with a hill

Prediction Fifth

Chris Froome

Strengths On paper, the volume of climbing favours him more than Contador or 
Nibali.In 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/21/tour-de-france-chris-froome> 
Froome was ahead of Quintana going uphill; from the way he raced the Dauphiné 
he should be at his best at the Tour, the question is how much the Colombian 
has improved. Another plus is his Sky team, who can be expected to perform on 
the flat stages, deliver a strong team time trial and have strong mountain men: 
Geraint Thomas, Peter Kennaugh, Richie Porte, Leopold Konig, Wout Poels

Weaknesses Froome was on the back foot with an ill-timed puncture on day one 
in 2012, lost time in crosswinds on 2013 andcrashed out in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/09/chris-froome-out-of-tour-de-france-team-sky>
. His poor bike handling and lack of race sense could let him down in a first 
week as demanding as this one

Target stages The summits at La Pierre-Saint-Martin (stage 10) and Plateau de 
Beille (stage 12) fit Sky’s predilection for structured uphill racing and their 
liking for seizing control of events early on. Failing which, La Toussuire 
(stage 19) is another option

Prediction Third

Vincenzo Nibali

Strengths The 2014 winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/27/vincenzo-nibali-tour-de-france-win>
 is a fine climber, if not quite at the level of Froome or Quintana, and 
tactically astute but his true forte is in gaining the psychological advantage 
early on – as he did last year at Sheffield and then over the cobbles three 
days later. The soaking wet cobbled stage where he gained so much on Contador 
and the others, however, was probably a one-off, or so most of the riders will 
be hoping

Weaknesses His Astana squad may be a little slower in the team time trial and 
is not the best for the flat finishes, where he may have to look after himself. 
Given Froome and Quintana’s obvious climbing strength – and their teams’ 
relative climbing ability - they will look to dislodge him on the steeper 
mountain finishes; if he survives those, he will be in the running

Target stages Nibali will look for openings on all the mountain stages but he 
discomfited his rivals early on in 2014, so could well make his mark at Huy 
(stage three) or Cambrai (stage four)

Prediction Second

Thibaut Pinot

Strengths Pinot is improving markedly and the route this year is tailored for 
him with an almost total lack of time trialling, and a heavy final week. He can 
climb well, is utterly tenacious and his motivation will know no bounds

Weaknesses He’s French and the weight of history is on his shoulders. French 
Tour contenders are often overcome by the sheer hype. This year, Pinot has 
mainly shone outside his home turf, which is no coincidence. The pressure will 
be on from the off and could tell in a brutal first week: last year he lost two 
minutes on the cobbles; this year he kept dropping seconds in tricky finishes 
at the Tour of Switzerland; finally his FDJ team have no pedigree at team time 
trials and a couple of minutes lost there would be devastating

Target stages Pinot is a rider who comes good in the final week of the Tour, 
as he did last year and in 2012, so he will be worth watching anywhere between 
Pra Loup (stage 17) and l’Alpe d’Huez (stage 20)

Prediction Fourth

Nairo Quintana

Strengths Quintana’s superlative climbing means, given the volume of mountains 
in the second half of the Tour, he needs only to reach day nine in one piece 
and within a couple of minutes of the other leaders; he also has that 
impenetrable calm that enabled Miguel Indurain to keep his head while the sky 
was falling in. Movistar are a strong and experienced outfit, if not quite as 
heavyweight as Team Sky; they should do the job in the team time trial – 
assuming they are there at close to full strength

Weaknesses Historically, Colombians struggle in the Tour’s first week. The 
question may be less whether Quintana can survive the riskiest days but if he 
can handle the cumulative effect of constantly varying day-to-day demands: 
crosswinds, cobbles, crashes and so on

Target stages Anywhere the road goes uphill steeply but if his team protect 
him well he could shine early on at La Pierre-Saint-Martin (stage 10), while 
l’Alpe d’Huez (stage 20) is a short, brutal stage made for a Colombian climber

Prediction Winner
 