
The Force Awakens reviews roundup: verdicts arrive on JJ Abrams' Star Wars epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-reviews-verdicts-jj-abrams-critics>
As global anticipation builds for what is undoubtedly the cinematic event of 
the year, if not the decade, Star Wars: The Force Awakenshad its world premiere 
in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/15/star-wars-the-force-awakens-premiere-carrie-fisher-turns-red-carpet-blue-and-george-lucas-gets-standing-ovation>
 in advance of its worldwide release.


Three auditoriums at the Hollywood and Highland complex in Los Angeles – 
including the legendary cinema formerly known as Grauman’s Chinese Theatre – 
were taken over for the world’s first public screening of the seventh episode 
of the science fiction series, originally created by George Lucas but since 
acquired by Disney and withJJ Abrams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams>
 installed in the director’s chair.

The Force Awakens has recalled the original trilogy cast members Harrison 
Ford, Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher, as well as introducing a host of new faces 
into the labyrinthine Star Wars narrative – including little-known British 
actors John Boyega and Daisy Ridley, established figures Lupita Nyong’o, Oscar 
Isaac and Adam Driver, and screen legendMax von Sydow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/max-von-sydow>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450270270225%2FKP_795717_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20special%3A%20Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-guardian-film-show-special-star-wars-the-force-awakens-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F16%2F1450270270225%2FKP_795717_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The Guardian film show special: Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
Despite a heavy security operation, which included bomb-sniffing dogs 
<https://twitter.com/carrieffisher/status/676583443040342016?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 and some 50 police officers, the arrival of the principal cast members on the 
red carpet triggered raucous cheers from assembled fans, many of whom had 
arrived in costume.

True to her unconventional style, Fisher swore copiously on a live TV feed 
while describing her younger self to an interviewer: “She was very busy 
partying, partying to make sure I would look like shit later.”

Also making a splash on the red carpet were celebrity fans not involved in the 
film itself. Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Dark Knight Rises and Looper star, turned up 
dressed as Yoda, while The Office’s Rainn Wilson wore an Obi-Wan Kenobi 
costume. Lucas, who directed the firstStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> film in 1977, as well as all three 
of the tepidly received but financially successful prequel trilogy – The 
Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith – was welcomed 
with a standing ovation.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens in-depth fan review: 'so much to obsess over'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-in-depth-review-hardcore-fans-jj-abrams>
Although Disney insisted on a global embargo on critics’ reviews until 8am UK 
time today, initial reactions from the premiere audience have begun to emerge. 
Composed largely of Hollywood insiders and entertainment journalists, comment 
was bound to be positive.Wilson tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/rainnwilson/status/676643291077603328?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “It was epic, awesome & perfect. The cast was stellar”; the actorPatton 
Oswalt wrote 
<https://twitter.com/pattonoswalt/status/676650767126695936?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “JJ [Abrams] did it”; andPitch Perfect director Elizabeth Banks tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/ElizabethBanks/status/676657491699105792?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “#StarWarsForceAwakens totally delivers … just #wow”.

Entertainment reporters also tweeted positively, with the LA Times’s Rebecca 
Keegan suggesting 
<https://twitter.com/ThatRebecca/status/676637958812798978?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
: “Story, characters, design, humor – #StarWars fans, this is the movie you’re 
looking for”, as well as noting that the film appeared topass the Bechdel test  
<https://twitter.com/ThatRebecca/status/676637681757982720?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
for female-friendly content. Some, however, were qualified in their praise, with
Mashable’s Josh Lincoln Dickey 
<https://twitter.com/JLDlite/status/676641748475482112?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
tweeting it rated “#3 in the series” andCollider’s Steven Weintraub 
<https://twitter.com/colliderfrosty?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> saying Force Awakens 
was “the best STAR WARS since 1983 … maybe 1980”.

However, the veteran awards watcher Scott Feinberg, of the Hollywood Reporter, 
went as far to assert 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/race/oscars-star-wars-force-awakens-848906>
that the Force Awakens could enjoy multiple Oscar nominations in major 
categories, something that has largely eluded the saga in the face of the 
genre-averse tastes of the American Academy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-cast-past-and-present-grace-the-red-carpet-at-world-premiere-in-los-angeles-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20cast%2C%20past%20and%20present%2C%20grace%20the%20red%20carpet%20at%20world%20premiere%20in%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-cast-past-and-present-grace-the-red-carpet-at-world-premiere-in-los-angeles-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20cast%2C%20past%20and%20present%2C%20grace%20the%20red%20carpet%20at%20world%20premiere%20in%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fstar-wars-cast-past-and-present-grace-the-red-carpet-at-world-premiere-in-los-angeles-video&media=>
 Star Wars cast, past and present, grace the red carpet at world premiere in 
Los Angeles 
Anticipation for The Force Awakens remains huge, with pre-release ticket sales 
reaching record levels.

In the UK, the Odeon chain, Britain’s largest, has reported selling more than 
500,000 tickets as it prepares to screen the film around the clock from a 
minute past midnight tonight, more than double the amount for Spectre, the 
previous record holder.

Vue, the third largest chain, says more than 355,000 advance tickets have 
gone. In the US current figures are not available, but industry magazines 
reported that over $50m in presales had been recorded 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/star-wars-aims-its-mighty-force-toward-a-box-office-smash-1447966327>
 – of which around a fifth were for the Imax format.Estimates suggest  
<http://deadline.com/2015/11/star-wars-force-awakens-advance-ticket-sales-box-office-1201631598/>
Star Wars presales could reach $100m by time of release.

The actual box office total for The Force Awakens is set to be huge. Jurassic 
World’s opening-weekend US record of $208m is a possibility and if it is to 
overcome the same film’s epic opening-week total of $525m worldwide, it will 
have to do it without the increasingly significant Chinese box office, where it 
is not opening until the new year. Moreover,it has been delayed a week in India,
 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/indiarealtime/2015/12/12/why-star-wars-arrives-a-week-late-in-india/>
so as not to clash with a pair of Bollywood blockbusters, Dilwale and Bajirao 
Mastani.Box office analysts all agree  
<http://deadline.com/2015/12/star-wars-the-force-awakens-all-time-record-box-office-opening-1201666595/>
the all time record – Avatar’s $2.78bn in 2009 – is certainly in danger.

Lupita Nyong'o 'had no idea she was auditioning' for new Star Wars film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/lupita-nyongo-had-no-idea-she-was-auditioning-for-new-star-wars-film>
The figures suggest the $4bn Disney paid for Star Wars in 2012 was money well 
spent <http://www.wired.com/2015/12/disney-star-wars-return-on-investment/>. 
Factoring in sales of merchandise, analysts estimate the company will earn half 
that amount back on this film alone. Given there are plans to produce at least 
two more Star Wars features, and two spinoffs (including a Han Solo “origins” 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/casting-young-han-solo-spin-off-movie-star-wars-2500-auditions>
), Disney’s investment would appear sound. 

Additional reporting by Ben Child
 