
Tourists could be urged to boycott Indian Ocean resorts on the Maldives 
following a scathing United Nations ruling condemning the illegal imprisonment 
of its former president,Mohamed Nasheed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-nasheed>.


A decision by the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD) 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Detention/Pages/WGADIndex.aspx>, released on 
Monday, concluded that Nasheed, who in March was sentenced to 13 years in 
prison after being found guilty of terrorism,“did not receive a fair trial” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/14/former-maldives-president-mohamed-nasheed-jailed-for-13-years>
.

The latest twist in the protracted legal battle, pitting barrister Amal Clooney
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amal-alamuddin> against Cherie Booth QC, 
has focused international attention on the islands’ increasingly controversial 
human rights record.

Clooney, of Doughty Street Chambers in London, is working pro-bono along with 
other lawyers for Nasheed’s wife, Laila Ali, inan attempt to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/amal-clooney-in-maldives-meets-jailed-former-president-mohamed-nasheed>
 the onetime journalist his freedom.

Booth, the wife of the former Labour prime minister Tony Blair, is the founder 
of Omnia Strategy, which has been advising theMaldives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/maldives> government currently headed by 
president Abdulla Yameen. Omnia describes itself as “a pioneering international 
law firm that provides strategic counsel to governments, corporates & private 
clients”.

In its report, adopted by the UN Human Rights Council last month, the WGAD 
said that the detention of Nasheed was “arbitrary”. It urged the government in 
the capital, Male, to free him “without delay”.

Release Mohamed Nasheed – an innocent man and the Maldives’ great hope | Amal 
Clooney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/30/release-mohamed-nasheed-maldives-president-conviction>
His lawyers – Clooney, Ben Emmerson QC, and the prominent US attorney Jared 
Genser – are calling for “targeted sanctions” against the Maldives government 
if it continues “to flout its international legal commitments”.

Asked whether tourists who visit the Maldives, many on their honeymoon, should 
boycott the country’s tourist attractions, Clooney said: “If we get to a 
situation where nothing is working and the government keeps dragging its heels, 
it’s something we wouldn’t exclude.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ftourists-may-be-urged-to-boycott-maldives-over-ex-presidents-jail-term%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F979538a11fef34d7414253e27356cd3653ed7fe9%2F0_168_4272_2564%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tourists%20may%20be%20urged%20to%20boycott%20Maldives%20over%20ex-president's%20jail%20term&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ftourists-may-be-urged-to-boycott-maldives-over-ex-presidents-jail-term%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tourists%20may%20be%20urged%20to%20boycott%20Maldives%20over%20ex-president%27s%20jail%20term&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ftourists-may-be-urged-to-boycott-maldives-over-ex-presidents-jail-term%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F979538a11fef34d7414253e27356cd3653ed7fe9%2F0_168_4272_2564%2F4272.jpg>
 Amal Clooney during a news conference for Mohamed Nasheed. Photograph: Peter 
Nicholls/Reuters 
Genser added: “Nasheed is not yet taking a position on whether there should be 
a tourist boycott. Everyone will have to make a personal decision about whether 
they want to travel to a country that is so beautiful yet abuses human rights.”

Nasheeed, 48, who read marine studies at Liverpool John Moores University, was 
the first democratically-elected president of the Maldives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/oct/29/maldives-presidential-elections> 
and once held a cabinet meeting underwater to highlight the dangers of global 
warming to his low-lying nation.He was ousted in 2012 following opposition 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/08/maldives-president-resign-gunpoint>
.

In February, he was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/former-maldivian-president-arrested-under-anti-terrorism-law>
 and charged with allegedly masterminding the abduction of a judge, an offence 
deemed to constitute terrorism. He has consistently denied the charge.

“The UN found that the judges were biased,” Clooney said. “Nasheed was not 
allowed to call any witnesses. Two of the three judges were witnesses for the 
prosecution.

“More than 1,700 people, are facing charges as a result of peaceful protest or 
for [exercising] free speech in the Maldives. One lawyer was stabbed in the 
head in broad daylight in Male.” Clooney said she had not been personally 
threatened but that there had been talk about whether the attack was intended 
to scare away international lawyers.


Former Maldives president detained under anti-terror law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/former-maldives-president-detained-under-anti-terror-law>
“The Maldives is shifting away from an alliance with the United States towards 
Saudi Arabia and China, and away from moderate Islam. It has the highest rate 
of recruitment per capita to ISIS.”

 David Cameron, the UN General Secretary, Ban Ki-Moon, the EU, Amnesty 
International and many others have already called for Nasheed to be freed, 
Clooney said.


“David Cameron was very supportive,” she explained. “He made a statement 
saying that Nasheed should be released. I agreed to have a continuing 
conversation so I hope to be able to meet him or his advisors [again] shortly.”

Ali, who is currently living in the UK, told the meeting: “My husband has been 
silenced so I feel compelled to talk on his behalf. Journalists are being 
routinely beaten up and some have been disappeared.”


Responding to the UN ruling, the Maldives government said: “This opinion is 
not accepted by the government as it is clear that the WGAD has failed to 
address a number of salient points submitted by the government in its response 
to the petition of complaint.


“The government of Maldives maintains its position of engagement, however, it 
does not accept the decision of the WGAD and will not be made to act on the 
basis of a non-binding opinion.”

It said that its domestic high court had ruled in its favour on the issue and 
the case was still being considered. “The former president is asked to end his 
position of non-engagement with the appeal process and to cease his deliberate 
attempts at frustrating the process,” the government statement added.

A spokesman for Omnia Strategy said: “Our work with the government of the 
Republic of Maldives is focused on important legislative reform that is 
intended to improve transparency and accountability across all arms of 
Government.

 “The country’s institutions are not fully formed – multi-party democracy has 
been in place for less than a decade. The work being undertaken therefore is to 
the benefit of the state and to its citizens in that it seeks to bring tangible 
development to a young nation.”

 Omnia said the government “does not accept that the former president is being 
held arbitrarily”.

 The spokesman added: “The former president was convicted of an offence of the 
utmost seriousness by the Maldivian courts, and thus it is for the courts to 
rule upon whether that detention is lawful or otherwise. There is no route of 
appeal against a decision of the WGAD as it is not a judicial decision but an 
unenforceable opinion.”

 He added: “The matter is now before the supreme court where the grounds of 
appeal will be considered in light of the facts of the case, and of course in 
light of the WGAD decision. It would however be inappropriate for the 
government to intervene in this judicial process.”
 