
I first visited Townsville and Magnetic Island (Maggie) about 10 years ago 
when some sailing-mad friends chose to get married there. After a lovely 
Saturday night wedding on Maggie, I remember walking through Townsville’s 
deserted, hosed-down Sunday morning streets and thinking there wasn’t much to 
the city beyond backpackers and cowboys.

48 hours in the Snowy Mountains – what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/17/48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go>
But the city has changed – and perhaps I have too. Townsville has long been a 
significant military base (during the second world war Magnetic Island served 
as a popular spot for service personnel on leave), one reason it does not have 
the obvious tourist appeal of Cairns or the Sunshine Coast. But there is plenty 
to do in the city – which offers events as varied as theCastrol Edge Townsville 
V8 meet 
<http://www.v8supercars.com.au/events/queensland/castrol-edge-townsville-400>
(10 to 12 July) and theAustralian Festival of Chamber Music  
<http://www.afcm.com.au/>(31 July to 8 August) – and on Magnetic Island, a 
20-minute ferry ride away.

The island is mostly national park, crisscrossed with 24km of walking trails 
and ringed by beaches, where the snorkelling and diving are top class, 
particularly for learners. Appealing as it is, there is nothing literally 
magnetic about the island: James Cook gave it the name after his ship’s compass 
went haywire as he passed.

 The highlights of a visit could be squeezed into 48 hours, but we spent three 
nights in the region and this is island living, so why rush?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439466639421%2F9d9103c0-ee6c-4e28-acb5-985e43f17e7f-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439466639421%2F9d9103c0-ee6c-4e28-acb5-985e43f17e7f-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Australia’s first ‘glampackers’: Rambutan in Townsville. Photograph: Sean 
Goldhawk for the Guardian 
The main attraction is a placid koala called Thor, whose diet of eucalyptus 
leaves has left him looking stoned

Day 1: Tour of the city


Townsville is less than three hours flying time from Sydney, and several 
degrees warmer. We check out one of the city’s newest hotels – Australia’s 
first “glampackers”,Rambutan <http://www.rambutantownsville.com.au/> on 
Flinders Street.

Not just for backpackers, the hotel has both dorms (beds in a mixed eight-bunk 
room start from $30) and king-sized family rooms (from $119) as well as 
underground mobile van sites (an uncovered site starts at $34). The main level 
features a very inviting swimming pool and an airy bar and restaurant, serving 
Latin American-inspired food.

After a quick lunch, we tour the city. During the second world war, Townsville 
was Australia’s most important air base, and Castle Hill, the highest point in 
Townsville, served as a lookout. During the war, the Americans contemplated 
levelling Castle Hill and using the rock to create a direct route to Magnetic 
Island. Fortunately it didn’t happen, and the hill, which is only one metre shy 
of being classified a mountain, affords spectacular views. There are a number 
of walking tracks that take more or less 40 minutes to reach the top, and 
judging by the power walkers marching up the side, it’s clearly a local 
favourite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439495203057%2Fbe81088e-5fc7-4cf1-8325-5d502714c051-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439495203057%2Fbe81088e-5fc7-4cf1-8325-5d502714c051-2060x1545.jpeg>
 The gnomes of Court Yard diner in Townsville’s City Lane arcade. Photograph: 
Sean Goldhawk for the Guardian 
There are also plenty of locals strolling along the Strand foreshore, a 2km 
seaside promenade winding from the army museum to Memorial Park. It’s a 
pleasant sunset walk, particularly while enjoying an artisanal ice-cream from
Juliette’s <http://juliettes.com.au/>. 

Just beyond the Strand is Jupiter’s Casino, recently bought by tourism tycoon 
Chris Morris,despite being the worst performing casino in Australia 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/why-rich-lister-chris-morris-bought-the-worst-performing-casino-in-australia-20141110-11jmt4.html>
. Morris reportedly plans to rename it the Ville and give it a $20m makeover in 
the hope of making it a stepping stone in his Queensland tourism empire.

After dinner at very popular Courtyard in City Lane 
<https://www.facebook.com/thecyard>, we spend the night at the the Grand on 
Palmer <http://www.grandhoteltownsville.com.au/>, one of a selection of hotels 
grouped together on Palmer Street, across the Ross river and with easy access 
to the CBD. The self-contained one-bedroom apartment with kitchen and laundry 
facilities costs about $160 a night. It’s wasted on us on our quick overnight 
stop, but it would be a comfortable base to explore the region.

Day 2: Magnetic Island


After a frankly-terrifying safety briefing, I convince myself to attempt to 
pilot one of the enormous watercrafts

One early, 20-minute ferry ride later (adult’s return ticket is $32, children 
from $8), we’re on Magnetic Island. The island is about 52 sq km of hilly 
national park ringed by beaches. Even at this time in the morning, numerous 
people get off at the Nelly Bay terminal: about 2,000 people live on the island 
year-round, but numbers swell between April and November. According totourism 
figures <http://www.whatsonmagneticisland.com.au/important-facts>, it’s the 
sunniest place in Queensland, with an average of 320 days of sunshine a year.

 A fun way to zip around the island is in one of the Mokes or topless cars from
Tropical Topless Car Rentals <http://www.miwheels.com/>. There are plenty of 
normal cars on the island, but the topless cars are easy to drive and given our 
allocated vehicle is hot pink, there’ll be no forgetting where it’s parked.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439495648320%2Ff4883a9d-a016-45e8-9ed0-92b624acefd1-1464x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439495648320%2Ff4883a9d-a016-45e8-9ed0-92b624acefd1-1464x2040.jpeg>
 Alex Spring with snakes at Bungalow Bay. Photograph: Sean Goldhawk for the 
Guardian 
The island’s main hub, Horseshoe Bay, with its palm trees, clear blue water 
and gentle lapping waves, is a great spot to swim or just sip beer while 
watching the sun disappear into the sea.

Here we enjoy a champagne bush tucker breakfast with the koalas 
<http://www.bungalowbay.com.au/breakfast-with-the-koalas/> at Bungalow Bay 
Koala Village. Backpackers and families tuck into eggs, bacon and jaffles with 
a glass of juice and champagne, while lizards and a sleepy snake are handed 
around. The main attraction is a placid koala called Thor, whose diet of 
eucalyptus leaves has left him looking stoned. Passed around from tourist to 
tourist, Thor has the same resigned pose in each photo.

After nachos at local Mexican cafe Noodies on the Beach 
<http://noodiesonthebeach.com/>, we amble through the weekend market, which 
sells the usual collection of curious jewellery, tie-dyed clothing and wind 
chimes.

Magnetic Island has a low-key charm but those looking for something a little 
swisher, will appreciate Peppers Blue on Blue 
<http://www.peppers.com.au/blue-on-blue/> at 123 Sooning Street, Nelly Bay. The 
resort also offers an à la carte restaurant. After we check in for the night, 
it’s dinner. I opt for the barramundi with prawns and a smidge of bisque, while 
my companion opts for the eye fillet steak. The desserts are particularly good, 
notably a coconut and kaffir lime panna cotta and a gorgonzola dolce with 
blistered grapes, a drizzle of honey and served with lavosh. The meal costs 
about $150 before wine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439496035973%2Fd763616b-61ab-42a5-9a96-37393ff5f2c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439496035973%2Fd763616b-61ab-42a5-9a96-37393ff5f2c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The spectacular views from the fort walk. Photograph: Sean Goldhawk for the 
Guardian 
Day 3: Fort walk, jet ski swanky dinner


After breakfast at the hotel and with the weather overcast, it’s time to 
undertake the 4kmfort walk <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_Battery>. 
Magnetic Island’s strategic east coast position made it an important lookout 
point for allied troops during the second world war. Two command posts were 
built overlooking the bay. Although many of the buildings and the gun 
emplacements are long gone, two hardy concrete forts remain. What they lack in 
aesthetics they make up for in spectacular views across to Palm Island in the 
north and Bowling Green Bay national park in the south, so its worth the 
moderate 90-minute walk to the top of the hill. Although we don’t see any 
koalas, there are apparently frequent sightings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439496270427%2Fd8ebb5dd-6454-43bf-b2a4-7c1ad7225466-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439496270427%2Fd8ebb5dd-6454-43bf-b2a4-7c1ad7225466-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Lorikeets feeding time at Bungalow Bay resort. Photograph: Sean Goldhawk for 
the Guardian 
Horseshoe Bay is also the island’s action hub and we’re to undertake one of the
Adrenalin jetski tours <https://www.facebook.com/AdrenalinJetSkiTours> around 
the bay. After a frankly terrifying safety briefing, I convince myself to 
attempt to pilot one of the enormous watercrafts. No such hesitation for my 
throttle-happy partner, and we are soon bouncing haphazardly across the waves 
in the wake of our guide, attempting to keep up with the party of four jetskis. 
The group stops from time to time, and we’re also on the lookout for whales, 
turtles and other sea life but have no luck. Instead we get spectacular 
offshore views of Magnetic Island and OK, I admit it, a roaring rush of 
adrenaline.

Back on the beach, we dive into a bucket of prawns and beer at Sandi’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/SandisOnMagneticIsland> (all up about $50). We start 
planning our sea change and dreaming of swapping city life for island days. An 
afternoon that drags into the evening in the Marlin bar watching the sun go 
down will do that to you.

We check into family-friendly Bungalow Bay Resort 
<http://www.bungalowbay.com.au/>, a home away from home for many of the 
island’s backpackers. The resort offers camping as well as accommodation in 
comfortable wooden A-frame bungalows, some with ensuites (from $95 a night), 
surrounded by the bush. Happy hour starts early, with $5 pints and $10 
cocktails. We stop to watch the staff feed a flock of lorikeets, much to the 
delight of the visiting children, then amble down to Horseshoe Bay.

We return for dinner at Mexican cafe Noodies on the Beach 
<http://noodiesonthebeach.com/>, charmed by the friendly service and 
possibility of fajitas. The restaurant also promises free sombreros with jugs 
of cocktails, and although we resist, it’s fun to watch our fellow diners 
steadily increase their collection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439505545565%2Fc3cf1608-dc20-41cf-b4e4-c692940ff832-1392x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Townsville%20and%20Magnetic%20Island%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20stay%20and%20eat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftownsville-and-magnetic-island-what-to-do-where-to-stay-and-eat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439505545565%2Fc3cf1608-dc20-41cf-b4e4-c692940ff832-1392x2040.jpeg>
 Horseshoe Bay on Magnetic Island. Photograph: Sean Goldhawk for the Guardian 
Day 4: Breakfast, museum, brewery lunch


Our last and most delicious discovery on Magnetic Island is the Early Bird  
<https://www.facebook.com/theearlyb>cafe. Formerly Nan’s Tea Room, it’s now run 
by a young Italian couple bringing excellent coffee and food to the island. I 
choose a flaky croissant with Nutella and an Earl Grey from their enormous tea 
menu, while my companion goes for baked eggs with chorizo and hot buttered 
toast. All up, it costs about $36.

48 hours on Norfolk Island: what to do, where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/13/48-hours-on-norfolk-island-what-to-do-where-to-go>
Back in Townsville, we head to the Museum of Tropical Queensland 
<http://www.mtq.qm.qld.gov.au/> (adults $15, children $8.80). It’s a typical 
regional museum, filled with schoolkids on a day trip, but it does offer a 
glimpse into the slightly odd tropical region. Where else would you find a 
mind-bending exhibition of all the area’s different coral forms? And a 
simulation of diving to the depths of the Great Barrier Reef. There’s also a 
fascinating exhibition about the sinking of the HMS Pandora, the royal navy 
ship sent to pick up Fletcher Christian’s HMS Bounty mutineers in 1790. When 
the ship reached Tahiti in 1791, the errant men were rounded up, but in its 
voyage home it was wrecked on the Great Barrier Reef. Thirty-one crew members 
drowned along with four of the prisoners who were constrained below decks.

We finish with lunch at the Brewery <http://www.townsvillebrewery.com.au/>, 
Townsville’s former post office and home to the local Townsville Bitter. Given 
its heritage, my beer connoisseur pal opts for the paddle to accompany his 
meal. At just $12, it’s good value with eight decent-sized tasters. To 
accompany it he tucks into a beef pie ($18) with mushy peas, while I choose 
fish and chips ($18). It’s high-quality pub grub, all delicious and well-priced.

The Brewery is a great example of all that has improved in Townsville and 
Magnetic Island over the last 10 years. They’ve kept the friendliness and value 
for money, but stepped up the polish. It’s still not Cairns or the Sunshine 
Coast – and that’s a good thing.
 