
The boss of the embattled Japanese carmaker Toyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> has conceded that his company's 
runaway growth over the past decade has clouded its focus on safety, in a 
deeply penitent apology for faults in accelerators and brakes that have led to 
a vast recall of 8.5m cars.

In written evidence ahead of a potentially humbling appearance before US 
Congress on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/24/akio-toyoda-statement-to-congress>
, Toyota's president, Akio Toyoda, pledged to place a high priority on 
improving "quality over quantity" and accepted personal responsibility for the 
safety crisis: "I am the grandson of the founder, and all the Toyota vehicles 
bear my name. For me, when the cars are damaged, it is as though I am as well."

The Japanese captain of industry's dramatically worded apology is Toyota's 
latest damage control exercise in a saga threatening to spin out of control. It 
came less than a day after Toyota received a grand jury subpoena in New York 
that could lead to a criminal prosecution of the company, in addition to a 
legal demand from the US Securities and Exchange Commission for all documents 
on Toyota's handling of faulty accelerator pedals.

In its home nation of Japan, the company has been criticised by a government 
official for its "light" response to potentially lethal technical problems. 
Transport minister Seiji Maehara said Toyota had lacked transparency: "There is 
a great possibility that Toyota didn't share information with the government 
properly."

Safety regulators and politicians are yet to be satisfied with Toyota's 
explanation of the causes of technical problems in its cars. In particular, 
there is scepticism in Congress about Toyota's argument that slipping floor 
mats have caused accelerators to jam, rather than more fundamental electronic 
difficulties. On Monday, a leaked internal memo revealedexecutives boasting 
aboutsaving $100m (Â£65m) by limiting the scope of a recall on floor mats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/22/toyota-memo-safety>.

During a hearing today at the US House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/23/toyota-boss-grilled-congress-live>
, a retired social worker from Tennessee, Rhonda Smith, recounted her Lexus 
accelerating uncontrollably over six miles to more than 100mph on a motorway in 
October 2006.

"I put the car into all available gears, including neutral. I put it into 
reverse and it stayed in reverse as it sped down the interstate at 100mph," 
said Smith, who attempted to place a phone call to her husband to say a final 
goodbye before "god intervened" and the vehicle slowed.

She attacked both Toyota and the US national highway traffic safety 
administration for failing to get a grip on the problem: "Shame on you, Toyota, 
for being so greedy. And shame on you, NHTSA, for not doing your job."

A keenly awaited showdown will take place when Toyota's president is quizzed 
by Congressmen tomorrow. The corporate boss, who took the top job at Toyota in 
June, is likely to get a rough ride despite vigorous backing from hundreds of 
Toyota dealers in the US who have arrived in Washington with badges reading "I 
am Toyota in America". Governors of states containing Toyota factories have 
pointed out that the Japanese firm employs 172,000 people in the US and have 
urged lawmakers to treat 63-year-old Toyoda with respect.

In written evidence ahead of the hearing, Toyoda said: "Toyota has, for the 
past few years, been expanding its business rapidly. Quite frankly, I fear the 
pace at which we have grown may have been too quick.

"We pursued growth over the speed at which we were able to develop our people 
and our organisation, and we should sincerely be mindful of that. I regret that 
this has resulted in the safety issues described in the recalls we face today."
 