
Toyota's president, Akio Toyoda, today bowed to US pressure and agreed to 
attend a congressional hearing next week overthe safety recall of more than 
8.5m cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/interactive/2010/feb/04/toyota-automotive-industry>
.

Toyoda had initially planned to send the firm's North American chief 
executive, Yoshimi Inaba, to address the House oversight and government reform 
committee on Wednesday.

His change of mind came amid pressure from New York Democratic congressman 
Edolphus Towns, who told Toyoda in a letter that American drivers were "unsure 
as to what exactly the problem is, whether it is safe to drive their cars, or 
what they should do about it."

Toyoda faces a barrage of criticism in the US over his handling of the recall, 
which has prompted government investigations, lawsuits and temporary factory 
closures amid plummeting sales.

Yesterday Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> confirmed it 
would suspend production at its plant in Burnaston, Derbyshire, for two weeks – 
a week longer than planned – from the end of March, leaving 3,500 workers idle. 
It is also attempting to shed 750 "surplus" jobs though voluntary redundancies 
at the plant. Burnaston makes the Auris and Avensis models, both of which have 
been recalled due to defective accelerator pedals. They are among more than 
180,000 cars to have been recalled in the UK.

Toyoda, the grandson of the firm's founder, will face calls to give details of 
a series of safety glitches thatcan cause unintended acceleration and temporary 
loss of braking power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/17/toyota-brake-override-system-corolla>
.

"I look forward to speaking directly to congress and the American people," he 
said in a statement, adding that he would offer a "sincere explanation" of 
defects that have caused a reported 34 deaths in the US over the past decade.

He will be joined by Inaba and Jim Lentz, president of Toyota Motor Sales USA.

US safety authorities said they had also launched a preliminary investigation 
into power steering problems with the Corolla, the world's best-selling car. 
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it had received 168 
complaints and reports of 11 injuries in eight crashes involving the Corolla 
and Corolla Matrix models with electric power steering.

The reputation of the Prius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/interactive/2010/feb/09/prius-braking-system-graphic>
, Toyota's market-leading hybrid, suffered a further blow yesterday after a 
lawsuit was filed in the US claiming that the car's headlights switch 
themselves off at "random intervals."

Towns, and his Republican committee co-chair Darrell Issa, welcomed Toyoda's 
change of heart. "We believe the testimony will be helpful in understanding the 
actions Toyota is taking to ensure the safety of American drivers," they said.

Toyoda had also come under pressure at home to attend the hearing, despite 
concerns that US politicians were lining him up for a public dressing-down 
designed to boost Toyota's American rivals.

Toyota's US sales dropped 16% in January and are expected to suffer again this 
month.

Japan's transport minister, Seiji Maehara, said: "It's good that he has 
decided to accept the invitation. But it's a shame there was flip-flopping on 
the decision."
 