
When Akio Toyoda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/akio-toyoda> became 
president of Toyota in June last year, he promised to steer it through its 
"worst crisis in a century".

He was referring, of course, to the global recession, which had left the 
carmaker with thefirst annual loss in its 73-year-history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/may/08/toyota-posts-record-loss>. 
The only consolation was that Toyota's pain was being felt across the global 
auto industry, and most acutely by its rivals in the US.

Nine months on, as he prepares to go before a US congressional committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/19/toyota-boss-congress-car-safety-recall>
 to account for Toyota's handling ofthe safety recall of more than 8.5m cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/17/toyota-brake-override-system-corolla>
, the 53-year-old chief executive must look back with strange affection on the 
days when his only concern was the bottom line.

It is no secret that some of his US inquisitors see the hearings in Washington 
on Wednesday as an opportunity to subject Toyoda to a dressing down in the full 
glare of the world's media.

While the substance of Toyoda's defence is known only to him and his closest 
advisers, there is little in his background to suggest that there is a 
committee room drama in the offing.

As the grandson of Toyota's founder, Kiichiro Toyoda, his chief qualification 
for becoming the company's youngest-ever president is his pedigree.

Well before the recall crisis cast doubt on his leadership abilities, the 
Japanese media was fond of calling him "the prince". But when it took him a 
fortnight to summon the courage to face the public after the recall of millions 
of cars with potentially faulty accelerators, more unkind commentators invented 
a new moniker: no-show Akio.

Yet in many ways Toyoda is no different from any other Japanese CEO. He has 
been a loyal, quietly diligent servant of the company he joined as a junior 
manager in 1984, and was singled out last year for his managerial skills, 
rather than the media-savvy guile expected of chief executives in other 
countries.

But the qualities that made him a candidate for the presidency of one of 
Japan's most conservative companies now seem wholly inadequate.

Toyoda was pilloried for his halting English during a recent press conference 
– although he speaks the language well – and even for not executing a deep 
enough bow.

His initial refusal to appear before Congress was interpreted as aloofness, 
when in fact he was probably right in insisting Toyota's senior US executives 
were better placed to respond to congressional cross-examination.

That said, his stumbling public performances of late belie years of exposure 
to overseas business culture.

He has lived in London and New York, led the firm's operations in China and 
served as head of the New United Motor Manufacturing plant,Toyota's doomed 
joint venture with General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/aug/28/toyota-closes-fremont-factory>
 in California.

Colleagues describe him as approachable and eager to play down his family 
background. He is said to make unannounced visits to assembly lines and 
dealerships, and until recently shared his infatuation for cars and racing on 
his blog.

Last year he was part of a team that drove his company's Lexus LF-A supercar 
at the challenging 24-hour endurance race at Germany's Nurburgring, finishing a 
creditable fourth in their class.

Toyoda graduated with a law degree from Keio, a prestigious private 
university, and gained a master's degree in business administration from Babson 
College in the US. His working life began outside the family firm, but his 
background made his elevation to president inevitable.

He is the first member of the founding family to lead Japan's biggest carmaker 
since his uncle, Tatsuro, stepped down in 1995; Akio's father, Shoichiro, ran
Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> throughout most of the 80s 
and into the early 90s.

After his appointment, Toyoda said he wanted to reconnect with customers and 
produce cars they could "fall in love with". For now, though, he will be happy 
if his testimony helps prevent a messy and expensive estrangement.
 