
Toyota's president finally emerged today to apologise for the recent safety 
recalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/04/toyota-recall-accelerator-fault>
 that risk ruining the reputation of one of Japan's corporate icons.

Akio Toyoda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/akio-toyoda>, the grandson 
of the firm's founder, acknowledged growing consumer disquiet over the safety 
of at least 8m vehicles worldwide affected by potentially lethal acceleration 
problems.

Toyoda said he "deeply regretted" the concern the acceleration faults had 
caused to customers and said it was his "personal responsibility" to fix the 
problem.

"The recalls are affecting several models in several regions and have caused 
anxiety among customers who are wondering if their cars are OK," he told 
reporters at a hastily called press conference in Nagoya near the firm's central
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> headquarters. "For that we are 
very sorry."

He conceded that he had decided to talk to the media in an attempt to reassure 
Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> owners, but added that he 
believed the firm would soon win back their trust. "Believe me," he said, 
"Toyota cars are safe. We always put the customer first."

The 53-year-old was appointed last year to lead the world's biggest carmaker 
out of its worst performance since it was founded in 1938. Toyota, which 
recently overtook General Motors as the world's biggest carmaker, was hit badly 
by the global downturn in demand for cars, particularly in its key US market.

"We are in the midst of a big crisis and face big challenges ahead," Toyoda 
said. However, he stopped short of announcing a recall ofToyota's 
third-generation Prius hybrids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/04/toyota-crisis-recall-prius-brake>
amid almost 200 reports of a brake defect.

Media reports in Japan today had suggested that Toyota was poised to recall 
about 270,000 Prius cars in Japan and the US in response to the problem.

Toyoda, clearly stung by the storm of criticism surrounding his slow response 
to the crisis, announced the launch of a new taskforce, to be placed under his 
control, dedicated to improving the quality of the firm's vehicles.

The new department will review internal checks, consider customer complaints 
and call on outside experts to devise solutions to quality control issues.

Toyoda had come under fire for his apparent refusal to publicly explain his 
company's response to the latest recall, which affects almost 4.5m cars around 
the world, including the hugely popular Camry and Corolla models.

The new recall was announced on 21 January, but it took almost two weeks for a 
Toyota executive to appear in public. That unenviable task fell to Jim Lentz, 
president of Toyota Motor Sales USA.

Toyoda's only public comment before today was a brief apology delivered last 
week to Japanese reporters on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in 
Davos.

The latest recall comes on top of a similar move last autumn that affects cars 
fitted with defective floor mats that could cause sudden acceleration.

The company's furtiveness – which some critics have interpreted as arrogance – 
has been poorly received in the US, where 2.3m cars are affected by the 
accelerator glitch.

Earlier this week the US transport secretary, Ray LaHood, said he would take 
the unusual step of calling Toyoda to discuss the crisis, and promised to "hold 
Toyota's feet to the fire" in an attempt to address the concerns of millions of 
worried American motorists.

Today, Toyoda promised to would "fully cooperate" with safety investigations 
into Toyota cars by US authorities.

Industry watchers warned that a recall of the new Prius, which went on sale in 
May, could deal a decisive blow to Toyota's reputation for quality and 
reliability.

But a recall of the world's best-selling hybrid now appears inevitable. 
Japan's transport minister, Seiji Maehara, today suggested that Toyota was 
planning an imminent recall or voluntary repair programme.

"Trouble with the Prius means real trouble for the Toyota brand," Ryoichi 
Shinozaki, a crisis management expert at Kyodo Public Relations, told the 
Associated Press. "It is a symbol of its commitment to ecology. It lies at the 
heart of Toyota's new successful business that was defined differently from its 
past success."

Toyota, which is expecting a return to profit this year despite 
recall-associated costs of $2bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/04/toyota-safety-recall-profits>
, has lost about $34bn in market value over the past fortnight.
 