
It has been a stunning fall from grace. Toyota, which had long been the 
world's most admired auto company,suddenly finds itself the most reviled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/25/toyota-akio-toyoda-congress>.

For decades, auto executives from around the world made the pilgrimage to 
Toyota's factories to learn its methods of lean production and continuous 
improvement. The famed quality guruW Edwards Deming <http://deming.org/> helped 
Toyota set up its manufacturing methods after being spurned by complacent US 
auto makers. Detroit thought its dominance could never be challenged, and 
certainly not by the Japanese with their fleets of small, cheap compacts. Since 
then, a generation of business school students has studied Toyota's management 
and manufacturing techniques. Now its safety woes are certain to find their way 
into business school case studies on how to ruin a company's reputation.

While Toyota's public fall from grace came suddenly, it was years in the 
making. A memo from 2007 portrayedexecutives boasting of saving $100m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/22/toyota-memo-safety> by 
negotiating a limited recall of floor mats related to the acceleration problem. 
(The cost to the company's reputation and sales will almost certainly be much 
greater.) Toyota's dismissive attitude of the acceleration problem brings to 
mind the sorry example of Ford's handling of the Pinto's exploding gas tanks in 
the 1970s. Nothing erodes confidence in a company's reputation so much as 
internal documents subordinating safety concerns to the bottom line.

For years, MBA students have compared Ford's mismanagement of the Pinto gas 
tank problem to Johnson & Johnson's handling of the Tylenol tampering case in 
1982. It has taken years, if not decades for Ford to recover, while the Johnson 
& Johnson credo has been held up as the model of corporate responsibility for a 
generation, even in the face of further product recalls. The lesson that good 
ethics can be good business was forgotten by Toyota.

Toyota executives have said they lost their focus on quality as they strove 
for market share. It wasn't too long ago that Toyota surpassed GM as the leader 
in sales. But in doing so, executives lost their focus on quality, and saw the 
acceleration problem as an impediment to meeting their sales targets, rather 
than a warning that the company was getting sloppy. Toyota is finding that it's
hard to maintain market share when 60% of its vehicles have been pulled 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE6114BW20100203> from dealer lots for 
safety concerns.

When Toyota, after years of fudging, finally acknowledged the problem, it went 
into full apology mode. Toyota president and chief executive officer Akio 
Toyoda told a congressional committee that he takes "full responsibility" for 
the auto maker's problem, and pointed out thathis name was on the cars the 
company sells 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/25/business/global/25toyota.html?hp>.

Toyota's troubles come as the rest of the auto industry has been catching up. 
In a few short years, the Korean auto maker Hyundai, following the now-classic 
Japanese strategy, has progressed from selling cheap compacts to offering a 
full line of well made cars. Even the much-maligned US automakers are staging a 
surprisingly strong comeback in quality rankings and market share. Ford and GM 
were ranked nearly equal to Toyota in last year'sJD Power survey 
<http://www.driving.ca/Ford+close+quality+Toyota/1721566/story.html>, and have 
posted gains in market share while Toyota has fallen 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE6114BW20100203>.

It is worth remembering that a year ago, the question of whether there would 
even be a US auto industry was being hotly debated. GM's annual report included 
a caution that thecompany's ability to carry on as a "going concern" was in 
doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2009/mar/05/general-motors-bankruptcy-bailout>
. Even those who supported the rescue of GM and Chrysler wondered whether it 
would simply postpone the inevitable.

After years of learning from Toyota's strengths, one hopes that the US auto 
makers will learn from its misfortune as well. A generation ago,Toyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> benefited from Detroit's hubris. 
Now it is returning the favour, just as Detroit is staging a comeback.
 