
Arvind Singh came to Barefoot Acupuncturists 
<http://www.barefootacupuncturists.com/> in Mumbai’s Vijay Nagar slum to find 
relief from debilitating low-back pain. His chronic suffering forced him to 
leave his job as a security guard, eliminating the family’s sole income. “We 
went for x-rays, CT scans and blood tests, but no one could give us a 
diagnosis,” says his wife, Anita. Doctors prescribed painkillers and suggested 
surgery – both costly options. Eventually, the Singhs turned to acupuncture, 
where, after 15 treatments at 20 rupees a sitting, Singh felt “completely fine”.

Founded by Belgian Walter Fischer in 2008, Barefoot Acupuncturists now has 
four clinics – two in Mumbai’s slums and two in rural Tamil Nadu – to bring 
holistic care to low-income communities. Around the world, traditional medical 
systems, such as acupuncture andayurveda <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayurveda>
 are increasingly being recognised as affordable, low-tech interventions for 
under-served areas. In India,65% of the rural population uses ayurveda 
<http://apps.who.int/gb/archive/pdf_files/WHA56/ea5618.pdf> and medicinal 
plants as a first step for healthcare. In Africa,traditional medicine serves 
80% of healthcare needs 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTHEALTHNUTRITIONANDPOPULATION/EXTHSD/0%2c%2ccontentMDK:20190826%7EmenuPK:438812%7EpagePK:148956%7EpiPK:216618%7EtheSitePK:376793%2c00.html>
. In China, the figureis about 40% 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTHEALTHNUTRITIONANDPOPULATION/EXTHSD/0%2c%2ccontentMDK:20190826%7EmenuPK:438812%7EpagePK:148956%7EpiPK:216618%7EtheSitePK:376793%2c00.html>
.

“For many millions of people, often living in rural areas of developing 
countries, herbal medicines, traditional treatments and traditional 
practitioners are the main – sometimes the only – source of healthcare,”the 
World Health Organisation’s director general, Margaret Chan, said in 2008 
<http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2008/20081107/en/>. “This is care that is close 
to homes, accessible and affordable.”

The WHO <http://www.who.int/en/> recently launched the traditional medicine 
strategy 2014-2023 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/92455/1/9789241506090_eng.pdf?ua=1> 
to mainstream traditional medicine alongside allopathic (modern, western) care, 
with an emphasis on improving safety and expanding access. The report aims to 
set up traditional medicine for contemporary health needs, diseases and 
standards.

Traditional medicine in its many forms has proven to be an effective treatment 
for non-communicable diseases (NCDs) – one of the biggest health burdens for 
developing countries. NCDs, such as heart disease, stroke, cancer and chronic 
lung disease,kill more than 36 million people each year 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs355/en/> and 80% of the deaths 
occur in low- and middle-income countries.

Founder of AyurVaid <http://ayurvaid.com/> chain of ayurvedic hospitals Rajiv 
Vasudevan says today’s “quick fix” society turns too quickly to pills and 
elective surgery but traditional medicine treats the root-cause. He says that 
allopathic medicine provides symptomatic treatment that, for example, returns 
blood pressure back to normal, but ignores the underlying conditions – a 
person’s constitution, the surrounding environment, diet – that cause the 
illness in the first place.

“In general, ayurveda can play an effective complementary role to allopathy’s 
emergency medical care system,” says Vasudevan, who believes the lowest 
economic strata can benefit the most from these choices in treatment. “Ayurveda 
offers an alternative option to elective surgery, which has multiple 
implications, including loss of livelihood, expense and irreversibility.” 
Ayurveda’s focus on long-term wellbeing is particularly important for 
vulnerable communities who rely on healthy bodies for a steady income.

Recognising the benefits of traditional medicine, the Indian government has 
included it in national schemes. The ayurveda, yoga and naturopathy, unani, 
siddha and homeopathy (Ayush <http://www.indianmedicine.nic.in/>) department in 
the ministry of health and family welfare focuses on upgrading education 
standards, quality control and expanding availability and awareness of these 
traditional systems. Ayush institutions across the country have approximately
62,000 hospital beds and more than 785,000 health workers 
<http://planningcommission.gov.in/aboutus/committee/strgrp12/st_ayush0903.pdf>.

Further, the government has included ayuveda in its insurance scheme, Rashtra 
Swastya Bima Yojana (RSBY) <http://www.rsby.gov.in>. The decision came last 
August after petitioning from around the country, including by the Ayush 
regional coordinator in Uttar Pradash, Anand Chaudhary.He argued that 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/varanasi/No-insurance-for-Ayurvedic-treatment/articleshow/20562178.cms>
 “escalating cost of allopathic drugs is still a challenge to provide quality 
patient care with minimal resources. Ayurveda may help a great deal in this 
regard and ensure cost effective treatment to all.” In another move in line 
with WHO goals, the Indian governmentannounced it would enlist a drug 
controller for traditional medicine 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Traditional-medicine-to-get-separate-drug-control-chief/articleshow/13002441.cms?referral=PM>
.

Disproving sceptics through improved regulation and quality assurance is an 
important task for the new drug controller. Several scientific studies have 
found toxic substances in traditional medicine, including one that found
ayurvedic medicines could cause lead poisoning 
<http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1108395>.

“Traditional medicine is a very wide term and it incorporates many harmful as 
well as good practices,” says Armida Fernandez, founder of the NGOSociety for 
Nutrition, Education and Health Action <http://www.snehamumbai.org/>. While the 
organisation uses allopathic medicine to treat babies with pneumonia or 
tuberculosis, Sneha supports proven traditional practices, such as giving the 
mother nutritious sweets post-delivery to improve lactation.

Traditional medicine can’t be assumed to all be harmful, ineffective or 
beneficial, but the WHO’s new strategy will help to validate effective 
practices on an international level, encouraging countries to look more closely 
at expanding this medical option.

“Chronic disease and poverty operate in a vicious cycle,” says Vasudevan. 
“They feed off each other.” In this sense, providing quality medical care is 
more than abasic right <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs323/en/>; 
the physical wellbeing of low-income communities, particularly in the 
developing world, is one of the most fundamental tools in fighting poverty. As 
development advocates search for new technologies and innovations to pressing 
issues, ancient wisdom continues to prove its relevance in the 21st century – 
and if the WHO’s new strategy is influential – will only become more important.

Read more stories like this: 

• Cancer: Kenya’s preventable killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jan/21/cancer-kenya-preventable-killer>

• 13 ways to tackle inequality in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/apr/22/india-elections-tackling-inequality-advice>

• India is polio-free: what can Pakistan, Afghanistan and Nigeria learn? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jan/13/lessons-india-polio-free-landmark>

• Advertisement feature: New tools help strengthen local advocacy skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/partner-zone-path/2014/sep/15/new-tools-help-strengthen-local-advocacy-skills>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 