
Hollywood is all about moments. Everything is moments in these days of Twitter 
and Instagram. A moment is all we get, so actually Andy Warhol was pretty 
off-mark with that 15-minute thing. Outstay your moment nowadays and they play 
theJaws music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZvCI-gNK_y4>. The "jump the 
shark" moment, they call it out here.

My mad weekend in LA started when Harry Potter and Gandhi were on my flight 
out, or Daniel Radcliffe and Sir Ben Kingsley as it probably says on their 
passports. And at the GREAT British nominee party held by the ebullient 
consul-general Dame Barbara Hay, I had what I call aMarshall McLuhan moment 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9wWUc8BZgWE>, as in when, in Annie Hall, Woody 
Allen produces the great cultural theorist in a cinema queue to back him up in 
an argument. I was chatting to Col Needham, founder ofIMDb 
<http://www.imdb.com/search/>, joking about what celebrities I could magic up 
to impress him. So, I grabbed George Lazenby to whom I'd been talking a bit 
earlier, and actually heard myself say: "Well, let's start with James Bond, 
shall we?"

Lots of fun Brits at that party, including the Anna Karenina posse of Seamus 
McGarvey, Sarah Greenwood and Jacqueline Durran. It was good to see actress 
Kate Ashfield, too, theShaun of the Dead star who has moved out there, glammed 
up the hair and is having a great time.

After that Bond incident, Needham generously invited me to his table at the 
Indie Spirit awards <http://www.spiritawards.com/> the next day, down on the 
beach at Santa Monica. I bumped into Emily Mortimer who was looking amazing in 
a gold Chanel jacket and giving out an award and all that, but was also filming 
for her new Sky seriesDoll & Em, in which she plays a bitter actress called Em.

Harvey Weinstein was enjoying the success of Silver Linings Playbook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook> (hardly 
very indie, really, is it?) winning big – everyone from that movie except poor 
Bradley Cooper seemed to win – but Jason Isaacs and Lennie James were down 
there, Sam Rockwell and Martin McDonagh, Jack Black and Jason Schwartzman, 
Kerry Washington and Mary Elizabeth Winstead (she's a very funny woman, and 
great inSmashed <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149499/smashed>) and the 
crew from my favourite, proper indie film of the year,Gimme the Loot.

Having a Bond to hand might be cool, but nothing beats actually having an 
Oscar in your mitt. That's how I got into theVanity Fair party on Oscar night. 
My friend the documentary producerSimon Chinn <http://redboxfilms.co.uk/about> 
won an Oscar a couple of years ago forMan on Wire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125351/man.on.wire>. So he's an old pro 
at all this and promised me that if, at the end of the ceremony he was "holding 
a little gold man" for hisSearching for Sugar Man 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147796/searching-for-sugar-man>, he could 
basically get me in anywhere.

The smart thing in LA on Oscar night is actually to walk and avoid the jam of 
hundreds of black limos ferrying stars to post-award parties. I passed Mark 
Ruffalo. AndTommy Lee Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tommyleejones>. 
And Don Johnson. I stopped to have a cigarette with Juliette Lewis. I don't 
really smoke any more, but when Juliette Lewis offers you a fag on Oscar night, 
you take it.

Then Shirley Bassey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/shirley-bassey> walked 
on by. For me, her rendition ofGoldfinger was the best thing about the whole 
ceremony. "Fabulous," I said to her. "You won the Oscars with that tonight, you 
know." And she stopped, clasped me by the shoulders and kissed me. On the 
street, right there on Sunset Boulevard. I know!

Jean Dujardin, Oscar winner last year for The Artist, walked by a moment or 
two later and gave me a man hug. I was standing by the makeshiftVanity Fair 
security gate where women with clipboards check all the numbers on the limo 
windscreens and read out the names of the occupants into headsets like mini-CIA 
agents. They even make the drivers wind down the blacked-out back windows to 
prove the celebs are actually in there.

As the cars purred slowly by, I overheard some ridiculous sentences, like: 
"Vanessa Hudgens and Selena Gomez, together." Or: "Michael Douglas and 
Catherine Zeta-Jones, yes that's definitely you." And: "Jeffrey Katzenberg, in 
the front, Oscar on lap.Steven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> in the back."

Standing at this odd spot in the universe, under a full silver moon, awaiting 
my golden ticket like Charlie at the Chocolate Factory, I eventually found 
Simon Chinn and his director Malik Bendjelloul, a very happy, gentle soul, who 
was cradling his Oscar in his jacket, like a golden baby.
 Malik Benjelloul, left, and Simon Chinn pose with their Academy awards for 
best documentary. Photograph: Jennifer Graylock/FilmMagic 
And these babies get you in. There were eight of us, to two Oscars. Then 
there's a security scanner machine, like at an airport, only it can't be very 
secure because, what do you know, two heavy goldenOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> don't actually set it off.

Gael García Bernal gave me an "Hola hombre", looking super cool in a midnight 
blue tux. He introduced me to his wife, and then he uttered the immortal words: 
"And do you know my friend Salma Hayek?"

And then in we went, to the throng of fame. It was like Madame Tussauds 
<http://www.madametussauds.com/>, but moving. Although actually, some of the 
women's faces were not moving. Does Botox deflate after, say, six hours, I 
wonder? Is that why they have to go home, like modern Cinderellas, whose faces 
now only last for an evening?

And, really, there was nothing happening. Celebrities were just milling about, 
everyone bumping into one another because everyone's really not looking at 
anything except what other celebs they might spot. Celebs are the worst 
offenders for craven celeb spotting, I discover.

There's Shirley Bassey again, talking to Joan Collins and Jackie Collins. Joan 
seductively fondled Simon's Oscar, before heading off to meet Quentin Tarantino.

I go to sit next to Helena Bonham Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter>, because she's fun and 
doesn't care that people always shit on her red carpet dresses. She's talking 
to Danny Huston, who's always a hoot, and who always has fags. Catherine 
Zeta-Jones, in fact, is also sitting in my booth, having one of Danny Huston's 
fags.

Yes. At the Vanity Fair party, you can smoke indoors. Anywhere you like. 
Everyone in there is so famous and fabulous that normal laws of the land do not 
apply. You can't tell someone holding an Oscar that they can't smoke. You can't 
tell them anything. Tonight, just for tonight, like James Cameron once said, 
they're kings of the world.

And anyway, the DJ put on Michael Jackson's PYT and the dancefloor suddenly 
got a busier. I could senseSilver Linings Playbook star Chris Tucker gearing up 
for an MJ impression and, well, it has been known for me to bust out my own one 
at these sorts of occasions – bar mitzvahs, weddings and Oscar parties. So 
there I was, having an MJ dance battle with Chris Tucker.

Somewhat chuffed with this, I texted my wife back home in London. She texted 
back saying: "Well done darling. But don't, on any account, do your Freddie 
Mercury. Please. Just sayin."

It seemed like the right time to leave. The place was emptying. The dream was 
fraying. I walked outside to where I'd left my car. Only I couldn't remember 
quite where that was. Or what just happened.Ang Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee> was now in front of me on the 
pavement, eating an In-n-Out Burger, and trying not to get mustard on his Oscar.

I walked down Sunset and off into the sunrise.
 