
Jonás and the wail

Alfonso Cuarón wrote the rapturously received opening-night film Gravity 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1454468/?ref_=sr_1> with his son, Jonás. There's a 
scene in the movie that involves Sandra Bullock desperately scanning her space 
radio to transmit a distress signal but only picking up a conversation with a 
stranger who identifies himself as Aningaaq.Gravity leaves this conversation 
dangling as a mystery, but at the opening-night party, Cuarón told me that this 
voice was in fact a real Inuit man whom his son had met while making a 
documentary in Greenland. The scene so intrigued that Jonas was inspired to 
make a short film about the other side of that conversation, shot from the 
Inuit's point of view, in Greenland. Bullock even provided her voiceover for 
it. The seven-minute short, calledAningaaq, will be showing in the Venice short 
film competition later this week. I wonder if it will also accompanyGravity 
when UK audiences get their first look at this sure-fire Oscar nominee at the
London film festival 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/bfi-news/57th-bfi-london-film-festival-announces-2013-dates>
 next month.

Jury service suits Arnold

Also at the opening-night do on the Excelsior beach was British director 
Andrea Arnold, who's on the jury this year. She brought her daughter along for 
the party. "I can't talk about any of the films," Arnold told me quickly, 
before any of us had even seen any of the competition entries. "It's bliss 
though," she added. "I just get to watch films and argue about them with Carrie 
Fisher andBernardo Bertolucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bernardobertolucci>. I was on the jury at 
Cannes, so I sort of know what to expect, but this is brilliant." Arnold will 
then be off to America to make her first film there. "It takes me ages because 
I write and direct," she told me, "but that's how you get the best stuff, isn't 
it?"

Spices of life


Variety held a dramatic pre-party on the roof of the Danieli hotel against a 
backdrop of a spectacular thunder and lightning show. It was themed around the 
films of jury president Bertolucci. So there were sumptuous tagines fromThe 
Sheltering Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/39305/sheltering-sky> 
and dim sum forThe Last Emperor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77920/last.emperor>. I expected a large 
tub of butter forLast Tango in Paris but instead we got a strange mix of French 
and Argentine cuisine.

Stars who get the hump

Mia Wasikowska is very good in Tracks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/aug/30/venice-film-festival-mia-wasikowska-tracks>
, an adaptation of the famous Australian travelogue about Robyn Davidson, who 
trekked across the outback with four camels and a dog in 1977. Camels are great 
actors, said Wasikowska. "It's a shame they're only called on to be in films 
every 20 years or so, because they're very obliging and co-operative. When we 
needed one to growl it would usually just do it on the first take. I felt a bit 
upstaged, but I would work with them again in a flash."

Friedkin works his magic

William Friedkin's film Sorcerer <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076740/> was a 
highlight of the festival's opening days, a lost 1970s oddity rescued and 
restored to celebrate its director winning the Golden Lion for lifetime 
achievement. Based on Clouzot'sThe Wages of Fear 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0046268/>, it stars the wonderful Roy Scheider and 
Bruno Cremer as fugitives who've agreed to transport boxes of explosives 
through a South American jungle.

A flop on release, its failure is sometimes blamed on Star Wars being around 
at the same time, and it could be seen as the moment when the blockbuster took 
over from the maverick movie. Viewed now,Sorcerer is the film that looks like 
something from a different planet. It's a wild movie of extraordinary faces and 
amazing sounds. I loved the score by Tangerine Dream and the use of Keith 
Jarrett'sHymns/Spheres. Friedkin was presented with the Lion on his 78th 
birthday. "I really don't want any gifts," he told the audience, "but I'm 
staying at the Danieli, room 325."
 