
So two newspaper publishing chiefs who have made much of a pursuing a digital 
future are showing a renewed, and touching, faith in print.

Trinity Mirror’s Simon Fox is overseeing the launch of a new daily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/17/daily-mirror-newspaper-new-day> 
while Johnston Press’s Ashley Highfieldhas acquired i. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/johnston-press-buy-the-i-newspaper-25m-deal>

In fact, both men have made it clear that print revenue is essential to their 
organisations. The advertising take is so much greater in print compared to 
online.

They also recognise that there remains a public appetite for newspapers as 
long as they are properly targeted at a specific audience, appropriately 
distributed and cheaply priced.

I’m not convinced that New Day is a great title, but Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> has time to reconsider that 
before launch on 29 February. I’m also uncertain whether there is a gap in the 
market.

Even if it works out, however, I am sure that a 20p paper will take buyers 
away from the company’sDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> flagship. The danger is 
obvious, as Independent staff know well enough after watching their readers 
abandon ship in favour of the spin-off, i.

We don’t know much about the New Day plans. Early leaks suggested it would be 
aimed at women. I hope not, if only because it reminds me of the Mirror’s 
inauspicious founding in 1903 as “a newspaper for women, run by women.”

It flopped within a year and its creator, Alfred Harmsworth, called in a male 
editor, Hamilton Fyfe, to revamp it as picture paper. Fyfe’s first job was to 
fire all the women journalists. “It was like drowning kittens,” he later 
observed.

Anyway, as I say, we’re still in the dark about New Day’s content. What Fox 
can be certain of is retaliatory action by rivals. I wouldn’t rule out a 
tactical price cut by the Sun and further short-term cuts in cover prices of the
Daily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> and Daily Star.

Rupert Murdoch and Richard Desmond are not going to let Trinity Mirror have a 
free run. Murdoch, the price-cutting pioneer, will do all he can to protect the 
Sun while Desmond has already shown his determination to build salesby slashing 
the cost of the Daily Star to 20p 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/30/richard-desmond-sparks-tabloid-price-war-by-halving-cost-of-star-editions>
.

As for i <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, Highfield will not be best 
pleased about Trinity Mirror’s initiative. It will muddy the waters as he seeks 
to expand his new acquisition in early April.

His advantage is that i already has a regular audience and he seems sure that 
New Day will not have the quality of i.

But New Day? Really? Should we not lend Simon Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simon-fox> a helping hand with some 
suggestions for a better title? How about Dawn? “Just ahead of the Sun.”
 