
Like a maternity ward deluged with multiple births, contemporary British 
writing is full of triplets. In literature,Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> and Will Self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/will-self> are working on the final parts 
of trilogies featuring, respectively, the historical Thomas Cromwell and the 
fictional Dr Zack Busner. And, in theatre,Rona Munro’s sequence of linked plays 
about Scottish Kings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/edinburgh-festival-review-the-james-plays-rona-munro-sofie-grabol>
 – James I, James II and James III – have just transferred from the National 
Theatre of Scotland to the National Theatre of Great Britain in London.

While novelistic trios are relatively common, the form is much rarer in 
theatre. The reasons are largely logistical: literary trilogies can be 
published and read over a period of years, but multi-part plays make most sense 
when performed in repertory, hugely multiplying budgets and rehearsal time, and 
requiring theatre-goers to commit three evenings or (on special three-in-one 
days) an entire Saturday.

In their shape, Munro’s The James Plays continue a dramatic tradition 
stretching back two and a half millennia toAeschylus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aeschylus>, although The Oresteia is the 
only surviving example of what are thought to have been many works by the Greek 
playwright in which a character or historical event was dramatised in three 
separate chapters.

In modern times, a key example is Arnold Wesker’s turn-of-the-60s trilogy 
comprising Roots, Chicken Soup With Barley and I’m Talking About Jerusalem, his 
escalating examinations of the nature of Judaism finding a sort of Irish 
equivalent around three decades later inBilly Roche’s haunting The Wexford 
Trilogy <http://www.cix.co.uk/~shutters/reviews/00166.htm>, which presents a 
triple perspective on a rural community.

A small-town American family in the Vietnam era is also progressively explored 
in The Talley Trilogy by theAmerican writer Lanford Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/mar/25/lanford-wilson-obituary>.

Wilson, Roche and Wesker all built up their trilogies progressively, with gaps 
around the earlier parts, as did David Hare, whose examinations of a trinity of 
British institutions – the church in Racing Demon (1990), the law in Murmuring 
Judges (1991) and politics in The Absence of War (1993) –were presented as a 
formal sequence only with the opening of the final play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/apr/23/theatre.artsfeatures>.

Contrastingly, as with the Munros, the three parts of Alan Ayckbourn’s The 
Norman Conquests (1973) were premiered together, as, on a single Saturday in 
2002, were Voyage, Shipwreck and Salvage, the constituent parts ofTom 
Stoppard’s The Coast of Utopia 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/11/24/theater/24coas.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>, 
his biographical triptych about 19th-century Russian revolutionaries and 
writers.

The most notable super-size play of late 20th-century American theatre was an 
epic two-parter – Tony Kushner’s Angels in America – but the rule of three 
applied to Neil Simon’s autobiographical string of alphabetically branded 
plays: Brighton Beach Memoirs (1983), Biloxi Blues (1985) and Broadway Bound 
(1986). Return readers will know that I maintain a rather lonely campaign for 
the greatness of a Scottish threesome: the pieces variously known as The Slab 
Boys or Paisley Patterns trilogies, written in the late 70s, drawing on his 
experiences while working in a carpet factory, by the writer-artist John Byrne. 
And space should be found for the only sequential piece of theatre inspired by 
a cheeky pun: while the Hare trilogy was running at the National, the great 
theatrical joker Ken Campbell, who had rather fewer than three hairs on his 
head, declared that his new show for the NT would be called The Bald Trilogy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Ftriple-threat-theatrical-trilogies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412335274264%2Ffed9241e-945f-4ee0-93df-24241f875685-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Triple%20threat%3A%20the%20trouble%20with%20theatrical%20trilogies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Ftriple-threat-theatrical-trilogies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Triple%20threat%3A%20the%20trouble%20with%20theatrical%20trilogies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F03%2Ftriple-threat-theatrical-trilogies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F3%2F1412335274264%2Ffed9241e-945f-4ee0-93df-24241f875685-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Voyage, the first part of Tom Stoppard’s Coast of Utopia trilogy Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton/Guardian 
The purest theatrical three-parters are probably The Norman Conquests and The 
Oresteia because each instalment is narratively and thematically connected to 
the others. With an architectural beauty remarkable even from the masterly 
craftsman Ayckbourn, his plays feature the same characters in different parts 
of one house over a weekend. Although the works can be watched separately, the 
pleasure is greatly increased by seeing them in turn.

An obvious risk of writing a trilogy of plays that can stand alone is that 
chunks of the trilogy will be stood up. Wesker’s Chicken Soup With Barley often 
goes out alone, while Hare’s Racing Demon is very rarely staged with its sister 
pieces.Belfry, the finale of Roche’s Wexford Trilogy, is about to finish a 
short solo run in London 
<http://www.londontheatre.co.uk/cgi-bin/search.cgi?mytemplate=tp2&method=all&10000001=10004309>
. Three works by Martin McDonagh – The Beauty Queen of Leenane, The Lieutenant 
of Inishmore and The Cripple of Inishmaan – have all been single hits in London 
or on Broadway at different times, although each technically belongs to one of 
the two trilogies into which the Irish writer’s work can be divided.

Conversely, the creative jeopardy of writing a trilogy in one go is that 
exhaustion can tangibly set in during the later stages, as I felt watching the 
National Theatre version of The Coast of Utopia (Stoppard later achieved 
greater creative evenness in a rewrite for a New York staging), and also the 
Edinburgh premieres of The James Plays. It seemed to me that another problem 
Munro had was that, while three sucessive kings of the same nation 
theoretically provide a neat reason for writing a trilogy, the reigns of the 
monarchs proceeded in descending order of interest, a problem addressed by the 
casting ofSofie Gråbøl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/03/the-killing-sofie-grabol-queen-edinburgh-festival-play>
 as the final king’s Queen.

But, above all, the drawback of three-packs is that they are expensive and 
unwieldy to put on, particularly because a significant proportion of the 
audience tends to come to only one show in a given period. Many viewers of 
Edward Bond’s The War Plays (1985), a dystopian trilogy about life after 
nuclear armageddon, felt they that had had enough after one or two chunks, 
partly because the writer-director had discouraged confidence by leaving the 
productions during rehearsal.
 All in the name … Ben Miles and Lydia Leonard in Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton/Guardian 
A textbook case of this problem occurred in New York in 2009, when producers 
staged a so-called “Neil Simon Season”, comprising, somewhat oddly, the first 
and third parts of his BB trilogy. However, after poor audiences for Brighton 
Beach Memoirs, theproject was pulled without Broadway Bound even opening 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/culturemonster/2009/11/what-really-happened-with-brighton-beach-memoirs.html>
.

A similar problem may face producers here and there in the next few years. The 
dramatist Mike Poulton has already expressed the hope that – whenHilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> completes her Cromwell 
trilogy, with The Mirror and the Light – it might be possible to add an 
adaptation to a revival of the first two plays and create a theatrical trilogy 
to match the published one.

The business difficulties can, though, already be anticipated. The first two 
Poulton-Mantel plays have been renamed, in cinematic fashion, Wolf Hall 1 and 
Wolf Hall 2 because of evidence from the West End that the second instalment, 
Bring up the Bodies, sold less well than the opener, Wolf Hall. So, if Wolf 
Hall 3 (The Mirror and the Light) were to happen in a few years’ time, would 
there be enough theatre-goers keen to see the earlier works again or would 
sales be focused on the conclusion?

One of the most popular theatrical anecdotes involves Hollywood producers 
changing the title of Alan Bennett’s The Madness of George III to The Madness 
of King George, in case those seeing the original title in listings feared that 
they had missed the first two instalments of the George franchise. With Rona 
Munro’s James III, there can be no such confusion, but it will be fascinating, 
when the final box-office figures are in, to see if the three plays sold 
equally well. Trilogies, in theatre, are often three times the bother.
 