
Sir Ian Blair was an unpopular commissioner, as much for his awkward social 
skills as the perceived closeness to New Labour that earned him the loathing of 
the Conservative press. He resigned in October after the mayor ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Boris Johnson, engineered a coup and 
made it clear he had withdrawn his support. At the time Blair was facing 
challenges on a number of fronts. Sir Ronnie Flanagan, HM chief inspector of 
constabulary, was investigating the award of £3m of Metropolitan police 
contracts to Blair's friend and skiing partner Andy Miller. That has still to 
be resolved. The inquest into the death of Jean Charles de Menezes was 
revealing a chaotic anti-terrorism operation.

Andy Hayman, the head of special operations, was forced to resign last 
December after an inquiry into £15,000 expenses claims. In April a three-month 
inquiry found there was insufficient evidence to bring misconduct charges.

Tarique Ghaffur, Britain's most senior Asian police officer, was suspended 
from duty in September after an acrimonious row with Blair about claims of 
racial discrimination. Following weeks of legal argument, Ghaffur accepted an 
out-of-court settlement of about £300,000 days before Blair retired, and 
withdrew his claim. A police officer for 34 years, Ghaffur claimed he was 
sidelined, discriminated against and humiliated in his role as boss of security 
planning for the 2012 Olympics.

Peter Clarke, the respected head of counterterrorism command, retired at the 
age of 52 in March. He was one of the Met's star detectives and had led the 
investigations into every major Islamist terrorist plot since 2002 as well as 
the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. He was credited with the successful 
prosecution of 60 terrorists and at his leaving party was showered with 
tributes from other anti-terrorist agencies.
 