
“I’m tall in Sweden,” says Alexander Skarsgård 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alexander-skarsgard>, lounging across 
a conveniently oversized sofa. “But I’m huge in Hollywood.” He’s not kidding: 
at 6ft 4in, he’s even taller in the flesh than he appears on screen. This must 
make film parties particularly awkward for people who find themselves pitching 
projects – or even just chatting – to his navel.

His height, in an industry full of titches, and his unmistakably Swedish 
looks, have helped Skarsgård stand out from the pack. He was perfect fora small 
turn in Zoolander <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EMTbkfgT_jc> as one of Ben 
Stiller’s buddies, and his imposing presence led to a breakout role in the 
vampire TV show True Blood. It also makes his turn in new movie The Diary of a 
Teenage Girl, in which his character has an affair with his girlfriend’s 
17-­year-­old daughter (5ft 2in), even more shocking. The coming­-of-age drama, 
which also stars Kristen Wiig and British newcomerBel Powley 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/bel-powley-interview-the-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>
, recently gained an 18 certificate in the UK for its explicit sex scenes, a 
decision its director has denounced.

Sundance 2015 review: The Diary of a Teenage Girl – today I slept with 
Alexander Skarsgård
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/25/sundance-2015-review-the-diary-of-a-teenage-girl>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Diary%20of%20a%20Teenage%20Girl%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fdiary-of-a-teenage-girl-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438873179210%2FKP_382808_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The film team review The Diary of a Teenage Girl 
Skarsgård’s own teenage years can be split into two chapters. “The first was 
when I was a young teenager and didn’t go out much, just hung out at home and 
played video games. The girls in our class, we weren’t cool enough for them and 
they found some older dudes with Vespas and moustaches. My late teens were 
wilder. I discovered partying.”

As Skarsgård turned 21, he made the unlikely decision to leave Stockholm and 
live in Leeds for six months. Unlike many international students, he was 
unperturbed by the British student lifestyle. “I don’t know if you’ve ever 
been,” he says of his homeland, “but they take their partying pretty 
seriously.” Leeds was just what he needed at the time: “A real tough 
working­-class town.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Falexander-skarsgard-interview-diary-of-a-teenage-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353302550%2F8f2d7988-f23e-40f1-a5d8-5805585c2018-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=True%20Blood%20to%20Tarzan%3A%20how%20Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20swung%20into%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Falexander-skarsgard-interview-diary-of-a-teenage-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=True%20Blood%20to%20Tarzan%3A%20how%20Alexander%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20swung%20into%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Falexander-skarsgard-interview-diary-of-a-teenage-girl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438353302550%2F8f2d7988-f23e-40f1-a5d8-5805585c2018-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Alexander Skarsgård and Bel Powley in The Diary of a Teenage Girl. Photograph: 
PR 
After he returned home, a career in Swedish film followed, but it wasn’t until 
his role as Eric Northman, the 1,000-year-old bar-owner inTrue Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-blood>, that he reached a wider 
audience. Outside the small screen, he’s mostly stuck with smaller fare but he 
went full­ blockbuster in 2012 withthe critically derided Battleship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/12/battleship-review> – something he 
doesn’t regret. “I’m only in Battleship for 30 minutes. I get blown up pretty 
early on. I’m a fan of Pete Berg. I still think he’s a fantastic director and I 
actually had a lot of fun. I know it was a disappointment at the box office but 
it didn’t turn me off big movies.”

Skarsgård’s idea of a “good time on set” might be slightly at odds with the 
average actor’s, however. He worked with Lars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> on the 2011 art-apocalypse 
dramaMelancholia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/melancholia-film-review> and 
quickly bonded with a director Nicole Kidman described diplomatically as 
“difficult” and who turned Björk off acting for ever. “People cracking jokes, 
having a laugh,” he says. “It was one of the best experiences I’ve ever had. It 
was as close to doing theatre as you can get.”

He’s now after what every actor appears to be looking for: a franchise. His 
father, fellow von Trier survivorStellan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/21/stellan-skarsgard-interview-in-order-of-disappearance-new-review-q-and-a>
, has attached himself to the Marvel cinematic universe, cropping up in both 
Thor films, as well as the Avengers outings. While Skarsgård hasn’t ruled out 
joining him (“If you do it with the right tone, then sure”), for the moment 
he’s set his sights on another type of superhero. Next summer, he’ll be the 
lead in a new Tarzan movie, heading a starry cast that includes Samuel L 
Jackson, Margot Robbie and Christoph Waltz. While he won’t reveal whether we’ll 
hear the iconic Tarzan call (“Maybe, maybe not”), he does suggest the retelling 
will surprise some.

“When you first meet Tarzan, he’s buttoned up in a three­-piece ­suit in 
Victorian England,” he says. “So it’s reversed – instead of it being about 
taming the beast, it’s about the beast within. There’s the dichotomy of 
functioning in a civilised society where you politely wait at the post office 
for your turn, but also being an animal with everything that contains. I can 
relate to it. I think every human being can.”

So Skarsgård will soon be yet more visible at those Hollywood shindigs, 
surrounded by even more hangers­-on eyeballing his belly­button. At least he’ll 
have some fellow Swedes for support: the rise of actors such asAlicia Vikander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/25/ex-machina-review-mark-kermode-alex-garland-vikander>
,Joel Kinnaman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/05/robocop-remake-killing-joel-kinnaman>
 andNoomi Rapace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/13/noomi-rapace-to-play-maria-callas-in-tale-of-aristotle-onassis-affair>
 suggests LA is undergoing something of a Scandinavian invasion. “There are a 
lot of Swedes in Hollywood in general,” he agrees. “We have a tendency to know 
each other and help each other out.”

And go for meatballs at Ikea? “Of course! We drive there in our Volvos 
listening to Abba.”

 * The Diary of a Teenage Girl is on general release on 7 August.
 