
American schoolchildren will be taught greater respect for patriotic values, 
Donald Trump promised on Thursday, as he followed up his surprise trip to 
Mexico and keyanti-immigration speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/donald-trump-vows-to-deport-millions-during-first-hour-in-office-in-hardline-speech>
 by stepping up his appeal to “Americanism”.

'No amnesty': Trump vows to deport millions during 'first hour in office'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/donald-trump-vows-to-deport-millions-during-first-hour-in-office-in-hardline-speech>
The Republican presidential candidate defied expectations that he would soften 
his stance on the issue on Wednesday night, when he returned to the US from a 
suprisingly conciliatory joint press conference with the Mexican president only 
to give a fiery speech vowing to deport millions of undocumented immigrants to 
a crowd inArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona>.

On Thursday morning he kept up this populist tone, telling an enthusiastic 
audience at the American Legion convention in Cincinnati: “We will stop 
apologising for America, and we will start celebrating America.”

 A Trump administration, he said, would consult with the military veterans’ 
group to promote “pride and patriotism” in schools – “teaching respect” for the 
US flag and pledge of allegiance.

“That flag deserves respect, and I will work with American Legion to help to 
strengthen respect for our flag,” said Trump. “You see what’s happening. It’s 
very, very sad. And, by the way, we want young Americans to recite the pledge 
of allegiance.

“One country, under one constitution, saluting one American flag … always 
saluting,” he added. “In a Trump administration, I plan to work directly with 
the American Legion to uphold our common values and to help ensure they are 
taught to America’s children. We want our kids to learn the incredible 
achievements of America’s history, its institutions and its heroes.”

One country, under one constitution, saluting one American flag … always 
saluting
Donald Trump 
The call to “advance the cause of Americanism – not globalism” came as Trump 
reiterated the anti-immigration message at the heart of his campaign, which 
delighted core supporters and dismayed his few remaining Latino allies, who had 
expected a tack towards moderation.

Despite a whirlwind visit to Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> 
on Wednesday and suggestions of a softening in his approach to the issue, the 
campaign increasingly seems to be emphasizing nationalism as a tactic to defeat 
Hillary Clinton in November.

“We will be united by our common culture, values and principles – becoming one 
American nation,” said Trump in Cincinnati, where he spent half an hour touring 
the convention floor before heading to another nearby rally in the key swing 
state of Ohio.

Trump vowed anew to deport millions of undocumented people and to build a wall 
on the border with Mexico.

Speaking hours after a lightning visit to Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-president-pena-nieto-immigration>
, Trump told a rally in Phoenix, Arizona, he was sticking with his plan for a 
“deportation force” to intercept those crossing the border illegally and hunt 
down criminal “illegal aliens” already in the US.

“We are going to take our country back,” he said, repeating a mantra from the 
primary campaign.

Speaking largely from a teleprompter, he also repeated his vow to make Mexico 
pay for a 2,000-mile wall which, he said, would bristle with sensors, towers 
and guards. “We will build a great wall along the southern border – andMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> will pay for the wall, 100%. They 
don’t know it yet, but they’re going to pay for it.”

Trailing Clinton in the polls with just 69 days to the election, Trump and 
campaign aides had recently fuelled expectations of a “softening” of 
immigration policy, prompting speculation about a flip-flop.

Instead the speech, which his campaign billed as a major policy address, 
represented an abrupt reversion to an aggressive tone just hours after an 
unfamiliar conciliatory timbre in Mexico City, where Trump met President 
Enrique Peña Nieto.

The GOP nominee roused the crowd in Phoenix with grisly details about murders 
committed by undocumented immigrants. He brought on stage “angel moms” whose 
children were killed.

He spoke of cancelling an Obama administration programme that gives work 
permits to about 800,000 young immigrants who came to the US as children – a 
stance likely to slam shut any chance of Latino outreach.

Anybody who entered the US illegally would be subject to deportation and 
undocumented immigrants who committed any crime, not just felonies, would be 
detained and deported, he said. “There will be no amnesty.”

Trump also promised ideological tests for would-be visa applicants, a “sunset” 
on visa laws requiring Congress to rewrite them every few years and a ban on 
taxpayer funding for cities that don’t deport undocumented immigrants.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fcompare-and-contrast-trumps-night-of-changing-rhetoric-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Compare%20and%20contrast%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20night%20of%20changing%20rhetoric%20on%20immigration%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fcompare-and-contrast-trumps-night-of-changing-rhetoric-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Compare%20and%20contrast%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20night%20of%20changing%20rhetoric%20on%20immigration%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fcompare-and-contrast-trumps-night-of-changing-rhetoric-video&media=>
Compare and contrast: Trump’s night of changing rhetoric on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/01/compare-and-contrast-trumps-night-of-changing-rhetoric-video>
Asked by conservative radio host Laura Ingraham on Thursday morning whether 
this represented a “softening”, Trump replied: “Oh, there’s softening. Look, we 
do it in a very humane way … Obviously I want to get the gang members out, the 
drug peddlers out, I want to get the drug dealers out ... And then we’re going 
to make a decision at a later date once everything is stabilised. I think 
you’re going to see there’s really quiet a bit of softening.”

He added: “I feel strongly that we have to stabilise the border … We have to 
have a strong border, otherwise we don’t have a country.”

Wednesday’s rhetoric trampled over the hopes of Trump’s dwindling band of 
conservative Latino supporters. “This is how I feel: disappointed and misled,” 
tweeted Alfonso Aguilar, head of Latino Partnership for Conservative 
Principles. Jacob Monty, a member of Trump’s national Hispanic advisory 
council, resigned,Politico reported 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/donald-trump-hispanic-leaders-arizona-immigration-227615>
.

The rightwing columnist Ann Coulter, in contrast, exulted. “Wow. This doesn’t 
sound like ‘softening’. GO, TRUMP!!!” she tweeted.

Trump did, however, imply most of the estimated 11 million undocumented 
immigrants would remain untouched while his putative administration focused on 
deporting two million with alleged criminal records. “We will begin moving them 
out, day one. My first hour in office, those people are gone.”

On Thursday, at a lunchtime rally in Wilmington, Ohio, Trump was greeted by 
chants of “U-S-A, U-S-A, U-S-A” as he took his nationalist message back to the 
Rust Belt.

The state has been hit hard by a decline in manufacturing jobs and the 
campaign is seeking to weave together economic uncertainty with the 
uncompromising message on immigration.

“We will treat everyone with compassion but our greatest compassion will be 
for the American citizen,” Trump told an almost entirely white audience.

“No state has suffered more from bad trade deals,” he claimed. “Ohio has lost 
nearly one in three of its manufacturing jobs since Nafta and one in four since 
China entered the WTO [World Trade Organisation].”

National polls 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/oh/ohio_trump_vs_clinton-5634.html>
 have begun to narrow again in recent days and although Clinton is still ahead 
in Ohio on average,the latest survey 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/3bebb2_865ec63b1c494be78da4af7d7834766c.pdf> shows 
the candidates tied.

“A new era of American greatness is going to begin a little earlier than 
scheduled on 8 November,” Trump boasted, to wild cheers. “I think we’re going 
to win Ohio, big league.”
 