
TS Eliot himself worked for Lloyds Bank, but John Kinsella has now become the 
second poet to withdraw from the prize set up in Eliot's name in protest at its 
sponsorship by an investment firm.

Kinsella, winner of a host of poetry awards in his native Australia and author 
of more than 30 books, said this morning that he supported the British poet 
Alice Oswald inher decision to pull out of the TS Eliot prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/06/alice-oswald-withdraws-ts-eliot-prize>
 over its newly-brokered sponsorship by investment management firm Aurum Funds. 
He has informed the Poetry Book Society, which administers the prize, that he 
is withdrawing his collection Armour from the running for the £15,000 award.

"I am grateful to Alice Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald>
 for bringing the sponsorship of the TS Eliot Prize to my attention," said 
Kinsella in a statement released by his publisher. "I regret that I must do 
this at a particularly difficult time for the Poetry Book Society but the 
business of Aurum does not sit with my personal politics and ethics. I am 
grateful to everyone at the PBS for all they have done to promote my work and 
that of poetry in general."

The Poetry Book Society negotiated the three-year sponsorship deal with Aurum 
earlier this year. The deal followed the withdrawal of its Arts Council funding 
–a move protested by over 100 poets including Carol Ann Duffy and Simon Armitage
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/04/withdrawal-poetry-book-society-funding>
.

Kinsella told the Bookseller that he "fully" understood 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/kinsella-joins-oswald-withdrawing-t-s-eliot-award.html>
 why the poetry organisation had looked elsewhere for funding, "given the 
horrendous way they were treated, but as an anticapitalist in full-on form, 
that is my position".

"Hedge funds are at the very pointy end of capitalism, if I can put it that 
way," he added.

Oswald, who pulled her collection Memorial from the prize on Tuesday, believes 
that "poetry should be questioning not endorsing such institutions".

Eight poets remain in the running for the TS Eliot prize, one of the most 
prestigious in poetry: John Burnside, Carol Ann Duffy, Leontia Flynn, David 
Harsent, Esther Morgan, Daljit Nagra, Sean O'Brien and Bernard O'Donoghue.

The Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Book Society declined to 
comment on Kinsella's decision, but PBS board member Desmond Clarke pointed out 
that "there is a tradition of financial institutions sponsoring literary prizes 
such as the Man Booker prize", adding that "Aurum are respected investment 
managers whose clients include public sector pension funds and Oxford 
University".

The winner of the award will be announced in January.
 