
A showdown between some of poetry's biggest names will see poet laureate Carol 
Ann Duffy competing with Sean O'Brien, Alice Oswald and John Burnside on the 
shortlist for theTS Eliot prize <http://www.poetrybooks.co.uk/projects/4/>.

Described as the "most demanding of all poetry prizes" by chair of judges 
Gillian Clarke, the 10 nominations for this year's TS Eliot award are a 
roll-call of poetry's great and good. Duffy, who won the award for her previous 
collection,Rapture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780330433914/rapture>, is 
shortlisted for The Bees, her first collection since she was named laureate. 
Woven through with imagery of bees, it is up against Burnside's Black Cat Bone 
(a look at love, faith, hope and illusionwhich took this year's Forward prize 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-15181254>), O'Brien's elegiac 
November and Oswald's take on the Iliad, Memorial.

Clarke, the national poet of Wales, called the lineup for the £15,000 prize "a 
library of the best". She and her fellow poets Stephen Knight and Dennis 
O'Driscoll also selected the spiritual, politically engaged collection Armour 
by Australian poet John Kinsella; Esther Morgan's Grace, an examination of our 
need for purpose; Daljit Nagra's satirical Tippoo Sultan's Incredible 
White-Man-Eating Tiger Toy-Machine!!!; and Irish poet Bernard O'Donoghue's 
meditation on exile and home, Farmer's Cross. The list is rounded out by David 
Harsent's Night and Leontia Flynn's Profit and Loss.

"To me an exciting book is one that makes me want to be a poet – to stop and 
write a poem at that very moment. It's a book which is plugging in to the 
chemistry and excitement about language which we all need before picking up a 
pen," said Clarke. "All these books [we've chosen] are nourishing, exciting and 
challenging. Some are more

challenging, others more nourishing, but all are tremendously important to us 
in their different ways – in quiet ways and in pizzazzy ways."

Won in the past by this year's contenders Oswald, Duffy and O'Brien, as well 
as by Derek Walcott, Ted Hughes, Les Murray and Seamus Heaney, the TS Eliot has 
been described as "the prize most poets want to win" by Andrew Motion.

"Eliot is one of the greatest poets of the 20th century and we can't let him 
down," said Clarke. "We all grieved

for the books we could not include but we do really feel that we have 
something here that represents a lot about British poetry at the moment."

The winner of the TS Eliot prize will be announced on 16 January 2012.

The shortlist

Black Cat Bone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780224093859/black-cat-bone>
 by John Burnside (Cape)

The Bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780330442442/the-bees> by 
Carol Ann Duffy (Picador)

Profit and Loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780224093439/profit-and-loss>
 by Leontia Flynn (Cape)

Night <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571255634/night> 
by David Harsent (Faber)

Armour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780330511841/armour> by 
John Kinsella (Picador)

Grace <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9781852249182/grace> 
by Esther Morgan (Bloodaxe)

Tippoo Sultan's Incredible White-Man-Eating Tiger Toy-Machine!!! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571264902/tippoo-sultans-incredible-white-man-eating-tiger-toy-machine>
 by Daljit Nagra (Faber)

November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780330535007/november> by 
Sean O'Brien (Picador)

Farmer's Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571268603/farmers-cross>
 by Bernard O'Donoghue (Faber)

Memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571274161/memorial> by 
Alice Oswald (Faber)
 