
The calls for increased security in English cricket that resounded last week 
when Karl Power, the sporting imposter, managed to stroll on to the field at 
Headingley disguised as a batsman obviously went unheeded. Otherwise how could 
Phil Tufnell possibly sneak past the bouncers and join the party for tomorrow's 
final Test at the Oval?

There is no more persuasive time for Tufnell's maverick tendencies to be given 
another airing. After a thrilling Headingley victory, the music has been turned 
up full blast and the nation wants to close the summer with a rave. Step 
forward Tuffers, the non-conformist who promises to make the party go with a 
spin.

Nevertheless escapism, however uplifting, brings only temporary relief. 
However much Mark Butcher's unbeaten 173 provided a thrilling escape from a 
demoralising summer, reality will intrude again at the Oval. The only 
Australian declaration there will be one of intent.

How England's coach Duncan Fletcher copes with the sight of Tufnell wandering 
up for practice at the Oval in his habitually prickly early-morning mood brings 
an intriguing finale to the summer. "Join the party" has become one of 
Fletcher's most popular utterances, but he prefers to draw up the strictest of 
guest lists.

Tufnell might be reluctant to look too far ahead - "I'm only thinking about 
the Oval," he said yesterday - but the outcome will have consequences which go 
beyond the final Test of a dead series. At issue here is Tufnell's chance of 
touring India this winter, a country that eight years ago, he admitted, "did my 
head in".

Tufnell has had a solid season, with his 53 championship wickets giving 
impetus to Middlesex's promotion challenge. He claims upon every comeback to be 
"more mature these days" although, as for wiser, he jokes that others can judge 
for themselves.

"The paranoia and the self-obsession have gone," he claimed in his 
autobiography, "as has the feeling that figures in authority were to be 
distrusted simply because they were figures in authority. I'm calmer, more 
relaxed and more self-confident."

Fletcher will test that assertion to the limit. His predecessor as England 
coach, David Lloyd, concluded that Tufnell "does not respond well to having his 
hand forced". Lloyd treated Tufnell sympathetically, saying: "Gradually I 
discovered that there is some enthusiasm for the game behind the front of 
studied moping but that it has to be brought out in a gently cajoling way." He 
was accused of "pandering to a maverick, even giving him preferential 
treatment".

Such an approach will not be to Fletcher's taste. Tufnell's commitment will be 
tested to the limit. If he passes, he might yet surprise himself by going to 
India. If he fails, England will be even more desperate for Ashley Giles to 
recover from the achilles operation that wrecked his season.

Giles, given his contribution to last winter's winning series in Pakistan, 
remains England's logical India choice and David Graveney, the chairman of 
selectors, has indicated that the operation was little more than "a 
cleaning-out exercise". Every opportunity will be given for him to regain 
fitness.

That leaves a historic parallel to Tufnell's return which does not bode well. 
Six years ago he was reluctantly recalled for the final Oval Test by Raymond 
Illingworth, then chairman of selectors, but subsequently excluded from the 
winter tour of South Africa.

Tufnell called it "one of the most humilating episodes" of his career. "I was 
treated like some kind of a leper," he said. "From the moment I arrived at the 
Oval I sensed the other players were uneasy about me being there."

That Tufnell's potential return may coincide with the retirement Tests of 
Michael Atherton and/or Alec Stewart is ironic. Neither, when captain, exactly 
proclaimed Tufnell's worth. Atherton was driven to distraction; Stewart 
preferred to leave him out.

But having picked Tufnell, England must not only play him but show faith in 
him. Of his 41 Tests, only 11 have been in England, where his record is 
strikingly better. In England his wickets cost 26 runs each as opposed to 44 
overseas. For a bowler who is at his most emotionally vulnerable on long tours, 
it has been a rum business.

 Â•The Indian government has denied the national team  permission to play a 
Test in Pakistan next month. Relations between the countries have been strained 
over the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir. The Indian government cancelled 
a tour of Pakistan late last year and banned all cricket between the countries.
 