
Tunisian television is to broadcast testimony from victims of decades of 
authoritarian rule, a first chance for the public to see the workings of a 
truth and dignity commission intended to help cement democracy after the Arab 
spring revolution of 2011.

 The commission is investigating crimes and abuses dating back to 1955, a year 
beforeTunisia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> gained independence 
from France, in an effort to come to terms with its past. In the last three 
years, it has gathered testimony behind closed doors from about 11,000 people.

“The goal is not revenge,” said its head, Sihem Bensedrine, a former activist 
who was harassed by the authorities under former presidentZine al-Abidine Ben 
Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zine-al-abidine-ben-ali>.

She said the sessions beginning on Thursday would be “a historic event that 
will be taught to our grandchildren and enhance the image ofTunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia> in the world as a model of 
tolerance”.

 Further public hearings will be held on 17 December and 14 January, dates 
that commemorate the outbreak of Tunisia’s 2011 uprising andthe flight of Ben 
Ali to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/14/tunisian-president-flees-country-protests>
. At the December session, officials accused of human rights violations, 
torture or corruption will present public apologies.

 The commission said the hearings could boost investment in Tunisia’s 
struggling economy, “because foreign investors will know that Tunisia is 
implementing a path for transitional justice aimed at dismantling its 
authoritarian and corrupt system”.

Tunisian political party fights for women's rights with gender violence bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/24/tunisia-gender-violence-bill-substance-progressive-image>
The country is hosting a major international investment conference at the end 
of the month.

 The 2011 uprising, the first of the Arab spring that spread across the Middle 
East, was driven by a wave of anger at unemployment, corruption and repression.

 Since ending Ben Ali’s 23 years of authoritarian rule, the north African 
country has won praise for its democratic transition. But many remain 
frustrated over a lack of economic opportunities and the fact that some former 
officials have been allowed to return to public life.

 Amnesty International said the commission was “a historic opportunity to 
affirm a commitment to end impunity for past crimes under international law and 
human rights violations”.

It added: “The real test facing Tunisia’s transitional justice process, 
however, is whether it will ultimately lead to criminal prosecutions for the 
crimes of the past decades, which have thus far gone without adequate 
investigation or punishment.”

 