
By the security gates at Sydney airport stands a surprising sight for British 
eyes: a row of polling booths. Australia's general election takes placethis 
Saturday <https://www.theguardian.com/australia/story/0,,2213323,00.html>, but 
advance voting is already under way - and taking part is compulsory, even if it 
has to be done after check-in.

Here - unlike Britain - there is no national debate about falling turnout and 
voter apathy. In the 24 general elections since 1946, participation has 
averaged 95% - and it will do so again this week.

Travellers leaving Sydney can choose in advance between John Howard's 
11-year-old conservative government andKevin Rudd 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/section/2/story.cfm?c_id=2&objectid=10476952>, the 
Labor challenger widely expected to remove him from power. They can also reject 
both parties of course - but they have to do so in person by spoiling their 
ballot paper. Abstention, of the sort indulged in by almost half Britain's 
voters at the 2005 general election, is illegal.

And this is more than a token threat. When Australia last went to the polls, 
around 500,000 people were sent an official non-voter notice through the post. 
Most were let off after explaining their absence, but 52,000 people were made 
to pay a token $20 fine and around 30 were prosecuted and convicted.

Australians find Britain's low levels of participation extraordinary. They are 
also puzzled that we hold elections on a working day. Voting here is a weekend 
habit carried out almost without question by both young and old: like jury 
service, there is no exemption.

It is surprising that Gordon Brown 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/peter_riddell/article2781108.ece>
, the sort of politician who likes to emphasise responsibilities as well as 
rights and who is looking for ways of embodying civic duties in law, has not 
suggested compulsory voting for Britain in his package of constitutional 
reforms. Perhaps he looks too much to America, where participation is even 
lower.

The Australian system would be a direct response to poor turnout, rather than 
the gimmicks and fixes theelectoral commission <http://www.aec.gov.au/> has 
tried, which have done more to reduce trust in the ballot. It would also help 
Labour win elections, since under the current British system its voters are 
much less likely than Tories to show up.

But there are good objections. For a start, though three-quarters of 
Australians support compulsory voting, it works because it has been in place 
almost as long as Australian democracy, introduced in the 1920s. Imposing it on 
the country now would be hugely controversial.

Nor is it clear that the system makes for better politics rather than busier 
elections. It is true that if Australian voters dislike a government, they know 
they share responsibility for having chosen it and can choose another. (And 
they do so with great frequency: Australia holds a national election of some 
sort every two years. Voting for frequent council and state elections are 
compulsory, too, and turnout just as high.)

But the outcome is much the same: a two-party system where minority voices are 
even more excluded from parliament than in Britain. The stale level of debate, 
negative attacks and bland, cautious promises are much like Britain's, too. 
Freed from having to persuade supporters to vote, Australian politicians can 
spend even more of their time attacking each other.

Distrust of politics is also common to both countries, and in both party 
membership is in steep decline. Compelling people take part in elections is a 
way of disguising this, not a solution.

And there is something illiberal about forcing people to be free. The right 
not to elect a government, however stubborn it seems to politicians, matters. 
In Britain, when people vote, it is because they want to.

Even so, the queues on Saturday morning, when an entire nation will make its 
choice, will be a small rebuke from down under to stay-at-home Britain.

For more comment on the Australian elections click here 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/category/australian_elections_2007>.
 