
One of the great inconveniences of a three-year election cycle is that there 
is hardly time to break campaign promises before having to face up to the 
ballot box, the memory still fresh in the mind of scorned voters.

So it was that the prime minister turned up in Adelaide on Tuesday with an 
apologetic smile and a promise to backflip on Tony Abbott’s backflip: 
Australia’s next generation of submarines will be built in South Australia 
after all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
, just as pledged in the leadup to the 2013 federal election and reneged upon 
shortly after the Coalition secured government.

Scott Morrison v the Grattan Institute: who should we believe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/scott-morrison-v-the-grattan-institute-who-should-we-believe>
The difference this time round is rather than a mere verbal contract with 
voters, there is an actual contract being hammered out with numbers and 
timetables and signatures on dotted lines. French company DCNS beat bids from 
Germany and Japan to win the $50bn contract to deliver 12 Barracuda submarines, 
with the bulk of building to take place at Osborne shipyards in Adelaide.

Speaking at the shipyards Turnbull declared: “The submarines project will see 
Australian workers building Australian submarines with Australian steel – here 
where we stand today – for decades into the future.”

The submarine news has the potential to kill several birds for the Coalition 
with one multibillion-dollar stone, reassuring not just Australian Submarine 
Corporation (ASC) employees of their job security but also those facing the axe 
in other industries battling to survive in South Australia’s beleaguered 
economy. The emphasis on local steel at least implies that there is some hope 
on the horizon for the 300 Arrium workers uncertain of their future in the state
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/arrium-the-steel-industry-and-whether-a-bailout-would-be-a-blunder>
. In addition, the South Australian government has simultaneously announced 
that support will be provided to reskill retrenched Holden workers for work 
with South Australia’s shipbuilding industry.

It follows Turnbull’s confirmation last week that the first two years of the 
$3bn offshore patrol vessels construction project would also take place in 
Adelaide from 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/18/turnbull-government-to-bring-forward-shipbuilding-plan-to-create-2500-jobs>
, narrowing the so-called “valley of death” facing local shipbuilders.

The Coalition brand had become synonymous with South Australia’s economic 
malaise after going back on the promise to build submarines locally, ending 
support for the automotive industry and watching on as the steel sector 
collapsed.

Turnbull has now at the very least disassociated himself from Abbott’s 
decisions, reducing Labor and Nick Xenophon’s line of attack.


 Some 2,800 jobs have been promised nationally on the submarine contract 
(including indirect work flowing down the supply chain) in addition to 400 jobs 
created courtesy of the offshore patrol vessels contract.


Turnbull promised the submarine work would deliver advanced manufacturing jobs 
“for our children and our grandchildren for decades to come.”

History is on Turnbull's side in double-dissolution gamble – but only just
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/22/malcolm-turnbulls-double-dissolution-election-gamble-gough-whitlam>
Unfortunately, as it stands, those future generations will still have to make 
do with far fewer jobs than there used to be inSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, even with tens of 
billions of dollars of shipbuilding work in the pipeline. In terms of 
employment numbers within the shipbuilding industry this latest announcement 
represents more a reinstatement of jobs that have been vanishing rather than a 
significant gain.

The numbers pale in comparison to the 24,000 jobs predicted to disappear from 
South Australia 
<https://www.adelaide.edu.au/wiser/pubs/pdfs/wiser201453_closing_the_motor_vehicle_industry.pdf#page=11>
 by the end of 2017 due to the collapse of car manufacturing. Add to that the 
thousands of jobs already being shedacross the rest of the state’s economy 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-07-10/timeline-recent-south-australia-job-losses/6610180>
 and the likelihood that a dozen submarines are hardly likely to sustain an 
entire steel industry.

But those are the details, and this is an election. Abbott might not have done 
Turnbull too many favours in South Australia, but there’s at least one valuable 
lesson he imparted: it is slogans that win elections. Australian built. 
Australian jobs. Australian steel.
 