
International espionage, poisoned teapots, mysterious radiation traces, 
political assassination: there is no question the facts surrounding themurder 
of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
 have plenty of dramatic potential. But, 10 years on, they also still have 
powerful diplomatic implications.

Gordon Brown says Litvinenko murder 'ordered from the top'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/gordon-brown-litvinenko-britain-leading-not-leaving-eu-referendum>
This weekend the British television company behind the critically praised BBC 
adaptation of Hilary Mantel’sWolf Hall has taken up the challenge of telling 
one of the most astonishing, sensitive and important British news stories of 
recent times. Company Pictures, also the makers of series such asMissing, The 
Village and Shameless, is working on a three-part drama based on the acclaimed 
book,A Very Expensive Poison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/29/a-very-expensive-poison-by-luke-harding-review-definitive>
, written by theGuardian’s former Moscow correspondent, Luke Harding.

“The book is a truly remarkable real-life fiction that reads like a Bond 
film,” said Judy Counihan, head of Company Pictures. “I cannot think of a more 
contemporary piece of drama. It mixes global power dynamics, dogged British 
detective work and the importance of democracy, freedom of speech and the rule 
of law to protect us from the rise of demagogues. This isn’t fiction, however, 
and that alone is chilling.”

The Litvinenko case might not match up to Wolf Hall for sumptuous costumes or 
courtly drama, but the pragmatic brutality of the central crime is certainly 
equal to Henry VIII’s decision to have Anne Boleyn beheaded. The project has 
attracted the interest of at least two leading screenwriters, said Counihan, 
and is now destined for broadcast on a major British network.

Harding’s book covers the complex events leading up to the London killing of 
the Russian dissident Litvinenko with the rare radioactive poison polonium 210, 
and then sets them in the context of political scheming inside the Kremlin.

Litvinenko inquiry: the key players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/litvinenko-inquiry-the-key-players>
Harding, who spoke regularly to the murdered man’s widow, Marina, and who 
followed the case through tothe shocking end of the inquiry 
<https://www.litvinenkoinquiry.org> in January this year, balances 
behind-the-scenes Kremlinology with the unnervingly normal routines of 
Litvinenko, who lived in suburban north London with his wife and young son. He 
also charts the erratic path taken by the initially ineffectual duo of 
assassins, Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun, who checked into a Best Western 
hotel in Soho in October 2006, apparently unaware the poison they were carrying 
is one of the most deadly ever to be deployed.

“I’m thrilled that the Litvinenko story will finally be told as TV drama,” 
said Harding, who also wrote the book on which Oliver Stone has based his 
latest filmSnowden, which is to be released here on 9 December. The Fifth Estate
, the 2013 film which starred Benedict Cumberbatch as Julian Assange, was also 
based on Harding’s bookWikiLeaks, written with David Leigh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ftv-drama-sheds-light-poisoning-alexander-litvinenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50c8f98d213bd8d018d5a1efca0ad2ce1435dfc3%2F0_78_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=TV%20drama%20aims%20to%20shed%20light%20on%20poisoning%20of%20Alexander%20Litvinenko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ftv-drama-sheds-light-poisoning-alexander-litvinenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=TV%20drama%20aims%20to%20shed%20light%20on%20poisoning%20of%20Alexander%20Litvinenko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ftv-drama-sheds-light-poisoning-alexander-litvinenko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50c8f98d213bd8d018d5a1efca0ad2ce1435dfc3%2F0_78_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 Alexander Litvinenko had formerly been a spy with the Russian FSB. Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
“For more than eight years much about Litvinenko’s murder was opaque,” said 
Harding. “It was only with the public inquiry in 2015 that we got the 
extraordinary details: that the assassins sent by Moscow were incompetent and 
took three attempts to poison their target; that the UK government has secret 
damning material which implicates Putin personally. It’s the stuff of 
thrillers. But, of course, it’s all real and scarily relevant.”

Counihan has been intrigued to see how tentative Britain has been about 
telling the story since the inquiry. “It’s as if Putin has really done his job 
well. Some people now truly fear his government can reach anywhere, at any 
time. It has helped create the myth,” she said.

The production company will focus on the Scotland Yard work that unravelled 
the crime and follow the links from the assassins to the secret services in 
Germany, Britain andRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. The real 
jeopardy of the story will be clear if the drama opens, as planned, with 
Harding’s harassment by the FSB, the Russian spy agency for which Litvinenko 
worked until he fled to Britain in 2000. Putin’s secret agents even broke into 
the journalist’s family home in Moscow, leaving bugging devices and making it 
chillingly clear they had visited.

For Harding, there are three heroes in the story: “They are Marina Litvinenko, 
who was determined to find out the truth of her husband’s murder; the inquiry 
chairman Sir Robert Owen, who faced down Kremlin intimidation; and Scotland 
Yard, which conducted one of the most exhaustive police investigations in 
British criminal history.”

• This article was amended on 14 November 2016 to clarify that Luke Harding 
wrote The Snowden Files.

 