
ITV1 stars Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> 
returned to Saturday nights with 7.3 million viewers on ITV1 on Saturday, 14 
February.

The first episode of the six-part series of Ant & Dec's Saturday Night 
Takeaway averaged 32% of overall viewing between 7.45pm and 9pm on ITV1. This 
was 500,000 viewers and two share points up on the average for last year's 
series.

The show, in which the Geordie duo introduced a new item called Escape from 
Takeaway Prison, eclipsed the last in the series of The National Lottery: In It 
To Win It, which averaged 6.1 million viewers and a 27% share between 7.35pm 
and 8.25pm on BBC1.

Earlier in the afternoon, BBC1's Live Six Nations rugby coverage of the 
England versus Wales averaged 6.6 million viewers and a 32% share for the 
entire programme, including pre- and post-match interviews and analysis between 
5.15pm and 7.35pm.

The duration of the game, which Wales won 23-15, drew 7.2 million viewers to 
BBC1, an average share of 34% between 5.30pm and 7pm, including the half time 
changeover.

BBC1's coverage of the unexpectedly close game was easily the winner, with the 
next highest rated programme, The Best of You've Been Framed, averaging 4.8 
million on ITV1 between 7.15pm and 8.15pm, a share of 22%.

Earlier in the afternoon the France versus Scotland tie, also on BBC1, which 
the French won 22-13, averaged 3.2 million for the coverage between 2.30pm and 
5pm – a share of 26%. The game peaked at 4.1 million viewers and a 30% share in 
the quarter hour from 4.15pm to 4.30pm as the game reached its conclusion.

Again ITV1 provided the nearest opposition to BBC1's rugby marathon, with an 
Inspector Morse repeat averaging 1.4 million viewers and an 11% share between 
2.55pm and 4.55pm.

In a quiet night for BBC2, its Arena arts programme on American singer Tony 
Bennett pulled in 1.5 million viewers – a 7% share between 7.30pm and 9pm.

On Channel 5 between 8.15pm and 9.15pm, NCIS pulled in 1.2 million a 5% share, 
while on Channel 4 a Grand Designs repeat was watched by 1.1 million viewers 
and a 5% share in the 8pm hour, with a further 107,000 watching on catch-up 
service Channel 4 +1 an hour later.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 