
BBC1's new Amanda Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/amanda-holden> sitcom Big Top began 
with 3.3 million viewers, while spy drama Spooks sank to its lowest audience to 
date last night, Wednesday 2 December.

Big Top, a comedy about a travelling circus, co-starring John Thomson, Tony 
Robinson and Ruth Madoc, had a 15% share of the audience in a tough 7.30pm slot 
against ITV1's Emmerdale.

An hour-long edition of the soap between 7pm and 8pm pulled in 7.6 million 
viewers and a 35% share.

Big Top was not the only BBC1 show to suffer against strong ITV1 opposition.

School drama Waterloo Road attracted 3.8 million viewers and a 16% share 
between 8pm and 9pm, while Spooks drew 3.9 million and 16% between 9pm and 10pm.

The fifth episode of series eight of Spooks, it is understood to be the spy 
drama's lowest audience to date, and was 2.1 million down on the6 million who 
saw it return for the new season on 4 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/05/tv-ratings-spooks>.

Both BBC1 dramas were beaten by an 8pm edition of Coronation Street, which 
pulled in 8.5 million viewers and a 36% share, and I'm a Celebrity... Get Me 
Out of Here!, which drew 8.1 million and 33% between 8.30pm and 10pm.

Andrew Marr's The Making of Modern Britain came to the end of its six-part run 
with 2.1 million viewers, an 8% share, between 9pm and 10pm on BBC2.

Marr beat the fourth of Channel 4's five-part drama documentary The Queen, 
which picked up 1.6 million viewers and a 7% share between 9pm and 10pm. The 
Queen drew another 179,000 viewers on Channel 4 +1.

Channel Five's Steven Seagal movie repeat Half Past Dead garnered 600,00 
viewers and a 3% share between 9pm and 11.05pm.

A big lead-in audience from I'm A Celebrity has helped ITV1's News at Ten 
narrow the ratings gap on BBC1's 10pm news bulletin.

Last night's News at Ten pulled in 3.9 million viewers and a 19% share against 
the BBC1 bulletin's 4.4 million and 21%.

Earlier, Five quiz Britain's Best Brain pulled in 600,000 viewers and a 3% 
share, beaten by a repeat of Sunday's Top Gear on BBC2, which drew 1.9 million 
and 8%.

Channel 4's docusoap The Family attracted 1.2 million viewers and a 5% share, 
also between 8pm and 9pm, with another 242,000 viewers on Channel 4 +1.

The fourth episode of Channel 4 drama Cast Offs drew 200,000 viewers and a 3% 
share between 11.15pm and 12.20am. Another 17,000 watched on Channel 4 +1.

BBC2 documentary Rich Man, Poor Man: Ben Dover Straightens attracted 400,000 
viewers and a 5% share between 11.20pm and 12.20am, while Five's America's 
Toughest Prisons, drew 300,000 and 3% between 11.05pm and 12.05am.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 