
The second edition of BBC1's revamped Watchdog, fronted by Anne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/anne-robinson>, attracted just under 
3.8 million viewers last night, Thursday 17 September.

BBC1's consumer affairs show had a 17% share of the audience between 8pm and 
9pm, and predictably once again lost out to a soap double-helping on ITV1, 
according to unofficial overnight figures.

Watchdog was down 700,000 viewers and four share points compared with 
Robinson's comeback show last Thursday.

Emmerdale had 6.5 million viewers, a 31% share, between 8pm and 8.30pm, and 
Coronation Street had 7.4 million viewers, 33% of the audience, between 8.30pm 
and 9pm.

Channel Five's coverage of Everton's Uefa Europa League match against AEK 
Athens averaged 1.4 million viewers between 7.30pm and 10.20pm, a 7% share.

Live coverage of the game itself, which Everton won 4-0, averaged 1.7 million 
viewers between 8pm and 10pm.

The football beat Channel 4's mid-evening line-up which included How Clean is 
Your House?, which had 1.5 million viewers between 8pm and 8.30pm, and 
documentary Alone in the Wild, which had 1.3 million viewers, 6% of the 
audience, between 9pm and 10pm.

How Clean Is Your House? attracted another 288,000 viewers on Channel 4+1, 
with Alone in the Wild watched by another 133,000 on the timeshifted channel.

But both Channel 4 and Five lost out to BBC2's Escape To The Country repeat, 
which had 1.8 million viewers, 9% of the audience, between 7.30pm and 8.15pm, 
and MasterChef: the Professionals, which had 2.4 million viewers, 11% of the 
audience, between 8.15pm and 9pm.

BBC1 took the 9pm drama honours with a New Tricks repeat picking up 5.5 
million viewers, 25% of the audience, against the 3.5 million, a 16% share, who 
saw ITV1's The Bill.

The second episode of new BBC3 sitcom Off the Hook had just 92,000 viewers, a 
0.5% share in multichannel homes, at 8.30pm.

Off The Hook lost out to sister digital channel BBC4's repeat of Portrait of 
Scotland. Shown first on the channel last week, Peter Capaldi's documentary had 
135,000 viewers between 7.30pm and 9pm.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 