
Ashes to Ashes returned to BBC1 for a third series 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00rwlc8/Ashes_to_Ashes_Series_3_Episode_1/>
 with just under 5.5 million viewers, beating the new ITV1 celebrity gameshow 
The Door on Good Friday, 2 April.

The retro cop drama began its final eight-part run with 5.498 million viewers, 
a 22.1% share of the audience between 9pm and 10pm, according to unofficial 
overnight figures.

Ashes to Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> 
easily had the better of The Door, hosted by Chris Tarrant and Amanda Holden, 
which averaged 3.589 million viewers, a 14.4% share, also between 9pm and 10pm.

But it was down on the 7 million viewers who watched the opening episode of 
the second series of the time-travel cop show in April last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/21/ashes-to-ashes-tv-ratings>. The 
first series also opened with 7 million viewers, in February 2008.

An hour-long Gardeners' World had exactly 2 million viewers (7.9%) between 
8.30pm and 9.30pm.

It beat the second half of Channel 4's A Place in the Sun, Home or Away, which 
had 1.127 million viewers (4.6%) between 8pm and 9pm, and the opening half of 
Embarrassing Bodies, which averaged 1.997 million (8%) between 9pm and 10pm. 
The two shows had another 154,000 and 447,000 viewers respectively on Channel 
4+1.

Channel Five's US drama The Mentalist had 1.722 million viewers (6.9%) between 
9pm and 10pm.

The Great American Songbook Night on BBC4, an evening of programmes 
celebrating US recording artists, peaked with 698,000 viewers (4%) between 10pm 
and 11.35pm for an Arena profile of Frank Sinatra.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 