
IdeaLab company TweetUp <http://www.tweetup.com/> has acquired digital content 
aggregatorPopurls <http://popurls.com/> and Twidroyd <http://twidroyd.com/>, 
the Twitter client for Android, it was announced today.

Twidroyd â€“ previously called Twidroid until it had to change its name to avoid 
confusion with products of Lucas Films which owns the trademark 'droid' - will 
now come as standard with new Android devices from five handset manufacturers.

"Acquiring Twidroyd provides TweetUp with a number of strategic advantages," 
said Bill Gross, chief executive of TweetUp. "Twidroyd is widely considered the 
best Twitter client for Android phones and it leads in market share, so its 
growing base of users will be a valuable source of well-informed feedback on 
TweetUp search on mobile devices.

"In addition, the popurls website, which attracts users looking for a 
convenient guide to the most popular sites, news, videos and blogs on the 
internet, will be a natural spot to display TweetUp search results and gain 
user feedback. This combination should enable us to more rapidly refine our 
offerings, generating better user experiences for distribution partners and for 
users searching for the world's best tweeters regardless of their choice of 
devices."

Thomas Marban, founder of Twidroyd and Popurls, said: "We are extremely 
fortunate to have been able to join forces with TweetUp. With their resources 
and experience along with the bundling deals we have developed with a number of 
the leading device manufacturers, we believe Twidroyd can widen its lead as the 
top Android client for Twitter users and aggressively grow our distribution 
while taking advantage of TweetUp's business model for uncovering the best 
tweeters on topics of interest to our users."
 