
A few episodes into the new series of Later… with Jools Holland 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/later/>, which starts on BBC2 next week, the music 
programme will celebrate its 20th year of broadcast. A slighter anniversary 
will have passed unnoticed – the casual inquiry that started it all, one 
producer to another at Television Centre: "What's Jools up to at the minute?"

Holland was then a touring musician and band leader who'd done presenting work 
for Channel 4 in the 80s, and later a stint on American television. TheBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> producers hoped he might front a new 
show they were planning. Something modest, late night, to go in among the 
weather bulletins and party political broadcasts on a Friday. Nothing special.

They were Michael Jackson, then in charge of The Late Show on BBC2, and Mark 
Cooper, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/26/mark-cooper-television-bbc> who 
arranged the cultural programme's occasional music acts. Cooper had an eclectic 
booking policy – "Ice T one day, the Kronos Quartet the next" – but was keen to 
showcase more musicians thanThe Late Show had room for. Jackson, meanwhile, 
wanted to make use of the studio space that went to waste after they went off 
air. They agreed to make a weekly spin-off, calledLater, with four or five 
bands each performing two or three songs over an hour.

Cramming musicians into their little studio, Cooper hoped, would create 
frisson. Because by now the idea for the show had evolved from the unromantic 
("Here's an empty studio") to the practical ("How can we get the most amount of 
different music on?") to the deliriously ambitious ("We hoped for something 
like a Greek tragedy… The kind of show where you couldn't lie!").

They wanted Holland to host, linking performances with puns and chat, 
occasionally playing jazzy piano with his guests. He'd done something similar on
Sunday Night, a show for US broadcaster NBC, and before that had worked on 
music programmeThe Tube. To him, Later sounded like "the bastard love-child of 
all the shows I'd done in the past". He signed up.

And so on Friday 9 October 1992, about 100,000 midnight viewers met Holland in 
his studio. Then in his mid 30s, skinny and hardly filling a wide-shouldered 
suit, the presenter wassat low on a piano stool 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3KrEVNX2RgA&feature=player_detailpage#t=32s> – 
placed, for no obvious reason, in front of a hat stand and a fire exit sign. He 
sounded less than certain as introductions were made: "Welcome, ladies and 
gentlemen, to the first show of these shows…"

The Neville Brothers and the Christians performed 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FTl16UOfXCg&feature=player_detailpage#t=6s>; 
Holland got the lead singer of Nu Colour's name wrong, andasked a member of 
D'Influence 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkSmE25kOY0&feature=player_detailpage#t=69s> if 
the growth in the popularity of British soul music was "a sort of reaction to 
some of the more hardcore... things?" The show featured artificial smoke, 
electric-blue lighting and a lot of cameras rolling just-too-late out of shot. 
It's unlikely any of those watching at home realised they were witnessing the 
start of something lasting. And "inconceivable", says Holland now, "that we'd 
be doing it 20 years later."

Gradually things got going. Paul Weller did a boisterous rendition of Sunflower
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eANiz4gZU7k> in 1993. Blur and Oasis appeared 
in 1995, as well as D'Angelo, David Bowie, Pulp with a full orchestra.Elliott 
Smith was awkward and heartbreaking <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dBxYfLqKyew>
 in 1999 – a year that Mel C was thefirst and last Spice Girl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ubcxrm0svhE> to be on. In 2000 a debuting Chris 
Martin muffed theintroduction to Yellow 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QZazBiZUrBU> because, he said, Gary Brooker was 
in the room and he couldn't stop thinking about this being one of the guys that 
wrote A Whiter Shade of Pale. In 2001 the Manics led astudio-wide rendition of 
an AC/DC riff <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-48SFXmbro> and Nick Cave joined 
in, so too Shaggy. Mary J Blige wassuperb and exhausting 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pzx5M_K9UZ8&feature=fvst> in 2002; Devendra 
Banhart played cross-legged <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cig2Ep-4udg> in 
2004; Klaxons wereout of tune <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gk1ZoR7Jq-E> in 
2006. Two years ago Chicago's Mavis Staples chatted up Bengaluru'sRaghu Dixit 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvL_Yk1Q9Z0> ("Boy you can really sing!" 
<http://raghudixit.com/later-with-jools-holland/>), and last spring Plan B sang 
lyrics <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xJs_UhaWAJw> he'd written minutes 
before, scribbling in his dressing room. Paul Wellerappeared for the 11th time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZIrx41r6e8>.

Later might once have been reduced, by Robbie Williams, to the status of "Top 
of the Popswith pubes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83R2Z57Obtk>", but a 
certain type of musician rings this booking in red, anticipating a trip to 
dingy studio seven in west London the way they might Shepherd's Bush Empire or 
the Pyramid stage. "It's the Holy Grail," says 25-year-old Ben Howard, whothis 
year performed <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TqSfJVqmG2w> tracks from his 
debut album. "There's nothing like it," says 68-year-old Randy Newman, wholast 
year performed <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LNut8cni8V0> tracks from album 
number 16.

"It reveals the nuts and bolts of bands," says Björk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork>. "You can't help but get a little 
puffed up, a little competitive," says KD Lang. "I'm not sure if it comes 
across on television," says Tracy Chapman, "but sometimes you can reach out and 
touch the band standing next to you."

Heath Fogg, guitarist from Alabama Shakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes>, says: "It was the most 
nervous I've ever been for a show." Guy Garvey, Elbow frontman, says: "There's 
a gentlemanly feeling of, we've got to do our stuff here."

"When it's over it's over," says Jools Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jools-holland>. "There are no retakes and 
you can go and have your tea."

Back in 1992, when Later began, Top of the Pops was in good health and 
confident enough of its viewership to give a guest-hosting spot to Ricky from
EastEnders. The Word, a Channel 4 magazine show that hosted live bands, was 
thriving. Indeed there was such an appetite for music television that Pete 
Waterman managed four years hostingThe Hit Man and Her, a dance show set in a 
disco <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fP4HTa89EEw>. None of the above survive 
(andThe Late Show, by the way, was binned in 1995).

Why has Later lasted? Holland, now 54, takes an idealistic view. "It has 
remained a servant to the song," he says. Mark Cooper, now 59 andLater's 
executive producer since the start, is more pragmatic. It's important, he 
thinks, that the programme endeared itself to artists by being tech-minded and 
fastidious. "Bands are obsessed with how they sound," he says, and so onLater 
they get to do extensive sound-checks, with technicians sensitive to quibbles. 
Artists get flattered as artists – a rare thing, several tell me, in the world 
of TV. Usually, KD Lang says, the musician is "shoved on at the end of a show, 
a second-class citizen". Björk recalls being booked on other programmes between 
"chat, comedy, bingo…Jools is the only show I know of that lets you play 
totally live, lets you soundcheck and rehearse and then has a full hour just on 
music."

Over 20 years, Cooper says, bonds have been forged with established acts. "Foo 
Fighters have doneJools since [1997 single] Monkey Wrench 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RrfWF-_f-IM>, Coldplay since Yellow. There's a 
homecoming aspect for them, and we benefit."

Many younger artists have grown up watching, wanting a patch of that congested 
studio for themselves. "I saw KT Tunstall onLater when I was 11 or 12 – hooked 
ever since," says singer Lianne La Havas, whodebuted last year 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=swN1sRpXjhY>. Ben Howard recalls watching from 
a sofa in Devon asBon Iver sang Skinny Love 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8gszYhoLgg> in 2008, "one of the most amazing 
live acoustic performances I've ever seen". A way away, in Athens, Alabama, "I 
used to get in from work and watch re-runs ofJools on a US cable channel," says 
Alabama Shakes's Fogg. "It was part of my routine while I ate dinner."

Alabama Shakes were invited earlier  this year to appear 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XTQXCuyRS40> on an episode also featuring Jack 
White <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCyCluXHjFw>. "Playing in front of a hero 
like that is one of the most nerve-wracking and rewarding things I've ever 
done," says Fogg. "You're in a circle. Jack White's watching. There's no other 
venue like it."

Cooper calls this Later's "Colosseum effect". "Artists try to trump each 
other," he says. "There are elements of the show that are gladiatorial."

Cooper and his Later colleague for the last 11 years, series producer Alison 
Howe, like to have fun with the tensions their format creates. "Poor 
Stornoway," says Howe. "Poor Stornoway, from Oxford, who I don't think were 
even signed when they came in." She refers to a show in 2009, whenJay-Z had 
been booked <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Qk_fAi5PuY>, also Norah Jones 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dnkkjMx8d-E>, also Dave Grohl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RNBqvInSNEU>, also Sting 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl1UrIVSWJI>. Somewhere in the middle of that 
the unsigned four-piece Stornoway made their TV bow 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-B8OAj9F7hI>.

"Because we had so much wealth!" says Cooper. "You just thought somebody 
should benefit from it," says Howe, "even though the experience must have been 
terrifying." On that note, she says, she still feels bad forFleet Foxes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZtdXl3QZD_A>, made to debut after Al Green 
singing Let's Stay Together <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PF0XdCSRXjY> in 
2008.

"But that's how it works, right?" says Norah Jones. "When I was first on the 
show <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dU6rEpRisfU> [in 2002] everyone else was 
well known and I wasn't. I remember having tunnel vision, telling myself: 'Just 
look at your piano,don't look at Wilco.'" Jones, at the time, was a newcomer 
whom Cooper had seen perform in a Pizza Express in central London. "The idea 
that she'd win Grammies, sell millions of records – that was never the point 
for us," says Cooper. "While we love the taste-making aspect [of the job], we 
don't book somebody thinking they're going to become successful."

Howe points out the many times Later has missed the boat with artists, booking 
them when they're already well established; recentlyMumford and Sons 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=56krdP5W3CQ>, Tinie Tempah 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cExQBFCnuMg>, Two Door Cinema Club 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGo5XTmLG7U>. "And of course there are quite a 
few emerging acts we've put on that don't go on to become successful," he says. 
He was big on a group calledPelvis in 1998 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M9TuKtxZKI8>... "It's a bit like being an A&R," 
says Cooper. "People remember the successes."

One was KT Tunstall, invited on in 2004 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r7XIQ_6J2do> with a few hours' notice because 
the New York rapper Nas hadn't got on a plane; Tunstall went platinum with her 
debut album that year, and has creditedLater ever since for the push. In 2007 
Cooper and Howe found themselves with a spot to fill between two heavyweights, 
Björk and Paul McCartney. Björk recalls a shy girl, "performing in front of me, 
almosta cappella." Howe: "This 18-year-old south Londoner, terrified at the 
time, but you felt she wouldn't falter." Cooper: "Watch the clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zf6dQxQURXE>. Adele is shitting herself."

Adele, then still to release an album, perched on a stool and sang Daydreamer. 
She told me last year: "It was my first TV appearance, andBjörk did The Anchor 
Song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3WHKeFLy1Bo> just before me, my favourite 
song of hers. It winded me." But Adele got through it (and returned, six months 
later, to perform onLater's regular New Year's Eve edition, Hootenanny). She's 
had an all right few years since.

"People have to rise to the occasion," says Cooper. "Good musicians do, 
generally, and the drama of them getting through is a big appeal of the show."

But not everybody gets it. Broadcast for 20 years and you'll become shorthand 
for something – something, in all likelihood, unflattering. Cooper complains 
that newspapers – including this one – useLater as a byword for predictable, 
safe music. "We know the cliches," he says. "I hope we're not predictable, I 
hope we're challenging… But we're not a cool show. We're not selling a 
lifestyle, what it is to be young – how could we be? Given who we are, given 
how long we've been on?"

Blogs on influential music site the Quietus have decried Later's 
"Sunday-supplement pop", and likened band-approval on the show toacceptance by 
the Masons 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/02007-cats-on-fire-our-temperance-movement-album-review>
. "The format is so well-worn it's self-parodic,"complained NME 
<http://www.nme.com/blog/index.php?blog=1&title=later_with_jools_holland_time_for_a_refr&more=1&c=1&tb=1&pb=1>
 this year. And a few outspoken musicians have taken againstLater. Folk singer 
Robb Johnson called it "a cosy televised version of Mojo magazine 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/05773-where-are-all-the-protest-singers-billy-bragg-nina-simone-dorian-lynskey-33-revolutions-per-minute-a-history-of-protest-songs-review>
". Mark E Smith of the Fallonce said 
<http://www.thestoolpigeon.co.uk/features/interview-mark-e-smith-fall-boogie-woogie-jools-holland.html>
 he only agreed to appear if hedidn't have to duet with Jools Holland. He 
claimed to have demanded: "No boogie-woogie piano, Mister Holland."

Smith was being mean (and a lot of musicians told me they agreed to their 
repeat visits to the show, in part, because of personal affection for Holland). 
Yet the host's jazzy piano work is one of a few longstanding, distinctly 
un-rocky features ofLater. Over its 20-year run a smooth and very grown-up 
production routine has been established by core staff who've been running 
things from the beginning. (Current director Janet Fraser-Cook and sound 
supervisor Mike Felton were in their jobs at launch;Michael Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/michael-jackson> went on to become a BBC 
controller.) Recordings are relaxed and efficient – Ben Howard says: "I thought 
TV was your classic load of nutters running around and shouting butJools was 
the most chilled-out place" – which doesn't leave much room for the chaos that 
can make telly memorable.

"There's a strain of thinking that music on TV is only really good when it 
fucks up," says Cooper. "L7 throwing tampons onThe Word. The Stone Roses 
[shouting "Amateurs!" after astudio power-cut 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HDRz3H30NmY&feature=player_detailpage#t=54s>] on
The Late Show. We don't deliver that."

The timetable for visiting bands is rigid. Artists commit for two days – 
individual sound checks on a Monday, rehearsals with all bands present on a 
Tuesday. Backstage there are paltry BBC treats: Fogg recalls being given a 
Lynyrd Skynyrd DVD to watch;Lianne La Havas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lianne-la-havas> got cheese, ham, and the 
sound of Holland's piano playing coming through the vents from his dressing 
room. In the studio an audience is brought in, followed by the bands, who 
record an hour-long show to be broadcast on a Friday. After that (since the 
addition in 2008 of a live show to the weeklyLater package) there's an extra 
30-minute broadcast that goes out live on a Tuesday.

Later asks a lot of its guests' time, and it makes the famous sit still and be 
patient while others are spotlit. "A real ego-leveller," says Randy Newman, and 
something that doesn't always make sense to debutants. "Jay-Z was really 
bewildered," says Cooper. "He wanted to know: 'Why can't I do my songs in a 
row?' But he's a music lover, and [the format] was so obvious to him when he 
stepped on to the studio floor."

There were difficulties in 2009 with Smokey Robinson. "For some reason – I 
don't think he was feeling well – Smokey didn't turn up," says Holland. 
"Smokey's probably been bored stupid in TV studios since the 1960s," says 
Cooper. Anyway, the R&B legend was late – and rehearsals had to start without 
him, even though a special guest had been booked for a duet. "Eric Clapton was 
getting pissed off," remembers Cooper. "He'd eaten the cheese sandwich he'd 
brought with him. He was saying, 'Jools, I'm going to get my coat.'" After a 
queasy wait, Robinson arrived in a cab and Cooper "pushed him through the 
curtain, literally as Jools walked across the floor to introduce him". 
Unruffled, Robinsonsang a track <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iX1PeMHUcCw> 
made famous by Norah Jones. Its chorus line: "Don't know why/I didn't come".

"That's our version of chaos," says Cooper. Janelle Monáe once lost her voice 
mid-show; At The Drive-Inpinched stage furniture from Robbie Williams 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Ar2Y_gjA4g&feature=player_detailpage#t=232s>; 
the Libertinessmoked an on-set cigarette 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_yde5BJrww>. It's not quite tampon-throwing, 
not quite Ian Brown having a hissy fit...Later has never been much good at 
forever-in-legend extravagance. Instead: "We once had McCoy Tyner getting so 
into his jazz tune that he decided to doan 18-minute version 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xZCBW-Ukhs8>," says Cooper. Holland tried to 
halt the music after five. The audience intervened with applause after six. 
Elbow were due next to perform, "and Guy Garvey kept looking at his watch," 
something that in the genteel world ofLater must rank equivalent to dashing a 
beer bottle on the nearest hard surface. "But it's our version of conflict," 
says Cooper, and he's comfortable with that. So too, I think, are most ofLater
's audience.

This is not a show about things going wrong, it's about things going very, 
very right. It's about artists – spurred on by weirdly intimate peer scrutiny, 
by close production and painstaking sound-management – putting on a four-minute 
rendition of a song that's as close to perfect as possible.Later isn't always 
dynamic; it has its cosy moments. But there's something properly commendable 
about the quality level it forces, the number of cut-out-and-keep moments 
created as a result. YouTube videos of Bon Iver doing Skinny Love have garnered 
more than 2m clicks.John Cale sang Hallelujah 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ckbdLVX736U> in front of 100,000 viewers in 
series one, a single clip that's been watched 4.4m times since.

Artists like Ben Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ben-howard> have 
come to see an appearance onLater as a deposit in the cultural time-capsule. 
"Most artists are terrified of what they'll be remembered for," he says. "Later 
is not necessarily a pivotal performance in your career but it's a defining 
performance. You're conscious it's something permanent, something that people 
will look back to."

"It's an opportunity for artists to leave a record," agrees Cooper.

"Our time on Jools is something I'd be proud to show my grandkids," says Fogg.

"Long," says Garvey, "may Later reign."
 