
Two Libyans have been identified as official suspects by Scottish and US 
prosecutors over the 1988 Lockerbie bombing in their investigation.

The Crown Office in Edinburgh confirmed on Thursday that Scotland’s chief 
prosecutor, lord advocate Frank Mulholland, had issued a formal international 
letter of request to the Libyan attorney general asking for permission to 
interview both men.

Despite the chaos and continuing violence in Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> since Muammar Gaddafi was deposed in 
2011, Scottish officials and the US Federal Bureau of Investigation have been 
pursuing other suspects in the bombing of flight Pan Am 103 which killed 270 
passengers, crew and townspeople over and in the Scottish town of Lockerbie in 
December 1988.

The Crown Office would not name the two new suspects, but they are believed to 
be Abdullah al-Senussi, Gaddafi’s brother-in-law and former head of 
intelligence, who is now in a Libyan jail sentenced to death, and Nasser Ali 
Ashour, an intelligence officer who supplied the IRA with explosives and 
weapons in the 1980s.

A third man also in a Libyan jail serving a ten year sentence, Abu Agila 
Mas’ud, has been identified as the bomb-maker and as a further suspect by Ken 
Dorstein, an American documentary film-maker whose brother was killed in the 
bombing.

Mas’ud was named in the original indictment in 1999 against Abdelbaset 
al-Megrahi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdelbaset-al-megrahi>, the only 
person convicted of the attack, who died in May 2012 after being released by 
the Scottish government on compassionate grounds in 2009.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Flockerbie-bombing-two-libyans-suspects-pan-am-103%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc13b311794a3f5127e4b5d2e020976ba3fd504b%2F0_0_4335_3066%2F4335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20Libyans%20identified%20as%20Lockerbie%20bombing%20suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Flockerbie-bombing-two-libyans-suspects-pan-am-103%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20Libyans%20identified%20as%20Lockerbie%20bombing%20suspects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Flockerbie-bombing-two-libyans-suspects-pan-am-103%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc13b311794a3f5127e4b5d2e020976ba3fd504b%2F0_0_4335_3066%2F4335.jpg>
 Floral tributes next to the memorial wall for Lockerbie victims in Dryfesdale 
cemetery. Photograph: Ian Forsyth/Getty Images 
The Crown Office said that after Mulholland recently met the US attorney 
general,Loretta Lynch <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/loretta-lynch>, in 
Washington DC, it now wanted to arrange a visit to Tripoli to interview both 
men as soon as conditions were secure enough in Libya.

“The lord advocate and the US attorney general have recently agreed that there 
is a proper basis in law inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
and the United States to entitle Scottish and US investigators to treat two 
Libyans as suspects in the continuing investigation into the bombing of flight 
Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie,” a spokesman said.

“The lord advocate has today, therefore, issued an international letter of 
request to the Libyan attorney general in Tripoli which identifies the two 
Libyans as suspects in the bombing of flight Pan Am 103.

“The lord advocate and the attorney general are seeking the assistance of the 
Libyan judicial authorities for Scottish police officers and the FBI to 
interview the two named suspects in Tripoli. The two individuals are suspected 
of involvement, along with Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, in the bombing of 
flight Pan Am 103 in December 1988 and the murder of 270 people.”

Despite this apparent breakthrough, it remains unclear whether any of the new 
suspects can ever stand trial in Scotland since they are currently in jail, 
with Senussi facing death, and the fact that the Lockerbie bombing took place 
nearly 30 years ago. Campaigners for other Lockerbie victims insist that Libya 
has been wrongly accused of the bombing; Megrahi died proclaiming he was 
innocent.
 