
Google’s software for smartwatches, Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> Wear, will start appearing on 
a range of devices from various manufacturers this autumn, and this year’s IFA 
electronics trade show, which starts on Wednesday, is expected to be packed 
with rival models.


Wear is a new platform, an overhaul of Google’s Android smartwatch software, 
which simplifies the user experience by cutting out all but the essential 
features.

The LG G Watch and Samsung Gear Live were the first Android Wear smartwatches, 
but they are expected to be joined by models from Sony, Asus, HTC, Motorola, as 
well as more fromSamsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> and 
LG soon.

Wearing Android Wear

For users, the pertinent question is whether Android Wear is worth investing 
in, and ditching a perfectly adequate watch for.

To answer that question, I was joined by Tom Grinsted, the Guardian’s group 
product manager for mobile and devices, and Subhajit Banerjee, the Guardian’s 
mobile editor – and we all tested Android Wear watches for two months to find 
out.
 Google’s first two smartwatches show promise but are expensive. Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Grinsted wore the Samsung Gear Live. He didn’t find shifting notifications 
from a phone to his wrist intrusive.

I’ve been genuinely surprised by how quickly the Samsung Gear Live I’ve been 
wearing for the past couple of months has replaced the many, many times I get 
my phone out for tiny interactions.

That was the premise of Android Wear, but after using it I’ve really felt like 
a wearable was offering me something useful for the first time – a quicker, 
less intrusive and less arduous way to manage the micro-interactions that make 
up much of my digital life. It’s become a habit, and very quickly.

That’s not to say it’s perfect. The Gear Live lasts for two days of reasonably 
heavy use but it’s another gadget inevitably leading to charging anxiety (if 
that’s a thing).

For small actions it’s great but as soon as I want to do anything more I reach 
for my phone because a screen on your wrist is too small for anything heavy. 
But I also reach for the phone because there are some things you simply can’t 
do on a watch. It’s considered odd to talk to non-phone technology in public.

Android Wear’s voice recognition is really very good: easily accurate enough 
to reply quickly to text messages or ask for directions. But using it means 
that you’re talking to your wrist in public. It’s less stare-inducing than 
wearingGoogle Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/23/google-glass-on-sale-in-the-uk-for-1000>
 but not by much.

Am I still wearing Wear after two months? Yes. I really like not getting my 
phone out all the time. It makes my technology quicker and less obvious in 
public. Unless I start talking to it … I don’t think we’re all quite ready for 
that. Yet.”
 Samsung Gear Live Photograph: Jeff Chiu/AP 
Banerjee also wore the Gear Live but struggled with the battery life.

For me, it’s really convenient to be able to look at all the notifications and 
act only on those that need urgent attention, especially the work related stuff 
(meeting reminders, breaking news alerts,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> chats, Twitter interactions, 
etc).

The Gear Live also looks like a watch, and the ability to change clock faces 
is great – a new watch everyday. Having the ability to ask your watch to look 
up stuff and measure your heart rate? Who wouldn’t want that.

But it’s not perfect. Having to remember to charge a watch as well as a phone 
each night is a drag. I get 36 hours of out of the Gear Live before needing to 
charge it, and I would prefer to charge it via microUSB without the charging 
attachment.

I also wish it had connectivity of its own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/28/samsungs-curved-gear-s-smartwatch-dick-tracy>
, and wasn’t simply a companion device. App selection is weak – I want a 
Spotify app to control what I’m listening to, for instance.

Having notifications on my wrist means that if I want a break from alerts, 
taking off the watch is much easier and practical than ditching the phone or 
going through loads of app settings.

Overall, it still feels like a product in development offering a glimpse into 
the potentials of wearables, very much like the early days of the mobile phone. 
But it is functional enough for me to continue to wear for over two months 
instead of a watch.”
 LG G Watch Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
In my view, having worn the LG <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lg> G 
Watch for just under two months there are two things I’ve noticed. The first is 
that Android Wear watches with their screens on all the time are the best for 
telling the time. Other smartwatches that rely on the wrist’s movement to light 
the screen are great in theory, but fail in practice.

The second is that having notifications vibrate and display on the wrist has 
saved me hours. I don’t need toconstantly get my phone out of my pocket, unlock 
it, swipe down on the notification shade then then dismiss it every time it 
vibrates.

Now I turn off all phone alerts and rely on the watch, swiping them away when 
I don’t care, which is most of the time, or tapping through them and pulling 
them up on the phone when something important arrives.

There is something very satisfying about junking an email on my wrist and when 
I don’t want to be notified I can just mute the watch or turn it off.

The G Watch lasted about two days on a charge, had minimal impact on my 
smartphone’s battery life and was comfortable to wear, easily fitting under a 
shirt cuff. It was the best smartwatch I’ve used and it proved to me that 
Android Wear was something worth having; it added to my smartphone experience 
rather than just being another gimmick.

Google should be applauded for taking a less-is-more approach to the 
smartwatch, thinking about what people actually want to do with a screen on the 
wrist. I’d still like a keyboard andmore apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/15/android-wear-the-good-the-bad-and-the-fixable-with-apps>
, but Wear works as it is now and is quickly becoming something I don’t want to 
live without.

Appealing to the mass market

Wear has yet to appeal to the mass market, to prove that having notifications 
on the wrist instead of the smartphone (or not at all) is worth spending 
£150-200 on.

For those not inundated with email, messages and social media there is still 
little in the way of a convincing use case – but like the first iPad, it’s 
something that you find uses for once you have it.

It will be exciting to see how smartwatches develop, with more 
phone-independent functionality expected, as well as what the round watches from
LG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/28/lg-g-watch-r-smartwatch-motorola-google-apple-men>
 and Motorola look like at IFA.

• LG’s G Watch R: the smartwatch that looks like a watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/28/lg-g-watch-r-smartwatch-motorola-google-apple-men>

• Google smartwatches review: LG G Watch, Samsung Gear Live and Android Wear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/11/google-smartwatches-review-lg-g-watch-samsung-gear-live-android-wear>
 