
Two men have died and three people are in hospital following a devastating day 
on Scotland’s hills and mountainsides.

Four mountain rescue teams were scrambled to the 1,130m-high Creag Meagaidh in 
the Highlands on Wednesday afternoon, following reports of an avalanche by a 
group of climbers who spotted equipment believed to belong to those trapped 
underneath.

Two people were transferred to hospital. One of them was in a serious 
condition and died soon afterwards. The search for further survivors was 
suspended at about 6pm after one of those rescued confirmed there were only two 
people in his party.

Inspector Donald Campbell said: “Police Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> would like to thank all rescue 
personnel involved in [Wednesday’s] rescue for the rapid response and 
determination displayed in very challenging conditions.”
Avalanche graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/scottish-climbingincidents/giv-27167crTh20901Y5e/>
The Creag Meagaidh range, on the northern side of Glen Spean, is one of 
Scotland’s most popular areas for mountain sports and is famous for steep 
cliffs that offer a challenge to experienced climbers. The avalanche risk for 
the area was designated to be “considerable” on Wednesday.

Police Scotland also confirmed that one of three hillwalkers who had been 
missing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/17/one-of-three-hillwalkers-found-after-going-missing-has-died>
 since Tuesday in Dumfries and Galloway had died.


The three men, who live locally and were regular trekkers, had disappeared in 
the Southern Uplands on Tuesday afternoon. They were spotted on open ground by 
a search and rescue helicopter about three miles east of the village of 
Durisdeer.

Bobby Thomson, 64, George Crosbie, 73, and Jeffrey Stewart, 74, told family 
members that they would return by 3.30pm on Tuesday and relatives called the 
police two hours later when they failed to appear.

A post on the Facebook page of Moffat mountain rescue team described the 
weather conditions overnight as “very wet and windy, very little visibility”.

The two surviving hillwalkers were being treated for hypothermia in hospital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4cabdc987b8b45d3a998046d80b62b1f74bace1%2F0_0_2558_1536%2F2558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20dead%20and%20three%20injured%20on%20Scottish%20hills%20and%20mountains&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20dead%20and%20three%20injured%20on%20Scottish%20hills%20and%20mountains&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4cabdc987b8b45d3a998046d80b62b1f74bace1%2F0_0_2558_1536%2F2558.jpg>
 Bobby Thompson, George Crosbie and Jeffrey Stewart went missing after 
hillwalking around Durisdeer in Scotland Photograph: Police Scotland 
Wednesday’s avalanche, which happened about 19 miles north-east of Ben Nevis, 
also diverted resources from the ongoing search for missing climbersRachel 
Slater and Tim Newton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/17/ben-nevis-search-for-missing-climbers-suspended-again-due-to-bad-weather>
. A coastguard helicopter that had been leading the search for the couple on 
Britain’s highest mountain was diverted north to attend the avalanche at about 
4pm.

Mountain rescuers had been searching for the couple from Bradford, West 
Yorkshire, who disappeared on Ben Nevis during a weekend climbing trip. The 
pair had not left information about their planned route.

The search has been severely hampered by poor weather conditions on the 
mountain, and it was only deemed safe to resume it late on Wednesday morning.

Donald Paterson, from Lochaber mountain rescue team, said his colleagues had 
not given up hope of finding the couple alive: “It’s only two days, we’re only 
looking at two days at the moment. We’ve actually had people on the Ben who 
have survived for four days.


“That’s why at this stage, we’re certainly not giving up and we’ll continue to 
do our best until we hear otherwise or hear any positive information that we 
can rely on otherwise.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc822a4e18ab3c03c0ab9bae0b3f54bbf707403ca%2F0_185_2500_1501%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20dead%20and%20three%20injured%20on%20Scottish%20hills%20and%20mountains&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20dead%20and%20three%20injured%20on%20Scottish%20hills%20and%20mountains&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Favalanche-in-scottish-highlands-sparks-fears-for-climbers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc822a4e18ab3c03c0ab9bae0b3f54bbf707403ca%2F0_185_2500_1501%2F2500.jpg>
 Rachel Slater and Tim Newton were reported overdue on Monday. Photograph: 
Police Scotland/PA 
The couple are believed to have travelled to Ben Nevis for a Valentine’s Day 
trip. The alarm was raised on Monday morning by Slater’s employers after she 
failed to arrive for work.

John Stevenson, who is leading the rescue effort, told BBC Radio Scotland: 
“We’re expecting more bad weather so we’ve put everything on hold and are 
reviewing it.

“As time goes on it’s very difficult, the weather conditions have been really 
bad and that no one has heard from them or seen them is a worry. You always 
have hope but as time goes on that diminishes quite rapidly.”

• This article was amended on 18 February 2016. An earlier version described 
the three hillwalkers as “elderly”; the Guardian style guide says that word 
should not be used to describe anyone under 75.
 