
Tyson Gay and Asafa Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asafapowell>, 
the two fastest sprinters in the world this year, have both tested positive for 
the banned amphetamine oxilofrine. Both have insisted they are not cheats. 
Here's our guide to the banned substance.

What is oxilofrine?

Oxilofrine is a stimulant of the amphetamine class that was developed to treat 
hypotension (low blood pressure) in people who do not respond to conventional 
treatment. Oxilofrine is the prescription name for methylsynephrine, 
hydroxyephrine and oxyephrine. It is not widely used in the UK and is not 
aÂ licensed drug in the US. Some firms use oxilofrine, in the form of 
synephrine, in so-called sports nutritional supplements as it is thought to 
allow people to burn fat faster and lose weight. Synephrine is a natural 
component ofCitrus aurantium <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12939122>, 
otherwise known as bitter orange, but it can also be synthesised or extracted 
from plant sources.

What are its effects?

Oxilofrine is thought to increase adrenaline production, boosting endurance, 
focus, alertness and heart rate and increasing oxygenation of the blood.

Is it dangerous?

Long-term abuse of a drug such as oxilofrine could put result in tachycardias 
(very high heart rate), cardiac dysrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) and 
haemorrhagic stroke. It could also cause hypertension (high blood pressure) if 
taken by people with normal blood pressure.

How do you take it?

If not supplied on prescription, oxilofrine (methylsynephrine) would most 
commonly be taken as a sports nutrition supplement, mixed with other 
supplements, in liquid capsule form.

Why is it banned?

It is considered a performance enhancing drug, and is on the World Anti-Doping 
Agency's <http://www.wada-ama.org/> list of banned substances.

What does Wada say?

Oxilofrine is found in its anti-doping code in "stimulants: section S6" in 
section "b: specified stimulants" 
<http://list.wada-ama.org/prohibited-in-competition/prohibited-substances/>. 
Wada states: "A specified substance is a substance which allows, under defined 
conditions, for a greater reduction of a two-year sanction when an athlete 
tests positive for that particular substance."

It goes on to say: "Specified substances are not necessarily less serious 
agents for the purpose of doping than other prohibited substances, and nor do 
they relieve athletes of the strict liability rule that makes them responsible 
for all substances that enter his or her body.

However, there is a greater likelihood that these substances could be 
susceptible to a credible non-doping explanation."
 