
The long-anticipated British bill of rights has been further delayed because 
of the legal complications arising from Brexit and the supreme court case.

Answering questions in the House of Commons on Thursday, the attorney general, 
Jeremy Wright QC, confirmed that the government would not attempt torepeal the 
1998 Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/may/09/british-bill-of-rights-could-unravel-constitution-say-mps>
 until it had finalised Brexit negotiations.

The prime minister, Theresa May, has already indicated that without a larger 
Conservative majority, a bill of rights is unlikely to become law in this 
parliament. The government, however, had indicated that itwould press ahead 
with publishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/aug/22/uk-bill-of-rights-will-not-be-scrapped-says-liz-truss>
 a bill of rights soon.

The Conservative MP Peter Bone, a prominent Eurosceptic, asked Wright: “[Is] 
it still the government’s policy to introduce a separate bill of rights to 
enshrine things into British law?”

The attorney general replied: “We remain of the view that human rights law 
requires reform ... The government are certainly committed to seeking to do 
something about that.

“He [Bone] will have noticed that we have a few other things on our plate at 
the moment; I think we will have to resolve those before we can resolve the 
matter to which he refers.”

In the meantime, the 11 justices who heard the Brexit appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/article-50-case-devolved-assemblies-risks-constitutional-crisis-supreme-court>
 this week will reconvene at the supreme court next week to begin private and 
lengthy deliberations. When theyleft the courtroom on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/supreme-court-brexit-10-things-learned-royal-prerogative-henry-viii>
 afternoon, they would not have reached a final decision on their judgment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&media=>
Attorney general opens government supreme court appeal – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/dec/05/attorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
Convention dictates that the discussion is led off by the newest member of the 
court <http://ukscblog.com/article-50-hearing-the-justices/> on the panel, in 
this case Lord Hodge.

Initiating the post-courtroom discussions can be influential, enabling the 
speaker to shape the debate. Hodge will be followed by other justices in 
reverse order of seniority.


Their ultimate written judgment will be delivered before the end of January. 
They will review written and oral evidence and precedent cases to help them 
assess whether the governmentcan use its prerogative powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-brexit-case-whose-prerogative-is-it-anyway>
 to notify under article 50, or whether only a parliamentary act would be 
sufficient to remove the rights created by the 1972 European Communities Act.

Supreme court decisions often include dissenting judgments. A simple majority 
is required to decide the issue. They could split narrowly, with five justices 
against six. An odd number is always selected to hear a case, ensuring that 
there cannot be a draw.

Each justice can state his or her reasoning and line of legal authority for 
their conclusions in the final judgment. Given thepolitical sensitivity of the 
case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
, there may be perceived pressure to produce a unanimous decision.

The Liberal Democrat justice spokesman Jonathan Marks QC said: “I am glad that 
the Government have put this vanity project on the backburner. TheHuman Rights 
Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> protects all our rights 
and any attempts by this Government to erode them will be met with the most 
robust opposition, certainly from Liberal Democrats, but also from the other 
opposition parties and some on the Conservative benches as well.”
 