
Thousands more children have been injured in custody through the use of 
controversial restraint techniques than the government had previously 
disclosed, new statistics show. This has prompted accusations that the true 
scale of harm in privately run jails has been suppressed. Figures reveal that 
the number of injuries to children caused by theuse of restraint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/19/gareth-myatt-died-prison-restraint-children-rainsbrook>
 is more than three times higher than the total previously stated by the Youth 
Justice Board (YJB).

It has emerged that, between 2010 and 2014, children who were restrained while 
in custody suffered 3,312 injuries that had not previously been declared to 
parliament or included in the government’s statistical bulletins.

According to the YJB’s official statistics, 318 incidents occurred between 
2010 and 2014 within secure training centres (STCs) where restraint led to 
either minor injuries that required medical treatment or serious injuries 
requiring hospital treatment. Yet Home Office minister Mike Penning said in a 
parliamentary answer last week that the actual number ofinjuries caused by 
restraint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/jul/18/guide-punishing-jailed-youths> 
in secure training centres over that period was 1,506, almost five times as 
many. The comparable figure for young offender institutions was 631, compared 
with a “new” total of 2,755 – 4.3 times as many.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fyoung-offenders-institution-restraint-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaba0c4c6fd4d6dcf5abdfe77f988ba4110defb6%2F125_0_2251_1350%2F2251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20child%20prisons%3A%20thousands%20of%20injuries%20not%20disclosed%20by%20government&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fyoung-offenders-institution-restraint-injuries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20child%20prisons%3A%20thousands%20of%20injuries%20not%20disclosed%20by%20government&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fyoung-offenders-institution-restraint-injuries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaba0c4c6fd4d6dcf5abdfe77f988ba4110defb6%2F125_0_2251_1350%2F2251.jpg>
 Medway secure training centre in Kent. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
The Ministry of Justice said that the increase was explained by the inclusion 
of a new category that included injuries that did not require medical or 
hospital treatment.

Andrew Neilson, director of campaigns at the Howard League for Penal Reform, 
said: “It is particularly surprising that the Youth Justice Board did not 
supply this information to parliament or, at the very least, supply an 
explanation of what was omitted.”

Carolyne Willow, director of the charity Article 39, which is named after a 
section of theUN convention on the rights of a child 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx>, added: “Now it 
seems thousands of children have been injured during restraint, and they have 
not been included in the statistics.”

Critics suggest that the new figures might still not show the full picture. In 
the Medway secure training unit in Kent, for example, the new data shows no 
injuries caused by restraint in 2014 and just 11 in 2013. Yet a recentPanorama 
programme “uncovered shocking abuse”, according to Neilson.

The programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06ymzly>, screened last month, 
raised allegations of abuse in Medway, which is run by private firm G4S. The 
documentary showed children being slapped on the head and submitted to 
restraint tactics that are against STC rules: these included one child having 
his windpipe pressed until he complained that he could not breathe. It also 
accused staff in Medway ofroutinely falsifying documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/g4s-guards-at-youth-prison-alleged-to-have-falsified-reports-to-avoid-fines>
 to prevent the company being fined for “losing control” of the young people in 
its care.

Neilson said: “Anyone who watched the programme will have noticed that none of 
the incidents shown was deemed to ‘require’ medical attention afterwards. This 
indicates just how serious these thousands of unreported injuries suffered by 
children may have been. The YJB already has some big questions to answer, given 
that it had a monitoring role at Medway, and this hardly engenders confidence 
in its ability to police the companies running these child jails.”

Campaigners say the failure of the government to publish data relating to all 
injuries amounts to it protecting private companies from proper scrutiny but 
also raises questions over the decision-making process when deciding a child 
does not need any medical treatment.

An Ofsted report last year documented an incident at Rainsbrook secure 
training centre in Warwickshire, in which a young person did not receive 
treatment for 15 hours after suffering a fractured arm apparently sustained 
when he was restrained by staff.

The G4S-run Medway youth jail must be closed | Frances Crook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/g4s-medway-youth-jail-must-be-closed>
In another incident, at Hassockfield STC in County Durham in 2004, Adam 
Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/jan/13/adam-rickwood-inquest-custody-death>
, 14, hanged himself after he was manhandled by secure centre staff. He was the 
youngest person to die in custody in Britain in modern times.

Willow said: “Children in prison haven’t got their mums and dads, or other 
carers, attending to them after restraint. Being physically restrained is 
usually a deeply distressing experience.

“All children are meant to see someone from healthcare after restraint, and to 
get treatment for injuries if they need it. So, is the real story here that 
thousands of children have been injured and then left alone in their cells, 
with no one coming to their assistance?” she added.

A Ministry of Justice spokesman said late on Saturday: “The YJB has routinely 
published data on injuries requiring medical and hospital treatment for a 
number of years. These categories are explained in the publication.

“Data on injuries which do not require medical attention have not been 
routinely published but are available on request.

“Ministers have asked officials to consider whether this data should now be 
routinely released as well.”
 