
If you build it, they will come. The glut of successful blockbusters released 
in cinemas in the first half of the year has resulted in a sharp increase in 
the numbers of British filmgoers, compared with last year.

The British Film Institute said there were 83.1m admissions to British cinemas 
between January and June 2015, an increase of 10% on the 75.5m visits in the 
same period in 2014.

The increase was driven by a series of high-earning Hollywood films, led by 
Jurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/jurassic-world-sequel-summer-2018>
, which took more than £57m in UK cinemas by the start of July. It was followed 
by superhero sequelAvengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/06/uk-box-office-avengers-ultron-far-from-the-madding-crowd>
 (£48.3m), action thrillerFast and Furious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/27/fast-furious-7-becomes-fifth-biggest-film-of-all-time>
 (£38.5m) andFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/17/fifty-shades-of-grey-uk-box-office>
 (£35.1m). All these films earned more than the top-grossing film in the 
corresponding period in 2014 –The Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/31/uk-top-10-box-office-2014-the-lego-movie>
, which managed £34.1m.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Avengers%20Age%20of%20Ultron%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fthe-avengers-age-of-ultron-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429879821874%2FKP_196429_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Avengers: Age of Ultron - video review 
Fifty Shades of pure UK box-office gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/17/fifty-shades-of-grey-uk-box-office>
Market share for British productions and co-productions has also risen, from 
19.1% in the first half of 2014 to 32% this year. However, the technicalities 
of certifying films as British or part-British mean that films such as 
Avengers: Age of Ultron and the live-action Disney adaptationCinderella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/26/cinderella-review-kenneth-branagh-cate-blanchett>
 are included. The highest-performing “British” film so far this year (but 
which had substantial Hollywood backing) is theStephen Hawking biopic The 
Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/01/the-theory-of-everything-review-stephen-hawking-biopic-gravity>
, which took £21.5m, while the leading wholly-British production,Shaun the 
Sheep the Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/05/shaun-the-sheep-the-movie-review-aardman-animation>
, made £13.7m.

Shaun the Sheep the Movie also counts as the leading British independent film, 
and this sector is looking healthier than last year. The top 10 UK independents 
grossed a total of £42m in the first half of 2015, with titles such as Thomas 
Hardy adaptationFar from the Madding Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/30/far-from-madding-crowd-review-carey-mulligan>
 (£6.1m), period-horror sequelThe Woman in Black 2: Angel of Death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/25/woman-in-black-2-angel-of-death-review>
 (£5m) and TV spinoffSpooks: The Greater Good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/spooks-the-greater-good-kit-harington-review>
 (£3.2m) following Shaun’s lead. In the same period last year the top 10 indies 
grossed £33.6m, so this year’s total is an improvement of £8.4m, or 25%.

Lucy Jones, executive director of box-office tracking agency Rentrak, says 
that the surge was not a surprise. “At the start of the year, we predicted 2015 
would be a very good year, with a lot of high-profile films. Last year, by this 
time, only five films had made over £20m, but this year, we have had eight.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fshaun-the-sheep-the-movie-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423134117476%2Fcrop_KP_86533_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shaun%20the%20Sheep%3A%20The%20Movie%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fshaun-the-sheep-the-movie-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shaun%20the%20Sheep%3A%20The%20Movie%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fshaun-the-sheep-the-movie-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423134117476%2Fcrop_KP_86533_640x360.jpeg>
 Shaun the Sheep Movie - video review 
Jones also says 2014 was an “unusual” year in box-office terms, the second in 
two years of consecutive drops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/06/films-box-office-takings-fall-cinemas>
, with a decline of 2.9%. Part of the reason for disappointing returns was the 
delay of two key films: Fast & Furious 7, after the death of its star Paul 
Walker, and the Pixar animationThe Good Dinosaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/05/the-good-dinosaur-pixar-disney-animation>
, which was beset by script problems. Both had been due to open in 2014, but 
were pushed into this year. If their figures had been included in last year’s 
total, the contrast would have been less dramatic. In the event, Fast & Furious 
7’s total has bumped up 2015’s first half, while The Good Dinosaur will follow 
Pixar stablemate Inside Out in November. “To have two Pixar films in one year, 
with the huge amount of work that goes into them, is unheard of,” said Jones.

Jones says she doesn’t foresee the 2015 bonanza slowing down, with Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out>, The Good Dinosaur, Spectre, The 
Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2 and Star Wars: The Force Awakens to come later 
in the year. “It’s one of those years when there are a lot of large-scale, 
almost review-proof films.”

Will next year, 2016, suffer as a result? “We don’t think it’ll go back to 
2014’s level, even though there will be few of those big franchises around: no 
Hunger Games, or Bond – though there will be a Star Wars standalone: 2016 will 
be a big challenge.”
 