
Suzie Ferguson has never been a member of a political party, or really had 
much interest in party politics or the workings of government. Until recently, 
she was living in Dubai with her two toddlers and working as a chemical 
engineer, while her husband remained at the family home in Reading attempting 
to keep his small building firm afloat.


But, on 9 April, three days after she returned to the UK at the end of her 
14-month contract, Ferguson handed in her paperwork to the returning officer in 
Reading West, registering her intention to stand as an independent candidate 
for parliament on 7 May.

Clive Peedell: 'I want to challenge David Cameron over NHS'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/25/clive-peedell-i-want-to-challenge-david-cameron-over-nhs>
Some may consider a period of less than a month an ambitious amount of time to 
devote to a hands-on parliamentary campaign, but Ferguson, 34, sees no reason 
why she can’t conjure an election win from little more than a pile of 
self-designed posters (she can’t afford fliers) and an impressively energetic 
manner.

“Yes, it would take months if I was going to do it the old-fashioned way” of 
door-knocking and leafleting, she says. Instead, Ferguson argues, lots of 
people will do their research online in the last few weeks of the election. 
“They are going to read everybody’s websites and go … ‘That one’,” she says, 
adding that she will be disappointed if she fails to overturn the 6,000 
majority of the Tory incumbent in favour of amanifesto 
<http://suzieferguson4readingwest.org/key-issues/> that, her website admits, 
remains a work in progress.

In constituencies across the country, alongside the thousands of activists 
canvassing for candidates from the major parties, a small but no less dedicated 
band of committed local campaigners, single-issue activists, micro-parties and 
eccentrics are standing for election to parliament. Some feel none of the 
established parties truly represent their local area, many are standing as an 
act of protest against the system, yet others have founded their own tiny 
parties to advocate specific agendas. Almost all of them will fail to attract 
the 5% vote share they need to have their £500 deposit refunded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476171131%2F79ff0d0e-1fdf-4f93-b08d-5aefd544cb87-2060x1481.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476171131%2F79ff0d0e-1fdf-4f93-b08d-5aefd544cb87-2060x1481.jpeg>
 Suzie Ferguson – coming to a lamp-post near you. Photograph: Martin Godwin for 
the Guardian 
What drives an individual to conclude that, if the political system doesn’t 
work for them, they will address it by standing as an MP? In Ferguson’s case, 
it was falling into debt when her second maternity leave coincided with a slump 
in the building trade that left her husband unable to draw a wage for 18 
months. She was forced to start working again when her daugher was two months 
old, and eventually to take the Dubai job to avoid losing the family home. The 
system, she concluded, was irretrieveably broken.

“I guess part of it is being an engineer, I’m a problem solver,” she says in a 
break from taping posters to lamp-posts and in shop windows on Reading’s busy 
Oxford Road. “I don’t want to just moan, so what could I do?” So she read some 
politics textbooks, started a blog and, before long, had decided, “right, I’m 
going to do it”.

It not as easy as one might expect to establish how many candidates are 
standing as independents on 7 May. TheElectoral Commission 
<http://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/i-am-a/candidate-or-agent/uk-parliamentary-general-election-great-britain>
 doesn’t keep records, referring inquiries to individual returning officers in 
each constituency.

The website YourNextMP <https://yournextmp.com/numbers/parties> lists 170 
independent candidates, making them the sixth-biggest group behind the three 
main parties, Ukip and the Greens. But this number does not include the scores 
of people standing in micro-parties, such as the 14 candidates forYorkshire 
First <http://www.yorkshirefirst.org.uk/>, nine for the Christian party 
“Proclaiming Christ’s Lordship” 
<http://www.ukchristianparty.org/what-is-your-doctrinal-basis.html>, the four 
people representing theWhig party <http://whigs.uk/> (“Britain’s original 
progressive party is back”), and many political sole traders standing under 
banners such asSave Hartlepool Hospital 
<https://www.facebook.com/savehartlepoolhospital> or World Peace Through Song 
<http://www.joestead.com/> or (standing in Reading West against Ferguson) The 
Roman party – Ave 
<http://www.getreading.co.uk/news/local-news/general-election-2015-reading-west-8695570>
.

In South Thanet <http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/2015guide/thanetsouth/>, six 
independents 
<https://thanet.gov.uk/your-services/elections-and-voting/parliamentary-election-2015/south-thanet/>
 are seeking to block Nigel Farage’s path to parliament. As well as the 
comedian Al Murray, they include representatives from the We Are the Reality 
party, the Manston Airport Independent party, and something called the 
Al-Zebabist Nation of Ooog.

Adam Osen was one of four people who changed their name to “None of the Above” 
to run for parliament in 2010 – he secured 202 votes inIain Duncan Smith’s seat 
of Chingford and Woodford Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/08/iain-duncan-smith-general-election-lisa-mckenzie-class-war>
. Though he is not standing on 7 May (“My wife said: ‘You’re not spending 
£500’”), he has compiled email addresses of more than 100 independent 
candidates and put them in contact, suggesting they liaise on issues they have 
in common, such as being excluded from hustings – “a fairly common experience” 
– and ignored by local radio and TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476352873%2Fda3a20d5-168b-48c1-b472-39f382a746be-2060x1276.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476352873%2Fda3a20d5-168b-48c1-b472-39f382a746be-2060x1276.jpeg>
 Comedian Al Murray, known as The Pub Landlord, FUKP parliamentary candidate 
for South Thanet. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
He is frustrated, he says, at the notion that independent candidates are 
largely joke candidates or eccentrics. “This is just my perception but, in very 
broad terms, the majority of independents see the country is being mismanaged. 
They don’t think that the political system that we have now is fit for 
purpose.” Among those on his list ishis 85-year-old mother Doris, who is a 
candidate in Ilford North 
<http://www.ilfordrecorder.co.uk/news/general_election_2015_chigwell_granny_vying_for_lee_scott_mp_s_seat_1_3915654>
. “She is worried about the way the country is being run and she sees the 
future for her children and grandchildren as very bleak,” he says.

For Liam Bryan, standing for the pro-electronic cigarette party Vapers in Power
 <http://vapersinpower.co.uk/liam> in Kingswood, near Bristol, the large number 
of independents is part of something wider. “People have been feeling 
disenfranchised and removed from all the main political parties,” he says.

Alistair Clark, a lecturer in politics at Newcastle University and expert on 
minor parties, agrees their spread is symptomatic of disillusionment with the 
political mainstream. The resurgence of the SNP has been an obvious inspiration 
for parties such as Yorkshire First, the Northern party and the North East 
party. “Obviously they look at what’s going on north of the border, 
particularly in the north-east, and think – perhaps we could have some of that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476732048%2Fdf6b716c-a37d-4b55-9167-82e11001b5a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20election%20candidates%3A%20Independents%20fight%20to%20bring%20their%20issues%20to%20the%20fore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Findependent-candidates-issues-uk-general-election-nhs-fracking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430476732048%2Fdf6b716c-a37d-4b55-9167-82e11001b5a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Liam Bryan, standing for the pro-electronic cigarette party Vapers in Power. 
Photograph: Adrian Sherratt 
Independents do occasionally get elected to parliament – most famously in the 
case ofthe journalist Martin Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinbell>, who ousted Tory Neil Hamilton 
from Tatton in 1997. Dr Richard Taylor won two terms as an MP standing under 
the banner Independent Kidderminster Hospital and Health Concern until he was 
defeated in 2010;he is standing again in May 
<http://nhap.org/dr-richard-taylor/> for a new grouping called the National 
Health Action party, which is fielding 12 candidates from Stafford to Truro and 
Falmouth.

But for the vast majority of candidates without one of the big parties behind 
them, says Clark, the best they can hope for is to get their issues on the 
agenda. “What makes a difference is [if] they can actually impact on the main 
parties in the direction of their aims. They are raising issues that the main 
parties have to react to.”

Paul Birch co-founded the social network Bebo in 2005, later selling it to AOL 
for $850m. In December, he founded a political party calledCista, or Cannabis 
Is Safer than Alcohol, <http://cista.org/> which is fielding 32 candidates with 
his financial backing, including four in Northern Ireland – enough to secure it 
a party political broadcast.

We’re not trying to get a few thousand votes … we are trying to win
Mike Hill, independent candidate, Fylde 
Birch’s investment of £100,000 was an attempt to put the issue of drug policy 
on the table, he says. “I’m not sure it’s the very most effective way, but 
there’s currently no coverage at all in this election around this topic.” It’s 
not the only issue he cares about, he says, “but it’s an issue that stands out 
from most of the other issues out there in that there are no coherent arguments 
for carrying on the current policy path.”

As Birch acknowledges, Britain’s first-past-the-post system means anyone 
standing without major party backing faces an almost impossible uphill 
struggle. And yet many refuse to be daunted by the scale of the challenge.

In the Lancashire constituency of Fylde, electrical engineer Mike Hill 
<http://votehill.org/about/> is running on an anti-fracking platform that he 
says began as a move to protect his family and gained momentum as he came to 
feel the regulating authorities were “astonishingly complacent” about the 
dangers the industry could pose.


Since December, he has invested £7,000 of his own money, and put his own small 
business on hold, he says. But withthe current Conservative MP, Mark Menzies, 
having won 52% of the vote in 2010 
<http://ukpollingreport.co.uk/2015guide/fylde/>, can he really mount a 
realistic challenge? “We’re not trying to get a few thousand votes off 
[Menzies], we are trying to win, you know? We have to win.”

Hill has contributed to expert reports on fracking and advised MPs on the 
issue, but ultimately, he says, he had to go further. “I needed to be in 
parliament myself, to be able to explain across the floor of the House of 
Commons to any secretary of state, minister, prime minister, exactly why 
fracking cannot go ahead in the UK. I can no longer do this fight from the 
outside. I need to be on the inside.”
 