
Women have scooped all the major acting prizes in the UK Theatre awards 2013. 
Cush Jumbo <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/cush-jumbo> won best performance 
in a play for her starring role in A Doll's House, while Janie Dee won best 
performance in a musical for Hello Dolly! and Siân Phillips took the best 
supporting performance for This Is My Family.

The highest profile loser in the annual awards for regional theatre was Sir 
Alan Ayckbourn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanayckbourn>, who recently 
launched his 77th play at his Scarborough Theatre at the age of 74. He was 
shortlisted for best new play for his 76th, Surprises, seen in both Scarborough 
and Chichester, but in the event the new play prize went to Bull by Mike 
Bartlett, a production by Sheffield Theatres which also won best musical and 
best touring show.

The Stage award for outstanding contribution to British theatre went to Simon 
Callow <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/simon-callow>, whose career in 
theatre began when he wrote a fan letter to Sir Laurence Olivier, and by return 
of post received an offer of work in the National Theatre box office. Acclaimed 
as an author and director as well as a stage, film and television actor, Callow 
is probably almost as well known now as Charles Dickens, from his touring 
one-man shows based on the novelist's own barnstorming readings. He also 
appeared as Dickens in a 2011 episode of Doctor Who.

A complex weighting system to ensure fair play among theatres of wildly 
different sizes meant the prize for the most welcoming theatre went to one of 
the smallest professional theatres in the UK, the60-seater Bike Shed in Exeter 
<http://www.bikeshedtheatre.co.uk/>. A cellar theatre with adjoining vintage 
cocktail bar, it has in the last three years hosted many touring companies and 
mounted a string of new productions.

Mark Shenton, a critic and member of the theatre judging panel, said the 
successes recognised in the awards were in the teeth of a sharply deteriorating 
financial climate for regional theatres.

"The cuts, in central government but more acutely in local government funding, 
are really starting to bite, with more to come. We have already seen some 
theatres close, and there will inevitably be more. It remains to be seen how 
much there is left for us to judge in future years. But the outstanding success 
ofSheffield <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> shows what can still be 
achieved by a well supported local theatre with really strong leadership. It is 
striking that all their successes were for ambitious new productions, not 
modest two-handers."

Sheffield Theatres' prizes, apart from the best new play for Bull, included 
best musical for This is My Family and best touring production for The Full 
Monty. This Is My Family, tracking the stresses of a family holiday won in a 
competition, with the award-winning performance by Sian Phillips as the 
grandmother, was written and composed by Tim Firth – author of the smash-hit 
stage version of Calendar Girls – and directed by Sheffield's artistic director 
Daniel Evans. Among the shortlisted productions it beat was another 
Sheffield-Evans show, My Fair Lady.

Cush Jumbo's performance as Nora in Bryony Lavery's version of the Ibsen drama 
at the Royal Exchange in Manchester wasadmired by critic Lyn Gardner for its 
"steely delicacy" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/08/a-dolls-house-review>. Jumbo, 
who was nominated for an Olivier award for her role as Mark Antony in an 
all-female casting of Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, has most recently won rave 
reviews for her one-woman show about the dancer and singer Josephine Baker.

Janie Dee won the musical performance prize for her starring role – described 
in the Observer as "irresistible" – inHello, Dolly! at the Curve in Leicester 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBhUY0MCwws>. The best director award went to 
Blanche McIntyre for her production of The Seagull, a Headlong and Nuffield 
Southampton production with Derby Theatre.
 