
A United Nations body made up of human rights experts has found the detention 
of Malaysia’s de facto opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim, to beillegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/anwar-ibrahim-guilty-in-sodomy-case>
 and declared that he should be freed, his family has said.

“The Working Group considers that the adequate remedy would be to release Mr 
Ibrahim immediately, and ensure that his political rights that were removed 
based on his arbitrary detention be reinstated,” said the report by theWorking 
Group on Arbitrary Detention 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Detention/Pages/WGADIndex.aspx>, released by 
Anwar’s family on Monday.

It said Anwar’s treatment in prison had violated international prohibitions 
against “torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment”.

Anwar’s supporters have said he is incarcerated in a dirty prison cell without 
sufficient medical care after he developed shoulder pain that has affected his 
spine.

Sivarasa Rasiah, a member of Anwar’s legal team, told the Guardian he filed a 
complaint to the UN group this summer, which prompted the report.

“We considered Anwar’s detention completely bizarre from the outset and 
completely politically motivated,” he said. “Unfortunately we reached a dead 
end in the local judicial system. We are gratified that the UN working group 
condemned the detention.”


The 68-year-old was jailed in February for five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/anwar-ibrahim-guilty-in-sodomy-case>
 on a charge of sodomy, which is illegal in Muslim-majority Malaysia. He denied 
the charge and said the ruling party had framed him to end a streak of 
opposition gains that threatened the Barisan Nasional coalition, which has 
ruled Malaysia since 1957.

“I maintain my innocence. This to me is a fabrication coming from a political 
conspiracy to stop my political career,” Anwar said at the time.

Heading a three-party alliance, Anwar helped the opposition make huge gains in 
the 2008 and 2013 general elections. Prime minister Najib Razak’s coalition 
lost the popular vote in 2013 – the opposition bloc’s best ever results – but 
kept a parliamentary majority.

“I am deeply grateful that the United Nations has called for Anwar’s release,” 
Nurul Izzah Anwar, his daughter who is also a member of parliament, said on 
Monday.

“Its strong stance in solidarity with my father sends a clear and unequivocal 
message to prime minister Najib Razak, and ensures that the sharp decline in 
human rights under his administration will not go unnoticed.”

A Malaysian government spokesperson told the Guardian: “Malaysia has an 
independent judiciary – with many rulings going against senior government 
figures – and the government does not have the power or authority to overrule 
the decisions of the courts.

“It was not the government but the victim, Saiful Bukhari Azlan, a private 
individual and Anwar Ibrahim’s employee, that lodged the police report and 
brought the case. Mr Anwar was convicted of a crime, and this was a criminal 
not a political case. It had nothing to do with the government.”

Malaysia's Mahathir: strongman turns activist to unseat former protégé
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/23/malaysia-mahathir-strongman-turns-activist-unseat-former-protege-najib>
Anwar had served as deputy prime minister of Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> from 1993 to 1998 as a member of 
the ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) party. However, his 
relationship with then-leader and mentor Mahathir Mohamad broke down and he was 
jailed for corruption and an earlier sodomy charge.

Mahathir told the Guardian in an interview last month that he had intended for 
Anwar to take over the country’s top post after his two decades in office.

“I wanted him to succeed me, I brought him up,” Mahathir said. “But with his 
faulty moral character I don’t think he was suitable to become prime minister. 
I sacked him with the consent of the party.”

The deputy home minister, Nur Jazlan Mohamed, said on Monday that Anwar 
receives “special treatments” in jail not afforded to other inmates. He said 
Anwar was allowed to attend his father’s funeral and also meet with Malaysia’s 
Human Rights Commission last month.

“He received special treatments which were not accorded to other inmates and I 
hope that his family will understand that the government will always take care 
of his health,” Nur Jazlan wasquoted as saying 
<http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/despite-outcry-government-says-anwar-getting-special-treatment-in-jail>
 in the MalayMail, adding that three orthopaedics experts had inspected the 
prisoner.

Agence France-Presse contributed to this report
 