
In Ntaria, 130km west of Alice Springs in Australia’s red centre, Que Kenny 
stands in country made famous by artist Albert Namatjira, her shock of red hair 
glowing against the clear blue sky. An Aboriginal transgender activist, 
studying law at Deakin University but living in and working for her central 
desert community, Kenny has fought against more kinds of discrimination than 
most.

“I’ve been through a hell of a lot in the community, but that never killed my 
spirit, people’s negativity. I’ve been spat at, sworn at, had dirt thrown at 
me.”

She laughs, dismissing the clearly still painful memories. 

“I’m still standing tall and proud. And now I’m helping the people that 
disrespected me. That’s their big barrier, thinking whether or not they should 
allow me to help them in anything.”

Kenny is being interviewed by Aboriginal photographer Wayne Quilliam, as part 
of a photographic exhibition soon to open at the United Nations in Geneva, 
exploring the race and gender discrimination experienced by Australian 
Indigenous women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dcbc0f493ad5c615711efb6d20cd7abf5bfafb1%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dcbc0f493ad5c615711efb6d20cd7abf5bfafb1%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘I want to see changes here’: Que Kenny. Photograph: Wayne Quilliam 
She is deeply religious, but blames European-imported Christianity for much of 
the discrimination she and other Indigenous transgender people face in their 
own communities. “We have brother-boys, and sister-girls, and we are being 
accepted now. I believe that this was accepted many years ago but colonisation 
took away a lot of things through the bible,” she says.

She draws parallels between the fights for the rights of women, LGBTQI people, 
andIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>, which all 
inform her activism both on behalf of and within her own community.

“I want to see changes here with us Aboriginal women, to have that voice to 
speak not only for ourselves but men and women and the younger generations,” 
she says.


With some pushing from Kenny, women are gaining more of that voice in her 
family’s community, navigating the traditions in Indigenous culture that jar 
with modern feminism. “Going back to remote communities out west, women still 
have to ask permission from old men to speak up and talk,” she says. “For us 
it’s rude [for women] to just get up and talk without permission from the 
elders.”

Kenny notes the difference between her activism and her place to speak up in 
her community where “most days the elders will tell you to shut up.” She laughs 
again. “Never mind, I can get up in public and talk – when I get back home you 
don’t have much say anymore ... [but] I can see it’s gradually working, because 
I’ll get a lot of elders asking me to get up and talk for us. So it’s 
happening.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4cb44f5bb3105bd0441533f50cc6ed84428df29%2F0_0_1200_792%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4cb44f5bb3105bd0441533f50cc6ed84428df29%2F0_0_1200_792%2F1200.jpg>
 Another image from An Undeniable Right. Photograph: Wayne Quilliam 
Leaving Ntaria, Quilliam describes Kenny as “pure unadulterated strength”.

“I suppose that’s one thing I’ve learned from these women. A lot of them are 
friends or acquaintances I’ve known for quite some time, but to now feel their 
resilience and know their strength is inspiring.”

In An Undeniable Right, an exhibition of striking individual portraits and 
filmed interviews, Quilliam hopes to shares the experiences of strong and 
proactive Indigenous women with an international audience.

“The idea, visually, is to be light skin and dark skin, urban, rural and 
remote from all different parts of Australia, so there is a balanced 
visualisation of what Aboriginal women look like,” Quilliam tells Guardian 
Australia on the road from Ntaria to Alice Springs.

Australians tend to have a preconceived idea of what Aboriginal Australia is 
meant to look like
Wayne Quilliam 
“Whenever I’m creating a show for Australia, I tend to find – and this is just 
a general rule – that Australians have a preconceived idea of what Aboriginal 
Australia is meant to look like, meant to act, meant to sound,” he says. “I 
find when I go to international exhibitions, they come very much with an open 
mind. They still do have have minor preconceived ideas, but they’re quite open 
to interpretations about who we are.”

The interviews are deeply personal, covering empowerment and inspiration, 
racism and discrimination. The project has been done “on the fly”, says 
Quilliam, who tentatively arranged meetings with women suggested to him along 
the way, hoping for the best.

Quilliam and Guardian Australia meet Trisha Morton-Thomas on the day the first 
episode of her comedy,8MMM <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/programs/8mmm/>, is to air 
on ABC TV. The writers says she has “sweated blood” for four years and almost 
lost her mind over the project.

“For me, tonight is not the big deal,” she says, standing on the edge of an 
Alice Springs suburb with the town’s famous ranges behind her, as Quilliam 
adjusts his camera. “A couple of days ago we had a screening for the community 
on our town council lawn and that was the night for me … For me I needed to 
know the reaction of the community to the series more than I need to know the 
reaction of Australia. Because it is about my community.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82a7fccc12677faca719e361ca48523e56cf2b7%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82a7fccc12677faca719e361ca48523e56cf2b7%2F0_0_1200_800%2F1200.jpg>
 Screenwriter and actor Trisha Morton-Thomas. Photograph: Wayne Quilliam 
The comedy is darkly funny and brutally skewers the relationship between white 
and black Australia. It’s written to shock, but shouldn’t surprise, and is 
borne from Morton-Thomas’s own experiences. She describes the outwardly racist 
and jaded white manager Dave Cross (played by Geoff Morrell), as “probably the 
most important character” in the show.

“Some people have had a go at me about including that kind of a character and 
those kinds of words in the series, but I can’t write about Alice Springs if I 
don’t include that character,” she says.

So many of our men have been disempowered
Trisa Morton-Thomas 
An Anmatyerr woman who raised her children mainly on her own while her late 
former partner battled schizophrenia, Morton-Thomas speaks highly of her family 
and community, butdespairs at the disempowerment and tragedy she has seen 
<https://newmatilda.com/2012/12/06/my-family-calling-justice>. In 2012, her 
nephew died in police custody. The coroner found “completely inadequate and 
unsatisfactory” care by police led to his death, and Morton-Thomas acted as 
spokeswoman for a family angry there would be no consequences.

Quilliam asks her view of the experience of women in Indigenous communities 
today, where such tragedy is not uncommon. “I think taking over the reins has 
been forced on Indigenous women here – that or they’ve had to just pick it up 
and run with it, because so many of our men have been disempowered,” she says.

“Our men are under attack in a huge way. So they drink or take drugs to sort 
of hold their soul together I guess. And a lot of times it’s destroying it. 
Then they come home and who’s the most vulnerable person at home? Your wife and 
your children.”

Morton-Thomas points to the role of men in her life, particularly in the older 
generation, who have grounded and shaped her. “You can’t have a full woman 
without a positive male influence there, a nurturing male influence,” she says. 
“Otherwise you’re only half a person. You have to have the yin and the yang.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21033f69d9aa350babbe656c87bca6b58a111350%2F0_0_800_1190%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unadulterated%20strength%3A%20the%20women%20of%20Indigenous%20Australia%20in%20their%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Funadulterated-strength-the-women-of-indigenous-australia-in-their-own-words%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21033f69d9aa350babbe656c87bca6b58a111350%2F0_0_800_1190%2F800.jpg>
 An Undeniable Right explores the experiences of Indigenous Australia women 
regarding gender and race discrimination. Photograph: Wayne Quilliam 
It’s been a personal journey for Quilliam as well as a physically exhausting 
one across the continent, with his own outlook challenged in the interviews, 
including those Guardian Australia witnesses.

He says he has been criticised over the project – another man trying to tell 
women’s stories for them – and has struggled not to react. As a man brought up 
to respect women but who does not witness the everyday sexism many rail 
against, he doesn’t understand the backlash.

Australia through the eyes of Wayne Quilliam — in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/gallery/2014/jul/10/australia-through-the-eyes-of-wayne-quilliam-in-pictures>
But after meeting so many strong women who have experienced discrimination 
based on gender as well as race, has the photographer learned much? It’s a 
leading question. Quilliam has been noticeably challenged by some ideas put 
forth by his interviewees, while latching on to others that confirm his own 
views.

“Oh yeah. It never ceases to amaze me, what I thought I knew compared to what 
I really know,” he says. “I suppose what I’ve learned [is] I thought we were 
all one people, and I thought we were on the same journey, but doing these 
interviews has actually opened my mind up to how different we are.”

He stops short of saying there have been any great feminist epiphanies, but 
there were certainly many surprising answers to his questions.

“What I thought would be the answer is not. It’s made me take a step back and 
say OK, I need to re-evaluate this,” he says. “Because the women have come back 
and gone ‘well you may be thinking that way, but it’s not the way we think’.”

 * An Undeniable Right opens at the United Nations in Geneva on 17 June
 