
Voters in the Australian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-capital-territory> will 
return to the polls this Saturday to elect a new legislative assembly for the 
next four years. The ACT has had its own self-governing assembly since 1989 
and, in that time, it has developed quite differently from most other 
parliaments in Australia, with the voting system favouring minority governments 
and multi-party politics.

Since 1995, the ACT has used the Hare-Clark system to elect the assembly. This 
system is also used to elect the lower house of the Tasmanian parliament and is 
similar to the system used to elect the Senate. Five members are elected to 
represent each electorate and each candidate needs a quota of roughly one sixth 
of the vote to win a seat. This proportional voting system makes it very 
difficult for one party to win a majority on their own, with members of 
different parties representing the same electorate.

A clean energy transition is already happening, but it is at risk | Alexander 
White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/southern-crossroads/2016/oct/11/clean-energy-transition-happening-act-at-risk>
The main difference between the Senate voting system and Hare-Clark is in how 
each party’s candidates are ranked. In Senate elections, each party nominates a 
ticket in a particular order. The candidates are listed in that order on the 
ballot and we have the shortcut of voting above the line to preference the 
candidates in the predetermined order. There is no such order in ACT elections. 
The “Robson rotation” system means that different ballot papers have different 
candidates at the top of their party’s list and you can’t just vote above the 
line for a party: you have to vote for individual candidates.

Robson rotation weakens the power of the party and encourages individual 
candidates to run their own campaigns. Even if a party holds one or two “safe” 
seats in an electorate, those seats are not safe for any individual member – 
it’s not uncommon for a member of the assembly to lose their seat to a fellow 
member of their own party and seats are only safe when the sitting MP is a 
high-profile and popular MP (such as the leader of a party).

Australian territory to pay for domestic violence prevention with yearly levy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/08/australian-territory-to-pay-for-domestic-violence-prevention-with-yearly-levy>
Since 1995, the assembly has consisted of 17 members elected to represent 
three electorates. The larger central electorate, Molonglo, elected seven 
members while the other two electorates elected five members each. The assembly 
will expand to 25 members at this election. There are now five electorates, 
with each electorate electing five members.

These five electorates roughly cover the five main centres of Canberra: 
Belconnen (Ginninderra), Gungahlin (Yerrabi), Weston Creek/Woden Valley 
(Murrumbidgee), Tuggeranong (Brindabella) and central Canberra (Kurrajong).

Australian territory to pay for domestic violence prevention with yearly levy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/08/australian-territory-to-pay-for-domestic-violence-prevention-with-yearly-levy>
Since Hare-Clark is proportional, parties rarely win a majority of seats. Only 
one election produced a majority for a single party – for Labor in 2004. In 
every other assembly, the government had to form an alliance with independents 
or minor parties to pass legislation and stay in power.

Labor has ruled the ACT for a majority of the last 27 years. Both parties 
formed government at different times in the first ACT legislative assembly, 
with Labor leading the second assembly elected in 1992. A Liberal minority 
government served for two terms, from 1995 until 2001.

Jon Stanhope led Labor back into power in 2001. He won a second term in 2004, 
winning the only majority government in ACT political history.

Stanhope’s Labor government lost its majority in 2008. The ACT Greens, who had 
held at least one seat in every assembly since 1995, managed to win four seats 
and formed an alliance with the Labor government.

At the 2012 election, Labor and Liberal both gained seats off the Greens. The 
major parties each won eight seats, with the Greens’ Shane Rattenbury holding a 
single seat for his party. The Labor-Greens alliance was renewed, with 
Rattenbury becoming the first Greens minister in the ACT.

Public service job cuts would break promise to the ACT, says chief minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/11/job-cuts-in-act-public-service-would-be-a-broken-promise-says-chief-minister>
A party will need to win a majority of seats in three out of five electorates 
to win a majority in the assembly. That will be tough for either Labor or 
Liberal to achieve. The Greens should retain their single seat and will be 
hopeful of gaining a handful of other seats. Numerous other minor parties and 
independents are running but it will be hard for any of them to win a seat.

It isn’t possible to predict who will win the election, as there hasn’t been 
any reliable polling published. It seems most likely that a Labor minority 
government, probably in alliance with the Greens, will continue after this 
election but theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> holds hope that, 
after 15 years of Labor rule, territorians will be looking for change.
 