
Proposals to involve children in the selection of teachers and headteachers 
were condemned yesterday by a teachers' union.

The children's commissioner, Al Aynsley-Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alaynsleygreen>, said children had played 
a part in his selection and he believed it was a beneficial process.

He said the views of children should be listened to and included in government 
policy.

Professor Aynsley-Green was set a written test by a group of children, who 
marked it and then interviewed him via a panel. "I have gone through the 
wringer in my interview process and, talking to young people afterwards, they 
felt incredibly proud of the fact they had been listened to, respected, and 
that they had a say in what was going on," he told the Sunday Telegraph.

But Chris Keates, general secretary of the National Association of 
Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers, said the suggestion would disrupt the 
relationship between teacher and pupil. She said prospective teachers were 
often asked to give demonstration lessons and were shown around schools by 
children to see if they interact well with young people. "That is as far as it 
should go," she said. "It is ridiculous, when people are being tested on the 
basis of their experience, their attitude and approach to teaching, to have 
children on the interview panel.

"On what basis will they get involved in the interview process? It will become 
subjective and be about whether they take to the person or not."

Prof Aynsley-Green was appointed children's commissioner by the education 
secretary, Ruth Kelly, in March. He stepped down from his roles as national 
clinical director for children and Nuffield professor of child health at Great 
Ormond Street hospital for children in London.

When he took up the role, he said he would be the voice of children. "I will 
be dedicating my time to listening to the views of children and presenting them 
to those who take decisions which affect them."
 