
There may be no formal vacancy yet, but Paul Howes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/paul-howes>, the right-wing trade 
union leader in the box seat for a NSW Senate spot, has announced he is 
stepping back from the contest.

Labor colleagues have been anticipating the resignation of the former foreign 
ministerBob Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-carr> since 
Labor's election defeat on 7 September. Howes, the national secretary of the 
Australian Workers Union and an influential player in the NSW Right, was 
thought by colleagues to be Carr's obvious replacement.

But Carr has not yet resigned. In the vacuum created by the non-resignation, 
the NSW Right faction has split over the identity of Carr's possible 
replacement.

Rather than have to crunch the numbers and have a public fight, Howes said on 
Thursday he would not seek the spot. "I will not be a candidate for the Senate. 
I will be running the Australian Workers Union for some time to come," Howes 
told reporters in Sydney.

Asked whether he was absolutely confident about Carr's intention to retire, 
Howes said: "The Labor party's never very good at keeping secrets is it?"

Howes indicated that his public support for gay marriage was one of his 
reasons for stepping back. Elements of the Catholic Right in NSW oppose 
legalising same-sex marriage. Others maintain the Senate vacancy should go to a 
woman.

 Deb O'Neill – a solid campaigner who lost the marginal lower house seat of 
Robertson at the election – is favoured to step up. O'Neill is also allied to 
the Shop Distributive and Allied Employees' Association, which takes 
conservative positions on issues such as gay marriage.

Carr secured election to the Senate on 7 September in the No 1 spot for Labor. 
Carr publicly promised several times to serve a full term even if Labor lost, 
but the widespread expectation is he will resign.
 