
Two days after the brutal murder of a PhD student in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/why-was-he-killed-brutal-death-of-italian-student-in-egypt-confounds-experts>
 hit the headlines, I received a phone call from a family member. “Did you hear 
about that Italian student?” they asked.

I responded, truthfully, that it had made me feel sick. 

Apart from being tragic beyond comprehension, the killing of Cambridge student 
Giulio Regeni served as a sobering reminder of the unpredictability and danger 
that researchers face in the field.

I am currently conducting research in another Middle Eastern country known for 
its pervasive and brutal intelligence apparatus. Like Regeni, I am here as part 
of myPhD <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> at a 
world-class UK university. I have good reason to believe that I have been 
monitored, both physically and electronically.

Working as a casual? Zip your lip and do as you're told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/22/working-as-a-casual-zip-your-lip-and-do-as-youre-told>
I like to think that my research is benign and that the state’s interest in me 
has passed, or will do soon. Then again, the arbitrary arrest and torture of 
students, academics and journalists in this country makes me feel afraid. Some 
days the risks seem non-existent, on others they can be absolutely terrifying.

My unease is deepened by the fact that my university seems to be utterly 
clueless when it comes to my security situation. Even broaching the topic feels 
like breaking a taboo.



Don’t get me wrong, I don’t think any university or supervisor should have to 
take the blame for another country’s violence. But it’s naive to put the onus 
on students to figure out their field sites while imploring host countries to 
uphold freedom of research.

In reality, intelligence agencies, armies and mobs will do as they please and 
students need to be prepared. Yet they often receive little help or advice.

I flagged to my department that state monitoring is rife in my field site, but 
no one suggested that I seek anti-surveillance training. Not even the 
essentials were offered, like advice on encryption software, being careful 
about what you write over email and setting up password protections. My 
university does have an information security team that can help, but students 
are not told about it. I found out about its existence in a chance conversation 
with a friend.

Giulio Regeni murder investigators from Italy and Egypt meet in Cairo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/giulio-regeni-murder-investigators-italy-egypt-meet-cairo>
A colleague of mine is currently based in a highly militarised region of the 
Middle East where she has been exposed to extreme levels of violence. She has 
been physically attacked more than once, and her mental health has suffered. 
She wasn’t given any training on how to handle a conflict situation – either 
physically or mentally – and neither have her supervisors, who don’t know how 
to support her. Meanwhile, the aid workers around her benefit from support 
structures put in place by their organisations, including exit strategies, text 
message alerts and emergency contacts.

There are many PhD students like us scattered around the globe, undertaking 
fieldwork in the face of risks that we (and our universities) are often 
oblivious to. This is even more frightening when you consider that many of us 
are stationed in our field sites for a minimum of nine months, learning the 
language as we go and organising ground support on our own.

Universities may point to the risk assessments that students have to complete 
before they go into the field. These are helpful in theory – but they put the 
onus of risk identification and mitigation firmly on students. My colleagues 
and I found ourselves filling out forms listing risk after risk and how we 
would mitigate them, but these were approved without any subsequent training 
from the university.

When things do go wrong, pressure is too often placed on supervisors to 
provide a solution. This is unfair. Supervisors are not safety experts; they 
may not even have been to the country in question. Nobody in my department 
researches my field site.

The pressure of academia drove me to heroin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/25/the-pressure-of-academia-drove-me-to-heroin>
As young researchers, we are perversely encouraged to be grateful for a lack 
of red tape from our universities, which could inhibit our research. Yet the 
solution surely isn’t less security, but better training and support. Simple 
things – like keeping a regular communication plan so that people can react 
quickly if you go missing – can save lives. Professional bodies have been using 
such techniques for years. They haven’t made it into academia and I’m not sure 
why.

Nothing can excuse the threats that researchers face in certain countries, but 
universities are places of learning, and wherever possible, that should include 
teaching students to stay safe. This may not be enough to prevent violence in 
every case, but that’s no reason to leave endangered students out in the cold.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 