
The opening night of Unsound 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/music/unsound_adelaide>, the festival 
of experimental music within the Adelaide festival, had seen signs posted at 
the entrance warning patrons that the show contained "a loud soundtrack, laser, 
smoke and haze effects". In place of lasers, the second night promised strobe 
lighting, but that warning might have been couched in even stronger language; 
anyone of a nervous disposition ought really to have been advised to turn heels 
and run to the Adelaide Hills.

Opening act Tim Hecker, who had appeared the previous evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/15/unsound-adelaide-raime-robin-fox>
 with Daniel Lopatin, performed in pitch darkness, summoning more extraordinary 
soundscapes from his laptop: shifting, ebbing waves of noise containing 
fragments of melody and occasional chest-hammering bursts of sub-bass. It was a 
reminder that experimental music of this ilk is as much a physical experience 
as a source of cerebral contemplation.

The next 45-minute set from Actress, aka ex-soccer player Darren Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/14/actress-darren-cunningham-rip>, 
introduced new elements into the mix: following what sounded like a storm 
breaking, rhythmic layers of sound were built, before a definite beat was 
introduced. This was techno of a recognisable ilk, featuring snatches of vocals 
and even melodies, and in the context of the festival, almost a disappointment, 
not quite the palimpsest of dance music it promised it might be. But before 
anything became too comfortable, Actress, squatting behind a desk, his face 
hidden by a hoodie, introduced gentler passages, then ruptured these with 
blasts of static bass.

It was left to Hype Williams – the mysterious duo of Dean Blunt and Inge 
Copeland,although these are not their real names 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/05/hype-williams-speak-the-truth> – 
to stun the audience fully into submission. The old theatre filled with dry 
ice, and then when the pair materialised on stage, relentless strobes rendered 
them essentially invisible. Washes of synths were swamped by corruscating 
noise, the sort of the thing once heard on Hammer Horror sound effect LPs, 
distorted at staggering volume to the point at which anyone with loose fillings 
or especially bowels would be advised to leave the building. But the pair also 
bring something new to the experimental music party, a love of R'n'B, or at 
least an appreciation of its subversive sonic possibilities.

Songs - songs! - emerged from the pall, with Copeland singing in a fashion 
reminiscent of Martina Topley-Bird on Tricky's classicMaxinquaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/01/tricky-maxinquaye-reissue-review>
 and playing the melodica. "I'm a happy survivor," I think she sweetly crooned 
at one point, before that tantalising sentiment was shattered by a further 
eruption of white noise, sirens and gunshot sounds.

The founder of Unsound, Mat Schulz, has talked about how a lot of the music he 
programmes "makes you feel uneasy, and that is somehow enjoyable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/08/adelaide-festival-blog-week-two1>
" and here the audience - still flickering in the punishing strobe glare - 
looked suspended in a state of utter bliss.

Unsound Adelaide 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/music/unsound_adelaide> concludes on 
Saturday 16 March.
 