
Let's be honest. That deeply satisfying feeling is chiefly about thumping 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/07/the-ashes-2010-11-england-australia>
. And on their home turf too. In crushing style. With both bat and ball. By an 
innings. Again and again. The way they used to do to us. Yet England's Ashes 
win prompts some less tribal thoughts too. One is it's a crying shame that most 
people can't see Ashes cricket on television. No one except Rupert Murdoch and 
the sports elite benefits from the Ashes being confined to expensive 
pay-per-view. It does no favours to the grassroots future of English cricket 
that its greatest exploits go unwatched by kids who might dream of being the 
next Alastair Cook or Jimmy Anderson, and for whom school facilities are 
becoming non-existent. Instead the paywall means that cricket becomes even more 
the preserve of the corpulent and the corporate than it is already. Eighteen 
months ago,an independent report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/13/sports-rights-davies-review-ashes>
 called for the Ashes to be one of the "crown jewels" of sporting events that 
must be available to all TV viewers free-to-air. Yet one of the first decisions 
taken bythe Conservative sports minister Hugh Robertson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/21/hugh-robertson-tv-money> last 
summer was to boot that plan into the long grass. Why? Answers, on a postcard, 
to Mr R Murdoch, please.David Cameron issued a pretty tribute to England's 
cricketers yesterday 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/news/latest-news/2011/01/england-celebrates-ashes-victory-58537>
. But he has a choice. He could take the Ashes away from Mr Murdoch â€“ and he 
won't do it. Result? England's Ashes win produces no seedcorn for the future. 
Meanwhile, Mr Murdoch laughs all the way to his tax-avoiding offshore bank.
 