
The Syria ceasefire agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
 brokered by Turkey and Russia this week could bring much-needed respite to a 
population that has suffered a brutal and bloody war fornearly six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
. In theory, this respite will bring an end to the conflict and translate into 
a lasting settlement. In practice – and at best – it is likely to last only a 
matter of days or possibly weeks, and may fall apart like previous agreements.

Syria ceasefire appears to hold after rivals sign Russia-backed deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
It is the political and military realities on the ground that will decide 
Syria’s conflict and its prospects of peace and stability. The backdrop to the 
latest ceasefire agreement is not one of goodwill and trust between the various 
belligerents. It comes only two weeks afterthe fall of Aleppo to the Assad 
regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
 and its backers,Russia and Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/aleppo-fall-syria-iran-winner-influence-analysis>
, who for many months brutally and indiscriminately besieged Aleppo’s 
population. Hundreds of thousands were forced into submission, their 
communities decimated.

Unless carefully monitored and implemented, ceasefire agreements can end up 
being superficial and can distract attention away from intensified military 
campaigns and human rights abuses. The tragedy is that theevacuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/aleppo-hopes-raised-that-evacuation-could-soon-resume>
 that followed the fall of Aleppo simply displaced the local population toIdlib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/airstrike-on-syrian-village-kills-26-people-reports-say>
, the last remaining rebel stronghold that is dominated by more extreme 
factions within the opposition group.

The deal brokered by Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and 
Russia does not include these factions and, while it is more accommodating of a 
number of rebel groups in comparison to previous agreements, Russia and Iran 
have in the past applied loose criteria for the groups that it considers to 
fall within the parameters of “terrorism” – and do not normally differentiate 
between the different rebel factions. In other words, this week’s deal could 
yet again provide them with plenty of political cover to intensify their 
attacks and worsen the humanitarian crisis in the country.

Other aspects of the deal are also vague. We know little about the details of 
the control mechanisms that are supposed to enforce its conditions. Both Turkey 
andRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> may lack the leverage that 
can force belligerents into accepting the ceasefire agreement.

Turkey has not asserted whether it will deploy any troops to monitor and 
police events on the ground, which is normally a fundamental prerequisite for 
ceasefire agreements and one that also allows humanitarian actors to go into 
conflict areas and do their job effectively. Tens of thousands of rebel 
fighters have not necessarily agreed to accept the ceasefire and have dedicated 
themselves to continuing the war against the Assad regime in the wake of the
fall of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/what-next-for-syria-its-allies-and-foes-after-fall-of-aleppo>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fputin-announces-syrian-ceasefire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Putin%20announces%20Syrian%20ceasefire%20between%20Assad%20government%20and%20rebel%20fighters%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fputin-announces-syrian-ceasefire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Putin%20announces%20Syrian%20ceasefire%20between%20Assad%20government%20and%20rebel%20fighters%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fputin-announces-syrian-ceasefire-video&media=>
Putin announces Syrian ceasefire between Assad government and rebel fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/29/putin-announces-syrian-ceasefire-video>
Russia’s hands are also tied. As Iran’s disruption of the Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> evacuation process two weeks ago 
showed, it is Iranian proxy militias and other Assad loyalists who control the 
local political and security environment and will ultimately decide the fate of 
ceasefire arrangements. Yet, Russia has no control over these groups, who do 
not necessarily have the same long-term political and geopolitical objectives 
as Moscow. As these militias and other Assad loyalists make further gains, they 
are likely to grow increasingly assertive and diverge further away from 
Russia’s sphere of influence.

The ceasefire deal could potentially be a prelude to what many hope will be 
successful peace talks in Astana, Kazakhstan next month; but without more 
credible and legitimate brokers, it is more likely to be just another temporary 
fix that provides a mere breather for those involved.

This week’s agreement did not signal a cessation of hostilities as much as an 
attempt to engender a political solution to a war with a momentum that 
considerably favours the Assad regime and its backers. Assuming the regime, or 
Russia andIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, do not go for total 
victory in the coming months, it will still be difficult, if not impossible, 
for them to convince the opposition and the Syrian people that they are 
interested in peace and a lasting settlement. Not when their victories have 
come at great humanitarian cost to the Syrian population – and when tens of 
thousands of rebels still have the resolve and resources to continue their 
rebellion in one form or another.
 