
Gunmen stormed the house of a long-serving American aid worker in Niger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger>, killing two people before fleeing 
with the man toward the border with Mali, authorities have said.

It is believed to be the first time a US citizen has been abducted in the vast 
Sahel region, where al-Qaida and criminal gangs have targeted French nationals 
and other Europeans for more than a decade, demanding millions of pounds for 
their release.

No group has claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> in the Islamic Maghreb 
(AQIM) is one militant group that has pledged to attack European and American 
targets in north-west Africa.

Isis and al-Qaida turf wars in Africa may push fragile states to breaking point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/06/isis-al-qaida-turf-wars-africa-may-push-fragile-states-to-breaking-point>
In the past decade, the organisation is estimated to have raised more than 
£40m from such kidnaps. Al-Qaida-linked militants have abducted foreigners in 
Niger and brought them to northernMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>.

“We are aware of reports of the kidnapping of a US citizen in Niger,” a US 
state department official said after the abduction late on Friday. “The US 
Department of State has no higher priority than the safety and security of US 
citizens overseas.”

The government of Niger said in a news release on Saturday that the American 
had lived in the country since 1992. “These criminals are currently en route 
toward Mali and our forces are pursuing them,” the interior ministry said.


“The president of the republic is personally following the situation and our 
forces are fully mobilised to capture them and put an end to this disastrous 
affair.”

African al-Qaida group claims kidnapping of Swiss woman in Mali
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/african-al-qaida-group-claims-kidnapping-of-swiss-woman-in-mali>
Daouda Maiga, the governor of Mali’s Ménaka region bordering Niger, said 
authorities had been alerted to be on the lookout for a white Toyota Hilux. The 
abduction took place in Abalak, in the Tahoua region of Niger.

About a week ago, 22 people were killed in a refugee camp 155 miles (250km) 
away from the site. The camp shelters Malian refugees who have fled into Niger 
from the violent unrest in their country, which is still riven by fighting 
between French-led forces and Al-Qaida-linked militants.

The Sahel region of north-west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, an umbrella term for parts of 
countries including Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, Algeria and Niger, 
has been the site of a series of kidnappings and targeted attacks on westerners.

A number of foreigners remain hostage in the Sahel region, including two 
people seized in separate attacks in Timbuktu, Mali. In Burkina Faso, an 
Australian doctor and a Romanian man are being held captive.
 