
Thriller romance The Perfect Guy narrowly beat out M Night Shyamalan chiller 
The Visitto top the US box office at the weekend 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-perfect-guy-narrowly-822689> 
with an opening bow of $26.7m (£17.2m).

David M Rosenthal’s film centres on a successful lobbyist, played by Sanaa 
Lathan, who embarks on a relationship with a dangerous new beau after breaking 
up with her boyfriend. Michael Ealy and Morris Chestnut co-star.

The Visit, which Shyamalan financed himself for just $5m following the failure 
of Will and Jaden Smith sci-fi bombAfter Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/after-earth> last year, took $25.7m on 
opening, the year’s top horror bow. The film centres on two teenagers who set 
off to visit their grandparents, who they have never met before, at their 
remote farmhouse. It could yet be hailed as this weekend’s No 1 once final 
estimates are confirmed.

The Visit review – a shocker from M Night Shyamalan, and not the good kind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/the-visit-review-ill-judged-shenanigans-shyamalan>
Reviewers have tentatively suggested The Visit marks something of a return to 
form <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/the_visit_2015/> for the Sixth Sense 
director, whose films have struggled to receive critical traction since 2002’s 
Signs. However,The Observer’s Mark Kermode delivered a scathing verdict on the 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/the-visit-review-ill-judged-shenanigans-shyamalan>
, which he described as an “endurance test”.

Kermode opined: “There’s a terrible sense of dread lurking in M Night 
Shyamalan’s latest. Sadly, it has nothing to do with the boring shaky-cam story 
about two incandescently irritating teenagers spending some Grimm-lite time 
with their unhinged grandparents. Instead, it’s the horrible realisation that 
the film-maker who was lauded forThe Sixth Sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/22/the-sixth-sense-film-frightened-me-most-sian-cain>
, defended forThe Village 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101785/village>, and just about 
tolerated forThe Happening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/15/culture.review1>, may actually 
have made a movie worse thanLady in the Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/aug/13/mnightshyamalan.thriller>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthe-perfect-guy-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447949475938%2FKP_599999_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Perfect%20Guy%3A%20Erotic%20thriller%20blurs%20into%20blandness%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthe-perfect-guy-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Perfect%20Guy%3A%20Erotic%20thriller%20blurs%20into%20blandness%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fthe-perfect-guy-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447949475938%2FKP_599999_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Perfect Guy - video review 
Last week’s top film, the Christian family drama War Room, slipped to third 
place this time around with $7.4m for a three-week total of $39.1m. The top 
five was rounded out by Robert Redford-led drama A Walk in the Woods, with $5m 
in its second week for a total of $20m, and the spy sequel Mission: Impossible 
- Rogue Nation, with another $4.2m for a seventh-week total of $188.1m. 
Christopher McQuarrie’s film, which sees Tom Cruise returning as daredevil 
secret agent Ethan Hunt, also opened spectacularly in China this weekend with 
$86m on debut.

The only other film to make this week’s top 10 was the Christian drama 90 
Minutes in Heaven, which scored just $2.1m to open in ninth place despite a 
relatively high-profile cast. The Star Wars prequels’ Hayden Christensen plays 
Baptist minister Don Piper, who finds himself temporarily in the afterlife 
following a near-fatal car crash, while Kate Bosworth portrays his wife, Eva. 
Piper’s book about his experiences, also titled 90 Minutes in Heaven, has sold 
more than 6m copies.

North American box office 11-13 September

1. The Perfect Guy, $27.7m

2. The Visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/10/the-visit-review-m-night-shyamalans-found-footage-loser>
, £25.6m

3. War Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/28/war-room-review-religion-christianity>
, $7.4m Total: $39.1m

4. A Walk in the Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/nick-nolte-in-a-walk-in-the-woods>
, $4.7m Total: $19.9m

5. Mission: Impossible - Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/30/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review>
, $4.1m Total: $188.1m

6. Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/aug/27/straight-outta-compton-video-review>
, $4m Total: $155.7m

7. No Escape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/06/no-escape-review-owen-wilson-brainless-action-movie>
, $2.8m Total: $24.1m

8. The Transporter Refuelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/the-transporter-refuelled-review-reboot>
, $2.7m Total: $13.3m

9. 90 Minutes in Heaven, $2.1m 

10. Un Gallo con Muchos Huevos, $1.9m Total: $6.6m
 