
To Washington conservatives they were egregious examples of "big government" 
overreach, but the White House's economic stimulus and bailout policies have 
saved 8.5m jobs and averted a further slump of 6.5% in US economic output, 
according to a study by two influential economists.

An in-depth modelling exercise 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2010-07-28/blinder-zandi-say-u-s-bailouts-likely-averted-a-depression.html>
 by Moody's chief economist, Mark Zandi, and a Princeton University expert, 
Alan Blinder, paints a bleak scenario of a 1930s-style Great Depression if the 
US government had enacted none of its $1.7tn (Â£1.3tn) programmes to avert a 
financial meltdown.

Using historical statistical relationships and a focus on the government's 
impact on narrowing credit spreads, the pair found that the downturn would have 
continued into 2011, with unemployment peaking at 16.5% rather thanlast year's 
actual high of 10.1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/08/fears-of-double-recession-us-jobs>
.

They believe US gross domestic product would have slumped by 7.4% in 2009 and 
by 3.7% in 2010, producing a "peak to trough" decline of 12%, rather than the 
anticipated 4%. Starved of demand, shops and employers would be cutting prices 
and wages.

"With outright deflation in prices and wages in 2009 to 2011, this dark 
scenario constitutes a 1930s-like depression," says the study, entitled How the 
great recession was brought to an end".

Thwarting stiff opposition from Republicans in Congress, the Obama 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> 
introduced an economic stimulus package of more than $780bn last year, adding 
to giveaways of $170bn by the Bush administration in 2008 that included tax 
refunds to tens of millions of Americans. Adding in banking-bailout measures of 
$600bn and smaller programmes such as the "cash for clunkers" scheme and a 
rescue of insurer AIG, total commitments by the US government reach $1.7tn.

Zandi and Blinder say that although economic activity and job creation remain 
extremely sluggish, theUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> has made "enormous progress" 
since its nadir last year: "Maybe the country and the world were just lucky. 
But we take another view: the great recession gave way to recovery as quickly 
as it did largely because of the unprecedented responses by monetary and fiscal 
policymakers."

The study's authors are likely to have their findings hotly disputed by 
Republicans, who maintain that an unemployment rate stubbornly close to 10% 
means the government's interventions were a failure, fuelling an out-of-control 
budget deficit.

Speaking earlier in the week, the Republicans' senate leader, Mitch McConnell, 
insisted stimulus efforts had "little or no results", and that such 
intervention "simply didn't work".

"Simply borrowing money from our grandchildren to send down to state 
governments is not going to jump start the economy," McConnell told a newspaper 
in his home state of Kentucky. "The biggest way for the economy to recover is 
for the private sector to grow."
 