
President Barack Obama often highlights his administration’s “all-of-the-above 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/05/29/new-report-all-above-energy-strategy-path-sustainable-economic-growth>
” energy strategy as a model for sustainable economic growth. But three months 
after the Environmental Protection Agency unveiled its landmark proposal to
regulate carbon-dioxide emissions from US power plants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/02/obama-rules-coal-climate-change>
 for the first time, that all-inclusive catchphrase seems more than ever like 
hyperbole.

The plan sets a targeted carbon-dioxide emissions rate for each state to hit 
by 2030. On average, these goals represent a 30% drop from 2005 rates, but – as 
critics have pointed out – the benefits and sacrifices of the plan are unlikely 
to be shared equally.


“At the highest level, there are some clear winners and losers,” said George 
Favaloro, managing director of PricewaterhouseCoopers’ sustainable business 
practice.

The same concept applies to the rest of Obama’s overarching Climate Action Plan
 <http://www.whitehouse.gov/share/climate-action-plan>, announced in 2013, as 
well. As programs growing out of the action plan begin to bear fruit, it’s 
becoming increasingly apparent that some businesses will gain while others will 
lose.

The winners conserve

 When it comes to the EPA’s plan, it’s easy to pick out some early 
beneficiaries. “Companies selling clean energy and energy efficiency products 
and services in residential, commercial and utility-scale markets are going to 
benefit,” Favaloro said. “You can debate what the final impact of the Clean 
Power Plan and other proposals will be, but there’s definitely going to be 
support for more renewable energy coming on line,” he added.

 This could mean more business for solar power companies such as First Solar, 
SolarCity and SunPower, which have led a solar building boom in the US in the 
past two years. Traditional engineering and construction companies could 
benefit as well. Bechtel, for example, already has expanded into solar power 
plant construction.

 The EPA’s power plan aligns nicely with other Obama administration climate 
initiatives. For example, the US Department of Energy, which has backed 
large-scale solar and wind projects with billions of dollars of loan 
guarantees, recently announced that it is enabling $4bn in loan guarantees for 
additionalrenewable energy 
<http://energy.gov/articles/energy-department-makes-additional-4-billion-loan-guarantees-available-innovative-renewable>
 and energy efficiency projects. This comes after the DOE’s April announcement 
that it plans to recharge its $16bnAdvanced Technology Vehicle Manufacturing 
Loan 
<http://www.energy.gov/articles/sec-moniz-discusses-advanced-technology-vehicle-manufacturing-loans>
program. Ford, Nissan and Tesla have used the program to improve fuel 
efficiency and produce electric vehicles.

 Other supporting initiatives include a Department of Agriculture 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/watch/shows/inside-story/articles/2014/8/15/how-are-america-scitiescombatingclimatechangeonthelocallevel.html>
 plan to invest $236m in improving rural electric infrastructure in eight 
states and a$1bn national disaster resilience competition 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/06/14/fact-sheet-national-disaster-resilience-competition>
 that will be conducted through the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development. More than 80% of the HUD program’s funds are targeted at regions 
where Obama declared major disasters in 2011, 2012 and 2013.

 The initiative is modeled after HUD’s Rebuild by Design 
<http://www.rebuildbydesign.org> competition, launched in the wake of Hurricane 
Sandy. The six winning Build by Design proposals – which were awarded $920m in 
June – aim to buoy regional infrastructure resiliency to protect New York and 
New Jersey against storm-related threats, especially floods and power outages. 
Dozens of design, architecture and construction firms and institutes are 
involved in the winning projects, including Bjarke Ingels Group, Interboro 
Partners, MIT, PennDesign and Scape/Landscape Architecture.

 Additionally, the administration’s new Climate Data Initiative 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/03/19/fact-sheet-president-s-climate-data-initiative-empowering-america-s-comm>
 aims to spur the private sector to use public climate data to help make 
communities more resilient to climate change. Google, Intel and Microsoft are 
participating.

 As a whole, the Obama administration’s efforts to mitigate and to prepare for 
the impacts of climate change are designed to have “a broad impact on the 
transportation, building and power sectors”, Favaloro said.

The losers litigate

 But not everyone will be a winner. 

 Despite the Obama administration’s efforts to prepare for the effects of 
climate change, “the US still relatively underinvests in infrastructure”, 
observes Jonathan Woetzel, a director at McKinsey.

 “The American economy and people deserve better infrastructure,” he said, 
pointing to the American Society of Civil Engineers annual infrastructurereport 
card <http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org>, which last year gave the 
country a mere “D+” grade. It remains to be seen whether Obama’s most recent 
climate-related efforts will change that, he added.

 On the other hand, argues PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Favaloro, Obama’s climate 
initiatives could accelerate a painful process of transformation, leaving 
behind companies that don’t understand “what it means to build in a resilient 
way”.

 In terms of the Clean Power Plan, some energy stakeholders, particularly 
those that are deeply invested in coal, could stand to lose billions of 
dollars. This, in turn, could accelerate coal’s replacement with natural gas, 
renewables and efficiency.

Companies that could be hit hardest include coal producers Alpha Natural 
Resources, Arch Coal and Peabody Energy; unregulated power companies with large 
fleets of coal plants, such as NRGEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Dynergy; and suppliers of 
coal-mining equipment, like Caterpillar, according to Moody’s Investor Service.

 Regardless of the long-term effects of the EPA’s power-sector proposal, it’s 
increasingly clear who its first beneficiaries will be: lawyers. The EPA 
already faces a lawsuit filedlast month 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-epa-lawsuit-20140805-story.html> by a 
dozen heavily coal-reliant states. Murray Energy, the largest privately held 
coal-mining company in the country, filed suit in March.

As such litigation illustrates, the impact of Obama’s climate initiatives will 
play out over time, and not for the benefit of “all of the above”. And, as 
similar lawsuits will undoubtedly work their way across several affected 
industries, it’s clear that the struggle for climate resilience will, at least 
to some extent, play out in the courts.

Garrett Hering is a San Francisco-based journalist covering energy, 
technology, business and the environment. His articles have appeared in 
California Energy Markets, the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, the Frankfurter 
Allgemeine Zeitung and elsewhere.

The values-led business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/values-led-business> hub is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.



 