
Who benefits from the rearranged schedule?

So, despite the fact that it would (probably) have been possible to fit in the 
remaining tennis between now and Sunday night, theUSTA <http://www.usta.com/> 
haspostponed the men's final to Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/sep/08/us-open-2011-mens-final> for the 
fourth straight year.

Surely the players letting off steam about being asked to play in treacherous 
conditions had something to do with that. Followed as it was by Rafael Nadal 
declaring that the potential scheduling of four matches in four days for those 
in the bottom half of the draw was "crazy".

So the men's and women's semi-finals are scheduled for Saturday, the women's 
final for Sunday and the men's final for Monday.

Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic still get the best opportunity from the draw, 
however, with their quarter finals being played on Thursday, meaning they would 
still get rest days between rounds.

Weather forecast

But the event is still at the mercy of the elements.

The Weather Channel forecast  
<http://www.weather.com/weather/5-day/New+York+NY+USNY0996>suggests there could 
well be thunderstorms on Friday, Saturday and Sunday. That could yet play 
further havoc with the remaining schedule.

So why no roof?

If the Romans could put a roof on the ancient Colosseum, why can't the United 
StatesTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association add a roof 
to one of its show courts at the United States Open? The question has, well, 
hung over the premier domestic tennis event for 20 years, since the U.S.T.A. 
opted for the sensational over the sensible in constructing Arthur Ashe 
Stadium, the tournament's marquee court.

opines Karen Crouse in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/08/sports/tennis/2011-us-open-building-a-roof-would-come-with-many-challenges.html>
.

Five-times US Open winner Roger Federer said (admittedly two years ago, rather 
than this year when he has benefited from the draw and the weather): "Is it 
necessary? Maybe not But with a roof you can make it more predictable for fans, 
sponsors, TV, players. That's why I'm obviously for it. In America, we have so 
many wonderful stadiums, you figure it's normal they would be taking the lead 
with something like this."

According to the NYT, the stadium, which opened in 1997, was built for $254 
million. A retractable roof would cost another $150 million for something that 
would only be used a couple of days a year at most.

Pam Shriver, who has served on the USTA on several occasions, said: "Even 
though on a rainy week it seems so obvious, when you look at a not-for-profit 
and all the U.S.T.A. tries to do, it's a really tough call. It's not based on 
three days of bad weather. It's based on a much bigger picture, one which is 
concerned with the grassroots level and elite-player development and senior 
tennis. I'm not saying they shouldn't have a roof, but it's a complicated issue 
with a lot of moving parts."

Watergate

And then there is the water coming up the other way. Andy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick> again confronted tournament 
referee, Brian Earley, this time when water bubbled up through a small crack on 
the Grandstand court.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcSoOsJS7WpQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcSoOsJS7WpQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcSoOsJS7WpQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Roddick had been called back to the court, having been assured that the 
situation had been resolved.

The Daily Beast put this into some context 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2011/09/08/the-u-s-open-s-watergate.html>
:

Here are the simple facts about why the players were in the right. A hard 
court, like the ones at the U.S. Open, consists of a thin film of acrylic over 
an asphalt base. That means that even a few drops of rain turn it into a 
skating rink.

Tennis is all about movement—just listen to the squeaking of sneakers on the 
court during a Nadal match—and a court that's even mildly damp becomes not only 
unplayable but downright dangerous. Imagine playing an NBA game on a court 
slathered with extra virgin olive oil and you'll get the idea of the absurdity 
of the situation. The USTA is just lucky that Roddick didn't break an ankle on 
national TV. And less than a day after this debacle, Earley is again seen 
trying to cajole a top player into action on a sketchy court.

Farce

For much more on US Open trials and tribulations, Kevin Mitchell writes: "US 
Open once again proves to be the dampest of all squibs." 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2011/sep/08/us-open-tennis-flushing-meadows>

The American Heritage Dictionary defines farce as a "light dramatic work in 
which highly improbable plot situations, exaggerated characters, and often 
slapstick elements are used for humorous effect."

If the authors ever visited Flushing Meadows in the New York borough of 
Queens, they would have been well placed to make such an observation on tennis. 
This year's US Open has had it all.

Semi-finalists

In between all of this there was actually some tennis played. Serena Williams 
and world No1 Caroline Wozniacki will meet in one women's semi-final 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/sep/09/serena-williams-wozniacki-us-open>
, while the other semi will be slightly less enticing (in a TV/showbiz sense), 
featuring seed Sam Stosur playing the unseeded German Angelique Kerber.

Friday's line-up

Despite the weather backlog, there are only two singles matches today:

John Isner (USA, 28) v Andy Murray (GB, 4),
Andy Roddick (USA, 21) v Rafael Nadal (Spa, 2)
 