
The British-born former AIG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aig> chief 
executive Martin Sullivan drew derision from US politicians by admitting he 
knew virtually nothing about the insurance company's vast exposure to complex 
financial insurance products until the credit crunch sparked early signs of a 
meltdown at the near bankrupt firm.

A US inquiry panel investigating the financial crisis quizzed Sullivan and 
several fellow former AIG bosses including Joseph Cassano, who ran the firm's 
financial products arm in London, about the collapse of AIG in 2008 that 
culminated in a government bailout costing $182bn. Its problems have been 
pinned on ill-fated derivatives contracts of more than $1tn.

There was little in the way of apology from the executives. Sullivan, a 
lifelong AIG employee who was once lauded as Britain's most influential 
businessman in the US, delivered a shoulder-shrugging performance in which he 
said he was unaware of crucial contractual terms in AIG's financial products 
until the middle of 2007, when Goldman Sachs began making multibillion dollar 
collateral calls on the firm. "I only became aware of the CDS [credit default 
swap] portfolio in 2007," said Sullivan. "I was receiving reports, but they 
didn't indicate any problems with the portfolio."

AIG has been described by critics as a large, stable insurance firm dwarfed by 
a huge "hedge fund" in the shape of its financial products division. The unit, 
run out of an office in Mayfair, wrote contracts insuring financial 
institutions against default by counterparties. AIG was plunged into chaos when 
banks began making billions of dollars of collateral calls. The first of these 
calls came in July 2007, when Goldman Sachs asked for $1.8bn. Sullivan, who was 
then the boss of AIG, admitted he did not know about Goldman's demand until 
after the event. "It was weeks or months later," said Sullivan, asked when he 
became aware of the problem. "It was nowhere near around July time â€“ I think it 
was much later on in the year."

This was greeted with amazement by Bill Thomas, vice-chairman of the US 
financial crisis inquiry commission, who said: "I will admit I've never been 
involved in an enormous multinational operation [but] there's not much 
communication in what I'd have thought was a major problem in a significant 
sector of the business."

The implosion of AIG, which came a week after Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy, was 
described by the Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke as the most 
anger-inducing moment of the financial crisis.

Sullivan, who was appointed OBE three years ago, has been attacked for being 
asleep at the wheel and is the latest British executive, following BP's Tony 
Hayward, to feel the wrath of US politicians.
 