
The senior lawyer for the National Security Agency stated on Wednesday that US 
technology companies were fully aware of the surveillance agency’s widespread 
collection of data.


Rajesh De, the NSA general counsel, said all communications content and 
associated metadata harvested by the NSA under a 2008 surveillance law occurred 
with the knowledge of the companies – both for the internet collection program 
known as Prism and for the so-called “upstream” collection of communications 
moving across the internet.

Asked during a Wednesday hearing of the US government’s institutional privacy 
watchdog if collection under the law, known as Section 702 or the Fisa 
Amendments Act, occurred with the “full knowledge and assistance of any company 
from which information is obtained,” De replied: “Yes.”

When the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data> and the 
Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/us-intelligence-mining-data-from-nine-us-internet-companies-in-broad-secret-program/2013/06/06/3a0c0da8-cebf-11e2-8845-d970ccb04497_story.html>
 broke the Prism story in June, thanks to documents leaked by whistleblower 
Edward Snowden, nearly all the companies listed as participating in the program 
– Yahoo, Apple, Google, Microsoft, Facebook and AOL –claimed they did not know  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/07/google-facebook-prism-surveillance-program>
 about a surveillance practice described as giving NSA vast access to their 
customers’ data.Some <http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2013/06/what.html>, like 
Apple, said they had “never heard” the term Prism.

De explained: “Prism was an internal government term that as the result of 
leaks became the public term,” De said. “Collection under this program was a 
compulsory legal process, that any recipient company would receive.”

After the hearing, De added that service providers also know and receive legal 
compulsions surrounding NSA’s harvesting of communications data not from 
companies but directly in transit across the internet under 702 authority. 

The disclosure of Prism resulted in a cataclysm in technology circles, with 
tech giants launching extensive PR campaigns to reassure their customers of 
data security andsuccessfully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/03/microsoft-facebook-google-yahoo-fisa-surveillance-requests>
 pressing the Obama administration to allow them greater leeway to disclose the 
volume and type of data requests served to them by the government.

Last week, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg said 
<https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10101301165605491> he had called US 
president Barack Obama to voice concern about “the damage the government is 
creating for all our future.” There was no immediate response from the tech 
companies to De’s comments on Wednesday.

It is unclear what sort of legal process the government serves on a company to 
compel communications content and metadata access under Prism or through 
upstream collection. Documents leaked from Snowden indicate that the NSA 
possesses unmediated access to the company data.

The secret Fisa court overseeing US surveillance for the purposes of producing 
foreign intelligence issues annual authorisations blessing NSA’s targeting and 
associated procedures under Section 702.After winning a transparency battle 
with the administration in the Fisa court earlier this year, the companies are 
now permitted to disclose the range of Fisa orders they receive, in bands of 
1,000, which presumably include orders under 702.

Passed in 2008, Section 702 retroactively gave cover of law to a post-9/11 
effort permitting the NSA to collect phone, email, internet and other 
communications content when one party to the communication is reasonably 
believed to be a non-American outside the United States. The NSA stores Prism 
data for five years and communications taken directly from the internet for two 
years.

While Section 702 forbids the intentional targeting of Americans or people 
inside the United States – a practice known as “reverse targeting” – 
significant amounts of Americans’ phone calls and emails are swept up in the 
process of collection.

In 2011, according to a now-declassified Fisa court ruling, the NSA was found 
to have collectedtens of thousands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/nsa-illegally-collected-thousands-emails-court>
 of emails between Americans, which a judge on the court considered a violation 
of the US constitution and which the NSA says it is technologically incapable 
of fixing.

Renewed in December 2012 over the objections of senate intelligence committee 
members Ron Wyden and Mark Udall, Section 702 also permits NSA analysts to 
search through the collected communications for identifying information about 
Americans, an amendment to so-called “minimisation” rulesrevealed by the 
Guardian in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/nsa-loophole-warrantless-searches-email-calls>
 and termed the “backdoor search loophole” by Wyden.

De and his administration colleagues, testifying before the Privacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board, strongly rejected suggestions by the panel that a court authorise 
searches for Americans’ information inside the 702 databases. “If you have to 
go back to court every time you look at the information in your custody, you 
can imagine that would be quite burdensome,” deputy assistant attorney general 
Brad Wiegmann told the board.

De argued that once the Fisa court permits the collection annually, analysts 
ought to be free to comb through it, and stated that there were sufficient 
privacy safeguards for Americans after collection and querying had occurred. 
“That information is at the government’s disposal to review in the first 
instance,” De said.

De also stated that the NSA is not permitted to search for Americans’ data 
from communications taken directly off the internet, citing greater risks to 
privacy.

Section 702 is not the only legal authority the US government possesses to 
harvest data transiting the internet.

Neither De nor any other US official discussed data taken from the internet 
under different legal authorities. Different documents Snowden disclosed,
published by the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/nsa-infiltrates-links-to-yahoo-google-data-centers-worldwide-snowden-documents-say/2013/10/30/e51d661e-4166-11e3-8b74-d89d714ca4dd_story.html>
, indicated that NSA takes data as it transits between Yahoo and Google data 
centers, an activity reportedly conducted not under Section 702 but under a 
seminal executive order known as 12333.

De and his administration colleagues were quick to answer the board that 
companies were aware of the government’s collection of data under 702, which 
Robert Litt, general counsel for the director of national intelligence, told 
the board was “one of the most valuable collection tools that we have.”

“All 702 collection is pursuant to court directives, so they have to know,” De 
reiterated to the Guardian.

• This article was amended on 20 March 2014 to remove statements in the 
original that the testimony by Rajesh De contradicted denials by technology 
companies about their knowledge of NSA data collection. It was also updated to 
clarify that the companies challenged the secrecy surrounding Section 702 
orders. Other minor clarifications were also made.
 