
Western society is completely, fanatically obsessed with cleanliness. Most 
homes today are disinfected with a rigour that would put hospitals of 
yesteryear to shame, and we spend immense amounts of time and money to do so.

Americans spent $4.7bn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/consumer-spending/2013-07-16/the-real-cost-of-being-clean.html#slide7>
 on household cleaners in 2012 and a further $1.9bn on cleaning products like 
brooms and mops. The average Briton devotes nearlyfive full hours a week 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2728363/Do-clean-five-hours-week-Average-Briton-spends-time-tidying-kitchens-getting-attention.html>
 to cleaning their home. We’re so clean, in fact, that our propensity for 
bleach and antibacterial products has resulted in a spate of new, 
drug-resistant super bacteria – so we can now devote our time and money to 
devising methods of cleaning them, too.

Unfortunately, feminism be damned, cleanliness still seems to be largely a 
woman’s responsibility. In adverts, it’s always the patient, cardigan-clad mom 
who is depicted mopping up messes with a bemused smile on her face. Perhaps it 
isn’t altogether surprising then, that as our obsession with cleanliness has 
grown, it’s been extended to encompass women’s bodies as well.

Are eco-friendly initiatives pointless unless we tackle overpopulation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/26/overpopulation-sustainability-environment-eco-friendly-initiatives>

One of the most popular disinfectant cleaning products sold today was commonly 
employed as a post-coital douche in the 1920s. Yes, that’s right. The brave 
women of yesteryear were routinely douching withLysol 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/lysols-vintage-ads-subtly-pushed-women-to-use-its-disinfectant-as-birth-control-218734/>
 to get rid of unwanted odours and also as a form of birth control. (Birth 
control sales <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/pill/timeline/timeline2.html> were 
illegal in some states until 1965 for married couples, and 1972 for those 
heathen singletons.)

Old ad copy for Lysol reads like a parody. “Gentle, non-caustic ‘Lysol’ will 
not harm delicate tissue. Many doctors advise their patients to douche 
regularly with ‘Lysol’ brand disinfectant just to ensure daintiness alone,” 
reads one ad.

“A man marries a woman because he loves her,” begins another. “So, instead of 
blaming him if married love begins to cool, she should question herself. Is she 
truly trying to keep herself and her husband eager, happy married lovers? One 
most effective way to safeguard her dainty feminine allure is by practicing
complete feminine hygiene as provided by vaginal douches with a scientifically 
correct preparation likeLysol.”

(As an aside, if you’re thinking that douching with Lysol sounds anything but 
gentle, you’re right. Despite it routinely being advertised as safe, doctors 
regularly recorded incidences of Lysol poisoning and uterine irrigation.)

Thank God we’re out of the dark ages, right?


Well, not exactly. 

In the intervening years, women have learned that we don’t need Lysol to 
safeguard our dainty feminine allure. We now know that our vaginas are, for the 
most part, self-sufficient and self-cleaning, naturally able to regulate pH 
levels with a spate of healthy bacteria and microorganisms.


Yet alongside this knowledge, our obsession with cleanliness has continued to 
grow, even as it’s begun trending toward a more natural approach. Sometimes 
this shift in direction can mean a simple, effective way to replace a harmful 
practice with one which is gentler yet still effective – likemaking your own 
cleaning products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/green-home-make-your-own-all-purpose-cleaner>
, rather than buying antibacterial ones, for example.

Other times, the fact that something has been rejigged and rebranded as 
“natural” is anything but. Despite the fact that douching has now largely 
fallen out of favour altogether because of the way it destroys the 
aforementioned healthy vaginal bacteria, it seems that it’s possible to erase 
that knowledge instantly when we replace “Lysol” with “ancient herbs”.

First it was Gwyneth Paltrow advising us to steam our vaginas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/30/sorry-gwyneth-paltrow-but-steaming-your-vagina-is-a-bad-idea>
; now it’s ‘detox pearls 
<https://embracepangaea.com/product/herbal-womb-detox-pearls/>’, little sachets 
of aromatic herbs inserted into the vagina, that are intended to ‘detox’ a 
woman’s womb. I am not kidding you with this shit.

What on earth is a toxic womb? If you found the vintage Lysol ad copy amusing, 
please sit down for this, taken from the ‘detox pearls’ manufacturer’s website: 
“Our womb (vagina, yoni, pum-pum or hot pocket) is is the foundation to our 
stability. It holds our deepest pains and is still responsibility [sic] for 
bringing forth souls to this world. The toxins from a poor diet, chemical based 
environment, and emotional stress get stuck in your womb.”

I’ll give you a minute to digest that.

Is sticking little bundles of cheesecloth-wrapped herbs into our pum-pums to 
rid ourselves of deep rooted painreally any different from douching with Lysol 
to retain our eager, happy marriages?

It seems like we’ve simply scratched out the archaic phrasing about remaining 
dainty and alluring and replaced it with vague, ramblings about toxins – the 
boogeymen of the 21st century. We’ve replaced the “scientifically correct” 
solution of Lysol with the “potent traditional herbs” of detox balls, but the 
effect is largely the same: a misguided, potentially harmful remedy to a 
problem which most likely didn’t need a solution in the first place.

These innocuous looking, prettily named detox pearls may not cause poisoning 
or uterine irrigation but several doctors have gone on record commenting that 
they pose a risk of upsetting the vagina’s natural balance and causing 
infections – or even resulting in potentially fatal toxic shock syndrome if not 
used properly. In other words, ladies, stop trying to clean your hot pockets by 
filling them with strange substances, herbal or otherwise.

We don’t need to disinfect our lives or detox our bodies. We weren’t meant to 
be blank and sterile and odorless – if vaginas were supposed to smell like 
lemon fresh Lysol or herb sachets they would, but theydon’t. They smell like 
vaginas. Let’s keep it that way.
 