
Too much remarkable cricket has been played by Australia over the past few 
years for "never" to be said. But yesterday, the prospect of a historic 
Australian whitewash - their first over England for more than 80 years - 
appeared to have receded.

On a deteriorating fourth-day pitch that will surely get worse, having set a 
target which has never even been approached in Test cricket, and employing 
aggressive bowling with the new ball allied to yet more fundamentally 
incompetent umpiring, England, almost disbelievingly, stared victory in the 
face.

Australia came back strongly in the closing hour, finishing on 91 for three, 
361 still required, with an unlikely hero in Andy Bichel at the crease. Sent in 
first wicket down, presumably to take the brunt of the new ball and see off its 
hardness - the better for the frontline batsmen to prosper when conditions ease 
- the bowler, unbeaten on 49, had already surpassed his highest Test score. 
Bichel made one-day centuries for Worcestershire last season, but this was a 
brave effort, made while grimacing in pain from the left index finger he 
fractured during the first England innings.

There was little joy, though, either for Justin Langer or Matthew Hayden, 
whose top- of-the-order partnership had tormented England all winter, nor for 
Ricky Ponting. Each was lbw, and the latter with least cause for complaint.

The decisions against the openers were scandalous however, with Langer, as in 
Melbourne, receiving a delivery from Andy Caddick that pitched seven or eight 
inches outside leg stump while Hayden, who stands outside his crease anyway, 
took a further stride down to Matthew Hoggard and was astounded to see Dave 
Orchard's finger raised.

A glazier was on standby last night as the glass in a dressing room door was 
shattered and Hayden faced disciplinary action from the match referee Wasim 
Raja for wilful destruc tion of property. Ponting's wicket was Caddick's 229th, 
taking him ahead of Darren Gough in the pantheon of English bowlers and into 
7th place. Alec Bedser is in his sights should his career be extended into the 
summer.

The England captain's handbook will contain little advice on the timing of 
declarations against the modern Australia. It tends not to happen often, the 
last time being in order to set a target on this ground in 1995 when Mike 
Atherton left Graeme Hick unbeaten on 98.

The conundrum for Nasser Hussain was to show confidence in his bowlers and his 
reading of the pitch, and leaving them adequate time to complete the job while 
at the same time eliminating the possibility of a home win.

Such Test match declarations generally - and that by Adam Gilchrist at 
Headingley two years ago was an exception - are made on the team's own terms. 
Given the rate at which Australia score, the depth to their order, and the 
paucity of the England attack, this was a ticklish one.

But by the time Hussain finally pulled the plug on his second innings shortly 
before five o'clock, Michael Vaughan's unquestioned world-class brilliance and 
the captain's own cussedness had taken the score from 218 for two overnight to 
452 for nine. Only twice, in 1975 and early in 1895, has an England team made 
more against the oldest enemy in the third innings, and almost certainly never 
on a pitch crumbling away as this one appeared to be.

Never, of course, has a side made more than India's 406 for four to win a 
Test, although Australia themselves made 404 for 3 at Headingley in 1948 and 
kick-started their phenomenal run of success by getting 369 for six to beat 
Pakistan in Hobart three years ago. But their best against England in Australia 
is 315 for six, and at the SCG specifically, 276 for four, both of them more 
than a century ago.

What is there to be said of Vaughan that has not been spoken and reiterated 
over the past eight months? That he is on the sort of roll experienced recently 
by Hayden, where anything seems possible and becomes so, is true. But he is 
playing with great concentration, an almost faultless technique, and a range of 
strokes that mark him al ready as the best right-hander England have possessed 
since Graham Gooch.

His century, his eighth in Tests and seventh since May, was completed on 
Saturday. Yesterday, he simply batted on, a man greedy for runs and recognising 
that the feast can be followed by famine.

Yet again he had a double century in his grasp only to be foiled by lbw, just 
like the Australians later. His 183, made in six-and-a-half hours with 27 fours 
and a six, is his fourth score in excess of 150, and in the last three decades 
only Gooch, David Gower and Dennis Amiss, with eight apiece, can match that for 
England. Only seven England players have made more than his 633 runs in an 
Ashes series, three of them in six matches rather than five.

He now joins Sachin Tendulkar, Gilchrist, Rahul Dravid, Hayden, Andy Flower 
and Jaques Kallis as the only current players to average 50-plus over 
significant time.

He and Hussain, who has squeezed every last drop from his batting this series, 
added 189 for the third wicket, after the captain had posted 160 for the same 
wicket with Mark Butcher in the first innings.

With the new ball taken by Australia, and piercing the surface of the pitch 
like a hand grenade, life for a while became perilous against Brett Lee. It did 
for Hussain, but not until he had made 72 invaluable runs. No one can have 
given more this winter.

 ENGLAND:  First innings 362 (M A Butcher 124, N Hussain 75, A J Stewart 71). 

 AUSTRALIA: First innings (overnight from Friday: 237-5) 

 *S R Waugh c Butcher b Hoggard  102 

 Cut high to second slip 

182min, 135 balls, 18 fours 

 A C Gilchrist c Stewart b Harmison  133 

 Caught cutting at wide ball 

194min, 121 balls, 18 fours 

 A J Bichel c Crawley b Hoggard  4 

 Pushed high to gully 

24min, 9 balls 

 B Lee c Stewart b Hoggard  0 

 Edged outswinger 

1min, 1 ball 

 J N Gillespie not out  31 

 102min, 83 balls, 2 fours, 1 six 

 S C G MacGill c Hussain b Hoggard  1 

 Running catch at cover off slog 

10min, 5 balls 

 Extras (b2, lb6, w2, nb9, pens, 0)  19 

Total (80.3 overs)  363 

Fall cont: 241, 267, 267, 349. 

 Bowling: Hoggard 21.3-4-92-4; Caddick 23-3-121-3; Harmison 20-4-70-3; Dawson 
16-0-72-0.

 ENGLAND: Second innings (overnight: 218-2) 

 M E Trescothick b Lee  22 

 Beaten for pace, played on 30min, 21 balls, 4 fours 

 M P Vaughan lbw b Bichel  183 

 Struck high on pad by straightening ball 399min, 278 balls, 27 fours, 1 six 

 M A Butcher c Hayden b MacGill  34 

 Gloved rearing ball to short leg 91min, 66 balls, 4 fours 

 *N Hussain c Gilchrist b Lee  72 

 Thin edge to ball of low bounce 236min, 181 balls, 9 fours 

 R W T Key c Hayden b Lee  14 

 Risky pull lofted to square leg 36min, 26 balls, 1 four 

 J P Crawley lbw b Gillespie  8 

 Stuck on the crease 25min, 15 balls, 1 four 

 A J Stewart not out  38 

 130min, 82 balls, 3 fours 

 R K J Dawson c and b Bichel  12 

 Leading edge to mid-off 39min, 35 balls, 1 four 

 A R Caddick c Langer b MacGill  8 

 Swung to mid-on 32min, 26 balls, 1 four 

 M J Hoggard b MacGill  0 

 Hoggard chopped on googly 9min, 10 balls 

 S J Harmison not out  20 

 26min, 23 balls, 4 fours 

 Extras (b9, lb20, w2, nb10)  41 

Total (for 9 dec, 125.3 overs)  452 

Fall cont: 313, 344, 345, 356, 378, 407, 409. 

 Bowling: Gillespie 18.3-4-70-1; Lee 31.3-5-132-3; MacGill 41-8-120-3; Bichel 
25.3-3-82-2; Martyn 3-1-14-0; Waugh 6-2-5-0.

 AUSTRALIA: Second innings 

 J L Langer lbw b Caddick  3 

 Ball pitched outside leg stump 9min, 8 balls 

 M L Hayden lbw b Hoggard  2 

 Marginal decision around off-stump 

13min, 6 balls 

 A J Bichel not out  49 

 85min, 54 balls, 8 fours 

 R T Ponting lbw b Caddick  11 

 Delivery angled in 

17min, 16 balls, 2 fours 

 D R Martyn not out  19 

 63min, 37 balls, 2 fours 

 Extras (b4, w2, nb1)  7 

Total (for 3, 20 overs)  91 

Fall: 5, 5, 25. 

 To bat: *Waugh, M L Love, A C Gilchrist, B Lee, J N Gillespie, S C G MacGill. 

 Bowling: Hoggard 5-0-17-1; Caddick 9-0-55-2; Harmison 5-1-13-0; Dawson 
1-0-2-0.

 Umpires: D L Orchard and R B Tiffin.
 