 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1442002798063%2F6676eaa2-2f3a-4a5c-963e-9ae247c01314-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1442002798063%2F6676eaa2-2f3a-4a5c-963e-9ae247c01314-2060x1371.jpeg>
 First among equals... Kristen Stewart on the Venice red carpet at the premiere 
of Equals. Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
Hang around the Venice Lido in September, and you could form the erroneous 
impression that film critics are mellow souls who inhabit a haze of balmy 
contentment.Venice <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> is a 
remarkably stress-free festival: frequent buses, screenings you can saunter 
into at the last minute, a leafy Casino compound where you can fuel yourself on 
lasagne and Aperol... All this and some perfectly fine films.

Word in the industry has it that Venice is on the wane. This year’s event felt 
strangely quiet, some of the Lido’s thunder, and some major films, having been 
stolen this season by transatlantic rivalsTelluride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/telluridefilmfestival>, Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> and an increasingly 
noteworthyNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/danny-boyle-steve-jobs-new-york-film-fest>
. But enough stars turned up to ensure a reasonable quotient of glitz – among 
them Johnny Depp, Kristen Stewart, Tilda Swinton, Ralph Fiennes, Juliette 
Binoche, Mark Ruffalo, the inevitable Shia LaBeouf, and adding some proper 
class, the Nobel prizewinning novelist Orhan Pamuk.

And the films themselves largely kept us happy. True, we’ve not seen much that 
is likely to change the face of cinema, but then Venice doesn’t send critics 
into that state of apocalyptic hysteria that grips us all inCannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannes-2015>. Here, movies breathe 
comfortably on their own merits, and this year offered plenty to impress.

The festival was front-loaded with early titles that made a big mark. Arriving 
two days in, I missed Aleksandr Sokurov’sFrancofonia 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yGF7vZALBQU> and Tom McCarthy’s investigative 
dramaSpotlight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=56jw6tasomc>, which people 
generally raved about, andBlack Mass 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5XL_4_7cdn0>, starring Johnny Depp, which left 
many cold. But there was plenty more to follow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ly_3i-jyes&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ly_3i-jyes>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ly_3i-jyes&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Laurie Anderson’s Heart of a Dog. 
One competition title that has been wringing sobs is Heart of a Dog 
<https://www.youtube.com/embed/5Ly_3i-jyes>, a very idiosyncratic essay film 
from artist and sort-of pop starLaurie Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/13/laurie-anderson-landfall>. 
Narrated by Anderson. In that familiar. Staccato diction. Of hers. The film is 
ostensibly a tribute to her late terrier, Lolabelle, which (wouldn’t you know 
it?) had talents as a painter and keyboard player. But it’s also a free-ranging 
contemplation on death, memory, Wittgenstein, Buddhist wisdom and Anderson’s 
childhood. Implicitly it’s also a lament for Anderson’s late partner,Lou Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/31/lou-reed-widow-obituary-laurie-anderson>
, to whom the film is dedicated. Arguably a touch precious,Heart of a Dog is 
nevertheless super-literate, witty, moving and extremely inventive.

The Israeli director Amos Gitai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jul/21/culture.features2> offered one of 
his best in the docudramaRabin, the Last Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EQTSvHj72R0>, a forensically serious 
examination of circumstances surrounding the assassination of the Israeli prime 
minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1995. Presented partly in a verbatim theatre format, 
the film is a non-editorialising but nevertheless angry indictment of rightwing 
Orthodox Jewish factions for scuppering the Palestinian peace process. The film 
eschewsOliver Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oliver-stone>-style 
conspiracy theory, but leaves some threads dangling that raise the question of 
whether Rabin’s killer had help in government security circles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42810d8ea75fa161cf6ce0a4ab67e84fa3676268%2F0_0_4002_2402%2F4002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42810d8ea75fa161cf6ce0a4ab67e84fa3676268%2F0_0_4002_2402%2F4002.jpg>
 Laurie Anderson at the premiere of her ‘super-literate, witty, moving’ Heart 
of a Dog. Photograph: Joel Ryan/Invision/AP 
There was more political material among a plethora of good documentaries. Last 
year the Belarus-born director Sergei Loznitsa madeMaidan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrZAnlIgZpg>, a film about present-day protest 
in Ukraine. He offers a kind of companion piece inThe Event 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WP8XhlL9HEQ>, a collation of archive footage 
from the streets of Leningrad in August 1991, during the attempted coup against 
the Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev. The imagery of confusion and hope among 
the crowd vividly evokes a sense of what it’s like to live, hour by hour, 
through a moment of irreversible change.

Other, more immediately pleasurable, documentaries included Noah Baumbach and 
Jake Paltrow’sDe Palma, in which Hollywood maestro Brian De Palma offers a 
no-holds-barred masterclass on suspense, the rise of his 60s “movie brats” 
generation, and what’s wrong with Hollywood today. Amy Berg’sJanis: Little Girl 
Blue was a rough and ready portrait of the singer Janis Joplin, whose raucous 
crazy-mama persona concealed a profoundly wounded soul; it’s celebratory and 
heartbreaking in equal measure. Not strictly a doc as such, more an 
essay-cum-reverie, wasInnocence of Memories 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3HfgVkayQ0>, a haunting nocturnal piece in 
which the British director Grant Gee explored the world of Pamuk, and his 
extraordinary experiment in turning a novel into a real Istanbul museum.

There were few real duds on display, although the competition title Equals got 
a universal thumbs-down. Drake Doremus’s futuristic romance reworks the 
hoariest dystopian premise: a future society where emotions are banned.Kristen 
Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> and Nicholas Hoult 
are strong as the white-suited citizens who find love despite it all, but the 
film is as weary as it is antiseptic. And while it was more a dud than not, you 
couldn’t help appreciate the ambition ofThe Childhood of a Leader, a sombre 
essay on French history from the actor-turned-director Brady Corbet, which 
essentially warned that inadequate parenting may result in angelic junior 
growing up to be a fascist dictator (played, in a supremely bizarre coda, by a 
bald, bearded Robert Pattinson).

All in all, it’s been a very strong actors’ festival. In Atom Egoyan’s Remember
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vFxXCoprNqc>, an elderly man with dementia 
(Christopher Plummer) goes on a mission to track down a Nazi in hiding. 
Bringing together the Holocaust and Alzheimer’s – in a thriller! – has every 
potential for a car crash of contentiousness, but Egoyan carries it off with 
compelling grace, and Plummer’s affecting, imposing performance provides an 
authoritative centre.

There was also a fine turn from the Chilean master of minimalist acting 
Alfredo Castro in the Venezuelan featureFrom Afar, about a middle-aged gay man 
who gets involved with a violent street kid. And an all-out feast of exuberant 
thesping came inA Bigger Splash, a hugely enjoyable number from Luca 
Guadagnino, the Italian director ofI Am Love. This comedy of manners, which 
later becomes a dark psychological thriller, features Swinton as a rock star 
who can’t speak, and an all-out hilarious Fiennes as a bumptious record 
producer who can’t stop yapping. Dakota Johnson, ofFifty Shades fame, is a 
taciturningénue fatale, while Belgian muscleman Matthias Schoenaerts breaks a 
line of nothing roles (not least in the competition’s prestige costumerThe 
Danish Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d88APYIGkjk>) to really shine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441991271186%2F8bef3740-5700-460a-9379-38211bb823f8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441991271186%2F8bef3740-5700-460a-9379-38211bb823f8-1020x612.jpeg>
 Anomalisa: ‘a mesmerisingly strange animation by Hollywood’s own Franz Kafka, 
Charlie Kaufman.’ 
I’ve left until last the title that most people are likely to remember as the 
absolute highlight of this 72ndMostra – Anomalisa, a mesmerisingly strange 
animation by Hollywood’s own Franz Kafka figureCharlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman>, which he has co-directed 
with the stop-motion specialist Duke Johnson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff19ec8bab8e15c38f7f7d971500884cc058dd976%2F0_394_4721_2833%2F4721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venice%20film%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20plenty%20of%20punch%20to%20disturb%20the%20peace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fvenice-film-festival-review-anomalisa-bigger-splash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff19ec8bab8e15c38f7f7d971500884cc058dd976%2F0_394_4721_2833%2F4721.jpg>
 The anomalies... (from left) Rosa Tran, Tom Noonan, Duke Johnson, Charlie 
Kaufman and Jennifer Jason Leigh at the Anomalisa premiere in Venice. 
Photograph: Sipa/Rex Shutterstock 
Anomalisa is an existential vignette about a depressed consumer relations guru 
– played by a puppet and voiced by David Thewlis – who visits a Cincinnati 
hotel and hooks up with a naive young woman, Lisa, voiced with exuberant 
wistfulness by Jennifer Jason Leigh. Apart from a genuinely freaky nightmare 
sequence, the film occupies a world of mundane normality – except that all the 
other characters share the same voice (that of Tom Noonan) and the discrepancy 
between the intensely human drama and the puppet actors makes for a very eerie 
effect. The clear frontrunner for the competition’s main prize, the Golden 
Lion, this determinedly child-unfriendly animation is the most trenchant 
statement on the human condition here. It will quietly tear your heart to 
shreds – and make you vow never to visit Cincinnati in your life.

Lido Thrills – Jonathan Romney’s best of the Venice film festival

Best film Anomalisa, directed by Charlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman> and Duke Johnson.

Best performance (female) Jennifer Jason Leigh as the voice of Lisa in 
Anomalisa.

Best performance (male) Christopher Plummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-plummer> in Atom Egoyan’s 
Remember.

Best director Amos Gitai for Rabin, the Last Day.

Best score Avant-legend Scott Walker’s terrifying orchestrations in The 
Childhood of a Leader.

Best cameo A young Vladimir Putin, furtive in a sports jacket, glimpsed in 
Sergei Loznitsa’s archive documentaryThe Event.

Best dance Ralph Fiennes’s contortions to the Stones’ Emotional Rescue in A 
Bigger Splash and, to audience delight, on stage after the screening.

Best song performance Jennifer Jason Leigh sings Girls Just Wanna Have Fun 
very slowly in English inAnomalisa – and then again in Italian.

Best party The reception for Grant Gee’s Innocence of Memories – a chance to 
sample toffee-apple figs, truffles à go-go, and make light conversation with 
the Turkish Nobel prizewinnerOrhan Pamuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/orhanpamuk>, who inspired the film.
 