
Verizon buying AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/verizon-to-buy-aol-44bn-deal>
 wasn’t the last deal we in agency land ever expected, but to most it’s come as 
a bit of a shock. It feels to me more like Applebuying Beats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/28/apple-buys-beats-dr-dre-music-streaming>
, than Comcasttrying to merge with Time Warner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comcast-Time_Warner_Cable_merger>. It’s a small 
vertical integration story of sorts, which doesn’t immediately make sense.

The deal itself is something of a Rorschach test 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rorschach_test>. Viewpoints on the issue reflect 
our viewpoint of the world and interests more than the deal itself. Publishers 
generally see the deal as a content play – others think it’s about advertising 
technology. For me, the deal is about personal data meeting video for a 
multi-screen play. The whole thing shines a light on the future of advertising: 
a world where it focuses on people, not media; where ads effortlessly move 
across screens.

We have a huge problem in advertising – one that few have been keen to 
address. We – as consumers – are spending more time in media channels that are 
demonstrably worse for advertising. In the 1980s, the atomic unit of 
advertising used to be the TV ad. Here on a large screen, people seeking 
entertainment and faced with few alternatives would likely pay some attention 
to a 30-second advert they could not skip. But as the screens get smaller, our 
attention spans are disappearing.

The Verizon and AOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> deal is a way 
to overcome these problems by focusing on the incredible new possibilities of 
digital media, which is something few have done. The deal will allow them to 
concentrate on better targeting, better interaction and cross-screen 
experiences, and getting mobile to work in a cookie-free environment.

Buying contexts not channels

The commonality in all new media is that it’s digital. For example, terms such 
as “TV” slowly morph to mean video; radio in the age of streaming is just 
audio; digital display gets upgraded to video; social media becomes merely 
social advertising, aka another place to put a video ad.

Media channels used to be named after the physical devices we used to consume 
media: magazines, radio, TV and cinema. But now that we watch TV on our phones, 
read magazines on tablets or make video-calls from our TV, these channels have 
lost their meaning. We still talk about the mobile or the desktop web, even 
though it’s just one internet and they’re simply different frames through which 
we see it.

The future of advertising: what will 2025 look like?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/16/the-future-of-advertising-what-will-2025-look-like>
The Verizon and AOL deal is a gateway into a world where everything becomes a 
video, audio, display or native ad buy. In this world, what matters most is the 
context for consumption: the sit-back environment of TV, the lean-forward 
nature of desktop or the mobility of the smartphone. In this world, Verizon 
powered by AOL ad tech becomes a connective tissue for all screens.

Buying people, not media

In 10 years’ time, it will seem incredible that we bought media as a proxy for 
people, not people directly. We still buy ads in the middle of the 9pm TV show 
about cars in order to reach 25-34-year-old males who probably like cars. 
However, if we simply knew search, browsing or location history, we could find 
the same people and serve ads for them everywhere. As things are, if you have a 
niche audience, bad luck: TV isn’t for you, unless there’s a niche show to buy 
against. It’s likely this need for audience segmentation and specialisation 
drives much content creation and programming commissions.

What advertisers need is a way to record, aggregate and segment data to form 
individual user-based ad experiences. As Facebook, Twitter, Google and 
Microsoft have invested heavily in doing this, they become the glue to the 
internet in order to extract our data. But the key missing element comes from 
the cookie-less environment of mobile, and this is where Verizon gets 
interesting.

Verizon knows our movements, our browsing history, our demographic profiles 
and our payment information, and thus everything a marketer could ever hope 
for. How they keep this information and what they do with it is limited less by 
law, but by having few ad tech relationships and by the current consumer 
attitude towards privacy. It’s politically challenging, but one day when a 
generation of people who’ve never known the concept of privacy grow up, we can 
expect to see this data be used to create more personalised, better placed, 
better served and more valuable advertising.

What AOL and Verizon could theoretically offer in the medium-term future 
through the combination of user data, content creation and advanced advertising 
technology is the holy grail. It would be a sort of user-based experience where 
we’re served ads on any screen and where ads are served sequentially to build a 
narrative, take people from awareness to purchase. There could be different 
calls to action on different screens. It will be where advertisers can reach 
niche audiences at scale.

AOL may have been at the birth of the internet, but it could, in a small way, 
help Verizon be a big part of its future too.

Tom Goodwin is senior vice president of strategy and innovation at Havas Media 
<http://www.havasmedia.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’ – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 