
The Victorian and Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> governments have united 
to pressure the federal government to overhaul support for foster and kinship 
carers by providing additional Medicare support and tax breaks.

Victoria’s minister for families and children, Jenny Mikakos, and Queensland’s 
minister for child safety, Shannon Fentiman, issued a joint statement on Friday 
morning that said commonwealth reform to better support children in out-of-home 
care had been too slow.

It came as the federal assistant social services minister, Zed Seselja, in turn
called on the states and territories 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-11/government-calls-for-reform-to-'broken'-state-adoption-system/8014798>
 to reform their adoption laws to speed up the process of permanent adoption.

Most states and territories prefer to empower parents to improve their 
parenting skills or to address issues preventing them from caring for their 
children, with the aim of eventually reuniting them with their children 
permanently.

Aboriginal children in care 'isolated from family and culture', says Victoria 
report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/aboriginal-children-in-care-isolated-from-family-and-culture-says-victoria-report>
But there are arguments that this process can add to the uncertainty faced by 
children, particularly for those whose parents show little prospects of 
reforming. Seselja is due to meet with his state and territory counterparts to 
discuss out-of-home care before the end of the year.

In the lead-up that meeting, the Queensland and Victorian ministers have 
called for a new Medicare benefit for a child health check for children in 
out-of-home care, a nationally consistent approach to theover-representation of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/09/indigenous-children-10-times-more-likely-to-be-removed-from-families-report>
, and for eligibility to family tax benefit part B to be extended for foster 
and kinship carers until the youngest child they are looking after turns 18.


“We want funding for early intervention and prevention trials expanded to 
build parenting skills,” Mikakos said. “Tax andCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> consequences are 
standing in the way of professionalised foster care.”

Fentiman said the state governments would also like to see the child care 
rebate extended to cover the full amount of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by 
foster carers.

Australia is decades behind on adoption and it's time to put children’s 
interests first | Oliver Jacques
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/national-adoption-awareness-week-australia-is-decades-behind-on-adoption-and-its-time-to-put-childrens-interests-first>
Support for foster carers differs between the states and territories. Foster 
carers do not get paid for the care they provide but are entitled to a 
fostering allowance to cover basic costs, usually paid fortnightly. Some foster 
carers are entitled to some family tax benefits but this depends on their 
personal circumstances.

Amid ongoing concern that Victorian foster carers were among the most poorly 
reimbursed in the country, the state’s Labor government allocated $31m to 
increase carer payments in its 2015 budget. It was the biggest boost in carer 
allowances in the state in a decade and took effect on 1 January.

A further $19.2m to support Victoria’s foster, kinship and permanent carers 
was announced this year to give carers better access to training, assistance 
and financial support. Last month Mikakos announced a trial to pay some of the 
state’s most experienced full-time carers $65,000 a year in a move to 
professionalise some roles.



 