
Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> looks likely to 
become the first state in Australia to legalise euthanasia, with a bill 
expected before parliament next year.

It is not known whether MPs would back a vote on the issue, however, the 
premier,Daniel Andrews <https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>, has 
shifted his language in recent weeks, saying the government would provide “a 
way forward”.

Victorian MPs who have called for legalised assisted dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/16/voluntary-euthanasia-support-grows-in-victoria-but-turnbull-wont-back-it>
 will get an official response from the government this week.

Voluntary euthanasia support grows in Victoria, but Turnbull won't back it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/16/voluntary-euthanasia-support-grows-in-victoria-but-turnbull-wont-back-it>
Andrews said his views on assisted dying had changed after the death of his 
father this year from cancer.

“We need to accept, all of us, that we can do much better by those who are at 
the end of their life in very vulnerable circumstances,” he told the ABC. “We 
are letting a lot of people down and we have got to do better than that.”

A cross-party committee of MPs in June recommended legalising assisted dying 
in limited circumstances and the government’s deadline for a response is 
Thursday. The committee examined voluntary euthanasia laws in other countries 
and found they had robust regulations to protect people against abuse.

The Andrews government has decided to establish an expert panel to advise it 
on an appropriate model,according to News Corp. 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/voluntary-euthanasia-laws-to-go-before-victorian-parliament/news-story/abc7a6c6f5fd9fde4a875f8df1e3d8e2>
 The finalised legislation then would be put to parliament, where all MPs would 
vote with their conscience, with the issue settled by the end of next year.

Desmond Tutu: I want right to end my life through assisted dying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/desmond-tutu-assisted-dying-world-leaders-should-take-action>
Last month the South Australian parliament knocked back for the 15th time 
voluntary euthanasia laws in that state.

The Victorian branch of the Australian Medical Association urged the 
government to ensure palliative care continued to be properly funded and 
adequate safeguards were in place.

“Palliative care must be freely available to all who have a terminal condition 
or who require management of the symptoms of chronic and incurable medical 
conditions,” said AMA Victoria’s president, Lorraine Baker.

It also called for the medical profession to be involved in discussions about 
any legislation.

The president of Right to Life Australia, Margaret Tighe, said Andrews could 
be unwittingly signing the death warrant of his own government by ignoring 
problems associated with legalised patient killing in other countries.
 