Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR67HqIlz-U4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR67HqIlz-U4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR67HqIlz-U4&media=>
We start with a treat for One Direction fans as the boys have a close 
encounter with Bert from Sesame Street 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R67HqIlz-U4> and sing a ditty about the 
alphabet. Have they bitten off more than they can chew?


One man who definitely did, was Liverpool and Uruguayan football striker Luis 
Suárez who has made headlines across the world for taking a bite out of Italian 
World Cup opponent Giorgio Chiellini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/jun/25/luis-suarez-fifa-inquiry-world-cup-biting-uruguay-italy>
.Suárez has been given a four-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/26/world-cup-luis-suarez-ban-biting-uruguay>
 from football, but a host of funny videos have swept social media in the 
meantime.Will Ferrell gees up American football fans  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3z4Hzo9UmrQ>by telling them that he will be 
playing as a sub and isn't frightened to bite any of the opposition on the 
field if necessary. A bemusedBruce Springsteen also has a go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wUK8iLRXUo> and, aping the original YouTube 
hit,Charlie Bit My Finger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OBlgSz8sSM>, which 
was viewed more than 730m times,Suárez Bit My Finger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WxU-cQvmi-k> will make you chuckle. Staying 
with football, Phil Neville came under fire for his BBC commentary during 
England's first World Cup game, but what would have happened if playwright Alan 
Bennett had described the action? Comedian Rob Brydon doeshis best Bennett 
impression <http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=3636284070001> for 
BT Sport's Baker & Kelly Not In Rio show. Listen and learn! And before we leave 
that biting incident,watch a cat get a surprise when his "dinner" bites back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOvPO8mW1Mw&feature=youtu.be>.

We have two film trailers for you – a hilarious spoof of the Tom Hanks' movie 
Forrest Gump <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvcex-loSJ4>, which was released 
20 years ago this week, and a taster of The Expendables 3 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xD0junWlFc>, which features many of the stars 
of Expendables 2, including Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Dolph Lundgren, 
and Arnold Schwarzenegger plus newcomers Wesley Snipes, Antonio Banderas, Mel 
Gibson, Harrison Ford and Kelsey Grammer.

Finally, if you are worried about doing a belly flop in the hotel swimming 
pool this summer, check out Jimmy Kimmel's8th Annual Bellyflop Competition 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sawUS6help4> – but only if you can stomach it!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWxU-cQvmi-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWxU-cQvmi-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWxU-cQvmi-k&media=>
Guardian Viral Video Chart. Compiled by Unruly Media and mashed by Janette.


1. Sesame Street: One Direction and Bert Sing the Alphabet
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R67HqIlz-U4>A* for 1D 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R67HqIlz-U4>

2. Bruce Springsteen -- Hey Suarez, There's No Biting In Sports!!!
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wUK8iLRXUo>Gory days
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wUK8iLRXUo>

3.  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wpd2VaFt5iY>Suarez Bit My Finger 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WxU-cQvmi-k&feature=kp>Toddler nails it
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WxU-cQvmi-k&feature=kp>

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wpd2VaFt5iY> 

4. What if Alan Bennett was commentating...
 <http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=3636284070001>Talking head
 <http://sport.bt.com/video-01363814401986?videoid=3636284070001>

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w59e20ijOpE>

5. Honest Trailers - Forrest Gump
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvcex-loSJ4>Hubba Bubba
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvcex-loSJ4> 

6.  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Jpb2_YdxYM>Jimmy Kimmel Live's 8th 
Annual Belly Flop Competition
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sawUS6help4>Making waves
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sawUS6help4>

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Jpb2_YdxYM>

7. Cat attacked by dinner 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOvPO8mW1Mw&feature=youtu.be>Ouch!
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOvPO8mW1Mw&feature=youtu.be>

8. England sing at rural Maori marae in Hamilton
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N39-mjv7tcw&feature=youtu.be>Rugby stars 
tackle a tune
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N39-mjv7tcw&feature=youtu.be>

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-OGvZoIrXpg>

9. The Expendables 3 Official Trailer #1 (2014) - Sylvester Stallone Movie
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xD0junWlFc>Lights, camera and lots of action
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xD0junWlFc> 

10. First Moon Party 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NEcZmT0fiNM>Laughs follow a lie
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NEcZmT0fiNM>

 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8yis7GzlXNM>

Source: Viral Video Chart <http://vvc-origin.unrulymedia.com>. Compiled from 
data gathered at 14:00 on 26 June 2014. The Viral Video Chart is currently 
based on a count of the embedded videos and links on approximately 2m blogs, as 
well as Facebook and Twitter.
 