
David and Victoria Beckham were guests of honour when actor Eva Longoria tied 
the knot with TV executive Jose Antonio Baston. Victoria designed the bride’s 
dress for the wedding near Mexico City, while former England player Davidgot 
into the spirit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OFd9pKbpBw0> at the reception 
by doing a singalong with American X Factor host and actor Mario Lopez. One 
wonders what another guest, Ricky Martin, thought of the singing?

Adele put her singing on hold <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gg0pSgrtQJo> 
for a few minutes at a recent concert to berate a member of the audience who 
was filming the show using a tripod. “Enjoy it in real life”, she called out to 
the fan recording the concert. Meanwhile, shoppers at Bristol’s Cabot Circus
thought they were listening <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSKfvHUa0y0>to 
quite a good Gary Barlow impersonator until the mask was taken off to revealthe 
man himself <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HsU9LQB7uU8>.

Viral video: Star Trek Beyond and Game of Thrones meets Family Guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/27/viral-video-star-trek-beyond-and-game-of-thrones-meets-family-guy>
There’s quite an animal theme to this week’s list, starting with a bear called 
Stepan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8mZGLRY2L0>who lives with Svetlana and 
Yuriy Panteleenko in Russia. The seven-foot bruin has been known to sit down in 
the evenings to watch the television with the couple. And if that isn’t scary 
enough, take a look atthe giant alligator 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXn1g0xtUMk> who decided to stroll across the 
third hole at Buffalo Creek Golf Club, Florida. It could be a scene  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omGjzl8mJJU>from Jurassic Park. We’ve also got 
a very handsome horse <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FPT0sCxBvxI> called 
Frederik and a couple of French bulldogswho go crazy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoO8eR1fwpo> at the words “dog park”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_8mZGLRY2L0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_8mZGLRY2L0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_8mZGLRY2L0&media=>
 Family who live with bear 
1) David Beckham and Mario Lopez sing at Eva Longoria’s wedding 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OFd9pKbpBw0>
Pitch problems


2) Incredible Family That Lives With A Bear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8mZGLRY2L0>
Teddy bear’s picnic

3) Adele Asks Fan to Stop Recording Her During Live Show  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gg0pSgrtQJo>
Hello – can you stop?

4) Giant Gator Walks Across Florida Golf Course 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RXn1g0xtUMk>
Snappy player


5) Giant Alligator in Jurassic Park 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omGjzl8mJJU>
Putt out of context

6) Masked Gary Barlow surprises shoppers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSKfvHUa0y0>
Could it be magic?

7) Most handsome horse, Frederik <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FPT0sCxBvxI>
Mane chance

8) French Bulldogs excited about the dog park! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoO8eR1fwpo>
Lead-ing words

9) Visit Australia! (Honest Government Advert) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V41-uYPXw6I>
Tongue-in-cheek tourism 


10) Bread - series 01 episode 01 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GeSmJCya2pk>
Farewell Carla Lane



 <https://www.youtube.com/user/thejuicemedia>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/ExploringLiverpool>


 <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3B-2J2Cac5BIQJbOGokr1g>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/pimroes>
 