Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjidziKYG9jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjidziKYG9jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjidziKYG9jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Tales of the unexpected is a theme this week and we kick off with respected 
NBC anchormanBrian Williams rapping Snoop Dogg's Gin and Juice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jidziKYG9jk&index=17&list=PL-DfNcB3lim9IZmUXEjE1Ov0Ir1NDa3Yr>
. Chatshow host Conan O'Brien anchored the MTV Movie Awards last week but 
struggled to be ready in time aftera hilarious American Hustle-style tussle 
with his hair <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJnczs3Fmac>. 

Superheroes are never unprepared – or are they? As The Amazing Spider-man 2 
wows audiences, we've got a mash-up of everything wrong with the Spiderman 
films. Meanwhile,Superman crops up in an exclusive alternative scene in Gravity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gw79smKZB9E> – and changes the course of the 
Alfonso Cuarón movie.

And if you are into special effects, you'll love Action Movie Kid 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34Q0BB8-2nA&list=UU2hAbftpVjHtFrDOpEM90aA>. 
His dad works for Dreamworks and uses his professional expertise to add some 
movie magic to the exploits of his little son.

John Barnes shows that he's still a good sport when he raps for a fan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTM3waFkM5k> during a beach holiday. The 
former England player rapped onNew Order's single, World in Motion, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_YiG7yN7PY> for the 1990 World Cup, beating 
off competition from Peter Beardsley, Paul Gascoigne, and Chris Waddle for the 
honour.

Finally, it's amazing to think that just nine years ago this week, the very 
first film was loaded on to YouTube. Jawed Karim, one of YouTube's founders, 
made the 18-second-long video called"Me at the Zoo". 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jNQXAC9IVRw> It's been watched more than 14m 
times, has more than 95,600 comments, and yet there is no way it would have 
ever gone viral if it had been made today. How far videos have come!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlJnczs3Fmac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlJnczs3Fmac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlJnczs3Fmac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Guardian Viral Video Chart. Compiled by Unruly Media and mashed by Janette.

1. Brian Williams Raps "Gin and Juice" 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jidziKYG9jk&index=17&list=PL-DfNcB3lim9IZmUXEjE1Ov0Ir1NDa3Yr>
Time to rap it up

2. Conan's "American Hustle" Hair Prep 
<http://teamcoco.com/video/mtv-movie-awards-hair-prep>
Conan gets a wigging

3. Everything Wrong With Spider-Man In 11 Minutes Or Less 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1aphO1Zd2kg&list=PL-DfNcB3lim9IZmUXEjE1Ov0Ir1NDa3Yr>
Not such a Marvel

4. John Barnes has still got it ... 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gTM3waFkM5k>
Sticking to the score

5. GRAVITY - Exclusive Alternate Scene (Redefines Entire Movie) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gw79smKZB9E>
Spaced out action

6. Me at the zoo  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jNQXAC9IVRw>
YouTube first

7. Orange Is The New Black - Season 2 - Official Trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e99SkdcB2UU>
Colourful coverage

8. Reporters Can't Pronounce Lupita Nyong'o 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNFs16F4wsQ>
Beauty and the beasts

9. 10 Animals That May Go Extinct In The Next 10 Years 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VrokfZ6mD5A>
Wildlife warning

10.Action Movie Kid - Volume 01 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34Q0BB8-2nA&list=UU2hAbftpVjHtFrDOpEM90aA>
Oh boy, he's powerful

Source: Viral Video Chart <http://vvc-origin.unrulymedia.com/>. Compiled from 
data gathered at 14:00 on 24 April 2014. The Viral Video Chart is currently 
based on a count of the embedded videos and links on approximately 2m blogs, as 
well as Facebook and Twitter.
 