Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWa0G5cj24V4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWa0G5cj24V4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWa0G5cj24V4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Here is the news … Anchorman is back! Will Ferrell returns as Ron Burgundy in 
Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues, which is due for release in December. We've 
gotthe latest trailer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wa0G5cj24V4> for the 
sequel to the 2004 film. Directed by Adam McKay and produced by Judd Apatow, it 
was written by McKay and Ferrell and features cameos by a host of stars 
including Nicole Kidman, Jim Carrey, Harrison Ford and Kanye West.

Scotland is still getting over the disappointment of the no-show of the 
expected baby pandabut in Washington their latest addition has just had her 
first jab <http://www.nbcnews.com/video/nightly-news/53357028/#53354590>. Check 
out the cute sounds she makes during a check-up. Meanwhile in Atlanta, twin 
giant pandas have celebrated their 100-day birthday.

If it's the arrgghh factor, rather than the ahh factor, you are after, check 
out cyclist Kelly McGarry who flips a 72-foot-long canyon gap 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x76VEPXYaI0&feature=youtu.be> at the Red Bull 
Rampage 2013. Another man of courage is celebrated inour two-minute tribute to 
Superman's 75th anniversary <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebXB0lBoaQ0>.

Our favourite cartoon family, The Simpsons, are celebrated with 10 amazing 
facts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZ5gBXjd_gE&feature=youtu.be> and we've 
got the perfect pick-me-up while you are enjoying Homer and the gang –a cup of 
Yorkshire Tea. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GFfn8L2saYI> Enjoy!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSZ5gBXjd_gE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSZ5gBXjd_gE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSZ5gBXjd_gE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Guardian Viral Video Chart. Compiled by Unruly Media and brewed up by Janette

1. Anchorman 2: The legend continues - Official Trailer - United Kingdom 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wa0G5cj24V4>
Headline comedy

2. Baby pandas thriving in DC, Atlanta 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/video/nightly-news/53357028/>
Cute and cuddly

3. The Tea Song - by Yorkshire Tea 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GFfn8L2saYI>
Brew ha-ha

4. 10 Amazing Facts About The Simpsons 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SZ5gBXjd_gE&feature=youtu.be>
Ay Carumba! 

5. Superman 75th Anniversary Animated Short 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ebXB0lBoaQ0>
Clocking Clark Kent

6. Ohio State Marching Band "Michael Jackson Tribute" - Halftime vs. Iowa: 
10-19-13 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GTca2nrIn4U>
They're so good they're Bad

7. GoPro: Backflip Over 72ft Canyon - Kelly McGarry Red Bull Rampage 2013 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x76VEPXYaI0&feature=youtu.be>
Tyreless bravery

8. Super funny to watch everyone! 2013 Cat 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Mfi7QxlbK8&feature=youtu.be>
Cat versus windscreen wiper

9. Baby LED light suit halloween costume preview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GkBDRUO8hAo>
A small scare

10. The worst two ball innings of all time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-S4YIMBnRBU>
Stumped!

Source: Viral Video Chart <http://vvc-origin.unrulymedia.com/>. Compiled from 
data gathered at 14:00 on 24 October 2013. The Viral Video Chart is currently 
based on a count of the embedded videos and links on approximately 2m blogs, as 
well as Facebook and Twitter.
 