
Going viral has gone viral. Social media have become the obsession of the 
media. It's all about social now: What are the latest social tools? How can a 
company increase its social reach? Are reporters devoting enough time to 
social? Less discussed - or not at all - is the value of the thing going viral. 
Doesn't matter - as long as it's social. And viral!

The media world's fetishisation of social media has reached idol-worshipping 
proportions. Media conference agendas are filled with panels devoted to social 
media and how to use social tools to amplify coverage, but you rarely see one 
discussing what that coverage should actually be about. AsWadah Khanfar, former 
Director General of Al Jazeera 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/wadah-khanfar>, told our editors when he 
visited our newsroom, "The lack of contextualisation and prioritisation in the 
U.S. media makes it harder to know what the most important story is at any 
given time."

Our media culture is locked in the Perpetual Now, constantly chasing ephemeral 
scoops that last only seconds and that most often don't matter in the first 
place, even for the brief moment that they're "exclusive." Like, for instance, 
the BREAKING NEWS!!! that Donald Trump was going to endorse a candidate for 
president last month. This was the jumping-off point for agreat piece 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/07/gop-primary-2012-media-twitter-news-cycle_n_1252925.html?1328634459>
 by HuffPost's Michael Calderone about the effect that social media have had on 
2012 campaign coverage. "In a media landscape replete with Twitter, Facebook, 
personal blogs and myriad other digital, broadcast and print sources," he 
wrote, "nothing is too inconsequential to be made consequential. Political 
junkies, political operatives and political reporters consume most of this 
dross, and in this accelerated, 24/7 news cycle, a day feels like a week, with 
the afternoon's agreed-upon media narrative getting turned on its head by the 
evening's debate. Candidates rise, fall, and rise again, all choreographed to 
the rat-a-tat background noise of endless minutiae."

Of course, as Calderone notes, there's a "real disconnect" between the media, 
which are obsessed with the urgency of social-media-driven news, and the 
American people, who are actually "more concerned about the struggling economy 
and their livelihoods." Or, as Dan Balz of the Washington Post put it to 
Calderone, "you feel you're in this circular conversation with people who are 
slightly disconnected with the real America." And that's because the concerns 
of struggling Americans aren't likely to be a trending topic.

At the same time, there is plenty of media commentary about how devoid of 
substance much of the political debate has been so far, but little effort to 
actually do something about it by helping start a more substantive debate. 
There's no reason why the notion of the scoop can't be recalibrated to mean not 
just letting us know 10 seconds before everybody else whom Donald Trump is 
going to endorse but also giving us more understanding, more clarity, a 
brighter spotlight on solutions.

"We are in great haste," wrote 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=xrksNAzWatEC&pg=PA91&dq=we+are+in+great+haste+to+construct+a+magnetic+telegraph+from+Maine+to+Texas%3B+but+Maine+and+Texas,+it+may+be,+have+nothing+important+to+communicate.+walden&hl=en&sa=X&ei=GU5ZT4OMGaGo0AGz9-3HDw&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 Thoreau in 1854, "to construct a magnetic telegraph from Maine to Texas; but 
Maine and Texas, it may be, have nothing important to communicate." And today, 
we are in great haste to celebrate something going viral, but seem completely 
unconcerned whether the thing that went viral added one iota of anything good - 
including even just simple amusement - to our lives. The truth is that 
sometimes it does, but very often it doesn't. It's not even a very complex 
question; the problem is that we seldom bother to ask the question before we 
dutifully hop on the algorithmic viral wave. We're treating virality as a good 
in and of itself, moving forward for the sake of moving. "Hey," someone might 
ask, "where are you going?" "I don't know - but as long as I'm moving it 
doesn't matter!" Not a very effective way to end up in a better place.

Of course, I'm writing this sitting in the HuffPost newsroom, where we are as 
aggressive as any media outlet in using social media. Indeed, we were recently
recognised 
<http://mashable.com/2012/03/01/the-most-viral-news-sources-on-twitter-and-facebook-infographic/>
 as one of the three "most viral news sources" on Facebook and Twitter. But 
maybe because we've been doing "social" well for a while, I hope we're more 
likely to see it for what it is - a tool - than some in traditional media who 
fetishise it as a new magical feat they haven't yet mastered.

How many times is the discussion of a topic justified by the fact that it's 
"trending on Twitter"? And is it really meaningful that "sentiment on Twitter 
is breaking 80 to 1 against such-and-such"? And is something important to talk 
about because it has 3,000 Likes on Facebook?

In fact, trending on Twitter may not mean much of anything at all, except what 
dominates the conversation at that particular moment (10,000 tweets per second 
<http://techcrunch.com/2012/02/05/twitter-in-the-final-3-minutes-of-the-super-bowl-there-were-10000-tweets-per-second/>
 in the final three minutes of the Super Bowl, for example, or10,901 tweets per 
second <http://blog.twitter.com/2012/02/twitter-recap-grammys-2012.html> during 
Adele's Record of the Year win at the Grammys). But as Twitter's Rachael 
Horwitz wrote to me in an email, "Twitter's algorithm favors novelty over 
popularity."

Indeed, to further complicate the science of trending topics, a subject can be 
too popular to trend: In December of 2010, just after Julian Assange began 
releasing U.S. diplomatic cables, about 1 percent of all tweets (at the time, 
that would have been roughly a million tweets a day) were about WikiLeaks, and 
yet #wikileaks trended so rarely that peopleaccused 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/chrismenning/is-twitter-censoring-wikileaks> Twitter 
of censorship. In fact, the opposite was true: there were too many tweets about 
WikiLeaks, and they were so constant that Twitter started treating WikiLeaks as 
the new normal.

The bottom line is that you can use Twitter to talk obsessively about Justin 
Bieber (in 2010, an astonishing3 percent of tweets worldwide 
<http://mashable.com/2010/09/07/justin-bieber-twitter/> were about the 
pint-size pop star) or you can use Twitter to bring to life Biz Stone's
aspirational statement 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/twitter-co-founder-biz-stone-delivers-keynote-address-at-capital-connection/2011/05/13/AFXLJK4G_story.html>
 that, "Twitter is not a triumph of tech; it's a triumph of humanity." That's 
what sites like Kickstarter and DonorsChoose are doing, leveraging the power of 
social media to crowdfund creative projects, or to help teachers fund many 
urgent classroom needs.

So, the question remains: as we adopt new and better ways to help people 
communicate, can we keep asking what is really being communicated? And what's 
the opportunity cost of what is not being communicated while we're all locked 
in the perpetual present chasing whatever is trending?

The fever isn't limited to the media. As Carolyn Everson, Facebook's VP of 
global marketing,

, marketers commonly tell their agencies and teams, "I need a little Facebook. 
I'll come up with a big idea, I'll do the typical 30 second spot, the print 
campaign, and by the way, give me a little Facebook."

These days every company is hungry to embrace social media and virality, even 
if they're not exactly sure what that means, and even if they're not prepared 
to really deal with it once they've achieved it. For example, as Grist's Jess 
Zimmermanreported 
<http://grist.org/list/mcdonalds-discovers-social-media-can-backfire-when-people-hate-you/>
 in January, McDonald's tried a social marketing campaign recently that 
backfired badly. The company asked people to use the hashtag "McDStories" and 
tweet about their experiences with McDonald's. The results weren't pretty. One 
#McDStory was a claim that McNuggets "contain dimethylpolysiloxane, an 
anti-foaming agent also used in caulks and sealants and Silly Putty;" another 
mentioned a live worm in a Filet-O-Fish.

"See, no matter what some social media guru told you," concludes Zimmerman, 
"Twitter is not just a marketing amplification engine. It's a bunch of people, 
sharing things they think are worth sharing. Trying to start a McDonald's 
appreciation hashtag is like the smelly, creepy kid running a write-in campaign 
for Prom King - not gonna work, and probably gonna backfire. People don't start 
liking you just because you suggest a way to express their admiration."

Or as Sheryl Sandberg put it 
<http://www.insidefacebook.com/2012/02/29/blogging-the-facebook-marketing-conference-keynote/>
, "What it means to be social is if you want to talk to me, you have to listen 
to me as well." A lot of brands want to be social, but they don't want to 
listen, because much of what they're hearing is quite simply not to their 
liking, and, just as in relationships in the offline world, engaging with your 
customers or your readers in a transparent and authentic way is not all 
sweetness and light. So simply issuing a statement saying you're committed to 
listening isn't the same thing as listening. And as in any human relationship, 
there is a dark side to intimacy.

So, the road to social media hell is paved with well-intended hashtags - as 
well as disingenuous or inauthentic ones.

Late last year, Qantas airlines launched a social media campaign asking people 
to tweet their thoughts about luxury air travel using the hashtag 
#quantasluxury. What they got instead was a lot of tweets about the labor fight 
the airline was having with its workers. As Alexandra Samuelwrote 
<http://blogs.hbr.org/samuel/2011/11/social-media-fail-airline-style.html> 
about the incident in the Harvard Business Review, "If all you've got is a 
social media marketing strategy, then you don't have a social media strategy at 
all."

Social media are a means, not an end. And going viral isn't "mission 
accomplished," regardless of what it was that went viral. As James DeJulioput it
 <http://www.businessinsider.com/10-tips-to-create-a-viral-video-2011-10>, "It 
seems that overnight, the viral video has become some sort of badge of honor 
within advertising communities. CMOs without them are beginning to feel like 
the only kid in second grade without a Cabbage Patch." Just google "how to make 
a video go viral" and you'll find a trove of tips on how to hit the sweet spot, 
along with reams of analysis on why this video lit up the Internet and why that 
one was dead on arrival.

Last week, NASCAR driver Brad Keselowski ascended to social media fame by 
tweeting from his stopped race car 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/27/brad-keselowski-twitter-daytona-500-car-delay_n_1305738.html>
 during a pause in the action at the Daytona 500. His photo of a fire on the 
track was retweeted more than 5,000 times; with a few taps of his iPhone, 
Keselowski tripled his Twitter followers. Even for non-NASCAR fans, the appeal 
was easy to understand: celebrity tweeter, unusual circumstances, the whiff of 
danger. The New York Timescalled it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/29/sports/autoracing/nascars-keselowski-gains-more-than-100000-twitter-followers-during-daytona-500.html?_r=1>
 "just the latest episode in social media's evolution."

But what are we evolving toward? And what is the price we are paying by 
feeding the virality beast?

Fetishising "social" has become a major distraction, and we're clearly a 
country that loves to be distracted. Our job in the media is to use all the 
social tools at our disposal to tell the stories that matter - as well as the 
stories that entertain - and to keep reminding ourselves that the tools are not 
the story. When we become too obsessed with our closed, circular Twitter or 
Facebook ecosystem, we can easily forget that poverty ison the rise 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2011/sep/14/business/la-fi-poverty-census-20110914>
, or thatdownward mobility is trending upward 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/Business/Robert-Reich/2012/0207/The-downward-mobility-of-the-American-middle-class>
, or that over 5 million people have beenwithout a job 
<http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/empsit.pdf> for half a year or more, or 
that millions of homeownersare still underwater 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-05-09/u-s-underwater-homeowners-increase-to-28-percent-zillow-says.html>
. And just as easily, we can ignore all the great instances of compassion, 
ingenuity, and innovation that are changing lives and communities.

"The campaigns can sort of distract reporters throughout the day by helping 
fuel these mini-stories, mini-controversies,"said 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/07/gop-primary-2012-media-twitter-news-cycle_n_1252925.html>
 the New York Times' Jeff Zeleny. Mini-stories. Mini-controversies. Just the 
sort of Twitter-friendly morsels that many in the media think are best-suited 
to the new social media landscape. But that conflates the form with the 
substance, and we miss the desperate need for more than snackable, 
here-now-gone-in-15-minutes scoops. So we end up with a system in which the 
media are being willingly led by the campaigns away from the issues that matter 
and the solutions that will actually make a difference in people's lives.

Someday, historians will likely look back at this virality-uber-alles age and 
wonder what we were trying to accomplish. The answer will be: not a whole hell 
of a lot. Our times demand a much better response. All these new social tools 
can help us bear witness more powerfully or they can help us be distracted more 
obsessively.

This article was first published on The Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/arianna-huffington/social-media_b_1333499.html>. 
Arianna Huffington speaks at theGuardian Activate Summit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/activate/new-york> in New York; an event for 
business leaders, developers and digital practitioners focusing on how to 
change the world through technology.Book your place today 
<http://activatesummitnewyork.eventbrite.co.uk/?ebtv=C>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://guardian.co.uk/professional>. To get more articles like this direct to 
your inbox,become a member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/media-network/start.php> of the 
Guardian Media Network.
 