
GP surgeries across England will face competition from health centres run by 
private companies, including Sir Richard Branson's Virgin group, under plans to 
be presented to the cabinet today. The health minister, SirAra Darzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/aradarzi>, a leading cancer surgeon who 
was asked by Gordon Brown to provide a new vision for the NHS, will propose 
radical changes to give patients more choice of family doctor services.

He has convened a conference of NHS trusts, charities and private companies to 
work out how patients could access GP services near their place of work or gym 
during the day, or near their home during evenings and weekends. The Department 
ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said it had already 
agreed to a request from Virgin to describe its proposed new outlets as "health 
centres", offering GP consultations from high street premises. Boots and 
Lloydspharmacy have also told officials they are interested in challenging the 
traditional service run by local GP partnerships.

The companies could be contracted to provide free services to patients, using 
salaried doctors and nurses, or paid for making consultation areas available in 
their stores, with medical staff provided by the local primary care trust.

The health secretary, Alan Johnson, told journalists yesterday that he wanted 
the NHS to respond to changes in society. That included "doing far more to 
ensure people have a choice in primary care as well as in acute hospital 
services", he said.

Sir Ara said hospital A&E departments were coming under huge pressure from 
patients needing services that could have been provided by a GP. "The system 
will not be sustainable in the next decade if we don't have alternative models 
of out-of-hours," he said.

A health department spokesman said Sir Ara had called a meeting of potential 
private and voluntary sector providers of primary care services. They would 
include private healthcare providers such as Bupa, Netcare and Care UK, but 
supermarket giants such as Tesco would also be welcome to attend. Sir Ara will 
present his ideas to the cabinet today.

The Confederation of British Industry said last night that rigid and outdated 
GP services were costing the economy about Â£1bn a year in lost output. Time 
spent at the doctor's wasted the equivalent of 3.5m working days a year - more 
than four times the amount lost due to industrial action. John Cridland, the 
deputy director general, said: "We need a GP service that fits around people's 
lives, offering convenience and flexibility."

Laurence Buckman, chairman of the BMA's general practice committee, said: "If 
employees lose time from work to see their doctor it is either because they are 
ill and need care, or because their employer has insisted they get a sick note, 
even for a temporary illness which has passed.

"This abuse of the sick note system is a waste of the time of both working 
people and clinicians."
 