
A new virtual reality film will help viewers immerse themselves in the 
Amsterdam annex where Holocaust victimAnne Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-frank> spent two years hiding from the 
Nazis during the second world war.

Anne Frank gets the VR experience and Knight of Cups reviewed – the Dailies 
film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/may/04/anne-frank-gets-the-vr-experience-and-knight-of-cups-reviewed-the-dailies-film-podcast>
Titled Anne, the movie aims to use cutting-edge technology so that the famous 
diarist’s story “can live on and reach as many young people in the world as 
possible”. Producer Jonathan Hirsch, who previously released the Wright 
Brothers-inspired virtual reality film First, will work with director Danny 
Abrahms on the project.

“To experience this film will be to immerse oneself in a place and time, to 
move about a room, among the people, and sense the moment in a way never 
possible before [virtual reality],”Abrahms told Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/05/03/anne-frank-virtual-reality-film>. “VR to 
me is this new, amazing tool that can allow viewers to connect with people and 
events like never before. I wanted to create a VR experience that connected 
viewers with arguably the most significant event in human history – the second 
world war and the Holocaust – and I couldn’t think of a better way to explore 
this subject matter than through the story of Anne Frank.”

The film will not be the first virtual reality experience linked to the secret 
annex where Frank, members of her family and others lived from 6 July 1942 to 4 
August 1944. The Anne Frank Foundation last year introduced a 10-minute, 
360-degree VR tour for museum visitors to the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam who 
are unable to access the annex for reasons of mobility.

Last month the Foundation criticised an “escape room” game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/anne-frank-foundation-criticises-escape-game>
 made to look like the apartment where the teenage Jewish diarist hid with her 
family. The organisation said the bunker in Valkenswaard, 87 miles south of 
Amsterdam, created the impression that hiding from the Nazis was an exciting 
game and if those hiding were smart enough they would not be caught, which was 
historically wrong.
 