
Waco, Texas

When: 19 April 1993

What happened: Six cult members and four federal agents were killed in a gun 
battle during a raid on the headquarters of the Branch Davidian sect at the end 
of a nearly two-month siege. The cult members had been stockpiling weapons.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82f8dae0f03a150b708daea3051e50929e21d920%2F0_190_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82f8dae0f03a150b708daea3051e50929e21d920%2F0_190_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 The Branch Davidian compound explodes in a burst of flames, ending the 
standoff between cult leader David Koresh and his followers and the FBI. 
Photograph: Shelly Katz/Getty Images 
What the president [Bill Clinton] said: “I am deeply saddened  
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=46448>by the loss of life in 
Waco today. My thoughts and prayers are with the families of David Koresh’s 
victims. The law enforcement agencies involved in the Waco siege recommended 
the course of action pursued today. The attorney general informed me of their 
analysis and judgment and recommended that we proceed with today’s action given 
the risks of maintaining the previous policy indefinitely. I told the attorney 
general to do what she thought was right, and I stand by that decision.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: “Waco was supposed  
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/05/13/us/terror-in-oklahoma-in-congress-congressman-calls-raid-near-waco-a-clinton-plot.html>
to be a way for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (BATF) and the 
Clinton administration to prove the need for a ban on so-called assault weapons 
… So an incident had to be encouraged to happen.” – Texas congressman Steve 
Stockman, writing in Guns & Ammo magazine

What happened: President Clinton signed the Violent Crime Control and Law 
Enforcement Act of 1994 <https://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/billfs.txt>which 
included a 10-year federal assault weapons ban.


Columbine

When: 20 April 1999

What happened: Twelve students and one teacher were killed when seniors Eric 
Harris and Dylan Klebold launched an assault on their high school inColumbine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/columbine>, Colorado. Both teens died by 
suicide before being apprehended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd3d5a5a80a356aec57484bacad058ae17678553%2F15_0_1205_723%2F1205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd3d5a5a80a356aec57484bacad058ae17678553%2F15_0_1205_723%2F1205.jpg>
 Students flee Columbine high school in the middle of the shooting. Photograph: 
Rex Shutterstock 
What the president [Bill Clinton] said: “I want to make a plea 
<http://edition.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/stories/1999/04/27/clinton.crime/transcript.html>
 to everybody who is waiting for the next deer season in my home state to think 
about this in terms of what are reasonable obligations to the larger community 
of America. Do we know for absolutely certain, if we’d had [the gun control 
legislation] I’m going to propose here, that none of these schools violent 
things would have happened? No.

“But we do know one thing for certain. We know there would have been fewer of 
them and there would have been fewer kids killed in the last several years in 
America. We know that for certain.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: In the wake of the Columbine shooting the NRA 
[National Rifle Association] launched its “Be Reasonable” campaign to 
demonstrate it wasn’t deaf to renewed calls for gun control.


In an advert, it said 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/31/nra-gun-show-loophole_n_2593937.html?1359677028>
: “We think it’s reasonable to provide for instant checks at gun shows just 
like at gun stores and pawn shops. But what’s unreasonable is how the proposed 
Lautenberg legislation ignores the 250,000 prohibited people, like felons, 
who’ve walked away from gun stores – instead of being prosecuted for a federal 
felony for trying to buy a gun.”

What happened: The Senate version of the legislation was considered too strong 
for Republicans, and the House version was considered too weak by Democrats. 
President Clinton called it “a bill plainly ghostwritten by the NRA”, and the 
billfailed 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/daily/june99/nra19.htm 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/daily/june99/nra19.htm 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/daily/june99/nra19.htm>.

Virginia Tech

When: 16 April 2007

What happened: Thirty-two were killed and another 17 wounded when Virginia 
Tech senior Seung-Hui Cho executed two separate attacks on the campus before 
committing suicide.

What the president [George W Bush] said: “Across the town of Blacksburg and in 
towns all across America, houses of worship from every faith have opened their 
doors and have lifted you up in prayer. People who have never met you are 
praying for you; they’re praying for your friends who have fallen and who are 
injured. There’s a power in these prayers, real power. In times like this, we 
can find comfort in the grace and guidance of a loving God. As the Scriptures 
tell us: ‘Don’t be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.’”


What the pro-gun lobby said: “Already spineless gun control advocates 
<http://www.cnn.com/2007/US/04/19/commentary.nugent/index.html> are squawking 
like chickens with their tiny-brained heads chopped off, making political hay 
over this most recent, devastating Virginia Tech massacre, when in fact it is 
their own forced gun-free zone policy that enabled the unchallenged methodical 
murder of 32 people” – Pro-gun activist Ted Nugent


What happened: Congress passed 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/nra-democrats-team-up-to-pass-gun-bill/>, and 
George W Bush signed, the NICS Improvement Amendments Act, which requires 
states to automate their lists of convicted criminals and the mentally ill who 
are prohibited under a 1968 law from buying firearms, and to report those lists 
to the FBI’s National Instant Criminal Background Check.

Fort Hood

When: 5 November 2009

What happened: Thirteen were killed and another 30 injured when Nidal Malik 
Hasan, a US army major and psychiatrist, began shooting at the Fort Hood 
military base. Hasan was convicted of 13 counts of premeditated murder and 32 
counts of attempted murder, and is currently on death row.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1c4b18cc57ee4ef9ae9c476fd8105b32b488a7d%2F0_370_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1c4b18cc57ee4ef9ae9c476fd8105b32b488a7d%2F0_370_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 First responders prepare the wounded for transport in waiting ambulances 
outside Fort Hood’s soldier readiness processing center. Photograph: Rex 
Shutterstock 
What the president [Barack Obama] said: “We are a nation of laws whose 
commitment to justice is so enduring that we would treat a gunman and give him 
due process, just as surely as we will see that he pays for his crimes. We’re a 
nation that guarantees the freedom to worship as one chooses. And instead of 
claiming God for our side, we remember Lincoln’s words, and always pray to be 
on the side of God. We’re a nation that is dedicated to the proposition that 
all men and women are created equal.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: “Shouldn’t an army base be the last place where a 
terrorist should be able to shoot at people uninterrupted for 10 minutes? After 
all, an army base is filled with soldiers who carry guns, right? Unfortunately, 
that is not the case. Beginning in March 1993, under the Clinton 
administration, the army forbids military personnel from carrying their own 
personal firearms and mandates that ‘a credible and specific threat against 
[Department of the Army] personnel [exist] in that region’ before military 
personnel ‘may be authorized to carry firearms for personal protection’. 
Indeed, most military bases have relatively few military police as they are in 
heavy demand to serve in Iraq and Afghanistan.” –Opinion piece 
<http://www.foxnews.com/opinion/2009/11/10/john-lott-ft-hood-end-gun-free-zone.html>
 by Dr John R Lott Jr for Fox News

What happened: The debate in the wake of the Fort Hood shooting rarely 
centered around gun control, but rather whether the act was an incident of 
“workplace violence” as it was designated by the Department of Defense, or an 
act of Islamistterrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/28/fort-hood-shooter-sentenced-death>
.

Tucson

When: 8 January 2011

What happened: Six people were killed and 13 others were injured, including 
Arizona congresswoman Gabby Giffords, when Jared Loughner pulled out a pistol 
at a town hall event Giffords was holding and began firing. Loughner pleaded 
guilty to 19 charges of murder and attempted murder, and is now serving a life 
sentence without parole.

What the president [Barack Obama] said: “We cannot and will not be passive in 
the face of such violence. We should be willing to challenge old assumptions in 
order to lessen the prospects of such violence in the future. But what we 
cannot do is use this tragedy as one more occasion to turn on each other. That 
we cannot do. That we cannot do.

“As we discuss these issues, let each of us do so with a good dose of 
humility. Rather than pointing fingers or assigning blame, let’s use this 
occasion to expand our moral imaginations, to listen to each other more 
carefully, to sharpen our instincts for empathy and remind ourselves of all the 
ways that our hopes and dreams are bound together …

“If this tragedy prompts reflection and debate – as it should – let’s make 
sure it’s worthy of those we have lost. Let’s make sure it’s not on the usual 
plane of politics and point-scoring and pettiness that drifts away in the next 
news cycle.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: The official NRA Twitter account tweeted a 
statement sarcastically attributed to Giffords whichread 
<http://tucson.com/news/local/nra-tweet-taunts-gabby-giffords-efforts/article_3bd2583d-7f85-5228-98db-409465867649.html>
: “Gabby Giffords: Everyone Should Have to Pass Background Check My Attacker 
Passed”.



What happened: New York congressman Peter King proposed legislation banning 
the carrying of firearms within 1,000ft of certain government officials. New 
York congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy proposed federal legislation restricting 
the sale of high-capacity magazines to civilians. Neither proposal ever came to 
a vote 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2015/01/02/carolyn-mccarthy-retiring/20599293/>
.

Aurora 

When: 20 July 2012

What happened: During a midnight screening of the film The Dark Knight Rises 
in a Colorado cinema, James Holmes set off teargas canisters and began firing 
into the crowd, killing 12 people and injuring 70.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd286d88339dabefe844426d6d38c229c6ab414a%2F0_144_4256_2551%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd286d88339dabefe844426d6d38c229c6ab414a%2F0_144_4256_2551%2F4256.jpg>
 An ambulance is parked outside the Century 16 Theater in the Town Center mall 
in Aurora, Colorado. Photograph: Bob Pearson/epa/Corbis 
What the president [Barack Obama] said: “Now, even as we learn how this 
happened and who’s responsible, we may never understand what leads anybody to 
terrorize their fellow human beings like this. Such violence, such evil is 
senseless. It’s beyond reason. But while we will never know fully what causes 
somebody to take the life of another, we do know what makes life worth living.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: The NRA largely avoided comment after the Aurora 
shooting <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/aurora-shooting>, but in late 
2013 the NRA Institute for Legal Action took aim at post-Aurora legislation 
when a shooting occurred at Arapahoe high school in Centennial, Colorado.

An article 
<https://www.nraila.org/articles/20131220/stopped-in-80-seconds-armed-response-not-gun-control-halted-school-rampage>
 said: “Gun-control laws didn’t stop a possible massacre at Arapahoe high 
school. A good guy with a gun stopped the rampage and in doing so almost 
certainly prevented much greater harm. For that, at least, we all can be 
thankful.”



What happened: Colorado passed sweeping gun control 
<http://www.denverpost.com/ci_23563059/colorado-gun-control-laws-go-effect-monday-critics>
 legislation in 2013 limitingmagazine size 
<http://www.denverpost.com/news/ci_26040446/federal-judge-upholds-colorado-law-limiting-gun-ammunition>
 and strengthening criminal background checks.

Sandy Hook 

When: 14 December 2012

What happened: Gunman Adam Lanza killed 20 elementary school students and six 
school faculty members in an assault on Sandy Hook elementary school in 
Connecticut, where Lanza’s mother had worked. Lanza also shot and killed his 
mother before the attack, and killed himself before being apprehended by 
authorities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82697aaab32c588e4dfd789f0db4c377bcb4a02%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82697aaab32c588e4dfd789f0db4c377bcb4a02%2F0_0_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Firefighters kneel at a memorial at the Sandy Hook elementary school sign in 
Newtown, Connecticut. Photograph: Eric Thayer/Reuters 
What the president [Barack Obama] said: “As a country, we have been through 
this too many times. Whether it’s an elementary school in Newtown, or a 
shopping mall in Oregon, or a temple in Wisconsin, or a movie theater in 
Aurora, or a street corner in Chicago – these neighborhoods are our 
neighborhoods, and these children are our children. And we’re going to have to 
come together and take meaningful action to prevent more tragedies like this, 
regardless of the politics.

“This evening, Michelle and I will do what I know every parent in America will 
do, which is hug our children a little tighter and we’ll tell them that we love 
them, and we’ll remind each other how deeply we love one another. But there are 
families in Connecticut who cannot do that tonight. And they need all of us 
right now. In the hard days to come, that community needs us to be at our best 
as Americans. And I will do everything in my power as president to help.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: “You know, five years ago, after the Virginia 
Tech tragedy, when I said we should put armed security in every school, the 
media called me crazy,” NRA executive vice-president Wayne LaPierresaid 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/12/21/us/connecticut-school-shooting/>, adding “the 
only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun”.

What happened: The Manchin-Toomey bill, which would would have required 
criminal and mental health background checks for advertised sales of guns, 
including at gun shows and online,failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/17/senators-killed-gun-reform-bill> 
in Congress.

Washington (DC) navy yard 

When: 16 September 2013

What happened: Twelve people were killed and another three injured when gunman 
Aaron Alexis carried out an attack at the Naval Sea Systems Command 
headquarters at the navy yard. He was killed by police.

What the president [Barack Obama] said: “And so, once again, we remember our 
fellow Americans who were just going about their day doing their jobs, doing 
what they loved …

“In the United Kingdom, in Australia, when just a single mass shooting 
occurred in those countries, they understood that there was nothing ordinary 
about this kind of carnage. They endured great heartbreak, but they also 
mobilized and they changed, and mass shootings became a great rarity.

“And yet, here in the United States, after the round-of-clock coverage on 
cable news, after the heartbreaking interviews with families, after all the 
speeches and all the punditry and all the commentary, nothing happens …

“No other advanced nation endures this kind of violence – none.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: “There weren’t enough good guys with guns ... 
When the good guys with guns got there it stopped,” NRA president Wayne LaPierre
said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/22/nra-wayne-lapierre-navy-yard-shooting>
.

What happened: Defense secretary Chuck Hagel ordered 
<http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=121854> a review of security 
standards on defense bases, eventually announcing a handful of procedural 
changes designed to make bases more secure.

Charleston 

When: 17 June 2015

What happened: Nine people, including South Carolina state senator Clementa 
Pinckney, were killed at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal church, where 
Pinckney was a pastor. The shooter, Dylann Roof, was captured in North Carolina 
the following day and is awaiting prosecution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc57567d3fd427dcf013cc7228d6a6d95bb6425a1%2F0_238_4521_2713%2F4521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20(and%20didn't%20change)%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Waco%2C%20Columbine%2C%20Aurora%20and%20Newtown%3A%2020%20years%20of%20mass%20shootings%20that%20changed%20%28and%20didn%27t%20change%29%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fmass-shootings-america-waco-columbine-charleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc57567d3fd427dcf013cc7228d6a6d95bb6425a1%2F0_238_4521_2713%2F4521.jpg>
 People pray outside Emanuel AME church in Charleston, South Carolina. 
Photograph: Mladen Antonov/AFP/Getty Images 
What the president [Barack Obama] said 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/06/18/statement-president-shooting-charleston-south-carolina>
: “But let’s be clear: at some point, we as a country will have to reckon with 
the fact that this type of mass violence does not happen in other advanced 
countries. It doesn’t happen in other places with this kind of frequency. And 
it is in our power to do something about it. I say that recognizing the 
politics in this town foreclose a lot of those avenues right now. But it would 
be wrong for us not to acknowledge it. And at some point it’s going to be 
important for the American people to come to grips with it, and for us to be 
able to shift how we think about the issue of gun violence collectively.

“The fact that this took place in a black church obviously also raises 
questions about a dark part of our history. This is not the first time that 
black churches have been attacked. And we know that hatred across races and 
faiths pose a particular threat to our democracy and our ideals.”

What the pro-gun lobby said: “Eight of his church members, who might be alive 
if he had expressly allowed members to carry handguns in church, are dead ... 
Innocent people died because of his political position on the issue.” Charles 
Cotton, NRA board member,said 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/06/most-awful-reaction-charleston-mass-shooting-nra>
.

What happened: A month after the shooting President Obama admitted 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-33646704> that failure to pass 
“commonsense gun safety laws” in the US was the greatest frustration of his 
presidency.
 