
I am standing in a room full of shit. Nothing new there, I hear you say. 
Deposited by the population of Zurich, an entire day’s worth of processed human 
faeces stand in a gridded arrangement of compressed cubic blocks. Californian 
artistMike Bouchet <>’s The Zurich Load was made not just by the inhabitants of 
clean, well-ordered Zurich, but in collaboration with the Werdhölzi Wastewater 
Treatment Plant, where the day’s worth of sludge was collected and mixed with 
concrete.


Bouchet’s 80,000 kilos of excremental minimalism is installed in the 
Löwenbräukunst, one of the main sites of the 11thManifesta 
<http://m11.manifesta.org/en> art biennial. This converted brewery is also home 
to both the Migros Museum and many of Zurich’s most prestigious commercial 
galleries. Good thing the extractor fans are working.

There is a heavy door at the entrance, along with a warning sign. Some 
visitors back out even as they’re going in. The space reeks of ammonia, and 
there is a back-taste as psychological as it is physical. “A unique fragrance 
has been developed to transform the viewer’s experience,” the guidebook tells 
us. Consider me transformed. If you resist the urge to heave and leave, you do 
get used to it, only to spend the rest of the day wondering if the whiff is 
still with you.

Bouchet’s work, as any Freudian could tell you, must have something to do with 
money. Titled “What People Do For Money – Some Joint Ventures”, and devised by 
the biennial’s guest curator, multimedia artistChristian Jankowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/29/nina-hoss-homeland-christian-jankowski-contemporary-fine-arts-berlin-retrospective-yacht-regents-park>
, the latest incarnation of Manifesta involves collaborations between artists 
and more than 30 professions in the city. The previous two editions – inSt 
Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/30/manifesta-10-artworld-takes-on-russias-regressive-lbgt-gay-laws>
 and aformer mining town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/aug/06/manifesta-9-art-mining-rich-seam>
 in Belgium – both dealt with the social situations of their respective venues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7979bea8cdd79873cf6bc1b9f7049165ae3b90ae%2F886_448_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq's%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq%27s%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7979bea8cdd79873cf6bc1b9f7049165ae3b90ae%2F886_448_1669_1001%2F1669.jpg>
 Paralympian Edith Wolf-Hunkeler in Maurizio Cattelan’s work. Photograph: 
Wolfgang Traeger 
So, fitfully, does this. Maurizio Cattelan, who had announced he was giving up 
art on the eve ofhis Guggenheim Museum retrospective 
<https://www.guggenheim.org/exhibition/maurizio-cattelan-all> in 2012, has been 
working with wheelchair racerEdith Wolf-Hunkeler 
<https://www.paralympic.org/news/paralympic-champion-edith-wolf-hunkeler-retires>
. If Jesus could walk on water, why not an athlete in a wheelchair? The 
Paralympic champion glided, or perhaps churned, across Lake Zurich, her 
wheelchair mounted on a raft powered by the wheels of the chair itself – but 
after I left Zurich. Some things work just as well as rumour.

I did visit Belgian artist Guillaume Bijl’s fully functioning dog grooming 
parlour, Hundesalon Bobby, where local mutts can get the latest in canine 
coiffure from dog stylist Jacqueline Meier. I can’t speak of the artistry of 
the doggy hairdos, but the kitschy, tongue-in-cheek parlour is amusing enough. 
Normally this place is part of a commercial gallery. If only others diversified 
so usefully.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe314ec4f10a97f4d64341cc7c07f464ce55626b1%2F0_101_4096_2576%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq's%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq%27s%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe314ec4f10a97f4d64341cc7c07f464ce55626b1%2F0_101_4096_2576%2F4096.jpg>
 Tom Emerson’s Pavillon of Reflections floats on its pontoon in Lake Zurich. 
Photograph: Ennio Leanza/EPA 
As well as the Löwenbräukunst and the Helmhaus museum, Manifesta 11 takes us 
to more than 30 outlying venues and collaborations around the city, including a 
cemetery, a public hospital, a school, a tourist office, a Swiss clockmaker’s 
shop, and out on to a floating Pavilion of Reflection on the lake. Designed and 
built by the studio of London and Zurich-based architectTom Emerson 
<http://www.emerson.arch.ethz.ch/>, the skeletal wooden structure doubles as 
outdoor cinema and swimming pool, complete with changing rooms, lockers and 
hairdryers. It’s like a spa, but with ashtrays, a barbecue and a bar, the 
perfect place to get Bouchet out of my system.

Is Michel Houellebecq OK, readers of the troubling French novelist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/michel-houellebecq-submission-am-i-islamophobic-probably-yes>
 often ask. Well, Houellebecq has checked himself in to one of Zurich’s leading 
private clinics – so upscale the row of clocks behind the main desk are set to 
the time-zones in Dubai and Stellenbosch, South Africa as well as Switzerland – 
and had a bunch of scans and blood tests. His charts are printed up in great 
piles for visitors to take away, though you have to edge round anxious patients 
in the lobby to get at them. I can’t make head nor tail of the novelist’s 
haemoglobin levels. Nor does he offer us copies of the bill for his check-up, 
probably a heart-attack inducing sum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb926a6e05f2b6276b5fb80ea99600c041d95f413%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq's%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq%27s%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb926a6e05f2b6276b5fb80ea99600c041d95f413%2F0_0_3600_2400%2F3600.jpg>
 French author Michel Houellebecq ponders his X-rayed skull at Manifesta 11 in 
Zurich. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 
Michel Houellebecq: ‘Am I Islamophobic? Probably, yes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/06/michel-houellebecq-submission-am-i-islamophobic-probably-yes>
Back at the Helmhaus, disturbing scans of Houellebecq’s head are on display. 
There’s the skull beneath the skin, and some squirmy stuff that looks as if 
parasitic worms have invaded his brain. They probably write his books. On my 
visit,artist Santiago Sierra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/dec/04/art>, who has also worked 
in the past with human excrement, had just begun barricading the entrance to 
the Helmhaus with the help of a local security consultant, who advised the 
artist how best to ensure the building would be safe from any possible car 
bombs, snipers and other attacks. Sandbags were on the way, but no razor-wire 
as yet uncoiled.

Everywhere is a war zone now, Sierra is saying. Next stop, the dentist. To 
tell the truth I ran away from the surgery, having already seen enough of
Torbjørn Rødland’s graphic photographs <http://www.rodland.net> of open mouths 
and dental procedures in the Löwenbräukunst. There are even pictures of teeth 
embedded in sugary foodstuffs, grinning through the patisserie. There’s more 
photos in the waiting room.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a150429a078c081a6ef50fc0fdc7709ab712688%2F0_0_3600_2399%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq's%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wake%20up%20and%20smell%20the%20Manifesta%3A%20piles%20of%20poo%20and%20a%20look%20inside%20Houellebecq%27s%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fmanifesta-11-zurich-review-sewage-sculpture-michel-houllebecq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a150429a078c081a6ef50fc0fdc7709ab712688%2F0_0_3600_2399%2F3600.jpg>
 Torbjørn Rødland, Intraoral no. 2. Photograph: Wolfgang Traeger/Manifesta11 
Unfolding through both the Helmhaus and Löwenbräukunst, a parallel “Historical 
Exhibition”, curated byFrancesca Gavin 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/user/francescag>, is a trove of photographs, 
paintings, sculpture and conceptual works organised by theme, paralleling 
Jankowski’s “collaborative ventures”. Very often it upstages the new 
commissions. In the section Break Hour is an installation ofDuane Hanson’s 1989 
Lunchbreak <https://www.artsy.net/artwork/duane-hanson-lunchbreak>, a group of 
life-sized, lifelike construction workers, lounging, smoking, staring blankly, 
hanging around. That’s builders for you.


In Portraits of Professions, August Sander’s photographs of labourers and 
singers, artists and seamen, sit next to the film of astronaut Chris Hadfield
singing David Bowie’s Space Oddity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/may/14/goodbye-space-oddity-commander-hadfields-viral-video-made-private>
 while orbiting in the International Space Station. This is fun, and though 
Hadfield has released an album, his artistic career has probably peaked. In 
Professions in the Art World, I came across oversized hollow papier-mâché heads 
of curator Hans-Ulrich Obrist and New York art critics Roberta Smith and Jerry 
Saltz. The cartoonish heads grin knowingly. But what do they know? I feel like 
snatching one up and inserting my own head, to get some inside knowledge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKaOC9danxNo&media=>
Astronaut Chris Hadfield performs Space Oddity in the International Space 
Station <https://youtu.be/KaOC9danxNo> 
At once playful and serious, and providing both context and counterpoint, 
Gavin’s show rambles through both main venues, with dozens of historical and 
recent works arranged on freestanding open structures that sidle through the 
galleries. Without it, much of the current Manifesta would look a bit thin. But 
there are high-points, including the riotous, scrabbly drawings that cover a 
huge wall in the Löwenbräukunst, the result of a collaboration between Andrea 
Éva Györi, a “sexpert” and a psychologist in clinical sexology.

Györi’s drawings are a bacchanalia of masturbating women and explosive 
fantasies, a ribald affirmation of female sexuality. Nearby, there is a vicious 
gouge in the wall. It looks like an injury, and was made by Sonja Victoria Vera 
Bohorquez, a Zurich-based transgender prostitute. Bohorquez is working with
Mexican artist Teresa Margolles 
<http://www.artesmundi.org/artists/teresa-margolles>, who last month organised 
and filmed a poker game in a hotel basement in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, with a 
group of transsexual sex workers. We watch them discuss their dangerous lives, 
and the unsolved murder of their friend and colleague Karlita in the city in 
December last year. Margolles has also organised a further Poker de Damas, 
including Bohorquez, in a Zurich hotel, where Manifesta visitors to ask 
questions and chat. An insight into other lives, Margolles’ project is one of 
the best, and toughest, here.

Over at Cabaret Voltaire, <http://www.cabaretvoltaire.ch/en/> original home of 
theDada movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/may/05/a-century-of-dada-anti-war-artists-mainstream-con>
, there is an open call for anyone to submit performance proposals. “A 
performance could consist of an artist kissing a clown or a real estate agent 
selling an artist’s studio,” suggest Jankowski and the cabaret’s guildmaster. 
One artist has already proposed a collaboration with a contract killer, while
Viennese performance group Gelitin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/audio/2008/may/27/art>have provided a drawing 
of the performance group engaging with various professions, including an alien, 
in a Sadean coprophagic orgy. Where are the sewage men when you need them most? 
Get me to the clinic. Take me to the spa.

 * Manifesta 11: the European biennial of contemporary art 
<http://m11.manifesta.org/en> is in Zurich until 18 September 2016  