
The Wales manager, John Toshack, left Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azerbaijan> on Saturday with his faith 
restored in the future of Welsh football after his unheralded team, comprising 
mostly Under-21 players, managed Wales's first away win in this World Cup 
qualifying group.

David Edwards scored the first-half winner for a team missing 10 senior 
players, in the kind of hostile atmosphere that would have tested even the 
senior internationals. "Under the circumstances – the long distance to get 
here, the heat and the four-hour time difference – it was a very encouraging 
display," said Toshack.

Wales's slim chances of qualification have been undermined by a succession of 
injuries, and key defeats to Finland, Germany and Russia ended any hopes of 
reaching South Africa. But victory in Baku was their second in succession and 
has given Toshack encouragement for the remainder of the campaign. "Just look 
at who we had missing and the problems we had coming into the game with 
injuries," said Toshack. "Experienced sides have had problems in Baku, we have 
to be satisfied with a win like that."

The new captain, Joe Ledley, was outstanding, as were Ashley Williams, Aaron 
Ramsey and the goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey. "In many ways it has given us 
something to work on in the future," said Toshack. "Now we have three games 
left, we have to start looking to try to take third spot. That has to be the 
objective now, and not be worried that teams below us can overtake us and upset 
our seeding for the next tournament.

"We are feeling a lot happier and feeling a lot healthier about ourselves and 
what these young players can achieve."
Man of the match Joe Ledley (Wales)
 