
A-level results in Wales have raised concerns that its pupils are falling 
behind the rest of Britain, with Conservatives using the results to argue that 
schools inWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> need reforms similar to 
those in England.

While the proportion of exam entries across the UK gaining A* and A grades 
declined only slightly to 25.8%, results in Wales fell more steeply to 22.7%, 
the country’s weakest performance since 2002.

A-level results show another drop in A* and A grades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/a-level-results-show-another-drop-in-a-and-a-grade-students>
Boys in Wales – possibly distracted by the national football team’s success at 
Euro 2016, according to one expert 
<http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/wp276.pdf>
 – did worst of all, as the proportion awarded grades in the A*-to-C range 
slipped by nearly a full percentage point to a little over 70%. Boys in 
England, in contrast, saw their proportion rise to 75% and girls to nearly 80%.

This year’s results are the last that will be directly comparable between 
Wales and England, as next year the two nations adopt different sets of A-level 
reforms.

In Cardiff there was concern that the country’s weaker performance, continuing 
a trend of recent years, will be repeated in the international Pisa comparison 
run by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to be 
published later this year.

Darren Millar, the Conservative party’s shadow secretary for education in the 
Welsh assembly, said it is frustrating that Wales was being outperformed by the 
rest of the UK.

“The results today will do little do bolster Wales’ standing on the 
international stage, and less still to the prospects of our students as they 
progress to the next stage of their education,” Millar said.

“In a growingly competitive job market and higher education sector, our 
students will have a tough fight on their hands to beat off the stiff 
competition posed by students in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland.”


Jonathan Simons, head of education at the Policy Exchange thinktank, said: 
“The huge falls on top grades in Welsh schools – including English and sciences 
– show that rather than obsessing about a system that is distinctively Welsh 
and not comparable to the other home nations, Welsh ministers would be better 
off considering how to create an exam system that increases opportunities and 
improves standards for all Welsh students.”

Since 2001, when the devolved Welsh government abandoned the use of league 
tables and national standardised tests, the country’s education system has 
increasingly diverged from England’s, culminating in failure to agree with GCSE 
and A-level reforms introduced under Michael Gove as education secretary in 
England.

After the most recent elections in Wales the education portfolio is now held 
by the Liberal Democrat assembly member Kirsty Williams, as part of the 
Labour-Lib Dem coalition.

“I will be looking closely at the full details of these results and those we 
expect next week to see what lessons we can learn and what we can do 
differently,” said Williams, adding that she planned to push ahead with reforms.

Williams noted that pupils in Wales continued to outperform those in England 
in maths, thanks mainly to stronger results among girls.

Rebecca Allen, director of the Education Datalab research unit, suggested that 
boys in Wales may have been distracted by the success of Gareth Bale and the 
national football team, which reached the semi-finals of the Euro 2016 
tournament.

“Such great celebrations of Welsh football in the months of June and July 
appear to have translated into some Welsh boys missing their expected A-level 
grades,” Allen said, pointing to research from Bristol university on how summer 
football tournaments have harmed exam performances.
 