
When Aerosmith manager Tim Collins answered his phone one day in early 1986, 
he was, at first, confused. The voice on the other end belonged toRick Rubin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rick-rubin>, the 22-year-old hip-hop 
producer and entrepreneur behindDef Jam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/04/def-jam-hip-hop-music>, the 
fast-rising record label he had founded while still a film student at New York 
University. Rubin, a rock kid who’d grown up – or, rather, who hadn’t – on the 
gonzo kicks of AC/DC, Ted Nugent and Aerosmith themselves, wanted to talk to 
Collins about the idea of remaking his charges’ 1975 singleWalk This Way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4c8O2n1Gfto> with a rap group on his roster, 
Run-DMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/19/run-dmc-review-scala-london>. 
Before Rubin could go into any further detail, Collins cut him off to request a 
little clarification: “What’s rap?”

A more valid question, for most people in the mid-80s, might have been “What’s 
anAerosmith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aerosmith>?”. The suburban white 
kids who had once been the Boston band’s faithful constituency had matured and 
moved on. A new generation was turning instead towards exactly the hip-hop 
sounds that Rubin and Def Jam co-founder Russell Simmons were selling them.


Not that hip-hop had always been an easy sell. The rap records that reached 
radio listeners in the early years had a tendency, ever since the Sugarhill 
Gang’s breakthrough,Rapper’s Delight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tUqvPJ3cbUQ>, to exude a novelty flavour, 
while turntablism, in real life the beating heart of the culture, tended to 
manifest itself only as a cheesy wikki-wikki add-on. And then there were the 
clothes. Oh dear God, the clothes. Seek outthe extraordinary footage of 
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five on Channel 4’s The Tube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BN9-K0aZXRg> performing The Message, its 
pioneering gritty street-level content undermined by their superfly sci-fi 
costumes, which looked like they’d been raided from George Clinton’s tour bus 
seven years earlier.


The reputation of the entire genre was rescued by Run-DMC who, in the words of 
British writer Neil Kulkarni in The Periodic Table of Hip Hop, “made everything 
that had happened before them sound old-fashioned, too slick and smarmy”. The 
trio had roots in that clunky prehistory: Run (Joseph Simmons), the teenage 
brother of Russell Simmons, had previously DJed for Kurtis Blow, before forming 
his own band, originally called Orange Crush, with DMC (Darryl McDaniels) and 
DJ Jam Master Jay (Jason Mizell). But everything changed in 1983 when the trio, 
renamed Run-DMC and still in their teens, released their debut single,It’s Like 
That <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_hN1SKVx31s>, on Profile. That track – 
brutally blunt by the standards of the time – and its rival-dissing flipside, 
Sucker MCs, blew up on rap radio and changed the game for good. “Ultimately it 
took Run-DMC, with their black leather, sweats, homburgs and in-your-face 
attitude, to crystallise the image of toughness into rap chic,” wrote SH 
Fernando Jr in hip-hop history The New Beats. “Their attitude, like their 
beats, was hard. Their dress, unlike the extravagant leather, sequin and 
feather outfits of most rap acts at the time, reflected a street aesthetic to 
which the average b-boy on the corner could relate.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOKMWSR2Aio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOKMWSR2Aio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOKMWSR2Aio&media=>
Aerosmith, meanwhile, were in a slump. Album sales had steadily declined since 
their 70s peak, the band’s key members were ravaged by various addictions, and 
they hadn’t had a Billboard top 10 single sincethe original Walk This Way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4c8O2n1Gfto>, a decade earlier. The song had 
first been recorded for the band’s Toys in the Attic album, and was born on 
tour when singer Steven Tyler, who had been listening to the Meters and James 
Brown, asked drummer Joey Kramer to lay down something with a little funk to 
it. (Run-DMC, therefore, were not so much appropriating Aerosmith’s groove for 
black culture as reclaiming it.) Guitarist Joe Perry added a simple but 
effective hook, and Tyler came up with a lewd loss-of-innocence lyric about a 
schoolboy getting caught masturbating by his father, who instructs him in the 
ways of seduction.


When it was time to record the track at New York’s Record Plant studio, it 
still needed a title and a chorus. Inspiration finally came to them when they 
took a break to walk a few blocks to Times Square to catch a movie. The film 
was Mel Brooks’s comedy Young Frankenstein, in which Marty Feldman’s Igor 
lurches and limps down some stone steps, then instructs Gene Wilder, playing 
the title role, to “walk this way”. In a classic sight gag, Wilder does exactly 
that.


By the time the Run-DMC/Aerosmith collaboration was mooted, Jam Master Jay had 
already been cutting Walk This Way back and forth between his decks for years, 
and Run had been rapping over it since he was 12. They weren’t the first act, 
though, to attempt a rap-rock hybrid. The Beastie Boys’ AC/DC-samplingRock Hard 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsVAOjVYQnY> and LL Cool J’s Rock the Bells 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hh5x3MeIwoQ> – both Rick Rubin productions – 
had already walked that way, and Run-DMC themselves had released several trial 
runs, notably the Russell Simmons-produced Rock Box and the provocatively 
titled King of Rock, both featuring chunky riffing from session guitarist Eddie 
Martinez.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXzWlPL_TKw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXzWlPL_TKw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXzWlPL_TKw&media=>
When Collins relayed Rubin’s offer to Tyler and Perry, they were initially 
sceptical, but went along to Magic Ventures studio in Manhattan on9 March 1986 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/pugpig/7049891> for the rate of $8,000 a day. And 
a day is all it took: Run-DMC had a rental car that was overdue for return, and 
needed to work fast. As Tyler recalled in Walk This Way: The Autobiography of 
Aerosmith, “Run and D and Jay were huddled in a corner, really intent on 
something. I go, ‘Joe, what are they doing?’ He says, ‘Probably smoking crack.’ 
Later we went over to the corner. They’d been eating lunch from McDonald’s.”


What Rick Rubin created with that day’s work still stands as an immortal party 
anthem, as liable to spark outbreaks of air-scratching as air-guitar among 
drunks unable to decide whether they want to be Jay or Joe as they lurched 
around (an ability to dance was optional for the enjoyment of Walk This Way). 
Tyler’s rapid-fire vocal was too slang-packed to be completely decipherable to 
British ears, but the bits about “feet flying up in the air”, a “kitty in the 
middle” and being “down on the muffin” left little doubt that it was thinly 
veiled filth.


And the video was one of the most literal in a decade not short of contenders. 
The two bands – the sleazy old rock slags and the box-fresh rap crew – are 
rehearsing in adjacent rooms and engaged in a loudness war, but join forces 
when Tyler literally smashes down the wall between the two rooms/races/genres, 
and the two groups storm a theatre stage to the delight of screaming fans. The 
clip instantly took Run-DMC into the MTV mainstream (the channel showed it 
twice an hour).


But which half of the hook-up were the real winners from Walk This Way? Who 
was doing a favour for whom? Rick Rubin had sold Aerosmith the idea as “a great 
crossover opportunity for both groups”, and so it proved. The received 
narrative is that the song broke Run-DMC and, by extension, rap, legitimising 
the genre in the eyes of white listeners, just as Eddie Van Halen’s solo on 
Beat It had done for Michael Jackson and black pop. It’s true that the single 
became the first rap single on Billboard’s Top 10 (peaking at No 4), that its 
parent album, Raising Hell, became rap’s first platinum LP, and that Run-DMC 
became the first rap act on the cover of Rolling Stone.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL4uESRCnv8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL4uESRCnv8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL4uESRCnv8&media=>
Arguably, however, Aerosmith benefited more. Run-DMC were unquestionably the 
hipper, cooler, younger, more current and relevant act (they’d been the only 
rap artists on the Live Aid bill the previous year), and the fact that the name 
Aerosmith appears nowhere on the label of the Run-DMC version of Walk This Way 
speaks volumes about the balance of power. Guesting on a Run-DMC single, albeit 
a cover of their own song, saved Aerosmith’s career. It got them on to the 
contemporary hits radio format for the first time, and achieved a different 
sort of crossover: if Run-DMC’s was racial, Aerosmith’s was generational. Kids 
whose contemporary poodle-rock heroes were Bon Jovi, Mötley Crüe and Guns N’ 
Roses welcomed Tyler and Perry as elder statesmen, and their next album, 
Permanent Vacation, sold 5m copies (10 times more than its predecessor), while 
the next two did even better. It also made them a truly global band for the 
first time: Aerosmith, who had previously meant next to nothing in the UK, were 
suddenly household names.

Run-DMC, however, never quite consolidated that success, their cultural 
visibility in later years restricted to Jason Nevins remixes and reproduction 
T-shirts in H&M. Meanwhile, the success of Walk This Way paved the way for a 
trio of white youths – Beastie Boys – to sell a hip-hop/heavy metal hybrid back 
to the suburbs in even bigger quantities.


Rap Rock itself, once established as an ongoing genre, became a mixed 
blessing, initially throwing up fertile cross-pollinations such asRage Against 
the Machine <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v5NeyI4-fdI>, Faith No More and 
Public Enemy’s collaboration with Anthrax, but eventually leading to such 
atrocities as Limp Bizkit and Linkin Park (though blaming Run-DMC for that is 
roughly as fair as blaming Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press for the 
existence of Katie Hopkins).


Nowadays, the sheer popularity of Walk This Way means serious hip-hop heads 
are often dismissive of its worth. But to put the needle on the vinyl, even at 
30 years’ distance, is to hear worlds colliding, and walls tumbling down.

 