
Two years ago, the top honchos at the Fed, Treasury and the Wall Street banks 
were running around like Chicken Little warning that the world was about to 
end. This fear-mongering, together with a big assist from the elite media 
(thatis, NPR, the Washington Post, the Wall Street Journal, etc), earned the 
banks their $700bnTroubled Asset Relief Programme 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troubled_Asset_Relief_Program> (Tarp) blank 
cheque bailout. This money, along with even more valuable loans and loan 
guarantees from the Fed andFDIC <http://www.fdic.gov/>, enabled them to survive 
the crisis they had created. As a result, the big banks are bigger and more 
profitable than ever.

Now, the same crew that tapped our pockets two years ago is eagerly pitching 
the line that their bailout was good for us. It may be the case that the 
history books are written by the winners, but that doesn't prevent the rest of 
us from telling the truth.

Let's step back to where we were two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-crisis>. The huge investment 
bank Bear Stearns had collapsed. So had Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the 
mortgage giants. Lehman Brothers, the fourth largest investment bank had also 
gone down. AIG, the country's largest insurer, had been put on life support by 
the government.

At this point, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morganstanley> and Goldman Sachs, the 
three remaining independent investment banks, all faced runs that would quickly 
sink them without government intervention. Citigroup and Bank of America, two 
of the three largest commercial banks, were also almost certainly insolvent. 
Many other banks also faced insolvency, especially if they took big losses on 
their loans to other institutions that were about to go bankrupt.

This was when the Wall Street boys made their mad rush for the public trough. 
They enlisted everyone that mattered in the effort, including Treasury 
secretary Henry Paulson, Federal Reserve Board chairman Ben Bernanke, and 
Timothy Geithner, then the head of the New York Federal Reserve Bank.

The line was that the economy would collapse if congress did not immediately 
rescue the banks. They were prepared to make up anything to save the banks in 
their hour of need. Bernanke was probably caught in the biggest fabrication when
he told congress that the commercial paper market was shutting down 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/25/business/25econ.html>. 

If true, this would have been disastrous, since most major companies rely on 
selling commercial paper 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=95099470> to meet their 
payroll and other routine expenses. If this market shut down, it would mean 
that even healthy businesses could not pay their workers and suppliers, which 
would quickly cause the whole economy to grind to a halt.

Bernanke did not bother to inform congress and the public that he had the 
ability to single-handedly support the commercial paper market. He waited until 
the weekend after congress approved the Tarp to announce that he would 
establish a special Fed lending facility to buy commercial paper.

In reality, the Fed almost certainly had the ability to keep the economy going 
by sustaining the system of payments, even if the chain of bank collapses was 
allowed to run its course. In the 1980s Latin American debt crisis, the Fed had 
an emergency plan to seize the money centre banks, and keep them operating, if 
a default by a major Latin American country pushed them into insolvency.

By the time of the Lehman crisis, the financial markets had been severely 
stressed for over a year. The first major bank collapse had occurred more than 
six months earlier. It would have required a degree of unbelievable 
incompetence and/or irresponsibility for the Fed not to have devised a similar 
emergency plan to keep the systems of payments operating in a worst-case 
scenario.

Furthermore, even if the Fed had been as incompetent as many claim, it would 
not have taken long for it to improvise a system whereby certain payments would 
be prioritised and the system of payments would again be up-and-running. The 
notion that we would be sitting in a 21st-century economy and reduced to barter 
payments was an invention of the bank lobby to get the taxpayers' money.

The first Great Depression was the result of a decade of failed policies, not 
a single bad mistake at its onset. There was absolutely nothing that we could 
have done back in September-October of 2008 that would have required that we 
experience a decade of double-digit unemployment. The spectre of a "second 
great depression" is a fairy tale invented by the bank lobby to make the rest 
of us feel good about having given them our money.

We are also supposed to feel good that the vast majority of the Tarp money was 
repaid <http://www.tarppayback.com/>. This is another effort to prey on the 
public's ignorance. Had it not been for the bailout, most of the major centre 
banks would have been wiped out. This would have destroyed the fortunes of 
their shareholders, many of their creditors, and their top executives. This 
would have been a massive redistribution to the rest of society â€“ their loss is 
our gain.

It is important to remember that the economy would be no less productive 
following the demise of these Wall Street giants. The only economic fact that 
would have been different is that the Wall Street crew would have lost claims 
to hundreds of billions of dollars of the economy's output each year and 
trillions of dollars of wealth. That money would, instead, be available for the 
rest of society. The fact that they have lost the claim to wealth from their 
stock and bond holdings makes all the rest of us richer, once the economy is 
again operating near normal levels of output.

Instead, we have the same Wall Street crew calling the shots, doing business 
pretty much as they always did. The rest of us are sitting here dealing with 
wreckage of their recklessness: 9.6% unemployment and the loss of much of the 
middle class's savings in their homes and their retirement accounts.

And the lackeys of the Wall Street crew are telling us that we should be 
thankful that we didn't have a second Great Depression. Maybe we don't have the 
power to keep the bankers from picking our pockets, but we don't have to 
believe their lies.
 