
Barnaby Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce> 
reckons he would be sacked if he lashed out with the same expletive-ridden 
tirade the South Australian water minister, Ian Hunter, has been accused of.

Hunter is alleged to have levelled a string of colourful insults at the acting 
prime minister as well as other state water ministers and their staff at a 
dinner inAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> on 
Thursday night to discuss the Murray river rescue plan.

Joyce would not confirm what happened in the room, joking he’d leave that up 
to Hunter to explain his “loquacious nature”.


“But if it happened to me, they’d say ‘come here Charlie Chapman you’re outta 
here’,” the agriculture minister told reporters in Darwin on Saturday.

“What was in the room will stay in the room” Joyce said, but called for Hunter 
to apologise to some of those involved.


“It’s quite obvious you can’t go through a room full of staff screaming at 
them,” he said.

Joyce rejected calls from Hunter for his dismissal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/sack-barnaby-joyce-for-ditching-plan-to-return-water-to-murray-river-says-sa-minister>
.

Sack Barnaby Joyce for ditching plan to return water to Murray river, says SA 
minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/sack-barnaby-joyce-for-ditching-plan-to-return-water-to-murray-river-says-sa-minister>
“The next day he called for me to be sacked – I couldn’t quite work that one 
out,” he said.

Hunter is furious at the lack of action by the federal government to provide 
an extra 450 gigalitres of environmental water flows down the river.

The South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jay-weatherill>, played down the 
incident, saying no complaint had been raised with him about the outburst.

But he reminded the minister of his obligations to behave appropriately and 
not use foul language.

He said he had spoken with Hunter, and that no complaint had been raised with 
him about the state minister’s actions.


Weatherill said South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> was determined not 
to be dudded by the commonwealth on the rescue plan and would fight for what 
was promised.


He vowed to raise the issue with the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull.


“The upstream states have been damaging and depleting this river for over a 
century,” he told reporters on Saturday.


“We have a historic agreement and just because it’s rained for a few months the
Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> has 
seized on the opportunity to walk away.”


Weatherill said Hunter felt passionately about the river and protecting the 
state’s interests.


But he said he had reminded the minister of his obligations to behave 
appropriately and to not use foul language.


Government agenda in doubt as Barnaby Joyce rejects South Australia water deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/government-agenda-in-doubt-as-barnaby-joyce-rejects-south-australia-water-deal>
“That’s what I expect of him,” Weatherill said.


“I’ve simply repeated the advice that I’ve given to all of my ministers.”


After Friday’s meeting, Joyce said it was “bleeding obvious” that extra 
environmental flows down the Murray could not be delivered under the current 
deal.


He said the legislation required there be no social or economic impacts to 
river communities and that was simply not possible.


Hunter declined to comment on his actions or what was said but pledged to 
continue to stand up for SA’s interests.


“I’m not going to talk about what I might have said in a private meeting, 
that’s not what I do,” he said.
 