
I heard the Slits a lot when I was growing up, through my parents and their 
friends, but I only became aware of them in high school. A friend had a copy of 
Cut and I just remember seeing the art work of them standing topless, covered 
in mud and thinking: "Wow, they don't give a fuck." Even then I didn't actually 
listen to their music properly. It wasn't until I was about 23 and had just 
started singing for the first time that I really listened. I was struggling to 
find my voice; it was a weak muscle that wobbled, and I wanted to strengthen 
it. My boyfriend handed me Cut, saying he thought it might help. I knew what he 
meant:Ari Up <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ari-up> had this tension in her 
voice that she managed to totally liberate. I found that inspiring. For the 
next two weeks after that I listened to no other CD in my car.

We actually got invited to support the Slits not long after we formed in 2004. 
It was incredible; we actually got asked to share a bill with them. But I only 
saw Ari in passing so never properly met her, though she'd watch us play. It 
wasn't until last year that we found ourselves at a mutual friend's house at 
the same time. She arrived in this huge padded jacket, kind of like a football 
coach, and sandals. I loved that. It was her finding a way of being at the 
exact right temperature so she could wear sandals. She was tough and had a cool 
exterior, but she was also playful and expressive. Like the Slits' music, in a 
way. I remember her talking about bringing up kids and being very funny.

A friend of mine runs a night called Dub Club, which Ari used to perform at. 
Often she'd just turn up and dance. Watching her perform, it struck me that she 
had the same energy and ability to captivate the audience as she'd always had. 
There was no sense that she'd lost touch; she was still in it, still 
dominating. In that sense, she was timeless, because she was an artist who 
commits and stands by what they're saying.

When I think of her in that big Jacket and her crazy hair, she was such a 
force. She was so necessary. That's why it is very hard to believe that energy 
isn't here anymore.

â€¢ Emily was speaking to Rosie Swash
 