
What a gorgeous little rabbit! Now, how would you like that very rabbit pinned 
up in your own bedroom at home? Katy Hudson is giving the original painting she 
made in this video away to one lucky reader, along with a copy of her new book
Too Many Carrots 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367816/>.

How to enter


Enter our Katy Hudson’s rabbit give away. One winner will receive an original 
painting of the rabbit from Too Many Carrots by Katy Hudson, plus a copy of Too 
Many Carrots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9188538a46f4ff84cf6b5c040aafa74f9c4e57bb%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Katy%20Hudson%20draw%20a%20rabbit%20%E2%80%93%20and%20then%20win%20the%20original%20picture!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Katy%20Hudson%20draw%20a%20rabbit%20%E2%80%93%20and%20then%20win%20the%20original%20picture%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9188538a46f4ff84cf6b5c040aafa74f9c4e57bb%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Here is a picture of the beautiful original painting by Katy Hudson that we 
are giving away in our rabbit competition! Illustration: Katy Hudson 
Just enter this prize draw by emailing childrens.books@theguardian.com with 
the subject line “Katy Hudson’s rabbit giveaway” with the following details: 
your name, your age, your address, your parent or guardian’s name, your parent 
or guardian’s telephone numberand the reason why you want to win. The winner 
will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries received before the 
closing date.

Entrants should be aged between 0 and 12, or entering on behalf of a child. 
Please include your name, age, and postal address; if you are under 16 you must 
also include the name, contact telephone number and email address of your 
parent or guardian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d0a757d528d86303fd39d58e35daa3d67532367%2F0_0_1471_1566%2F1471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Katy%20Hudson%20draw%20a%20rabbit%20%E2%80%93%20and%20then%20win%20the%20original%20picture!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Katy%20Hudson%20draw%20a%20rabbit%20%E2%80%93%20and%20then%20win%20the%20original%20picture%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fkaty-hudson-rabbit-illustration-competition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d0a757d528d86303fd39d58e35daa3d67532367%2F0_0_1471_1566%2F1471.jpg>
After the draw closes at 5pm on Monday 4 April 2016 we will pick the winner at 
random. Good luck and do read the Ts and Cs in full before you enter!

Terms and conditions

1. The Katy Hudson rabbit give away prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to 
children aged 0 to 12, resident in the UK. Adults (aged 18+) are permitted to 
enter to win the prize for a child aged 0-12 of whom they are the parent/legal 
guardian.

2. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw.

3. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions.

4. To enter the Prize Draw you must email childrens.books@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> with“Katy Hudson rabbit giveaway” in 
the subject line. For entrants aged under 16 years, the name, telephone number 
and email address of a parent/legal guardian must be provided. No purchase is 
necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in 
connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> with 
“Katy Hudson rabbit giveaway query” in the subject line.

5. Only one entry per person. You are responsible for the cost (if any) of 
sending your Prize Draw entry to us.

6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM.

7. The Prize Draw opens at 12:30am 25 March 2016 and closes at 17:00pm on 4 
April 2016. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered.

8. One winner will receive Katy Hudson’s original rabbit painting plus a copy 
of her bookToo Many Carrots 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367816/>. 

The draw will take place on or before Friday 8 April 2016. Only one winner per 
household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the 
prize that are not expressly included in the prize.

9. The winner will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will be 
performed by a random computer process.

10. The winner will be notified by email on or before Tuesday 12 April and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM 
within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner or runner up in 
accordance with the process described above (and that winner or runner up will 
also have to respond to notification of their win within 14 days or else they 
will also forfeit their prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is 
invalid or in breach of these Terms and Conditions, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner.

11. The prizes will be sent to the winner by 30 April 2016

12. The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 30 April 2016 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian 
children’s books Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, 
London N1 9GU.

13. The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize.

14. GNM reserves the right to substitute the specified prizes with an 
alternative prize of similar value in the event that the specified prizes are 
not available.

15. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you 
supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and to identify 
you as a winner in the Prize Draw (if applicable).

16. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence.

17. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

18. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

19. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of 
the English courts.

20. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 