
“Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome...” booms the announcer at the end of 
the trailer: then up pops the words, as if typed into a computer, “steve jobs”.

It’s a suitable sign-off line for a film that looks to be about performance as 
much as anything else: scriptwriterAaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aaron-sorkin> has said it will revolve 
around three separate product launches at different points in Jobs’ career.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaEr6K1bwIVs&media=>
So in a trailer that flashes up one shot after another, we get lots of 
glimpses of the frenzied crowds that Jobs addresses, the coalface of the cult of
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>.

But lest anyone think this is just a corporate snowjob, the trailer throws in 
lots of full-on dramatic conflict: Jobs tricky relationship with his 
then-girlfriend and their daughter Lisa (denying paternity at one point); 
strained relationships at work; and plenty of maverick genius type yelling and 
arm-waving.

Aaron Sorkin: Steve Jobs biopic to play out in three scenes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/16/aaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-biopic> 
Fassbender, of course, is the headline act, and the trailer is a feast of 
vein-popping, hair-flicking intensity (though did Jobs actually speak with a 
soft Irish accent? Maybe Fassbender is ahead of the curve there).Kate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet>, as key early Mac collaborator 
Joanna Hoffman, is absolutely recognisable, and playing Steve Wozniak doesn’t 
seem like a massive stretch for Seth Rogen. Rogen, however, does get to ask the 
opening voiceover question – “what do you do?” – which the film looks like it’s 
been designed to answer.

Steve Jobs <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> is due to be 
released on 8 October in Australia, 9 October in the US, and 13 November in the 
UK.
 