
Wayne Rooney reflected last night on a season of resurgence under Fabio 
Capello that has taken England tothe brink of the World Cup finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldcup2010> with an admission that the 
disappointment of missing out on Euro 2008 has driven the squad towards South 
Africa.

The 6-0 humiliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jun/10/england-andorra-world-cup-qualifier>
 of Andorra left England likely needing one more win from their final three 
qualifiers to reach next year's tournament. The Manchester United striker – 
whosefirst-half brace punctured shoddy opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jun/11/englandfootballteam-andorra> 
– became the first English player since Gary Lineker to score 10 international 
goals in a season and equalled Sir Geoff Hurst's overall tally of 24 goals for 
his country.

He departs on a four-week holiday today having mustered 10 goals in his last 
seven appearances for his country to spearhead the team's revival. "The 
disappointment of not getting to the Euros was still very much in the players' 
minds at the start of the season, and the manager and his coaching staff coming 
in have been a big plus for us," Rooney said.

"We're playing more as a team now. That's why we're doing so well and winning 
games. Certainly not qualifying motivated me and, speaking to other players, 
I'm sure it's the same for them. Now we've won our first seven games in 
qualifying and we've got one foot already in the World Cup finals. Hopefully 
we'll get there in our next game."

Rooney, 23, remains on course to eclipse Sir Bobby Charlton's record of 49 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> goals. "Obviously it 
would be a great achievement but I've always said I never base my game just on 
scoring goals," he said. "It's very much about getting on the ball and being 
involved. And, hopefully, I'm doing that."

Capello has instilled belief in a side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jun/10/glen-johnson-england-andorra-richard-williams>
 that failed to qualify for last summer's European Championship. A victory over 
Croatia at Wembley in September should be enough to see Capello's team through. 
"We have found ourselves a little bit as a group," Frank Lampard said, 
sentiments shared by David Beckham, who earned his 112th cap last night. "We 
know we've got the players, we know we've got the talent," Beckham said. 
"There's a very professional attitude and a great atmosphere about the place at 
the moment."

The former captain paid tribute to the supporters who attended the game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2009/jun/10/worldcup2010-englandfootballteam>
 despite astrike on the London Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/11/harry-redknapp-andrew-flintoff-arsenal>
. "They had problems arriving here but we played well for these people," 
Capello said. "We started strongly, pressed and created two chances to score 
even before Rooney's first goal.

"We started this group against Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> not so well and suffered in the 
first half [in Barcelona last September] without scoring but, since then, 
step-by-step, we have ... created a group with good style on the pitch, and the 
spirit is excellent."

Asked whether Rooney had needed some persuasion to be withdrawn at the 
interval with a hat-trick a possibility, Capello said: "No. I'd decided and 
said to him: 'Thank you very much. Now have a good holiday'."
 