
As free-music websites begin to realise they're not making enough money to pay 
for the tunes their users play,Peter Gabriel-backed We7 is following Last.fm by 
introducing a premium subscription feature. Coming this summer, the model 
exactly matchesSpotify's own price system - £9.99 a month or £0.99 a day to 
listen to streamed music without ads.

That doesn't mean We7 is ditching its free, ad-supported option, which will 
continue for non-subscribers. But, withYouTube crying to PRS For Music about 
proposed rates reform, and withLast.fm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/last-fm> now charging €3 a month for music 
streaming outside the UK, US and Germany, it's clear music sites are having to 
find dependable revenue sources as the advertising climate, on which they 
depend, turns down with the economy.

Chief executive Steve Purdham, who earlier founded SurfControl and was a DJ, 
last monthtold paidContent:UK 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-why-youtubes-prs-spat-is-just-one-battle>
: "The rates don't allow you to create an economic model that makes sense." To 
meet royalties costs, he said the site would need to sell ads consistently at 
£10 per thousand impressions, but it's currently making anywhere between £1 and 
£12.

We7 seemed to struggle with its original business model of embedding 
self-expiring audio ads in free music downloads and has since diversified to 
audio ads in the web-based stream, as well as its basic pay-per-track 
downloads. So, the site now has a wide range of listening options. But, so far, 
many of the ads in streamed tracks are for We7 itself and Gabriel's other 
online interest, recomendation engineTheFilter. As well as the new premium 
model, We7 is also using brand promos to remove the ads - the first with this 
Sunday'sDaily Star, giving readers a promo code that will unlock a month's 
worth of free music without the usual ads.

From paidContent:UK: <http://www.paidcontent.co.uk>
• France's piracy law in tatters; MPs focus instead on Easter hols 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-frances-piracy-law-in-tatters-mps-focus-instead-on-easter-hols/>
• Print round-up: Trinity Mirror Scotland cuts; Spectator business; Newsquest 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-print-round-up-trinity-mirror-scotland-cuts-spectator-business-newsques/>
• Goal tweets silenced under leagues' legal threat 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-football-leagues-halt-twitter-score-alert-service-in-copyright-dispute/>
• Pay TV riding high: Pace ups forecast, BSkyB upgraded 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-Pay-TV-Riding-High-STB-Maker-Pace-BSkyB-Upgraded/>
• Analyst: YouTube, PRS must compromise or risk crippling online music 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-analyst-youtube-prs-must-compromise-or-risk-crippling-online-music/>
• U2 manager: Only kicking off customers can save the music biz 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-u2-manager-only-kicking-off-customers-can-save-the-music-biz/>
• PRS endorses Spotify, Rickrolling earned Pete Waterman just £11 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-prs-endorses-spotify-rickrolling-earned-pete-waterman-just-11/>

From paidContent: <http://www.paidcontent.org>
• 12seconds rolls out video ads for Twitter 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-12seconds-rolls-out-video-ads-for-twitter/>
• Radio station to AP: Next time, read up on the web before you call us 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-radio-station-to-ap-get-a-grip-on-your-web-strategy/>
• Earnings: CanWest loss widens significantly 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-earnings-canwest-loss-widens-significantly/>
• Sales analytics company TouchCommerce raises $10m 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-touchcommerce-raises-10-million-for-online-sales-solution/>
• What are a million social-media followers, friends or subscribers worth? 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-what-can-you-get-with-a-million-social-media-followers/>
• Industry Moves: Tumri hires former Yahoo exec Jeff McCombs as chief 
financial officer 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-industry-moves-tumri-nabs-former-yahoo-exec-jeff-mccombs-as-cfo/>
• Hearst's Bronstein takes on Colbert: Internet is not killing newspapers - 
but Google isn't helping 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-hearsts-phil-bronstein-internet-is-not-killing-newspapers-but-google-is/>
 