
To its fans it is a classic pop anthem, which put Britain's Band Aid effort to 
shame. To its detractors it is simply one of the worst records of all time, let 
alone the worst charity record.

Whichever side of the fence you sit on, it is beyond doubt that the lineup for 
We Are the World provided a snapshot of the biggest US acts of the mid-80s. 
Now, 25 years on, the song has been re-recorded in aid of the Haitian 
earthquake appeal with a mostly different chorus of stars. The original 
featured Bob Dylan, Stevie Wonder, Tina Turner andMichael Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michaeljackson>. This time round the lineup 
includes L'il Wayne, Snoop Dogg, Nicole Scherzinger from the Pussycat Dolls and 
– perhaps incongruously – Barbra Streisand.

Their efforts – expected to raise millions – will be played for the first time 
during coverage of the Vancouver winter Olympics next week before being 
released worldwide as a download, video and CD.

The recording took place yesterday in the same Hollywood studio as the 1985 
original, which was recorded in aid of African famine relief. The new version 
was again masterminded by the producer Quincy Jones and Lionel Richie, who 
co-wrote the song with Michael Jackson. But they are the only two stars to have 
played a part in both records.

The crossover classical tenor Josh Groban insisted "everybody left their ego 
at the door" – which may not have been universally apparent as Beach BoysBrian 
Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianwilson> and Al Jardine ignored 
one another and perfectionist Streisand recorded take after take of her few 
bars.

Some of the younger stars seemed distinctly overawed by the company they found 
themselves in. The 15-year-old Canadian singer Justin Bieber said he would ask 
his new friend, the R&B starAkon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/akon>, to 
get him the phone number of Nicole Scherzinger.

Rapper Lil' Wayne managed the requisite display of humility, however, by 
claiming he thought the organisers were joking when they asked him to sing the 
line originally performed byBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>. Asked whether he had done it 
better, he replied: "Hell no!" He also revealed that his mother had asked him 
to get a photograph of Gladys Knight.

The original was recorded as an American response to Bob Geldof and Midge 
Ure's Do They Know it's Christmas?, performed by the supergroup Band Aid. Even 
now, more than two decades on, there are heated arguments over which was the 
superior record.

Band Aid featured every British and Irish pop star Geldof and Ure could get 
hold of, after the former was inspired to act by Michael Buerk's harrowing 
report for the BBC on the famine in Ethiopia. The record stormed to the top of 
the 1984 Christmas charts, and stayed in the No 1 slot for five weeks.

Within weeks Harry Belafonte was leading a campaign for a US charity record 
about the famine. We Are The World was finished by Richie and Jackson the night 
before the first of several recording sessions in January. The final version 
featured the voices of Dionne Warwick, Willie Nelson, Tina Turner, Ray Charles, 
Billy Joel, Diana Ross, Cyndi Lauper,Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> and Smokey Robinson. A notice 
as they arrived at the studio implored: "please check your egos at the door".

It rapidly become the fastest-selling single in history, with more than $63m 
(£39m) raised for projects across Africa..

A British Haiti charity record, masterminded by the X Factor impresario Simon 
Cowell – a cover of the REM classic Everybody Hurts, featuring 21 artists 
including Take That andRobbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> – was first heard on the 
airwaves today and will go on sale as a download later this week.

The artists performing also include Susan Boyle, Kylie Minogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kylieminogue>, Leona Lewis and Rod Stewart.
 