
Is it surprising that NHS hospitals are facing a deficit (Financial crunch 
tips NHS towards £1bn deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/15/nhs-financial-crisis-deficit-1bn-hospitals>
, 16 September) when the so-called “efficiency savings” of 4% a year have been 
running for at least four years and the money for hospitals for doing the work 
(tariff and non-tariff) has been reduced every year. Mental health hospitals 
have had a bigger reduction in payments than other hospitals and there can be 
no rational reason or justification for that, particularly as Jeremy Hunt 
stated there was to be “parity of esteem” for the treatment of mental illness.

Simon Jenkins (Devolution of the NHS is next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/16/devolution-nhs-health-service>
, 16 September) is wrong to say that there is a growing lobby of doctors 
calling for charges for GP care. The number is small, not growing and the call 
was decisively rejected at the BMA annual representative meeting this year. I 
am glad Jennifer Dixon of the Health Foundation agrees that the NHS needs more 
money (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/17/health-care-provision-nhs>, 18 
September), but disagree with her solution.

Since managers took over the NHS in 1984, administrative costs have risen from 
5% to 15.5% in 2011. The Commonwealth Fund, an independent US body recently 
placed theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> at the top of the OECD 
league for efficiency. We believe that abolishing the purchaser-provider split 
and the market would save at least £10bn; and if Monitorand other “regulators” 
were also abolished, and clinicians really put in charge, we believe merging 
health and social care would improve services for patients and save money, once 
the system had bedded down.

I am not a conspiracy theorist, but the combination of tough language from the 
Department of Health; the yearly reduction in frontline funding; the fact that 
in the previous two years the NHS paid back over £3bn to the Treasury; and the 
continual denigration of the NHS from the centre; does make one suspicious that 
the NHS is being set up to fail so that the private sector will seem a more 
attractive option.

As David Cameron said during the floods, “We are a rich country”, and we can 
afford to provide a properly funded NHS. As Andrew Lansley said during the 
passage of the 2012 Health and Social Care Act: “No decision about me without 
me” and “clinicians will be in charge”. This has not happened, but we could try 
it – and ask NHS staff how to make the service run better, as well.
Wendy Savage
President, Keep Our NHS Public <http://www.keepournhspublic.com/index.php>

• Urgent action must be taken to ensure that equal value is placed on 
patients’ mental and physical health and mental health patients are no longer 
let down by a lack of adequate care (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/16/mental-health-patients-unwell-waiting-talking-treatment>
, theguardian.com, 16 September). Repeated warnings that many mental health 
patients have to wait a dangerous amount of time for treatment have gone 
unheard and as a consequence thousands of people have attempted suicide while 
waiting for psychological treatment. Very simply, these people have been failed 
by the current system. Mental health in the UK is not universally held in the 
same regard as patients’ physical health, nor does it receive comparable levels 
of funding. There would be an outcry if patients with a physical illness were 
denied treatment or care due to cuts in funding, yet this is what we are seeing 
for those patients suffering from mental illness.

Waiting times for therapy treatments must be reduced, mental and physical 
health problems must be regarded with equal importance and provided with the 
same high levels of care, and training must be improved for medical trainees 
and doctors in how to deal appropriately with people with mental illness and to 
make any needed adjustments to their care to achieve positive outcomes.
Professor Sheila Hollins
Chair of the board of science, British Medical Association <http://bma.org.uk/>

• It’s astounding that the Labour party, which, in the NHS, created one of the 
greatest institutions this country has ever seen, feels it is a gamble to state 
clearly it will protect that institution. And, further, that it is a problem 
that “the service is likely to end the year £1bn in the red”. We, the taxpayer, 
supported the banking sector to the tune of hundreds of billions of pounds 
(which then found its way on to their balance sheets via QE). I feel I am more 
likely to need healthcare, free at the point of need, than I am a bank, most of 
which are not free and will largely abandon you in your hour of need. No,Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, be plain and be clear, tell 
people you will protect the majority, not the privileged few. £1bn versus 
£375bn – no contest.

Healthcare before bankers.
Barnaby Stackhouse
Shepshed, Leicestershire

• This situation was common before the NHS came into being in 1948 (Poorer 
women receive worse maternity care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/17/low-income-women-worse-care-pregnancy-oxford-university-study>
, 17 September). Poor women could not afford to go to a doctor or hospital, 
with the result that they’d cope with childbirth themselves.

This resulted in multiple injuries for many and some couldn’t even walk 
without pain. I know because as a student nurse on a gynaecological ward I was 
able to help them when at last they did not have to pay. We must not allow this 
to happen again.
Joyce Morgan
London
 