
Two hugely significant media mountains moved last week. Facebook began to run 
stories from theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/13/bbc-news-guardian-facebook-instant-articles>
, BBC News, theNew York Times and a few other major players direct on its site: 
no links, just instantaneous access.Verizon, the US’s biggest telecoms player, 
paid $4.4bn for what’s left of AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/verizon-to-buy-aol-44bn-deal>
 – now with added video content and knowhow. And – oh yes! – way down the scale 
in molehill Britain, we wallowed in yet another debate about the future of the 
BBC licence fee as nightmare No 10 briefers seemed poised once again to 
defenestrate Auntie.

The Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> experiment is a 
leap in the dark for newspapers and broadcasters alike. Instead of linking 
conventionally to the content providers’ own sites, so driving traffic and ad 
revenue their way, Mark Zuckerberg’s legions – 1.4 billion of them around the 
globe – will be able to call up those news stories and features seamlessly 
(with some or all of the ad cash generated offered in return).

Inevitable questions follow. What happens when Facebook changes its algorithms 
and thus the whole slant of news? What happens when the race to maximise money 
made from “instant articles” alters the nature of news selection, and thus of 
coverage? What happens to individual websites down the track if Facebook sucks 
the life from them? Why is the tiger smiling?

Verizon’s move comes in an adjacent part of the digital forest. Facebook needs 
content because mobile advertising space is already harvesting $11bn of its 
$15.5bn ad take this year. Mobile giants, in turn, need ad technology expertise 
and video – staples that AOL is well placed to supply. A mighty, 
number-crunching game of corporate thrones is joined – with subsidiary, barely 
break-even properties such as the Huffington Post left awaiting a 
billion-dollar bid or two. “Any company that doesn’t see change as a weapon… 
will be blown over,” chants the boss ofAOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbbc-whittingdale-licence-fee-facebook-digital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431696127436%2F1275b22d-6585-4f64-a921-312b0c142fe8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20can%20treasure%20the%20BBC%2C%20but%20it%20has%20to%20make%20its%20own%20way%20in%20the%20digital%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbbc-whittingdale-licence-fee-facebook-digital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20can%20treasure%20the%20BBC%2C%20but%20it%20has%20to%20make%20its%20own%20way%20in%20the%20digital%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbbc-whittingdale-licence-fee-facebook-digital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F15%2F1431696127436%2F1275b22d-6585-4f64-a921-312b0c142fe8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New culture secretary John Whittingdale has said the licence fee is worse than 
the poll tax. Photograph: Reuters 
But where on earth does that leave the BBC and its new supposed public enemy 
number one, John Whittingdale , MP for Maldon and finally secretary of state 
for culture, media and sport, a policy patch that he has made his own over two 
decades of shadowy specialist and committee chairmanship? Whittingdale will now 
preside over the negotiations for BBC charter renewal in two years’ time. His 
old all-party committee recommended ditching the licence fee when it reported 
just before the election. He has said the fee isworse than the poll tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/29/bbc-licence-fee-poll-tax-tory-john-whittingdale>
. Cue apprehension right along Portland Place. Cue Tory MPs thirsting for blood 
and Tory leader writers claiming their pound of proprietorial flesh. Cue one 
more “defining issue” of Cameron victory.

Cue, also, rather too much fear, loathing and incipient hysteria. The licence 
fee is supposed to defend BBC independence. How does it do that when the prime 
minister was able tofreeze it in a single one-on-one meeting with the director 
general <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/19/bbc-licence-fee-frozen> 
five years ago? The deep chill is back again today, either modestly indexed or 
frozen solid at £145.50p. There’ll certainly be an end to prosecutions for 
licence evasion, which may cost the corporation £200m a year in lost revenue – 
but will mean 200,000 or so fewer cases gumming up the courts.

The fee system (born 1922) is viscerally divisive because the commercial foes 
of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> – or at least those among 
them who also own newspapers – habitually reach for it as a lever-cum-cosh. 
Defending the fee therefore becomes a matter of champions versus predators.

But there’s a dimension here that doesn’t really work any longer. How can it 
be right, in logic, for the corporation to produceNewsbeat  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat>content for its own youth website, and turn this 
over instantly to Zuckerberg Inc in return, sooner or later, for ad revenue 
from outside Britain to help fill up the licence fee pot? The Facebook 
experiment, remember, is there to help Facebook first and foremost. Why is the 
BBC part of the testing crew?

It’s there because, of course, the world – and BBC Worldwide – spins on. 
Because more or less everything digital is connected, one way or another. 
Because youthful audiences are vital. Because 1.4 billion users are a force far 
beyond Cameron’s reach. Because mobile (at least for the moment, because 
everything digital morphs constantly) is where the cash flows most freely. 
Because content, whether from print or broadcast newsrooms, is valuable, and 
Facebook and Google don’t do it for themselves. Because the means of charging 
and collecting subs is now as infinitely various as your latest iPhone bill.

The BBC isn’t some sleeping giant in this new world. iPlayer isn’t the end of 
its road. But the debate over the licence fee, thus far, has been fatally 
stagnant, as enlivening as a traffic jam outside a magistrates court. You can 
be a true friend and admirer of the BBC and still reckon that – over the next 
dozen years of political angst – it has to define why and how it exists in a 
transformed environment, explain where the boundaries of non-TV and radio 
services lie, and propose better ways of safeguarding its independence.

Politicians can’t set subscription rates. Politicians can’t rig a pell-mell 
market of change. Politicians have to listen when innovators come forward to 
tell them what a world of opportunities offers. Tony Hall, the director general 
in the hot seat, is dead right: “The BBC should be prepared to be bold and 
inventive about its future.”

Front foot, not back foot. Leading reform, not traipsing along behind.
 