
Ten years ago this week Britain's biggest ever political protest 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/2765041.stm> took to the streets of London to try 
to stop the war on Iraq, or at least British participation in it. There were 
many things at the centre of debate then that scarcely need consideration now – 
did Saddam have weapons of mass destruction? Would the United Nations give the 
attack a patina of legality? Would war make the world safer from terrorism? 
Would the Iraqi people welcome invaders as liberators? On all this, the jury 
has long since come in.

Nor can there be any doubt that Tony Blair was motivated solely by his secret 
pledges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jan/12/bush-blair-pledge-iraq-campbell-chilcot>
 to stand by President Bush come what may, and that considerations of legality 
and British public opinion scarcely registered with him. It may be small 
consolation, but let it be said once more: on every point, those who marched 
were right.

The Iraqi people have paid a staggering price for the Bush-Blair war of choice 
– not least those families now learning details of the bestialabuse and murder 
of their loved ones by soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/30/iraq-torture-allegations-uk-military-investigations-reopened>
 who at least knew well enough that the killing and torturing was not being 
carried out "in our name".

But British democracy took a body blow too. The shadow of the largest 
demonstration in British history <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ysva-csAg8A> – 
an estimated attendance of 2 million was supported by two independent opinion 
polls taken the following week – still hangs over democratic politics.

If our politicians wonder why they are held in such low esteem, it is not just 
their fiddling of expenses, nor their prolonged bipartisan infatuation with 
bankers and Rupert Murdoch. The rot began with thedodgy dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/mar/12/iraq-iraq>, the 
"45-minute" Iraqi missile threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/dec/08/45-minutes-wmd-taxi-driver>, 
the duplicitous diplomacy, and thedecision to ignore the wishes of their own 
voters <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/2862325.stm> in preference to 
those of George Bush. Mainstream politics bought public contempt with the blood 
of millions.

There is a broader issue, of course. Is marching and protesting a waste of 
time? If 2 million people can be disregarded like this, then what price 
democratic politics? In fact, the enormous strength of the anti-war movement of 
2003 and beyond has shaped politics in many ways.

First, British troops pulled out of Iraq in 2009 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/iraq/4884929/British-troops-to-start-leaving-Iraq.html>
 with their tails between their legs, militarily and politically humiliated. 
That was surely due to the reluctance of the Iraqi people to offer them the 
exuberant welcome Blair had banked on – but it also owes something to the 
sustained opposition of the British people to the war and Gordon Brown's 
reluctance to go to the electorate with British soldiers still dying in a war 
that millions had opposed from the outset.

Second, the bar has been raised for further wars of aggression. Not high 
enough, as David Cameron's scratching of the imperialist itch in Libya and now 
Mali shows. But the fact that the prime minister has to pledge "this is not 
like Iraq" every time, and the reluctance to move to overt war in Syria or 
Iran, shows that a lesson has been learned. It will surely be a long time 
before British boots are put on the ground to secure US foreign policy aims 
again.

Third, the New Labour warmongers have in some measure been held to account. 
Blair was bundled out of office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/feb/05/uk.topstories3> by an 
eventually exasperated party ahead of his desired schedule, largely as a result 
of his unrepentant neoconservatism and Bushophilia. And theChilcot inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>, meandering as it may be, 
owes something to that march. It is not the war criminals' dock at The Hague, 
which would surely be more appropriate – but it is a start.

Finally, 15 February 2003 established a political coalition that cut across 
almost every political, social, ethnic or cultural category in society. It only 
divided imperialists from the rest. In particular, it united hundreds of 
thousands of British Muslims with their neighbours in a joint project of peace. 
Years later a senior police officer told me that the anti-war movement had done 
more for community relations than any government initiative. This alliance will 
endure, much as it continues to frighten neoconservative pundits to this day.

Add in the students walking out of school to oppose their country's 
aggression; the unprecedented emergence ofMilitary Families Against the War 
<http://www.mfso.org/>, people like Rose Gentle and Reg Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/apr/22/election2005.uk4>, brave 
enough to say their sons were killed for politicians' lies; and the millions of 
people who could be classified only as "none of the above"– and it is clear 
that the movement against the Iraq war created something unique in British 
political history.

That coalition is still needed today, not only to finally terminate the 
misbegotten "war on terror" – now in its 12th year, with results that range 
from the barbaric to the merely disastrous and have touched almost every 
country from Mali to Pakistan – but also to renew our own democracy and society.

So we can be sure that demonstrations do not change everything; but equally it 
is wrong to say that they do not change anything. It is in that margin that 
political struggle is conducted. It is my view that when the campaigning zeal 
and broad progressive politics of the anti-war movement are allied to a 
resurgent labour movement – the missing ingredient in 2003 – then we will be on 
the threshold of that world of peace and social justice that got 2 million 
people out on the streets on a freezing February morning.
 