
Could 2015 be the year when the world again starts to turn its back on 
Afghanistan? Now that atumultuous decade of military intervention has ended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/27/afghanistan-nato-troops-withdraw-ashraf-ghani>
, and a new government is taking over, many in the international community 
appear eager to forget about the country and leave Afghans to handle their 
myriad problems alone. That would be a fundamental mistake.


It is not just western combat troops who are withdrawing: UN and embassy 
personnel are also leaving in significant numbers, as governments reduce their 
footprints in Afghanistan. In its rush to see the country stand on its own two 
feet, the international community risks cutting critical funding and support to
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> too soon and too 
far, leaving millions of the most vulnerable Afghans behind.

At this week’s London conference on Afghanistan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/london-conference-on-afghanistan-2014>
, the new president,Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, will have his first meeting 
with global supporters to discuss the country’s future now that the Nato combat 
mission is at an end. Discussions are likely to focus on security and 
big-ticket economic and governance reforms. It is certainly important that the 
continuing Nato training and support role is backed up with personnel on the 
ground, and that international development funding does not just fall off a 
cliff. Ghani needs to make a convincing case for all this. But the elephant in 
the room, probably sadly undiscussed, will be once again the fate of those7.4 
million people 
<http://www.humanitarianresponse.info/system/files/documents/files/Afghanistan%20HRP%202015%20Executive%20Summary%2026Nov2014.pdf>
, almost one-third of the population,still in desperate need of lifesaving aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/02/britain-us-syria-refugee-crisis-food-aid>
.

It has never been easy to get attention for humanitarian needs in Afghanistan, 
given the long-running security and political crises. Following the massive 
investments of time and money and the loss of so many lives over the past 
decade, it is even less politically popular to talk about the humanitarian 
crisis that persists.About 670,000 Afghans are unable to return 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/MHB_July_2014_final.pdf>
 home for fear of violence, or because of Afghanistan’s frequent environmental 
disasters. This year alone,140,000 people have been displaced 
<http://www.humanitarianresponse.info/system/files/documents/files/Afghanistan%20HRP%202015%20Executive%20Summary%2026Nov2014.pdf>
 and150,000 people affected by devastating floods 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14-928_en.htm>. A recent nutrition 
survey revealed that one in 10 Afghan children under the age of fiveis acutely 
malnourished 
<http://www.af.undp.org/content/dam/afghanistan/docs/MDGs/NRVA%20REPORT-rev-5%202013.pdf>
.

Violent conflict has taken a particularly heavy toll. Civilian casualties have 
risen again this year,up 24% from the same period in 2013 
<http://www.ohchr.org/RU/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=14839&LangID=R->
 – thehighest levels since 2001 
<http://www.internal-displacement.org/assets/publications/2014/201405-global-overview-2014-en.pdf>
. And while international staff are at risk, as unfortunately we have seen with
fatal attacks against a NGO compound and a British diplomatic convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/29/two-die-taliban-attack-guesthouse-kabul-afghanistan>
, it is the most vulnerable who suffer the most, not only from the direct risk 
of violence but because of the disruptive impact it has on their ability to 
access healthcare, find work or send their children to school.

Despite the needs, international financial support for the Afghan people is 
already plummeting. The US, by far Afghanistan’s biggest donor, has slashed its 
aid budget by half since 2010, and funding is likely to fall further next year. 
Humanitarian aid has always been the Cinderella as far as the major donors are 
concerned, and nothing suggests this is likely to change.

Yet we cannot and must not leave ordinary Afghans behind. Reserving even a 
small percentage of the trillion dollars disbursed during the long years of 
military intervention for genuinely effective programmes – like the 
Afghan-designed community-driven projects that have allowed the International 
Rescue Committee to reach 4 million people in more than 4,000 villages – would 
help transform Afghanistan’s humanitarian reality, and offer hope and the 
prospect of a better life to the most vulnerable people.

The election of a new president and his coming together with his main 
political rival to allow the formation of a united national government provide 
a potentially unique opportunity for a new start, with better governance, less 
corruption and the prospects of national reconciliation. The London conference 
gives the international community the chance to make clear its continuing 
commitment to the Afghan people and its desire to preserve and build on 
hard-won gains, such as increased literacy, and education for boys and girls.

It is clear that the future of the country depends, above all, on Afghans 
themselves. The political elite there cannot go on behaving in the same old 
way. The international community will be justified in expecting real reforms 
and genuine change in return for its continued support. There can be no blank 
cheques.

However, now is not the time to give up, to squander what has been achieved 
and to leave the long-suffering people without crucial assistance. I appeal to 
the donors to ensure that, as part of their continuing engagement in 
Afghanistan, they allocate sufficient resources to allow good projects based on 
local needs and local cooperation to go on, and to go on helping those whose 
requirements are greatest.
 