
A great start to your focus on the NHS, with some words from the people 
actually providing the service, showing their amazing dedication to the ethos 
of the NHS as a caring organisation (The workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/17/portrait-of-nhs-staff-national-health-service>
, 18 January). But that last phrase shows one difficulty: the NHS is, or should 
be, just one part of the whole social care structure of the country.

The truth is that many of the patients the NHS is dealing with should not be 
in hospitals at all; as Rob Hinchliffe, the vascular surgeon at St George’s put 
it, theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is “keep[ing] frail people 
alive for longer”. Most of these people do not need urgent medical care and 
should be out in their homes and communities. To achieve this, we need a 
properly integrated and fully funded social care system, not the present 
situation where most of these functions are dumped on local authorities while 
this lousy government puts massive pressure on their budgets.

Much of this social care is being provided by private companies, most with a 
strong focus on their profits, hence the decisions made last year when several 
care home companies simply walked away from the problem, leaving elderly and 
vulnerable people with little or no support. You reported last November that
half of the UK’s care homes could close due to a £2.9bn shortfall of funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/21/half-uk-care-homes-close-funding-gap-nhs-george-osborne>
, but I haven’t heard of any efforts by George Osborne to deal with this issue.

The NHS itself, even under current funding pressure, is incredibly efficient 
and, more importantly, highly effective in getting people’s problems dealt with 
and back on their feet. So the real target should be getting this government to 
fund the whole social care network properly and to stop fiddling with the NHS. 
The Tories wasted their first five years on Andrew Lansley’s completely 
unnecessary reforms of the NHS, with the same track now being followed by the 
equally ignorantJeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>

Do not let the Tories get away with this utter failure to address the wider 
picture and instead wasting energy attacking the NHS, while neglecting social 
care and forcing councils to cut budgets at the same time. They are failing the 
whole country.
David Reed
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 