
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> has become 
the first jurisdiction in the world to ban the public display of outlaw 
motorcycle club colours under sweeping organised crime reforms passed by state 
parliament.

The ban on clothing associated with the Hells Angels and others was a notable 
exception among new laws that lifted restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/06/labor-talks-tough-on-bikies-even-while-taskforce-wants-less-draconian-stance>
 on bikie gatherings, clubhouses and employment that will now largely apply 
only to serious criminal offenders.

The Palaszczuk government, whose reforms superseded its Liberal National 
predecessor’s bikie laws with crossbench support on Tuesday night, touted them 
as “Australia’s toughest serious organised crime laws”.

Mandatory sentencing for Queensland gang crime criticised by civil liberties 
group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/09/mandatory-sentencing-for-queensland-gang-criticised-by-civil-liberties-group>
They included increased sentences for child exploitation rings, financial 
fraud and drug trafficking, as well as a mandatory extra seven years’ jail for 
those convicted of a “serious organised crime”.

The attorney general, Yvette D’Ath, said the new package to tackle organised 
crime – which expands the former LNP government’s focus on bikies – restored 
judicial oversight and “traditional, conviction-based legislative principles”.

D’Ath said a review by the former judge Alan Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/04/queensland-to-dump-bikies-anti-association-laws>
 found the LNP laws were “unable to secure convictions and remained vulnerable 
to legal challenge”.

They included a blanket ban on bikie associate gatherings that saw a female 
librarian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/07/queensland-police-drop-charges-bikie-librarian>
 and a group of family members charged with going to pubs.

The LNP crackdown on bikies was provoked by periodic public displays of 
violence but proveninvolvement in serious crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/behind-bars-how-queensland-police-cracked-bikie-twins-ice-trade-secrets>
 across club ranks remains mixed.

The ban on clothing worn by bikies, which prompted the Labor MP turned 
independent Rob Pyne to abstain from voting on Tuesday, was the Palaszczuk 
government’s own initiative. It was not recommended by the Wilson review or an 
earlier commission of inquiry into organised crime.

The logos of clubs such as the Hells Angels, Bandidos and Rebels are 
recognised under copyright laws as registered trademarks, with clothing 
retailers such as Mambo having fallen afoul of past lawsuits.

The law firm Irish Bentley is examining trademarks laws as grounds to 
challenge the colours ban.

The new laws have also stopped the use of secret police information or club 
membership alone as grounds to deny bikies tattoo licences.

The prominent tattooist Mick Kosenko, a Rebels president who is fighting a 
refusal of his tattoo licence that shut down his Brisbane parlour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/21/rebels-president-forced-to-close-tattoo-parlour-under-queensland-anti-bikie-laws>
, said he remained unsure of his prospects of re-entering the business.

Kosenko said the colours ban was “ridiculous” and a “ploy to make it look like 
there’s no bike clubs left in Queensland”.

Former bikie boss faces deportation after Peter Dutton cancels visa again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/10/former-bikie-boss-aj-graham-faces-deportation-after-dutton-cancels-visa-again>
“Nowhere in the world have they been able to ban club colours,” he said. 
“There’s guys who’ve ridden to work with their colours on this morning and not 
even known [about the new ban].

 “We can all ride down the road together again, we can all go to a pub 
together again, we can open a clubhouse together again but we can’t wear our 
colours. 

“And you can’t hang out if you have a bad criminal record.

“I talked to a few of the boys in America, they just can’t believe what’s 
going on.

“They think banning us from wearing colours is going to solve crime – what 
stroke of genius.”

A former national president of another bikie gang, speaking on condition of 
anonymity, said the colours ban was a trivial matter that would have no impact 
on the survival of a worldwide subculture that has been under the eye of law 
enforcement for decades.

“We haven’t worn our club gear around for years. We know we’re in a fishbowl,” 
he said. “Realistically, they’ve forced us underground as it is. Why do you 
need to wear them around anyway?

“The ones that wear their colours or their club stuff into shopping centres to 
intimidate families and kids are the cunts who caused all of this in the first 
place, who need the bikie fuckin’ stuff to make them look important.

“We don’t have to have something written on us to say, hey, look at me, I’m a 
tough cunt.

“So it doesn’t bother the real men, who are here to stay, no matter how hard 
the laws get. Don’t give a fuck, brother.”
 