
“The perfect place for the grand finale” ran the headline in the local 
newspaper, but as the early starters began to arrive in howling wind and 
pouring rain for the start of the second round on Friday they were greeted by 
the sight of flooded fairways, the Swilcan Burn swollen and close to 
overflowing, and desperate mopping-up operations already under way.

Play started at 6.32am but was suspended after 14 minutes with the hoolie 
still blowing. When play resumed at 10am, with the first trio on the 1st green 
and their balls marked from earlier, Jaco van Zyl, of South Africa, completed 
one of the most time-consuming birdies in Open history.

St Andrews has previous in this regard, and back in 1960 torrential rain 
rendered play impossible for the final day, 36 holes, then played on Fridays. 
The Scottish professional Ian Smith recalls standing on the 1st, waiting to tee 
off, when the heavens opened and water began cascading down the steps of the 
R&A clubhouse, with the Valley of Sin submerged, and the players were called in 
and told to reconvene on the Saturday. In the final analysis, Kel Nagle won by 
a shot fromArnold Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arnold-palmer>, 
with Smith – who recalls being given three balls by the Dunlop rep to play the 
first two rounds and another three for making the cut – finished in 16th place, 
taking home £60 of prize money for his efforts.

In 1988, late finishing took on a completely different complexion after 
conditions at Royal Lytham worsened in Saturday’s third round with rain 
flooding several greens and the scores were scrapped as nobody had finished 18 
holes. Sunday saw all of the players start and complete 18 in threeballs and, 
for the first and so far only time, the tournament finished on a Monday, when
Seve Ballesteros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2015/jul/16/the-open-seve-ballesteros-major-faldo-couples-price>
, playing in a threeball with Nick Faldo and Nick Price, lifted the Claret Jug 
for the third and final time. The first of his wins, incidentally, came on a 
Saturday at Lytham in 1979 and the second at St Andrews in 1984, by which time 
the Open finished on a Sunday.

Royal Birkdale had its problems in 1961 and, on day two, was completed in 
howling winds which blew down the luncheon tent, overturned trailers and 
reduced the place to a shambles. Nine players recorded scores in excess of 80 
with another dozen on 78 or 79, though Arnold Palmer played one of his best 
spells of golf at the height of it, with four birdies in his first six holes as 
he punched his ball under the wind with a one iron on his way to a 73.

“What hadn’t been blown away had been washed away,” Palmer said and the 
tournament was again completed on the Saturday, with the R&A decreeing 
beforehand that if it could not be finished that day then the Championship 
would be declared null and void as it was not allowed to charge gate money on 
the Sabbath under the old Sunday trading laws. The weather relented 
sufficiently to complete, however, and Palmer won his first Open, by a shot 
from Dai Rees.

Birkdale again had its problems with high winds in 2008, with balls moving on 
some of the more exposed greens out by the coast road and causing play to be 
suspended for 40 minutes in the third round. Players stayed out on the course 
and sheltered to be ready for the resumption and were rewarded for their 
patience with a lie-in the next day, though none of them beat par for the third 
round.

“I’ll put this down in the top three hardest rounds of golf I have played,” 
said Greg Norman, the leader at the end of it. “I have played in tougher 
weather but this being the third round on Royal Birkdale golf course, it was 
brutal.” An hour’s play was lost at St Andrews in 2010 on the Friday evening 
because of similarly high winds, causing a handful of games to return on the 
Saturday morning before the cut could be made. Rory McIlroy was out at the 
height of it andadded an 80 to his first-round 63 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jul/16/the-open-2010-rory-mcilroy>, 
which all but ruled him out of contention.

Last year at Royal Liverpool an early weather forecast suggested that the 
mother of all storms was heading towards the Irish Sea and was anticipated to 
hit the Wirral coast in early evening on the Saturday so the R&A took 
pre-emptive action and, for the first time in Open history, opted for double 
tee-times to get the day completed swiftly, with half the field setting off 
from the 10th.

They all completed under grey but dry skies and the eventual winner, McIlroy, 
was outlining his thoughts about his final round in the media centre when a 
huge clap of thunder announced that the Met Office had indeed been correct and 
the R&A’s controversial decision had been vindicated.
 