
Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> has attacked web 
services startup CloudFlare for providing protection against cyberattacks to 
pro-Isis websites.

The company protects customers against the distributed denial of service 
(DDoS) attacks popular amongst groups like Anonymous by routing connections 
through its own content delivery network. By weeding out malicious connections, 
it prevents DDoS attacks from succeeding in their goal of overwhelming a 
website with traffic so that it collapses.

But according to members of Anonymous, which has reaffirmed its yearlong “war” 
against Isis following the Paris attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/17/anonymous-war-isis-hacktivist-group-confirms>
, that technology is also being used by pro-Isis websites to protect themselves 
against the hacktivist collective’s attempts to bring down their servers.

The week before the Paris attacks, Ghost Security, an Anonymous-affiliated 
“counter-terrorism network”,counted almost 40 websites 
<http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/1892477-anti-terrorist-hacker-group-reveals-40-isis-websites-protected-by-us-tech-firm/>
 that use CloudFlare’s services to protect their content. According to 
GhostSec, 34 were propaganda websites, four were discussion forums, and two 
offered technical services.

Such accusations are nothing new to CloudFlare, which has long argued that it 
is not its job to police content on its network. In August 2013, in response to
similar allegations 
<http://kernelmag.dailydot.com/features/report/4361/cloudflare-terrorists-little-helper/>
 from James Cook, a reporter at the Kernel magazine, the company’s chief 
executive Matthew Princepublished a blogpost 
<http://kernelmag.dailydot.com/features/report/4361/cloudflare-terrorists-little-helper/>
 laying out its view on free speech on its network.

Prince wrote: “A website is speech. It is not a bomb. There is no imminent 
danger it creates and no provider has an affirmative obligation to monitor and 
make determinations about the theoretically harmful nature of speech a site may 
contain …

“If we were to receive a valid court order that compelled us to not provide 
service to a customer then we would comply with that court order. We have never 
received a request to terminate the site in question from any law enforcement 
authority, let alone a valid order from a court.”

In response to the latest criticism from Anonymous, Prince has redoubled his 
stance. “I did see a Twitter handle said that they were mad at us,”he told The 
Register 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/11/18/cloudflare_ceo_rubbishes_anonymous_claims_of_terrorist_support/>
. “I’d suggest this was armchair analysis by kids – it’s hard to take 
seriously. Anonymous uses us for some of its sites, despite pressure from some 
quarters for us to take Anonymous sites offline.”

“Even if we were hosting sites for Isis, it wouldn’t be of any use to us … I 
should imagine those kinds of people pay with stolen credit cards and so that’s 
a negative for us.”

Those statements are now prompting a further call amongst Anonymous members to 
boycott the company altogether.
Anonymous (@TheAnonMovement) 
#Anonymous <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Anonymous?src=hash> would also like to 
encourage you to not use@CloudFlare <https://twitter.com/CloudFlare> services 
any longer.https://t.co/GqhRe4yr8U <https://t.co/GqhRe4yr8U> #OpParis 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpParis?src=hash> #OpDaesh 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpDaesh?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/TheAnonMovement/status/667141241935646720> November 19, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/TheAnonMovement/status/667141241935646720> Anonymous 
(@GroupAnon) 
We don't use @CloudFlare <https://twitter.com/CloudFlare>, and we encourage 
others not to either.https://t.co/pdhNZifiug <https://t.co/pdhNZifiug> 
#Anonymous <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Anonymous?src=hash> #OpISIS 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpISIS?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GroupAnon/status/667060475121766400> November 18, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/GroupAnon/status/667060475121766400> 
The Guardian has not received a response to a request for comment from 
Cloudflare.
 