
An Evening with Peter Alliss
7pm, BBC2

TV’s voice of golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/jul/17/peter-alliss-martin-kelner> 
may have been part of the BBC’s coverage since 1961, but lately he has been 
heard less frequently, thanks to the Beeb’s habit of losing tournament rights 
to Sky. Here to help redress this imbalance is an hour-long celebration of the 
life and career of the Colemanballs regular, including highlights from his CV 
such as Pro-Celebrity Golf, Around with Alliss and A Golfer’s Travels. 
Contributors include Gary Player, Terry Wogan and Jimmy Tarbuck.Mark Jones

100 Year Old Drivers Ride Again
8pm, ITV

Old people are brilliant. When they’re not carrying out diamond robberies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/20/hatton-garden-jewellers-welcome-arrests-robbery-suspects>
, they’re haring down the motorway at 103 (years old, not miles per hour). And 
while motorists over 70 are obliged to reapply for a driving licence, they’re 
not obliged to take another test. This programme profiles those who are still 
putting the pedal to the metal despite hitting their centenary on the clock of 
life. Charming and inspirational.Ali Catterall

Britain’s Forgotten Slave Owners
9pm, BBC2

When the abolition of slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/british-history-slavery-buried-scale-revealed>
 came in to force in 1834, the issue of compensation arose. The government 
found itself obliged to pay out the equivalent of £17bn … to slave owners. The 
emancipated slaves didn’t receive a penny. In this chastening two-part series, 
historian David Olusoga trawls the records and discovers that slave ownership 
permeated all levels of British society – not only aristocrats, but also 
lawyers, clergymen and widows, all of whom claimed successfully for “losses”. 
Uncomfortably, the millions they made benefit many of us today.David Stubbs

Escape from Isis
10pm, Channel 4

One difficulty of comprehending – never mind confronting – Islamic State is 
the lack of reliable information from inside its fiefdom. This documentary 
redresses that somewhat, sharing testimony from those who have come into 
contact with the group, including former Isis adherents,women rescued from the 
organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/21/isis-women-its-not-about-jihadi-brides-its-about-escape>
 and online activists harvesting covert footage. None of it, inevitably, is 
much of an advertisement for Isis, but little of it creates any worse an 
impression of the group than its own gleefully violent propaganda.Andrew Mueller

Girls with Autism
10.40pm, ITV

As the title implies, there’s a bit of a myth that girls don’t have autism. 
This series goes inside Limpsfield Grange,the only state-run boarding school 
that caters for girls with the condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/14/autism-girls-emotion-self-harm-school>
. Autism affects how people read the world around them emotionally, which 
results in great anxiety and frustration. As such, this film is often fraught, 
but it’s not without hugely moving moments, charm, good humour and deep pathos. 
“How can I possibly be human,” one girl asks, “if my own species won’t accept 
me?”John Robinson

People Just Do Nothing
10pm, BBC3

The first episode in the second series for the hit, west London-based 
mockumentary following pirate radio proprietors and all-round incompetentsMC 
Grindah and DJ Beats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jul/18/people-just-do-nothing-dj-beats-mc-grindah-top-10-pirate-radio-anthems>
 (Allan Mustafa and Hugo Chegwin). Idiocy ensues as Grindah prepares for 
daughter Angel’s “christianing”, enlisting the help of jack-of-all-trades 
Chabuddy G and the drug-addled Steves. Meanwhile, Beats is on a mission to 
prove that he would make the ideal godfather. Fresh, farcical comedy with a 
soft spot for suburban loserdom.Hannah J Davies

Veep
10.10pm, Sky Atlantic

Uncharacteristically, for someone who spends much of her time grasping defeat 
from the jaws of victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2015/apr/13/hillary-clinton-veep-24-lisa-simpson-film-tv>
, Selina Meyers enjoyed a big win at the end of the last season of Armando 
Iannucci’s political satire; she’s now president of the United States, after 
the previous incumbent stepped down to look after his sick wife. However, in 
Veep, a good thing is habitually followed by a succession of very bad things, 
and this opener finds Meyer ballsing up her inaugural speech to the joint 
session of Congress, and her staff battling for their careers.Gwylim Mumford

Film choice

Amour (Michael Haneke, 2012)
1.20am (Thursday), Channel 4
Michael Haneke’s Palme d’Or winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/dec/12/best-films-amour-michael-haneke>
 concerns two retired music teachers, Georges (Jean-Louis Trintignant) and Anne 
(Emmanuelle Riva). They are happy in their handsome Paris apartment, until Anne 
is struck down by a stroke. As her condition deteriorates, she makes Georges 
promise to care for her at home, and so begins the painful, emotionally 
exhausting final chapter of their love. A gruelling, intensely moving drama.
Paul Howlett

Today’s best live sport

Premier League Asia Trophy football: Everton v Stoke City Mid-table sides 
clash in the unlikely setting of Singapore’s national stadium. Arsenal v 
Singapore Select XI follows. 10.45am, Sky Sports 1

Cycling: Tour de France Stage 11, from Pau to Vallée de Saint-Savin. 1pm, ITV4

Golf: The Open Coverage of the Champion Golfers’ Challenge, the charity 
curtain-raiser for the tournament, which begins tomorrow. 4pm, BBC2

Live T20 cricket: Lancashire Lightning v Nottinghamshire Outlaws Old Trafford 
hosts this T20 Blast fixture. 6pm, Sky Sports Ashes
 