
We don’t yet have a law in this country that bans supermarkets from destroying 
unsold food. It is bound to come, but heaven knows when. The figures for 
supermarket wastage, the perfectly good food that cannot be sold simply because 
it is past its sell-by date, are shocking and can only get worse with the 
onward march of the “local” small supermarkets, spreading across the country 
like STDs.

But this is changing, partly due to the Real Junk Food Project, a system where 
waste food, not just from supermarkets, but from allotments, shops and 
well-wishers is given a second life at schools and at pay-as-you-feel cafes 
around the country. The idea is growing, and growing fast, with spaces from 
Brighton to Leeds where you pay whatever you can afford for a meal or just a 
cake and a cup of coffee made with perfectly good food that would otherwise 
have gone into landfill. Carole Cadwalladr has tracked down the busy Adam Smith 
whose idea it was to turn waste into good, cheap food.

And we have more food for thought from the Ethical Carnivore. Louise Gray 
decided that if she was to eat meat at all, it would only be meat from animals 
she had killed herself. A life-changing decision that took her not only hunting 
shooting and fishing but in pursuit of everything from stags to roadkill. In an 
extract from her new book, we join her as she makes her first trip to an 
abbatoir.

We have recipes for you, too. With seasonal nutty ideas from me (warm cardamom 
and hazelnut cookies anyone?) to harissa-glazed aubergine and walnut butter 
cakes from Marcus Wareing, and a host of super-cheap recipes from green mango 
salad to Mediterranean fishermen’s stew from Dr Ali Khavandi and Dara 
Mohammadi. We also have lunch with the internet phenomenon Joe Wicks and Life 
on a Plate with comedian Josie Long.
 