
Welcome to Guardian Healthcare Network, a new site for everyone striving to 
make the UK's health services work better. We'll be covering non-clinical 
innovation in all of the UK's four national health services, and I hope you'll 
join us in sharing your experiences.

Guardian Healthcare Network builds on the success of SmartHealthcare.com, 
which has covered health and social care informatics and ICT for the past two 
years. That site's archive, along with ongoing coverage of this important 
topic, can be found under theInformatics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/informatics> tag at the top of 
every page.

You can become a member of the Healthcare network online here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2012/jul/16/become-member-guardian-healthcare-network>
.You can also follow us on Twitter. <http://twitter.com/gdnhealthcare>

Guardian Healthcare Network joins other business-to-business publications, 
events and business intelligence services from Guardian News and Media's 
Business & Professional division.

The NHS is the most popular part of the public sector, with its principal of 
care free at the point of use supported across the political spectrum. For 62 
years, it has helped Britons live longer and healthier lives. By doing so it is 
becoming a victim of its own success, through the fact that we're living longer 
and wanting more expensive treatments.

To misquote The Leopard, Tomasi's 1958 novel on the decline of the Italian 
aristocracy – filmed in 1963 starring Burt Lancaster with a 40 minute ballroom 
scene – if we want the NHS to stay as it is, things will have to change. We're 
going to try to help you make those changes.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian 
Healthcare Network to receive regular emails on NHS innovation. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/healthcare/start.php>
 