
As thousands of New Yorkers took to streets in Brooklyn on Monday for the West 
Indian Day parade, one man was stabbed to death and two were shot and wounded.

One of the men shot was identified as Carey Gabay, previously an assistant 
counsel to New York’s governor,Andrew Cuomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/andrew-cuomo>, who was an honorary marshal 
at the parade.

“Carey is an outstanding public servant who joined our administration in 2011,”
Cuomo said in a statement 
<https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/statement-governor-andrew-m-cuomo-81>. “He is 
a Harvard-educated lawyer who works for the state because he wants to give back 
to others and make a difference. He is just 43 years old and is a kind-hearted 
man.”

Cuomo asked New Yorkers to keep Gabay and his family in their prayers.

“This tragic shooting – this one by another seemingly random bullet – is the 
latest heartbreaking reminder that the crime of gun violence must stop,” the 
governor said. “Enough young, innocent people have died, and it must stop now.”

Gabay was in critical condition at Kings County hospital in Brooklyn.

“I’m the governor of the state of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, and there’s not a thing I can 
do,” Cuomo told reporters after visiting Gabay’s family at the hospital. 
“There’s not a thing I can say, and there’s nothing I can do. And sometimes it 
just hurts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db434a38a290f2ada3a79d33ff940abcc64f038%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Indian%20Day%20parade%3A%20Andrew%20Cuomo%20staffer%20shot%20before%20annual%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Indian%20Day%20parade%3A%20Andrew%20Cuomo%20staffer%20shot%20before%20annual%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3db434a38a290f2ada3a79d33ff940abcc64f038%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 New York’s Governor Andrew Cuomo addresses the media before participating as 
an honorary marshal in the West Indian Day parade. Photograph: Andrew 
Kelly/Reuters 
According to the NYPD assistant chief Patrick Conry 
<http://www.newsday.com/news/new-york/carey-gabay-cuomo-aide-shot-ahead-of-west-indian-day-parade-1.10814435>
, Gabay was shot at about 3.40am. Pre-parade festivities, known as j’ouvert, 
often begin as early as 3am.

“We do have some leads we’re following. We have recovered a firearm,” Conry 
said. “Based on ballistics we recovered, it appears there are two groups of 
people shooting back and forth at each other.”

No arrests had been made, police said. 

The identities of two other men – one killed and one wounded – were not 
immediately available. One, aged 24, was stabbed to death 90 minutes before 
Gabay was shot. A 21-year-old was shot and wounded.

The parade has become associated with violence. Last year, after one man was 
shot dead and four were injured 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/West-Indian-Day-Parade-Set-to-Step-Off-273440721.html>
 around the parade, New York’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, said the vast majority of 
those attending had “a wonderful time andonly a few individuals get out of line 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/01/west-indian-day-parade-shooting_n_5748062.html>
”.


In 2013, a one-year-old boy sitting in his stroller was killed by a bullet 
meant for his father 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/west-indian-day-parade-set-kick-off-nyc-33583236>
. In 2012,two people were stabbed to death 
<http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2013/09/02/brooklyn-to-celebrate-west-indian-culture-today/>
 and two were shot. In 2011, two police officers were injured by gunfire.

This year, De Blasio and the police commissioner, Bill Bratton, said the New 
York police department was working with local leaders to make the parade safer. 
A heavy police presence lined the route, and several helicopters hovered 
overhead.

The parade went on as scheduled and drew thousands of people to a stretch 
along Eastern Parkway. Throbbing basslines pulsated, propelling outlandishly 
clad revellers to dance and those on the sidelines to bob their heads as they 
ate indigenous foods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30364c2e4f9614bc29cb953c9586bd68a3d9ca70%2F0_203_5400_3239%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=West%20Indian%20Day%20parade%3A%20Andrew%20Cuomo%20staffer%20shot%20before%20annual%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=West%20Indian%20Day%20parade%3A%20Andrew%20Cuomo%20staffer%20shot%20before%20annual%20event&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwest-indian-day-parade-violence-andrew-cuomo-staffer-shot-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30364c2e4f9614bc29cb953c9586bd68a3d9ca70%2F0_203_5400_3239%2F5400.jpg>
 Dancers from Grenada join the parade. Photograph: Mark Lennihan/AP 
“This is our heritage. It means so much to me to see all these colors and 
music,” said Alicia Jackson of Brooklyn. “It’s one of my favorite days of the 
year.”

Politicians dotted the route. De Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, who is 
of Caribbean descent, drew cheers as they waved flags, shook hands and posed 
for photographs.

The march and an official pre-parade breakfast were the first public events 
since July which Cuomo and De Blasio, who are locked in a simmering dispute, 
were both scheduled to attend.

Their paths did not cross. Cuomo left the breakfast about 10 minutes before De 
Blasio arrived. The two men, both Democrats, marched separately.

At the breakfast, Cuomo was asked if he planned to speak to the mayor 
<https://twitter.com/andrewsiff4NY/status/640887078126026753>. The governor 
responded by asking, “Is he here?” Told no, Cuomo glared and bluntly said: 
“There’s your answer.”

Hours after the parade, Cuomo and several other elected officials were 
planning to fly toPuerto Rico 
<http://abcnews.go.com/topics/news/puerto-rico.htm> to offer advice to the 
island government, which is grappling with a debt crisis. De Blasio was not 
invited.

The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
 