
I’ve been following the inspiring yet disturbing stories shared by aid workers 
such as Megan Nobert, whosebrave account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/aid-worker-rape-humanitarian-south-sudan-sexual-violence>
 of rape has paved the way for others to share their personal experiences.


As someone who has worked in the international development sector for a number 
of years, I am only too aware of the risks to personal safety faced by 
humanitarians, with targeted attacks on aid workers reachinga record high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/19/deaths-aid-workers-world-humanitarian-day>
 in recent years and our notion of “neutrality” increasingly contested in 
fragile environments.

Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>
In 2014, there were 190 major attacks 
<https://aidworkersecurity.org/sites/default/files/HO_AidWorkerSectyPreview_V1.pdf>
 against aid operations, affecting 329 aid workers in 27 countries. Having 
shared experiences of sexual harassment and assault with fellow female 
development workers, I know how devastating it can be.

In a previous role, I worked for a small organisation operating in a 
politically-sensitive environment. The organisation lacked an internal 
reporting system and had no obvious path to escalate concerns: staff relied on 
each other for protection and support. As the victim of ongoing sexual 
harassment, rather than being supported I was left feeling at risk, manipulated 
and exposed by a manager, the very person who should have supported me most.

I tried to get on with the job as best I could. However, I felt compelled to 
justify wholly inappropriate behaviour as “normal” in that particular context 
and culture. I experienced humiliation and shame in the workplace and didn’t 
know where to turn.

For many victims, the risk of losing a job or the reputational repercussions 
makes it difficult to speak out. Some worry about destroying team morale or 
jeopardising the good work of colleagues. And in many cases female aid workers 
prefer not to give any leverage to the perception that they are the “weaker 
sex” in a male-dominated sector.

As a sector we have to ask ourselves if we are doing enough to protect our 
staff

When it comes to gender, the particular security challenges faced by men and 
women often differ, depending on the context and culture. As a rule, women tend 
to experience more specific cases of sexual harassment and assault, although 
it’s certainly something that also affects men.

As a sector we have to ask ourselves if we are doing enough to protect our 
staff. The need for effective security training to protect staff from sexual 
harassment and assault is more critical than ever. It’s imperative that workers 
know how to prevent and report incidents; they need to feel empowered to seek 
support.

For humanitarian professionals, the safety of those we serve is of prime 
importance. Ultimately, risk is always an accepted part of the job. But it’s 
time these risks were managed more effectively and taken more seriously by the 
sector.

Sexual violence in the aid sector: what should NGOs be doing?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/19/sexual-violence-aid-sector-ngo-action>
Some development agencies are already putting this issue high on the agenda. 
When I joinedChristian Aid <http://www.christianaid.org.uk>, it was already 
running a gender and security programme. With input from colleagues overseas, 
this programme has reviewed reporting mechanisms along with gender-sensitive 
risk assessments and security plans: these reflect the organisation’s work in 
some of the world’s most dangerous countries, many of which are becoming 
increasingly unstable.

As a trainer for this programme, I deliver educational sessions for staff 
developed using guidelines from theEuropean Interagency Security Forum 
<https://www.eisf.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/1137-Persaud-2012-Gender-and-Security-Guidelines-for-Mainstreaming-Gender-in-Security-Risk-Management.pdf>
. These training events explore gender-specific risks in different contexts, 
including checkpoint confrontation and staff assault in the compound. We 
analyse different scenarios based on what we know about gender and security 
issues, often using actors to conduct role-plays on issues such as staff 
assault in the compound.


The sessions have encouraged people to find ways to support each other, and to 
come forward and talk openly about their experiences. For instance, male 
colleagues have spoken out about the level of aggression they have faced in 
comparison to female staff, particularly at checkpoints.

In conjunction with the ACT Alliance’s <http://www.actalliance.org/> safety 
and security community of practice, we recently trained 15 humanitarians from 
across the world, exploring issues such as the regional and contextual 
differences in gender risk and how the threats facing local and overseas aid 
workers differ. We hope to build a global network of gender and security 
specialists.

Sexual violence and inequality: it’s time the UN got its own house in order
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/21/sexual-violence-inequality-united-nations-un-gender-equality>
Security coordinator for ACT Alliance, James Davis, says: “The threat to aid 
workers has gone up over the last decade, and our industry has taken positive 
steps to prepare staff to manage those risks, but one area we are still 
struggling with is in how gender affects our security. LGBTI staff can face 
even higher levels of threat. We are looking at these issues now and we are 
bringing together representatives from around the world to discuss how we can 
keep all our staff safe, regardless of gender or sexual orientation.”

The sooner the humanitarian sector gets this right, the better off we will all 
be.

Amy Sheppey is a communications and information officer for Christian Aid 
<http://www.christianaid.org.uk>. She’s a gender security trainer and a member 
of theACT Alliance safety and security community of practice 
<http://actalliance.org/about/communities-of-practice/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 