
Is the short story the literary form of the moment? Prize juries seem to think 
so. When judged against the novel the short story has won out in the
International Man Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/22/man-booker-international-prize-lydia-davis>
, theNobel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/10/alice-munro-wins-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, the inauguralFolio prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/10/george-saunders-tenth-of-december-first-winner-folio-prize>
 and just recently, theIndependent Foreign Fiction prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/22/exiled-iraq-first-arab-winner-uk-foreign-fiction-prize>
.

But where, asked AS Byatt 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/wheres-uk-book-talent-asks-a-s-byatt-as-american-george-saunders-wins-40000-folio-prize-9183785.html>
 as US short story supremo George Saunders collected his Folio prize in March, 
are the British authors? When curating the programme for the upcomingLondon 
Short Story Festival <http://www.lssf.co.uk/>, I began to think about the great 
short story writers Britain has produced, and what their best works might be.

I asked Cathy Galvin, founder of the Sunday Times EFG short story award 
<http://www.booktrust.org.uk/prizes/5> and director of Word Factory 
<http://www.thewordfactory.tv/>, a short story salon bringing together readers 
and writers. She says it's a difficult task to choose a single story from "a 
field that holds everyone from DH Lawrence to PG Wodehouse; from Charles 
Dickens to HG Wells; from Virginia Woolf to AS Byatt". Her current 
recommendations are Tea at the Midland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/14/tea-at-midland-david-constantine-review>
 by David Constantine ("elegant, redemptive, human") andAll the Rage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/12/all-rage-al-kennedy-short-stories-review>
 by AL Kennedy ("is this woman really the love-child of Samuel Beckett and 
Katherine Mansfield?")

She continues: "If you are looking for simple joy in one story, try Clive 
Sinclair <http://literature.britishcouncil.org/clive-sinclair>'s subversive 
account of a rabbi who turns into a pig in A Bad End, from his latest 
collection Death and Texas 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/10713912/Death-and-Texas-by-Clive-Sinclair-review.html>
. The writer Philip Hensher is currently collating an anthology of the best of 
British short story writing and we are agreed on the brilliance of a 
now-forgotten funny, working-class collection that created an appetite for the 
short story in both of us: Bill Naughton's The Goalkeepers' Revenge."

So what is the best British short story? We have opened the question up to 
readers and writers everywhere, and votes are now coming in on theShort Story 
Festival website <http://www.lssf.co.uk/get-involved/>. Jackie Kay 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330451062>
's My Daughter the Fox is one of the nominations. She in turn recommends "one 
of our best and most neglected short story writers, the Scottish writer Agnes 
Owens. If I had to pick just one story, it'd be The Lighthouse. I love the 
voice of this story and the way the structure surprises you."

Adam Marek is a rising star in the British short story world; his story 
Tamagotchi was nominated via the website. His own vote goes to Memories of the 
Space Age by JG Ballard: "It puts a lot of pressure on an individual story to 
test it for bestness. But from a line-up of British short story authors, I'd 
pick JG Ballard as one of the best we ever had. Memories of the Space Age – an 
amazing, glass-clear, Ballardian oddity."

So what's your choice? Spread the Word <http://www.spreadtheword.org.uk> is 
offering the chance to win a year-long membership of their writer development 
agency if youvote over at the Festival website 
<http://www.lssf.co.uk/get-involved/>. At the Festival launch on 21 June, a 
shortlist of three will be drawn up and the winning story will be read by 
Stella Duffy at the free closing event on Sunday 22 June at 4.15pm at 
Waterstones' Piccadilly branch.

• The London Short Story Festival <http://www.lssf.co.uk> in association with 
Waterstones Piccadilly runs from Friday 20 – Sunday 22 June
 