
Everyone in our family has had flu and I wondered if there were any books 
about being stuck in bed and feeling poorly?

Responding to anyone in exactly the right way when they are ill is always 
difficult – especially if they are a child. Sometimes it is easy to see at a 
glance just how ill someone is; at other times it is hard to know whether to 
encourage more or less.

The well-known rhyme Miss Polly had a Dolly 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/miss-polly-had-a-dolly.html> (and the 
interactive version in Miss Polly had a Dolly Touch and Sing Board Book) may be 
too relentlessly cheerful for some but it does have a jollity about it that can 
be cheering – and it does offer some advice about looking after yourself. 
“Polly had a Dolly who was sick, sick sick/ So she phoned for the doctor to 
come quick, quick, quick./ The doctor came with his bag and his hat,/ And 
knocked at the door with a rat-a-tat-tat. He looked at Miss Polly and he shook 
his head/ And he said ‘Miss Polly put her straight to bed”/ He wrote a paper 
for a pill, pill, pill/ “I’ll be back in the morning with the bill, bill, 
bill”. Children will find the bill, bill, bill bit amusing/puzzling too.

AA Milne’s poem Sneezles <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/241536> is in 
much the same vein and includes some excellent word-play such as “They 
wondered/ If wheezles/ Could turn/ Into measles,/ If sneezles/ Would turn/Into 
mumps”.

For greater reflection on being sympathetic to others who are ill and looking 
after them Karma Wilson’sBear Feels Sick 
<http://www.karmawilson.com/books/bear/sick.htm>, illustrated by Jane Chapman, 
has a kindly and caring tone. Bear is too ill to go out to play. All his 
friends - Mole, Hare and Mouse – give up their own fun to help make Bear 
comfortable. The story captures the way being ill makes you feel and the need 
for anyone who is ill to be treated kindly.

A similar theme is at the heart of Philip C Stead’s award-winning A Sick Day 
for Amos McGee <http://us.macmillan.com/asickdayforamosmcgee/philipcstead>, 
illustrated by Erin Stead. Amos McGee is a zoo keeper who loves the animals in 
his care. Every day he gets up early to make sure he can be at the zoo in time 
to look after the elephant, the tortoise, the rhinoceros, the owl who is afraid 
of the dark and the shy penguin in the best possible way. One day Amos McGee 
doesn’t turn up for work. Anxious as to why, the animals set off for his home 
to find out why. Each then puts aside their own needs and fears to help Amos 
McGee get back to good health. The inversions of a carer being cared for is 
nicely played out in a story that is also amusingly impossible.

The carer falling sick is not always so satisfactorily resolved. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhat-can-we-read-when-were-all-ill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F5%2F1420452344448%2Ff4d95eb1-495c-4139-add2-543257d12669-1020x861.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20can%20we%20read%20when%20we're%20all%20ill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhat-can-we-read-when-were-all-ill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20can%20we%20read%20when%20we%27re%20all%20ill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwhat-can-we-read-when-were-all-ill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F5%2F1420452344448%2Ff4d95eb1-495c-4139-add2-543257d12669-1020x861.jpeg>
 Mrs Large is sent back to bed and Mr Large takes charge in Jill Murphy’s 
classic book, perfect for mums who want sympathy! Photograph: Walker Books 
The wide-ranging effects of mum being ill are excellently captured in Jill 
Murphy’sMr Large in Charge 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mr-large-in-charge.html>. The Large family of 
elephants first appear inPeace at Last 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/peace-at-last.html>, a classic title about the 
imaginative lengths the elephant parents have to go to find somewhere quite to 
sleep. In Mr Large in Charge, Mrs Large is too ill to keep going and so Mr 
Large sends her back to bed and promises to keep everything in order. He gets 
the children hoovering and cleaning but somehow, things to not go quite 
according to plan! Can mums ever really be given time off to be ill?

The most extreme result of illness – the need to go to hospital – is 
excellently captured in Tony Ross’s Little Princess titleI don’t want to go to 
hospital <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-don-t-want-to-go-to-hospital.html>. 
Having done everything she possibly can to avoid having to go the hospital, the 
Little Princess finds life there isn’t as bad as she feared. In fact, she is 
treated just like a Princess!

At the opposite end of the spectrum, how it feels to have a cold and how to 
manage it is simply captured inPeppa Pig: George Catches a Cold 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/peppa-pig-george-catches-a-cold.html>. 
Atishoo! Let’s hope all colds are better soon.

Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
booksjoin here, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 