
Fantasy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fantasy> writers have a harder time 
of it than "serious" novelists. They introduce their readers not only to plots 
and characters, but entire new worlds, complete with history, geography, 
language and customs. Typically, a new landscape is sketched and suggested in 
the first few pages of a fantasy novel — although initial appearances can be 
deceptive, the reader usually understands fairly quickly whether they've landed 
somewhere medieval Arthurian, matriarchal utopian, wholly unknown or teasingly 
familiar.

Whether I stride gamely into the new world, ready to sniff the carnivorous 
flowers, or have to be dragged like a mutinous toddler depends to a great 
extent on the world's nomenclature. The names of people, things and places 
provide insights into the landscape's familiarity, and hint at intended 
cultural echoes. They also tell me whether the writer has doled out names you 
wouldn't call your hamster to his or her protagonists, countries and fauna. 
This is usually a deal-breaker.

Consistency is particularly important. Among the manifold horrors of Terry 
Goodkind's 11-bookSword of Truth series 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sword_of_Truth>, the jarring incongruity of 
its hero's handle ranks high. In Wizard's First Rule — amid villainous Darkens, 
wise wizards known as Zeddicus Zu'l Zorander (Zedd for short), and sexy witches 
called Shota — Richard, wielder of the Sword of Truth, stands out like the 
proverbial sore pollex. As if his substandard sobriquet (no one, alas, ever 
shortens it to Dick) weren't incongruous enough in such a "fantastic" world, 
everyone addresses him by it in tones of portentous wonderment ("You are a very 
rare man, Richard Cypher"), drawing attention to its dullness. In fact, all the 
Cypher men — Richard, Michael and George — might have been dropped by a 
world-travelling stork from the land of Prosaic. Another bum note is struck by 
the cataclysmic use of The Midlands as the name of a neighbouring magical 
region. I can't help but picture the Confessors, dangerous women with the power 
to compel truth and dissolve personality, being met with bemused indifference 
in Birmingham.

I also insist that no name should have an apostrophe in it. In 2007, the Evil 
Overladyhanded down the dictat <http://issendai.livejournal.com/429293.html> 
that fantasy mid-name apostrophes were to be pronounced "boing". Anne 
McCaffrey's dragon-riders thus suffered a sea-change ("F-boing-lar" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F%27lar>, "F-boing-nor" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F%27nor>), as did Mercedes Lackey's People of the 
Plains, or"Shin-boing-a-boing-in" <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shin%27a%27in>, 
which improved them no end. Admittedly the McCaffrey apostrophe represents an 
honorific contraction of a civilian name to a dragon-riding one, but I still 
find it a lazy, meaningless, unreadable short cut to foreignising names. Also, 
it gives them a disastrously fey effect, as if their bearers' resting state is 
gazing inscrutably into the middle distance, accumulating wisdom by unknown 
means.

Names with too evident meanings, which alert you early to a character's nature 
à la Dickens, are a mixed blessing — it's hard to take someone seriously if 
he's called Mr Badcrook. For this reason, JK Rowling's nomenclature leaves me 
with mixed feelings — in fact, I boycotted the books for two years after the 
first one appeared because I found the surname Potter offputtingly boring (an 
idiocy I curse now that a first edition of the Philosopher's Stone would just 
come in handy.) I don't warm to most of the goodies' sweater-vested names 
(Ronald, George, Neville), and some of the onomastic determinism meted out to 
evil-doers is a bit heavy-handed (poor old Draco Malfoy never stood a chance). 
But I do like the dog Latin spells, and places such as the Room of Requirement.

When it comes to imbuing names with realism and meaning, though, you can't do 
better than Ursula Le Guin. A Wizard of Earthsea and the other Archipelagic 
books are all about the power conferred by names, and, fittingly, they feature 
some of the best in fantasy. Both Le Guin's workaday names (Sparrowhawk, Vetch, 
Yarrow) and the names of power underlying them (Ged, Estarriol, Kest) steer 
elegantly between the shoals of overblown cliché and leaden dullness, 
contriving to seem both inventive and deep-rooted. Le Guin is also brilliant at 
naming animals (I still mourn the untimely demise of the sleek, intelligentotak 
<http://otak.k-k.pl/>) and places — there's never been a better fantasy setting 
thanthe Archipelago <http://www.ursulakleguin.com/Harcourt/map_lg.jpg>, or a 
more thrilling haunt of secret wizardry than the Immanent Grove.

Other superb fantasy namers include Alan Garner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/alangarner>, whose Norse borrowings 
(svart-alfar, lios-alfar) fit harmoniously with the Celtic (Cadellin, Morrigan) 
to create many shades of menace, andNaomi Novik <http://www.temeraire.org/>, 
whose dragon breeds range from the sturdily English (Regal Copper, Winchester) 
to the sneakily French (the dark Fleur-de-Nuit, used for night attacks, and the 
Flamme-de-Gloire, a dangerous fire-breather).

Which characters do you think have the best — and worst — names in fantasy? 
 