
People were still wondering what David Bowie had been trying to tell them  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/21/final-mysteries-david-bowie-blackstar-elvis-crowley-villa-of-ormen>

David Bowie’s death last week set the amateur detectives sleuthing. What had 
he been trying to tell the world with his final album, and with the videos for 
Lazarus and Blackstar? Had heset up a Tumblr to add to the mystery 
<http://thevillaoformen.tumblr.com/>? Did it all feed into something greater? 
His last gift to the world appeared to have been a puzzle so complex that it 
might take years to reveal the answers – and even then we’ll likely never get 
those answers confirmed. One thing we can be sure of, though –because it was 
made plain by the designer of his album sleeves, Jonathan Barnbrook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/22/david-bowie-album-cover-designer-jonathan-barnbrook-blackstar-cover>
 – is that the cover of Blackstar was a deliberate reflection of Bowie’s 
awareness of his own mortality.

Bowie and Elvis? (And Springsteen, Waits, Young …) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/21/elvis-presley-david-bowie-produce-record-request-country-star-dwight-yoakam>

One of the week’s stranger news stories was buried deep in an article in a 
local newspaper in California. TheOrange County Register  
<http://www.ocregister.com/articles/yoakam-700535-bowie-elvis.html>carried an 
interview with the country singer Dwight Yoakam ahead of a gig. It being 
post-Bowie, the paper naturally asked about him. It turned out Yoakam had met 
Bowie in 1997, and they had discussed Elvis. And, said Yoakam, Bowie said he 
had been called by the King a few months before his death in 1977, with a 
request to produce new Presley music. Bowie. In 1977. Producing Elvis. Imagine 
the catering – peppers, milk, peanut butter, hamburgers … Meanwhile, a studio 
outtake emerged from 1985 in which Bowie, having a bit of fun, was heard
impersonating some of his contemporaries 
<http://consequenceofsound.net/2016/01/david-bowie-impersonates-tom-waits-lou-reed-on-newly-discovered-recording/>
: Bruce Springsteen, Neil Young, Tom Waits, Iggy Pop, Lou Reed and others. The 
clip had been recorded by Mark Saunders, who worked on the Absolute Beginners 
soundtrack. It’s well worth a few minutes of your time (the Lou Reed and Tom 
Waits, especially, are spot on).

Last bit of Bowie for now (we promise). With added Kanye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/19/kanye-west-david-bowie-covers-album>

At the start of this week, it was reported that Kanye West was planning a 
tribute album of David Bowie covers. Thestory was later denied 
<http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/blog/stop-signing-shit-kanye-west-is-not-and-was-never-doing-a-david-bowie-cover-album>
, but not before a certain section of the world decided that this was an 
outrage. A petition was drawn up to demand it be stopped (if you laid all the 
petitions demanding Kanye be prevented doing something end to end, they would 
stretch from here to Jupiter. Fact). Social media ignited with people who do 
not listen to rap explaining why this was a desecration. So we got Joe Muggs to 
write about why Kanye is actually the nearest thing to Bowie we have these 
days. Then we stepped well back.

Yasiin Bey, formerly known as Mos Def, cares not for your borders (and he’s 
retired) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/yasiin-bey-kanye-west-freestyle-retirement-protesting-south-africa>

Remember when Yasiin Bey was picked up by South African customs at Cape Town 
the other day? Turns out he’d been trying to leave the country on a “world 
passport”, a document recognised by only six countries (and that’s the claim 
made by the organisation that issues it). That didn’t stop Bey sending a long 
and rambling message toKanye West <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> 
– which West duly posted on his website – complaining that his treatment was 
politically motivated. Oh, and announcing his retirement. To be honest, we’re 
only inclined to believe that one after five years of public silence (a rule we 
apply to all musical retirements).

A writer was finally allowed to ask R Kelly about the sex-crime allegations 
against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/r-kelly-bill-cosby-assault-accusations-just-strange>

For years, people sent to interview R Kelly have been told: DON’T ASK ABOUT 
THE SEX. And they have duly complied (to our shame, us included). Finally, 
Chris Heath – writing for GQ – was told Kelly would“speak about his whole life 
without restrictions” <http://www.gq.com/story/r-kelly-confessions>. It made 
for an odd encounter. Kelly spoke about being sexually abused as a child, and 
described it as “a generational curse, so to speak, going down through the 
family”. It seemed as if he was preparing for the big confession, but then he 
backed away. He couldn’t speak about his long-rumoured marriage to Aaliyah, 
because “when there’s two parties involved in any situation, both parties have 
to be respected”. He couldn’t even say whether it was him in the infamous video 
showing a man engaging in sexual acts with a young woman, believed to have been 
14 at the time: “Because of my lawyers, to this day I cannot have those kind of 
conversations. Being advised by my lawyers in this.” It’s a strange, disturbing 
and extraordinary interview.

Glenn Frey of the Eagles died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/18/glenn-frey-eagles-founder-dies-aged-67>

Glenn Frey was 67 when he died – from complications from rheumatoid arthritis, 
acute ulcerative colitis and pneumonia – and he’d been one of the very biggest 
rock stars of all time. The first Eagles greatest hits record remains the 
second-biggest selling album of all time, and the band’s reunion tours in 
recent years raked in the money from their boomer audience. Yet the band were 
never liked by critics. It took Frey’s death to make those criticswonder if 
maybe the audiences had been right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/19/glenn-frey-death-the-eagles-los-angeles-music>
. Meanwhile,Everett True wondered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/20/david-bowie-glenn-frey-mourn-mock-eagles-everett-true>
 why the same people who had been furious at those scoffing at their mourning 
of Bowie were on his social media timelines mocking Frey’s death. The deaths of 
Bowie and Frey lent a sombre note, too, to the opening couple of dates of Bruce 
Springsteen’s US tour – on night one he coveredRebel Rebel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgmhF0XV8uA> in tribute to Bowie, on night two 
he playedTake It Easy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S6sC66RNK68>, which Frey 
co-wrote with Jackson Browne.

Abba reunited! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/20/abba-reunites-stockholm-restaurant-mamma-mia-the-party>

Don’t get too excited, though. The foursome have no new music and no gigs to 
play. Their third appearance together since their split in 1982 – the first, in 
1986, was for a TV show; the second, in 2008, was at the Mamma Mia! movie’s 
Swedish premiere – was for the launch of a Mamma Mia!-themed Greek-style 
taverna in Stockholm. Take a chance on tea. The dinner takes it all. Sorry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fabba-reunites-on-stage-at-stockholm-restaurant-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453362886515%2FKP_1500431_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABBA%20reunites%20on%20stage%20at%20Stockholm%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fabba-reunites-on-stage-at-stockholm-restaurant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABBA%20reunites%20on%20stage%20at%20Stockholm%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fabba-reunites-on-stage-at-stockholm-restaurant-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453362886515%2FKP_1500431_crop_640x480.jpg>
That Fat White Family album sounds icky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/21/fat-white-family-songs-for-our-mothers-review>

The consensus around albums is usually that they are good or bad. Not with 
Songs for Our Mothers, the second one from Fat White Family, which was met with 
disgust from many reviewers. “What did their mums to do deserve this?” wondered 
Will Hodgkinson in the Times.Lee Arizuno of the Quietus 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/19549-fat-white-family-songs-for-our-mothers-review>
, while able to find the lolz in songs about Shipman and Goebbels, felt 
compelled to shout “enough of your shit!” at a song trying to mine humour from 
Ike Turner beating up Tina. Our own Alexis Petridis reckoned: “In a world in 
which someone appears to find almost everything, no matter how innocuous, 
‘problematic’, here’s something so wilfully, relentlessly, self-evidently 
problematic as to boggle even the most libertarian mind. You don’t have to be 
the kind of person who spends their days forensically examining the lyrics of 
pop records in order to find something problematic to be horrified by the 
disgusting line in Satisified, where frontman Lias Saoudi compares a woman 
fellating him to a starving Auschwitz inmate reduced to ‘sucking the marrow out 
of a bone’.”

It’s not easy when your underground band goes overground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/21/devo-white-town-babybird-what-happens-when-your-cult-pop-band-gets-huge>

Paul Lester tracked down some of the musicians who’d seen themselves as 
alternative – toiling away willingly in obscurity – when they stumbled across a 
song that took them up the charts (and not always even a song they liked). Peel 
favourites the Piranhas and US confuseniks Devo were happy enough with the 
success, but not everyone was. The Flying Lizards starting rowing about money 
and being forced to appear on TV alongside Captain Beaky. Stephen “Babybird” 
Jones got sick of people shouting “You’re gorgeous!” at him. And one member of 
Pigbag walked out of the band because he wasn’t going to be allowed to wear his 
donkey jacket on Top of the Pops.

Let’s hope for a miracle … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/21/black-colin-vearncombe-critical-condition-car-accident-cork-ireland-january-10>

Finally, a thought for Colin Vearncombe of Black, a maker of lovely music for 
30 years, some of which has filtered into the mainstream, but most of which 
hasn’t. On 10 January he was hospitalised after a road traffic accident in 
Ireland. We now learn he has “only a slim chance of pulling through”. Our 
thoughts are with him.
 