
It's an oft-discussed perfect storm; the gloomy economic climate and 
advertising downturn combined with a business model crisis in newspapers.

Increasingly desperate for some way to relieve the pressure on them, papers 
have intensified their co-ordinated attack onGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, which they see as unfairly 
making money through a market dominant search service populated by other 
companies' content.


Something's brewing... Photograph: Arbron 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/arbron/66697520/>/Some rights reserved
 <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>
Whether that pressure looks like a mix of desperation and opportunism is up 
for debate. Newspapers have negotiated withGoogle, not least over advertising, 
for years, but a mention by Washington Post media commentatorHoward Kurtz 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/05/10/AR2009051002044.html>
 about a new level of negotiation has attracted particular attention this week.

As Staci Kramer said on paidContent 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-in-todays-news-about-news/>, it would be 
news if Google wasn't talking to newspaper publishers. A Google spokesman told 
her:"This was an informal meeting, and we're always talking with publishers to 
find new and creative ways to help them make money from compelling online 
content."

As well as asking why no established media company created Craigslist, or 
Twitter, or Google News or the Huffington Post, Kurtz reveals a little of what 
Google and WaPo's chief executives have been mulling - and the fact that talks 
have been at such a senior levelis interesting. 

"Some high-level people are trying to square the circle. Post Co. chief 
executive Donald Graham and Google chief executive Eric Schmidt and their 
lieutenants have been holding talks about a possible collaboration. This could 
range from creating new web pages to technological tools for journalists or 
readers. Hanging over the talks is the reality that the search giant, while 
funneling vital traffic to news sites, vacuums up their content without paying 
a dime."

Sounds like Google is being pushed to do its public service for the newspaper 
industry. Is that fair? Should wider industry, and society, be prepared to fund 
newspapers for the social and cultural good of the nation - or is this just a 
last-ditch attempt to support a dying industry, and money that would be better 
spent supporting a new generation of businesses?

What could be on the cards is a new Google news distribution project, notes 
Kara Swisher 
<http://mediamemo.allthingsd.com/20090511/google-talking-to-new-york-times-washington-post-about-something/>
. The firm is six months away from the launch of a news-specific, tailored 
search service - as told toSharon Waxman 
<http://venturebeat.com/2009/04/27/coming-soon-a-new-smarter-google-news/> by 
Schmidt himself.

"Under this latest iteration of advanced search, users will be automatically 
served the kind of news that interests them just by calling up Google's page. 
The latest algorithms apply ever more sophisticated filtering – based on search 
words, user choices, purchases, a whole host of cues – to determine what the 
reader is looking for without knowing they're looking for it," wrote Waxman.
 
"And on this basis, Google believes it will be able to sell premium ads 
against premium content."

Washington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post> and the 
News York Times are first in the queue. Curiously, she asked if sites will make 
more money from this service and the answer was no. So even though Google 
thinks it can benefit from premium advertisers, there won't be a premium for 
news sites. Unless, of course, that's what is being hammered out by Google's 
top brass.
 