
In his neat jumper and jeans, Nicolas Kent doesn’t look much like a 
subversive. Yet this quietly spoken 71-year-old has probably provoked more 
serious thinking on controversial issues than any other theatre director 
working in Britain today. For almost 30 years, from his base as artistic 
director of the Tricycle theatre in north London, he turned a fierce spotlight 
on the issues of the moment, moulding the form of verbatim theatre, where the 
words of real people are spoken on stage, to examine how we live and who we are.

No subject was too big for the tiny theatre. He began by staging an edited 
version of public inquiries such as the one into the racially motivated killing 
of the black teenagerStephen Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lawrence> 
in 1993 or Lord Hutton’s investigation of the events leading up to the death of
Dr David Kelly <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-kelly>, following a 
controversy related to the Iraq war. From using actual tribunals as the subject 
of drama, he progressed to commissioning his own inquiries. In 2004’s Guantánamo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/may/25/theatre1> (the story of the 
British subjects imprisoned without trial) andThe Riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/23/the-riots-tricycle-review> (an 
investigation of the causes of the disturbances that swept Britain in 2011), he 
collaborated with the novelist Gillian Slovo to reveal the human stories behind 
the headlines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f0c87a2e1be116ca2fa0ac7411c26b3aa0ebd3c%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f0c87a2e1be116ca2fa0ac7411c26b3aa0ebd3c%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 A scene fromThe Riots by Gillian Slovo, directed by Nicolas Kent at the 
Tricycle theatre, November 2011. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Kent has forged a type of theatre that allows calm yet impassioned 
consideration of questions that get buried in the rush of the rolling news 
agenda. As Charles Spencer, former theatre critic of the Daily Telegraph and no 
lover ofbien pensant lefties, remarked after watching Guantánamo: “The 
cumulative effect of Kent’s characteristically lucid, sober production is to 
create a feeling of concern that gradually rises to indignation.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/drama/3617731/Where-justice-is-caged.html>

I felt I didn’t know enough about Isis. I rang up Gillian and said, ‘I don’t 
get this, why don’t we do a play about it?’

All that clear-eyed sobriety is now being brought to bear on perhaps Kent’s 
most challenging subject yet.Another World: Losing Our Children to Islamic State
 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/another-world-losing-our-children-to-islamic-state>
, written by Slovo, and opening at the National Theatre on 9 April, looks at 
the organisation that calls itself Islamic State and the reasons some young 
westerners want to join its ranks.

“I am always curious about things that I don’t know enough about,” 
Kent explains. “And I felt I didn’t know enough about Isis. I didn’t know what 
the government policy was, what the American policy was and why people were 
radicalised. I rang up Gillian and said, ‘I don’t get this, why don’t we do a 
play about it’, and she was very enthusiastic.”

So was Rufus Norris <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rufus-norris>, artistic 
director of the National Theatre. “I emailed him and got a reply within 24 
hours,” says Kent, smiling. “When you get to a certain age as a director, 
you’re lucky if you get a reply within 24 months. It was rather wonderful.”

With the National on board, time was of the essence. In mid-July, Slovo began 
the interviews that form the basis of the play, talking to more than 40 people 
with a range of viewpoints, though not all of them are heard on stage. “The 
people I don’t use are often the people who have informed me of something and 
helped me ask the questions of the people that I do use,” she explains.

The Riots - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/23/the-riots-tricycle-review> 
The process is deeply collaborative. Kent either attends the interviews or 
listens to the tapes afterwards. They seek the broadest base, allowing 
conflicting voices to be heard so that the end result is balanced. “Of course, 
the starting point is that Isis is a murderous organisation that is wrecking 
the lives mostly of Muslims in the areas where it is, but that it also wants to 
wreck our lives and our way of life,” says Slovo. “I think I began to 
understand more about why young people are attracted to it, not that there is 
one answer. And that is part of the understanding.”

Like Kent, Slovo – who grew up in South Africa where her parents Joe Slovo 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/people/joe-slovo> and Ruth First 
<http://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/first-ruth> were leading anti-apartheid 
campaigners – is softly spoken yet committed. He credits her with using her 
novelist’s skills to shape a succession of verbatim transcripts into gripping 
drama. “That’s a real skill,” says Kent. “She wrote thrillers years ago, so she 
knows how to do that.”

“I worry about shaping something people would like to see,” Slovo 
acknowledges. “I don’t want to feed people information, I think that’s boring 
and switches you off. I want people to be involved in the play and I want them 
to come out and maybe not think the same thing as when they came in.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cbc5932b294cabdbd1bfe59da904adc75b5843c%2F0_461_6856_4115%2F6856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cbc5932b294cabdbd1bfe59da904adc75b5843c%2F0_461_6856_4115%2F6856.jpg>
 Gillian Slovo. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
The play covers an enormous amount of ground, and interviewees ranged from 
Helen Ball, deputy assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan police and 
coordinator of counter-terrorism policing, through a cabinet office member who 
used to be in charge of the government’s Prevent programme, toMoazzam Begg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/moazzam-begg>, the former Guantánamo Bay 
detainee. His imprisonment was a key strand inGuantánamo, and Slovo and Kent 
had no problem finding interviewees in the Muslim community. “It built trust,” 
says Kent. “We have form, in a way. It has got much easier for me over the 
years because, after 12 or so plays, people are willing to talk to us and to 
trust us.” Participants whose words are cut but not altered are always shown a 
transcript of what they have said and allowed to make any changes. “But they 
never do,” Kent says.

The strange case of Moazzam Begg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/defence-and-security-blog/2014/oct/07/moazzam-begg-mi5-syria>
Yet, despite this, the families of those who had left the UK to join Isis 
would not be interviewed. “Some of the press have been very punitive towards 
these people and they feel their words will be badly used,” says Slovo. “And 
young Muslims are very scared at the moment, scared that their words will be 
taken wrongly, that they will be fingered when they haven’t done anything, that 
if they say something the police will come knocking at their door and ask them 
to implicate someone else.”

Eventually, they found a support group of mothers in Belgium who were prepared 
to speak, partly to warn other mothers about what could happen inside perfectly 
normal and seemingly happy families. When violent jihadism made Brussels its 
target, the relevance of their testimony became more pointed.

“Because the awful things that Isis does stick in our minds, we don’t quite 
understand that there is an appeal to young people that is not just murderous 
but is utopian,” Slovo explains. “Part of the reason for them being attracted 
to Isis is that they want to build this community that they feel will give them 
a better place, a more meaningful place, than the place they have in England.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a03404f188be340b62525aaf7cf39aeeeeaac5e%2F0_0_2800_1873%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20appeal%20of%20Islamic%20State%20to%20young%20people%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a03404f188be340b62525aaf7cf39aeeeeaac5e%2F0_0_2800_1873%2F2800.jpg>
Guantánamo: Honour Bound to Defend Freedom byVictoria Brittain and Gillian 
Slovo, directed by Nicolas Kent at the Tricycle theatre, London, May 2004. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
There are two conflicting risks in putting such explanations on the stage of 
theNational Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>. The 
first is that it is simply too dangerous, in a time of political tension, to 
explore these ideas. “I do have anxieties but that is what makes the project 
worth doing,” says Slovo. “You have to think very carefully about your own 
prejudices and not sticking them on the stage. So I think that kind of anxiety 
is good.”

Guantanamo, Tricycle, London
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/may/25/theatre1> 
The other possibility is that their work will only preach to the converted – 
that although the National is making every effort to encourage a diverse 
audience to seeAnother World, in the end it will reach only those ready to 
accept its conclusions. Slovo points out that everybody already has a view on 
the subject – what is missing is the facts. “It is very easy to have an opinion 
on this but it’s mind-expanding to be able to sit in a theatre for 90 minutes 
while somebody lays out some of the important elements of the debate.”

Kent’s previous work has made politicians and thinkers sit up and take notice. 
At a time when the emphasis is on quick debate and instant reaction, this 
serious form of investigation – the equivalent, as he points out, in terms 
of length, of 40 long reads in a newspaper – is a way of pausing to take stock.

“What we are doing is an inquiry into Isis,” he says. “It works like a very 
good documentary. Except that you can’t go and boil a kettle and have a coffee 
in the middle – you have to concentrate. It is an immersive, communal 
experience. People laugh, they cry, they get angry.”

What does he hope people will learn? “I hope people will understand that 
a knee-jerk reaction is completely the wrong reaction. If we are repressive 
about our human rights, if we are phobic about Islam, if we are going to stop 
the way we live, we are playing into Isis’s hands – and that is a real worry.”

• Another World 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/another-world-losing-our-children-to-islamic-state>
 opens at the National Theatre, London SE1, on 9 April.
 