
The word "diva" was co‑opted from opera to refer to powerful women in other 
fields. But, in three shows being staged this autumn, the metaphor is reversed 
by turning non-singing high-achieving controversial figures into musical 
leading ladies.

The story of Imelda Marcos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/11/jonathanwatts.mainsection>, the 
85‑year old former first lady of the Philippines, is told inHere Lies Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/23/here-lies-love-stage-review>, 
a disco-inspired piece byDavid Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/david-byrne> and Fatboy Slim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fatboy-slim>, which has its UK premiere at 
theNational Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> next 
month; the short and scandalous life of model and actorAnna Nicole Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-nicole-smith> (1967-2007) has returned 
to the Royal Opera House stage in a revival of Mark-Anthony Turnage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mark-anthony-turnage> and Richard Thomas's 
operaAnna Nicole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2011/feb/18/anna-nicole-opera>; and 
Eva Perón <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eva-peron> (1919-52), the 
matriarch of an Argentinian political dynasty, sings and dances withChe Guevara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/che-guevara> in a new production of Tim Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/timrice> and Andrew Lloyd Webber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber>'s Evita.

This coincidence raises the question which historical women are worth singing 
about. It is little surprise that, statistically, Joan of Arc has kindled most 
creativity in composers, with at least two dozen operas, musicals or 
song-cycles from talents including Verdi, Tchaikovsky and Bernstein. Fewer, 
though, would have predicted that so close behind Joan would beFrancesca da 
Rimini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/04/francesca-da-rimini-review>, an 
aristocratic friend of Dante and character in hisDivine Comedy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840221664>
, who has subsequently sparked 21 substantial pieces of music, among them works 
byRachmaninoff <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sergei-rachmaninov>, Rossini 
and Ambroise Thomas. The 14th-century Galician noblewoman Inês de Castro has 
also inspired numerous musicians, from Zingarelli to the contemporaryJames 
MacMillan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jamesmacmillan>.

As Francesca was an adulterer who was murdered, Joan of Arc became a famous 
fighter before being burned alive for heresy and Inês was decapitated after 
becoming a king's lover, it can be concluded that it is useful to a musical 
heroine to have defied the gender conventions of her society and then to die in 
a dramatic fashion. And, although Marcos has not so far done the latter, the 
protagonists ofHere Lies Love, Anna Nicole and Evita otherwise fit the template 
of highly sung women.
 Imelda Marcos in 1992. Photograph: Rex Features 
Marcos, Smith and Perón all improbably reinvented themselves from unpromising 
starts. Born into poor families, they achieved astonishing – and, in each case, 
legally contested – wealth by marrying powerful or rich men. The three women 
had all at some point made their living as actors and models and, in their 
public lives, went beyond even the status of supermodel to become a sort of 
hypermodel.

These transformations prompt a song in each show. Rice and Lloyd Webber's 
"Rainbow High" satirically depicts the makeover ("I came from the people, they 
need to adore me / So Christian Dior me from my head to my toes") that turns 
Eva from actor into national symbol. And Byrne and Slim, whose Imelda musical 
has been described as a "disco Evita", seem to be acknowledging the influence 
in the song "Walk Like a Woman" when Imelda turns from country girl into 
first lady: "I'm going to learn how to walk like a woman / I'm going to learn 
how to dress." Thomas and Turnage make these fairytale echoes explicit 
by including the words "once upon a time" in anAnna Nicole aria.

Both Eva and Imelda were (in common with Joan of Arc and Inês de Castro) Roman 
Catholics and, in the cult of national mother that Perón and Marcos encouraged 
around themselves, they were drawing on the iconography of their church's 
worship of the Blessed Virgin Mary, although perhaps downgrading chastity as a 
virtue.

Smith, nominally a Baptist, was less religious than the other women but 
the opera turns her into a quasi-saint by incorporating, in the opening scenes, 
the wordsRequiem aeternam dona eis, Domine ("Grant them eternal rest, O Lord") 
from the Catholic Mass of the Dead; a phrase that Rice and Lloyd Webber had 
earlier borrowed for a parodic requiem for their diva in Evita.

Most curiously, this trio of divas have all been involved in corpse-related 
oddities. Perón's body was embalmed and, following a trend set by Lenin, kept 
on public display. However, following the removal of her widower in a military 
coup, the remains were spirited away by the army and buried in Milan under a 
pseudonymous gravestone. When the Perónistas returned to power, Eva was exhumed 
and displayed for some time on a platform in the home of her husband.

A similar posthumous constancy was shown by Marcos, who kept her stuffed hubby 
in the basement of the family house in a refrigerated glass casket which, in a 
photo-op ghoulish even by political standards, she was pictured kissing when 
announcing one of her bids to run for office. The title of Here Lies Love is 
taken from a remark Imelda made when contemplating her husband's dead body.

Smith, found dead in a hotel room at 39, was less lucky with her after-death, 
reportedly decomposing with such unusual rapidity – possibly due to the volume 
of drugs that the autopsy discovered in her body – that, unusually for an 
American Protestant funeral, she was displayed in a closed casket. These 
obsequies are routine, however, in comparison with those of that frequent 
musical heroine Inês de Castro, whose body was exhumed and crowned queen by her 
grief-stricken royal lover, with the court reputedly ordered to kiss 
her decaying hand.
 Eva Perón. Photograph: Reuters 
A surprising number of modern historical women have already gone to their 
operatic reward, partly because the American composer Michael Daugherty 
incorporates a quartet of strong candidates –Jackie Onassis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jackie-onassis>, Maria Callas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2007/sep/14/mariacallasthegreatest>
, Princess Grace of Monaco andElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/elizabethtaylor> – in his Jackie O (1997). And
Hillary Rodham Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hillaryclinton>, 
surely a key subject for future biographers of historical women, inspired a 
mezzo-soprano role in Curtis K Hughes'sSay It Ain't So, Joe (2009), which 
musicalises her failed bid for the presidential nomination.

But, with the exception of Liz Taylor, all of those women come from the US, 
and – althoughEvita, Here Lies Love and Anna Nicole were wholly or partly 
composed by British talent – their protagonists are Argentinian, Filipino and 
American.

So which women from recent UK history may inspire pieces of musical theatre? 
The likeliest contenders would seem to beDiana, Princess of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/diana> and Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, who have already 
attracted interest. Thatcher's friendship with the Chilean dictatorAugusto 
Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> was the subject of 
Esteban Buch's operaAllies, premiered in Paris last year. And Diana has 
featured in two operas –Jonathan Dove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/05/jonathan-dove-choral-music-wells-cathedral-choir>
 andDavid Harsent <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-harsent>'s TV piece D
eath of a Princess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/mar/03/monarchy.johnarlidge> (2002) and A 
Lady Dies (2000), a German work by Stefan Hippe and Gerhard Falkner – and 
a ballet,Diana the Princess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/mar/13/dance> (2003), created by the 
Danish choreographerPeter Schaufuss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/feb/19/monarchy.arts>.

The dance piece was seen in Manchester but none of the Diana shows has yet 
appeared on a major London stage, possibly for reasons of institutional 
sensitivity, as the princess's former husband is the patron of the Royal Opera 
House and the Queen's cousin, Princess Alexandra, has the equivalent role 
at English NationalOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>.

During Evita's original London run, from 1978-86, audiences and satirists were 
tempted to make comparisons with another unprivileged girl turned imperious 
leader who, for most of those years, occupied No 10. The connection became even 
more compelling when, in 1982, Maggie went to war with Eva's nation over the 
Falklands. What an extraordinary operatic moment the clash of the Thatcherites 
and the Perónistas may one day provide.

• Anna Nicole is at the Royal Opera House, London WC2, until 24 September; 
roh.org.uk <http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/anna-nicole-by-richard-jones>. 
Here Lies Love is at the National Theatre, London SE1, from 1 October; 
nationaltheatre.org.uk <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/here-lies-love>.
Evita is at the Dominion theatre, London W1, from Tuesday until 1 November; 
dominiontheatre.com <http://www.dominiontheatre.com/theatre/evita/>.
 