
What is one to make of the critical reaction to the Royal Opera's new show 
about the life of Anna Nicole Smith? I'm supposed to tell you, I know. But 
look, read this,from Jessica Duchen in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/reviews/first-night-anna-nicole-royal-opera-house-2218425.html>
: "Shocking it isn't; stunning it is ... Richard Thomas's libretto would carry 
the day even if the score weren't as terrific as it is: varied, acidic, lyrical 
and occasionally heartbreaking." Now read this, fromAndrew Clark in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/dafa39ba-3b87-11e0-a96d-00144feabdc0.html>: "What a 
tragedy. What a waste ... Anna Nicole is not an opera. It's a 
musical-theatrical hybrid, so simplistic in its construction and vocal scoring, 
so cheap in its pseudo-sexual thrills and narcotic spills, that it wastes an 
opera house's resources."

This is how opinion has divided over Anna Nicole: deeply, and down the middle. 
In the view of the Guardian's Andrew Clements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/18/anna-nicole-review>, the whole 
project is "in thrall" to the libretto of Richard Thomas. "There are very few 
moments when the drama is driven by the music," Clements complains, "when the 
cartoon-like scenes, with cliche texts and schoolboy humour, are given shape 
and purpose by Turnage's contribution." And, asAnna Picard notes in the 
Independent on Sunday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/classical/reviews/anna-nicole-royal-opera-house-londonbrdie-fledermaus-wales-millennium-centre-cardiffbrthe-fairy-queen-queen-elizabeth-hall-london-2219809.html>
, "Richard Thomas's libretto follows the model he forged inJerry Springer: The 
Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/apr/30/theatre.artsfeatures2>, 
turning the air several shades of blue with alliterative argot then delivering 
a sucker-punch of Tin Pin Alley sentiment."

Yet Barry Millington of the Evening Standard loved it 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/music/review-23924427-the-rise-and-fall-of-anna-nicole.do>
. "The libretto ... is caustically witty, raucous and could only be quoted with 
care in a family newspaper," he says – without, unfortunately, doing so. "Not 
only does it flay the many undesirables who contributed to the tragic outcome 
of Anna Nicole's life – her family, her husbands, the cosmetic surgeon, the 
paparazzi – but it does so with knowing irony." The Telegraph'sRupert 
Christiansen also had a fabulous time 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/opera/8331452/Anna-Nicole-Royal-Opera-House-review.html>
. "Richard Jones's production is immaculately slick and deliciously 
imaginative," he says. "Antonio Pappano conducts with all the required pizzazz 
and an enraptured audience did its bit too, rewarding this world premiere with 
a tumultuous reception." But even Christiansen, though he awards the production 
five stars, can't quite make up his mind. "A masterpiece?" he wavers. "I don't 
know."

The lead singer, at least, reunites opinion. "A terrific gallery of caricature 
is led brilliantly by soprano Eva-Maria Westbroek as the doomed and decadent 
Anna," saysDavid Gillard in the Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1358034/Anna-Nicole-Smith-family-sue-Royal-Opera-House-father-daughter-blasts-sleazy-opera.html>
. Westbroek is "sensational", according toClare Colvin in the Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/posts/view/230179>. "She portrays her just this side 
of caricature, so that you feel some sympathy even at her most outrageous." 
Perhaps the Observer'sFiona Maddocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/20/anna-nicole-parsifal-nixon-china-review>
 and the Telegraph'sMichael White 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/culture/michaelwhite/100051609/anna-nicole-opera-gets-lost-in-its-own-froth/>
 find the most reflective assessments. "Spankingly naughty, riotously melodic 
and brilliantly performed, Anna Nicole … is a fabulous show," says Maddocks. 
"Whether it was great opera, and whether it pushes forward the art form, are 
harder questions." Meanwhile the show "is a colourful and naughty novelty with 
the appeal of a seaside postcard" in White's view. "But from a major, 
international and publicly funded opera house, you're entitled to hope for more 
than that."

Do say: What a splendid evening's entertainment.

Don't say: But is it opera?

The reviews reviewed: Brilliant rubbish. Just what Covent Garden should (or 
shouldn't) be doing.
 