
Emma Rice

When I first made The Red Shoes 
<http://www.kneehigh.co.uk/show/the-red-shoes.php> in Cornwall with Kneehigh, I 
dared to think that it might be something special, and dreamed of taking it to 
London. I put photos of the show in brown paper, tied them up with red ribbon 
and sent them to every theatre I could think of in town. Only one replied: BAC. 
David Jubb journeyed down to Heligan Gardens, sat on a hay bale, looked at the 
stars and booked the show.

Battersea Arts Centre: the show goes on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/15/battersea-arts-centre-fire-show-goes-on>
We have returned to BAC ever since, knowing that this is a place where you can 
be free, be brave, be supported and be encouraged to make the best work you are 
capable of making. BAC is home. It is where I grew up as an artist and where I 
return to when I need to be reminded of who I am. It is precious, it is 
irreplaceable and it is vital to the health of British theatre.


Arthur Smith 

BAC was one of the first theatres to offer me a spot when I was in a revue 
show back in the late 70s. I subsequently did my second play there, not to 
mention numerous standup gigs. Last September we tried the new long-form 
version ofmy Leonard Cohen show <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03vdl1v> 
first at BAC. There is an agreeable woody feel to the rooms and an audience 
that is open to new ideas. The redoubtable staircase that greets you as you 
enter the building feels elegantly at odds with the shows it whisks you up to. 
It’s like some benign school.

 Something special ... Kneehigh’s The Red Shoes 
Stewart Lee

When BAC’s funding was threatened a few years ago, many leaped to its defence 
citing the successful transfer of shows it had developed to the West End, or to 
more commercial areas generally, inadvertently falling into the kind of logic 
that Conservative culture mavens use to validate the arts, as if they were 
nothing but another branch of business.


The work of BAC was justified as a kind of test bed to produce shows, 
performers and ideas that would go on to make wealth-generating art. But BAC 
has always provided, and hopefully will always provide, space for artists to 
make work which seemed inherently worth having a go at, whatever its financial 
potential.

Sometimes this inherently worthwhile work would make money, often despite the 
fact that it may have looked obtuse at first. Sometimes it wouldn’t. But this 
is the purpose of (increasingly rare) places like BAC; to pursue ideas because 
ideas in and of themselves are valuable, and to do so in co-operation with a 
community.

Having appeared to survive shifts in social attitudes and government policy 
that don’t necessarily chime with this approach, it’s tragic that BAC was
consumed by something as straightforward as a fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/13/major-fire-at-battersea-arts-centre>
, which as far we know doesn’t have its own political agenda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429137366416%2Fa92c573b-b852-4f00-a541-46db8239842d-1654x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20BAC%20means%20to%20us%3A%20Arthur%20Smith%2C%20Emma%20Rice%2C%20Stewart%20Lee%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20BAC%20means%20to%20us%3A%20Arthur%20Smith%2C%20Emma%20Rice%2C%20Stewart%20Lee%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429137366416%2Fa92c573b-b852-4f00-a541-46db8239842d-1654x2040.jpeg>
 Stewart Lee and Richard Thomas, writers of Jerry Springer – the Opera. 
Photograph: Avalon 
Richard Thomas

A call came from BAC artistic director Tom Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tom-morris> some time back in 1999, asking 
if I was still up for performing the psycho-operaTourette’s Diva 
<http://www.bacarchive.org.uk/items/show/5113> that I’d been banging on about, 
drunk, in the BAC bar the year before.


Tourette’s Diva was my first show and is an unrepentant outpouring of bile, 
vitriol and (surprise) love. It’s also very funny. But we didn’t know how funny 
it was until Tom let me perform in front of a crowd. Tom said he didn’t need to 
hear any music or read any script and was happy for it to be performed in any 
state.

Tourette’s Diva stormed it. This tiny little show garnered some press from a 
few broadsheets and I can honestly say turned my career around. Tom then asked 
me what I wanted to do next. I told him: Jerry Springer – the Opera. “Great,” 
he said and booked it in the diary for that summer. We had no idea other than 
the idea and that seemed to be the whole idea.

Tom used to play trombone in meetings and loved the music of Tom Waits. I used 
to do a Tom Waits impression with five cigarettes. Ah, Battersea nights...

Toby Jones

I’ve been visiting BAC ever since I first wasn’t earning a living as an actor. 
In 1992, just out of drama school, we’d formed a theatre company and (like all 
the companies we dreamed of becoming) we headed to Battersea to try and get a 
gig. In the various bars and meeting rooms of the old town hall we all praised, 
envied and slagged each other off and felt we were part of a community. One 
part of me has never left that bar. Nowadays artists, poets, theatre companies 
and performers can go there with a whiff of an idea and step on a well-trodden 
ladder of development. They can eat and dream up a new theatre (there are 
artists’ bedrooms to sleep in) without the commercial pressures that will later 
come to prey on their vision. Battersea has managed to hold true to the radical 
tradition of its town hall by nurturing , defending and promoting all kinds of 
performance. We need to get the roof back on it as soon as possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429137487592%2F5bf01e06-d76c-4c52-99ff-57b11d779375-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20BAC%20means%20to%20us%3A%20Arthur%20Smith%2C%20Emma%20Rice%2C%20Stewart%20Lee%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20BAC%20means%20to%20us%3A%20Arthur%20Smith%2C%20Emma%20Rice%2C%20Stewart%20Lee%20and%20others&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fwhat-bac-means-to-us-arthur-smith-emma-rice-stewart-lee-and-others%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429137487592%2F5bf01e06-d76c-4c52-99ff-57b11d779375-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Forced Entertainment’s The Notebook was performed at BAC in 2014 
Tim Etchells

Ramshackle, idiosyncratic, confoundingly maze-like, too small and too large, 
yet somehow ideal and in any case endlessly changing and mutating its decor and 
dimensions, BAC is both a theatre/arts centre and at the same time clearly 
almost nothing of the kind, stuffed full of people watching intently or 
laughing like drains and discussing like wise fools or drunks or tomorrow’s 
intellectuals on a night off, half full of really slick, sharp and beautiful 
performance; and at the same time half full of really unfinished 
notes-in-action towards a performance; or else a space spilling over with a 
vivid set of fragments and scenes presented out of order, as work-in-progress; 
and at the same time half full of people looking for the bar, or for the creche 
or the kids group or a workshop or meeting; or else looking for a black cat 
called Pluto last seen padding across the mosaic tiles down there beneath the 
stained glass dome, or else just killing time on a piano that has somehow 
washed up in the foyer sometime, from somewhere, no one knows quite when, how 
or why; and at the same time half full of historical echoes, traces and 
reflections, the trials of conscientious objectors, the daily grind business of 
the Town Hall, the early meetings of the Communist Party of Great Britain; and 
at the same half full of questions, statements, arguments, propositions about 
theatre and the future of it (some more likely than others); and at the same 
time apparently more than half full of people loading out the remnants of an 
old set, or costumes, equipment and curtains from some previous thing; or else 
traversed by a self-organised search party scouring the whole entire building 
for a particular chair or lamp that’s gone missing, probably walkabout all on 
its own, lost somewhere in the labyrinth; and at the same time seemingly full, 
almost entirely full of hot air, full of possibilities, full of futures, full 
of love, attention and thinking and what you might think of as diverse forms of 
“necessary gathering”; joyous and alternately sombre or fractious, Battersea 
Arts Centre doesn’t stand alone – there are places of a similar heart, heat and 
vitality in Berlin, in Essen, Brussels, Antwerp, Leeds, Glasgow, Edinburgh and, 
Lisbon to name just some – but it is the one that is on so many minds right 
now, and for all kinds of reasons, it’s a really important, hugely valuable 
part of the performance scene in the UK and much further afield, a place that
Forced Entertainment <http://www.forcedentertainment.com/> and I have been more 
than lucky and very happy to call home for the last chunk of years, presenting 
works great and small, from performances to neon signs; and a place that I’d 
really love to see thrive, go on, turn around, vibrate, shimmer, walk tall, 
keep moving, change and continue.


 * Battersea Arts Centre Phoenix Fundraiser is at the Royal Festival Hall, 
Southbank Centre, London, on 18 April 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/battersea-arts-centre-phoenix-fundraiser-91631?dt=2015-04-18> 