
Shirley Hughes, author of classic picture books including the Alfie 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308797/> books, Dogger 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dogger.html> and her latest books for 
teenagers on the second world war:Hero on a Bicycle 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hero-on-a-bicycle.html> and the soon to be 
published Whistle Down The Wind
My choice is Carrie’s War <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/carrie-s-war.html>, 
by Nina Bawden. Carrie’s War paints a poignant and realistic picture of what 
the second world war was like for a child. The second world war was traumatic 
and frightening for children, and those being evacuated had to be very brave. 
Carrie’s War captures the true reality of war for a child, and it doesn’t 
sentimentalise war.


Katherine Rundell, author of Rooftoppers 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rooftoppers.html>
A book that made a huge impression on me was Number the Stars 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/number-the-stars.html> by Lois Lowry (the 
author of the sublime book, The Giver). It’s about two best friends, one 
Jewish, during the Nazi occupation of Denmark, and it’s extraordinary; honest 
and wise without being sentimental or exploitative. There’s a scene in it, with 
a sniffer dog and a boat filled with refugees, that still haunts me.

Michael Morpurgo, author of books including War Horse 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-horse-12.html>, Friend of Foe 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/friend-or-foe.html>, The Amazing Story of 
Adolphus Tips 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/amazing-story-of-adolphus-tips-2.html>
I would choose Goodnight Mr. Tom 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goodnight-mister-tom-6.html> and/or Carrie’s 
War <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/carrie-s-war-6.html>, both hugely relevant 
stories today, when we consider those refugee children worldwide fleeing from 
the devastation of war. It’s a subject I have written about often myself.

SF Said, author of Varjak Paw 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/varjak-paw-2.html> and Phoenix 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/phoenix-8.html>
I’d like to recommend two books on the second world war. The first is The 
Diary Of Anne Frank 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-young-girl-9.html>: for me, still 
the most powerful book about the war. Anne Frank’s voice was incredible: so 
honest and direct. I just wish she’d lived to write all the other books she 
wanted to write.

The other book I’d recommend is less well-known, but equally worth searching 
out: Robert Westall’sBlitzcat 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280971/>, a 
fantastically evocative novel about the Blitz. It’s told from the point of view 
of a cat who passes through many human lives, achieving something like what 
Michael Morpurgo’sWar Horse <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-horse.html> 
did with the first world war.

Philip Reeve, author of Mortal Engines 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mortal-engines.html> series and Cakes in Space 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/cakes-in-space.html>
My favourite second world war set book is Empire of the Sun 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/empire-of-the-sun.html> by JG Ballard, a 
child’s-eye view of war which is both startlingly unsentimental and weirdly 
dreamlike, it’s not written for children but teenagers would enjoy it. I also 
want to recommend Pied Piper by Neville Shute, which was actually written 
during the war and is about an elderly Englishman who becomes responsible for a 
growing group of children as he tries to escape from the German invasion of 
France in 1940. I read it as a child, and it left a deep impression.

Tony Bradman, author of My Brother’s Keeper 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-brother-s-keeper.html>
I want to recommend three: Last Train from Kummersdorf 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293962/> by Leslie 
Wilson – this is a terrific story about Hanno and Effi, a boy and a girl trying 
too survive in the chaos of Germany at the end of the war. Johnnie’s Blitz by 
Bernard Ashley – a gritty, hard-edged novel about Johnnie Stubbs, a boy who 
finds himself on the run and looking after a three-year-old girl in the blitz.
The Machine Gunners 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280970/> by Robert 
Westall – still one of the best books for children about the second world war. 
Geordie lad Chas McGill adds the ultimate trophy to his collection of war 
souvenirs – a working machine gun from a crashed German bomber…

James Dawson, author of Under My Skin 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/under-my-skin-268032.html>, current Queen of 
Teen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/11/james-dawson-wins-queen-of-teen>
My favourite second world war story is a beautiful picture book called Rose 
Blanche <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rose-blanche.html> by Ian McEwan 
(illustrated by Roberto Innocenti). After soldiers come to her German town, 
young Rose follows a strange truck through the forest, unprepared for the 
horrors she witnesses behind a barded wire fence. Originally published in 1985, 
the book clearly influenced both Schindler’s List andThe Boy in the Striped 
Pyjamas <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-striped-pyjamas.html>, and 
the haunting illustrations stayed with me long after I finished the book.

Anne Frank: 10 beautiful quotes from The Diary of a Young Girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/27/the-greatest-anne-frank-quotes-ever>
Louise O’Neill, author of Only Ever Yours 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/only-ever-yours.html>
I was fascinated by the second world war as a child and begged my mother to 
buy me as many books as she could on the subject. Some of these have stayed 
with me ever since. Anne Frank’s Diary, Carrie’s War by Nina Bawden,Goodnight 
Mr. Tom <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goodnight-mister-tom-6.html>, and Back 
Home <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/back-home-4.html> by Michelle Magorian, 
and of course, the wonderfulWhen Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-hitler-stole-pink-rabbit.html> by Judith 
Kerr. But the book I remember having the greatest impact on me wasSummer of my 
German Soldier <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summer_of_My_German_Soldier> by 
Bette Greene. I read it when I was about 10 and it was the first time I gave 
any consideration to the fact that not all of the Germans fighting in the war 
were inhumane monsters. The eponymous German soldier, Anton, has no interest in 
Nazi ideology; he is simply a young man caught up in something beyond his 
control. It’s a powerful book about love and desperation.

Twilight Vi, site member
The book that I love most on the second world war is Carrie’s War 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/carrie-s-war-6.html> by Nina Bawden. It made 
me think about what it’s like to be evacuated and I just love this book. I 
really want Jacqueline Wilson to write a book about an evacuee, I think it 
would be brilliant.

Sita Brahmachari, author of Artichoke Hearts 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/artichoke-hearts.html> and Red Leaves 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/red-leaves.html>
My choices are The Book Thief 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-thief-4.html> by Markus Zusak. This book 
and the young heroine Liesel Meminger’s story is one of personal friendship and 
courage with “the enemy” against all odds. When Liesel steals a book from her 
wealthy employer her world begins to expand. Despite the fact that these books 
are read in the basement of her house while bombs fall all around her. The book 
speaks of the power of literature to open people’s hearts to each other. She 
and her foster father cannot stand by and see the young Jewish man who is her 
friend be taken by the Nazis and when he is at his lowest ebb it is Liesel 
reading from her stolen books that keeps hope in his heart. This book will make 
you cry, restore your faith in human nature and think about the power of 
stories to transform lives.

I also want to recommend a book for younger children: The Lion and The Unicorn 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lion-and-the-unicorn-2.html> by Shirley 
Hughes, a beautiful picture book story of a boy who holds on to the badge he is 
given by his father as he goes off to fight in the war. Through all Lenny’s 
trials – having to be evacuated, fear for his father’s safety, missing his 
mother and meeting a wounded soldier – it this badge of the Lion and the 
Unicorn that keeps him believing in hope. It seems to have an almost magical 
power. Shirley Hughes’s illustrations bring home the loneliness and confusion 
that war brings to children’s lives.

Paul Dowswell, author of The Story of the Second World War 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/story-of-the-second-world-war.html> and 
Ausländer <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/auslander.html>
These are written for adults, but great for teens: The World at War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/30/historybooks.features1> by 
Richard Holmes, the book accompanying the unbeatable 1970s TV documentary 
series. These eye-witness accounts just pip Studs Turkel’s similarThe Good War  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Good_War>at the post, with first hand 
testimony by everyone from Lord Mountbatten to Hitler’s secretary Traudl Junge, 
and the poor chaps on the ground who had to do the actual fighting.

Site member ItWasLovelyReadingYou
My second world war book recommendation is Code Name Verity 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/code-name-verity-266205.html> by Elizabeth Wein
. I cannot stress how much I love this book, and if I described why I liked it 
i’d probably just echo my review so yeah, Code Name Verity!

Sarah McIntyre, author and illustrator whose books include Oliver and the 
Seawigs <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/oliver-and-the-seawigs-2.html>
My favourite second world war book growing up was called Marta and the Nazis 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13264644-marta-and-the-nazis> by Frances 
Cavanah. It follows the escape from Austria of a Jewish girl who’s secretly 
carrying the family diamonds in her baby doll’s bottle. But I think it’s out of 
print… So I’m going to choose another couple of YA books too:Maus 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/complete-maus.html> by Art Spiegelman. 
Spiegelman’s groundbreaking use of comics to tell the story of a man 
interviewing his father about the Holocaust feels even more universal because 
he chooses to draw its human characters as different kinds of animals.Empire of 
the Sun <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/empire-of-the-sun.html> by JG Ballard: 
a young Brit named Jamie scavenges an existence alone in wartime Shanghai and 
in Japanese prison camps, coming to identify with his captors, admiring their 
fighter pilots and losing any sense of taking sides in the international 
conflict.

Judith Kerr: I wasn’t scared enough. That’s how I nearly gave us away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/18/judith-kerr-interview-when-hitler-stole-pink-rabbit-mog>
Jessamy Taylor, author of King’s Company
Recommending something to read about the second world war is particularly 
difficult because the good books (The Diary of Anne Frank, Goodnight Mr Tom, 
The Boy in Striped Pyjamas,The Silver Sword 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/silver-sword-6.html>, and many, many more) are 
also very important. My own best-loved one is When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit, 
Judith Kerr’s story of her family leaving Berlin in 1933 and living as refugees 
in Switzerland, Paris and finally England. It’s warm and compassionate and very 
funny. When I read it to my daughters, one of them laughed until she fell off 
the bed at Max and his French homework. Then we cried over Onkel Julius, 
because the fear, and the terrible implications of Hitler winning the election, 
are all there too, calmly and clearly explained. It’s a wonderful book and I’ll 
not just recommend it, I’ll plead for it to be read.

Leslie Wilson, author of My Last Train from Kummersdorf 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293962/>
Good Night Mr Tom by Michelle Magorian is a deeply touching story that 
confounds expectations of “the war story”. Linda Newbery’sSisterland 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sisterland.html> displays a profound 
understanding of the complexities of human experience, as well as being an 
engrossing read with a highly sympathetic main character.

Shalini Boland, author of the Outside 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/outside.html> dystopia series as well as A 
Shirtful of Frogs 
<http://someonewotwrites.blogspot.co.uk/p/shirtful-of-frogs.html>, a second 
world war timeslip adventure
I want to recommend Goodnight Mr Tom 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goodnight-mister-tom-6.html> by Michelle 
Magorian is a beautiful tale of the makeshift families that were created when 
children were evacuated from the cities. At first it seems as though 
nine-year-old Londoner Willie Beech is sent from one terrible, abusive 
situation to another; but Mr Tom isn’t as gruff as his exterior… I also adored
The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/boy-in-the-striped-pyjamas.html>by John Boyne. 
It’s a shocking, heart-wrenching tale, but absolutely gripping. A true modern 
classic that will make you think long after you turn the last page.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwhat-are-the-best-childrens-books-on-the-second-world-war-ve-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430909620315%2F2ea29ca0-1bbe-433a-9b20-05309cabebf7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20best%20children's%20books%20on%20the%20second%20world%20war%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwhat-are-the-best-childrens-books-on-the-second-world-war-ve-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20best%20children%27s%20books%20on%20the%20second%20world%20war%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fwhat-are-the-best-childrens-books-on-the-second-world-war-ve-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430909620315%2F2ea29ca0-1bbe-433a-9b20-05309cabebf7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Asa Butterfield in The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas. Photograph: 
c.Miramax/Everett / Rex Features 
Laxmi Hariharan, author of The Many Lives of Ruby Iyer
I’m going to recommend The English Patient 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/english-patient-2.html>, Michael Ondaatje’s 
novel for adults which is perfect for older teens. I saw the film before I read 
the book. Not one but two doomed love affairs set towards the end of the second 
world war. I loved the vast richness of his canvas from an Italian monastery to 
the deserts of North Africa, the weaving of the politics of war with the power 
play of passion, all exhilarated with the thirst for exploration and adventure. 
I also loveUnder the Blood Red Sun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Under_the_Blood_Red_Sun> by Graham Salisbury – I 
love this coming of age story set in Hawaii in 1941 when the Japanese launch a 
surprise attack on Pearl Harbour. It shows how devastating an effect a war can 
have on children. In this case it changes Tomi’s life from being an all 
American baseball loving teen, to becoming an enemy in the eyes of his 
neighbours and finally to rediscovering his pride in his Japanese heritage. So, 
ultimately it helped him find his identity and place in society.

Site member, Infinity scolopendra 
I like the Michael Morpurgo books on the second world war.

Piers Torday, author of the Last Wild 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/last-wild.html> trilogy
I have a few to recommend! First of all Hero on a Bicycle 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hero-on-a-bicycle.html> by Shirley Hughes. 
Shirley Hughes is one of my literary heroes but her story is about a very 
different kind of hero. Britain was never invaded during the war, but this 
tense adventure gives a thrilling taste of the dilemmas which might have faced 
young people if we had been.

Girl With a White Dog 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-with-a-white-dog.html> by Anne Booth. 
This story is not set during the second world war, but without giving the 
clever plot away, it is about a young girl confronting her family’s past role 
in the conflict and discovering that while the 1940s feel far away now, many 
prejudices which inflamed the hostilities then remain all too current.

Otto <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/otto.html> by Tomi Ungerer. A 
beautifully illustrated classic tale about a teddy bear separated from his 
Jewish owner at the start of the war – will they ever find each other again? 
Says so much with great simplicity and power.

And lastly, The Machine Gunners 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280970/> by Robert 
Westall. As a young boy growing up in the North East, I remember being hooked 
by this Carnegie award-winning yarn about five children from the region who 
find a working machine gun in a crashed Luftwaffe plane and set about defending 
their home town from bombing raids with dramatic results. It made me realise 
that war sweeps everyone up in its path, whatever their age.

Damian Kelleher, author of A Dog in No-man’s Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/apr/12/first-world-war-dog-in-no-mans-land-damian-kelleher>
I’d choose Robert Westall’s The Machine Gunners 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280970/>. It’s the 
second world war seen through the eyes of Chas, a teenage boy on Tyneside, and 
Westall brings the whole business of war down to a very personal level. He also 
creates an incredibly exciting adventure with Chas and his gang finding a 
German machine gun and the lengths they go to conceal it. I can also recommend 
Michael Foreman’sWar Boy <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-boy.html>, his 
beautifully illustrated second world war memoir of his childhood in Suffolk. It 
includes the true story of the bomb that comes crashing through the roof, 
bounces round his bedroom before landing in the grate and exploding up the 
chimney.

Top 10 animal war heroes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/04/top-10-animal-war-heroes-first-world-war-megan-rix>
Sarwat Chadda, author of the Ash Mistry  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ash-mistry-and-the-world-of-darkness.html>
series
My choice is William Carries On 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/just-william-4.html> by Richmal Crompton, was 
published right in the heart of the second world war. We see all its little 
absurdities played out in the life and times of William Brown, always aged 11. 
The book is a collection of seven stories, ranging from how William discovers 
that lemon soap (guest size) does not make for a good lemon substitute in 
cooking, to how the village suffers from a “Bomb Inferiority Complex”, to how 
William (sort of) captures Hitler in the old barn, to finally witnessing his 
attempts to accelerate the peace process by having Violet Elizabeth run over by 
a train. Or at least lie between the tracks.

Bernard Ashley, author of Dead End Kids 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/307156/> and Johnnie’s 
Blitz
My favourite, in order, are: The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank, The 
Machine Gunners by Robert Westall,I Am David 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-am-david.html> by Anne Holm, Carrie’s War by 
Nina Bawden, The Silver Sword by Ian Serraillier. I also want to quote what 
14-year-old Yitskhok Rudashevski wrote in his diary during his imprisonment in 
the Vilna Ghetto:

Today the ghetto celebrated the circulation of the one hundred thousandth book 
in the ghetto library. The festival was held in the auditorium of the theatre. 
… Hundreds of people read in the ghetto. The reading of books in the ghetto is 
the greatest pleasure for me. The book unites us with the future, the book 
unites us with the world.

He was killed in 1944.

Rachel McIntyre, author of Me and Mr J 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/me-and-mr-j.html>
I love Back Home <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/back-home-4.html> by 
Michelle Magorian. The moving experiences of an evacuee returning from America 
to drab, post-war England. Rusty’s bewilderment and confusion is so vivid in 
this heartfelt book. And I’d also like to recommendCode Name Verity 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/code-name-verity-266205.html> by Elizabeth 
Wein. Every detail of every scene is woven into a story so fast-paced, it had 
me literally holding my breath as I turned the pages. An authentic and gripping 
read rooted in female friendship and heroism.

Ayesha, site member
My favourite second world war book would most definitely have to be The Book 
Thief <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-thief-4.html> by Marcus Zusak. This 
is because it is told in the perspective of Death and not in an English or 
French or German or Russian perspective, showing that no one is being 
dishonest. It is about an innocent young girl who discovers a love for reading 
and who doesn’t understand exactly why there is a Jew hiding in the basement. I 
love the innocence that is portrayed in this book as well as the brutality of 
Death’s narration. It is an addictive read and I highly highly recommend it to 
anyone.

Thedauntlessbookthief, site member
My all time favourite book (that just so happens to be set during the second 
world war) is The Book Thief by Markus Zusak.

Lottie Longshanks, site member
I would recommend anything written by Michael Morpurgo about the war, 
especiallyFriend or Foe <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/friend-or-foe.html>. I 
also enjoyed The Machine Gunners by Robert Westall andStorm Warning 
<http://freespace.virgin.net/wbb.ltd/titles/stormwarning.html> by Mara Kay. My 
two absolute favourites areFireweed 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/fireweed.html> by Jill Paton Walsh and The 
Snow Goose <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/snow-goose.html> by Paul Gallico.

ButterflyLion, site member
I really like Adolphus Tips 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/amazing-story-of-adolphus-tips-2.html> by 
Michael Morpurgo.

PetrovaFossil, site member
My favourite second world war book is The Book Thief by Markus Zusak; I loved 
the way the characters spoke to me as if they were real. I felt part of the 
story and the fact that is was narrated by Death just made it all the more 
believable! I love Liesel’s and Rudi’s relationship and was in tears when the 
bomb hit the street. It is one of the best books that I have ever read and one 
of the very few that has made me emotional.

The Book Bunch, site members
We loved When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit, Judith Kerr. We were moved to tears by 
Once by Morris Gleitzman
Danielle Woodward (@daniellewoody14) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Goodnight Mister Tom 
and When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit. My faves when I was young#VEDay70 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/VEDay70?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/daniellewoody14/status/596580368943316992> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/daniellewoody14/status/596580368943316992> 
David, on email

This choice or recommendation may seem a little obscure, or obtuse, but I’d 
offer The Book of Merlyn by T H White. Though not published until 1977, it was 
written in 1941 and deals, not directly but through analogy, with the causes of 
the war and its consequences in the militarisation of human life. The character 
of Mordred from the traditional Arthurian cycle is updated to be head of a 
political movement, called The Thrashers, with obviously fascistic overtones 
(though they may also echo the Oprichniki of Ivan IV, known as Ivan the 
Terrible – a kind of medieval SS in some versions of events). White, though a 
tortured soul in some respects, had a depth of compassion for humanity that’s 
evident in this anti-fascist allegory, a work that remains neglected because it 
wasn’t included with the original Once and Future King collection.
Jenni Fuchs (@jennifuchs) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit by Judith 
Kerr. I re-read it just recently :)
 <https://twitter.com/jennifuchs/status/596582264315731968> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/jennifuchs/status/596582264315731968> 
Annie, on email

My favourite book about the second world war is Peggy Larkin’s War by Trevor 
Forest. It’s excellently written and has my grandchildren enthralled whenever 
we read it.
Melanie J Florence (@MelanieJFlorenc) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Jane Gardam's A Long 
Way from Verona with both frightening scene of bombing in NE, and hilarious 
wartime teashop visit.
 <https://twitter.com/MelanieJFlorenc/status/596610669182656512> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/MelanieJFlorenc/status/596610669182656512> 
Scott, on email

I would like to nominate Trevor Forest’s book Peggy Larkin’s War as the best 
children’s book about the second world war.
Scott McChesney (@scottrmcchesney) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> I have vivid memories of The Silver Sword 
from primary school. Very powerful and thought-provoking book.
 <https://twitter.com/scottrmcchesney/status/596581483206279169> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/scottrmcchesney/status/596581483206279169> 
Lynn, on email

I nominate Peggy Larkin’s War by Trevor Forest. A beautiful and engaging 
friendship. My daughter LOVES this book.
Laleh Hobbs (@Laleh_online) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Fireweed by Jill Paton Walsh. Its impact 
still stays with me, decades on.#VEDay70 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/VEDay70?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Laleh_online/status/596580706664509440> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Laleh_online/status/596580706664509440> 
Verity (aged 14), on email

I nominate Biggles Defies the Swastika 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/biggles-defies-the-swastika.html> by W.E. 
Johns. It’s a classic adventure story set during the invasion of Norway in the 
second world war. I think this part of the war is perhaps a little less well 
known, and also the author is more obscure now. Johns was a pilot and so the 
information about second world war aeroplanes is very interesting and detailed. 
This story also has a confrontation between Biggles and his arch enemy, Erich 
von Stalhien, a German Intelligence officer. It makes for an entertaining and 
informative read, as Biggles and his associates attempt to evade capture in 
order to escape to London with important military information.
Meadowlark (@4norsemen) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> No doubt it would be 
the Nevil Shute novel Pied Piper 1942
 <https://twitter.com/4norsemen/status/596580636707553280> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/4norsemen/status/596580636707553280> Fruin O'Dill 
(@FruinODill) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Little known,much loved 
as a child: The Last Flower,James Thurber.Could be any war but written '39 
after invasion of Poland
 <https://twitter.com/FruinODill/status/596586988872032256> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/FruinODill/status/596586988872032256> Ruth Kennedy 
(@ruthkennedy) 
@EmilyDrabs <https://twitter.com/EmilyDrabs> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Ian Serrellier's The Silver Sword
 <https://twitter.com/ruthkennedy/status/596587858045116417> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ruthkennedy/status/596587858045116417> Pramodha Weerasekera
(@wpramodha) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> The Book Thief and Boy in The Striped 
Pyjamas
 <https://twitter.com/wpramodha/status/596587048191938560> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/wpramodha/status/596587048191938560> Irish Writers' Union 
(@WritersUnion_ie) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> @jabberworks 
<https://twitter.com/jabberworks> Sandi Toksvig's Hitler's Canary, about a 
Danish theatre family under Nazis - excellent#WW2KidsBooks 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WW2KidsBooks?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/WritersUnion_ie/status/596584595606413312> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/WritersUnion_ie/status/596584595606413312> Lisa Donnelly 
(@LisaDonnelly12) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Morris Gleitzman's 4bk series beginning 
+Once-read 2many yr6 classes & thy wld even miss lunch to hear more
 <https://twitter.com/LisaDonnelly12/status/596584157330804736> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/LisaDonnelly12/status/596584157330804736> Harper360 
(@Harper360UK) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> We love Pennies for 
Hitler by@Ozlaureate <https://twitter.com/Ozlaureate> - WW2 seen through the 
eyes of a young German boy Georgpic.twitter.com/UfnRtGVN5a 
<http://t.co/UfnRtGVN5a>
 <https://twitter.com/Harper360UK/status/596611040470786048> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Harper360UK/status/596611040470786048> Harry Oulton 
(@HarryOulton1) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> WW2 Henderson's Boys, 
Robert Muchamore's exciting series, Art Spiegelman's heartbreaking Maus, my 
favourite graphic novel.
 <https://twitter.com/HarryOulton1/status/596625073924141056> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/HarryOulton1/status/596625073924141056> Lara 
(@still_readingme) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Susan Cooper's Dawn of 
Fear- growing up WW2style, air raids etc, not old enough to be frightened -but 
having to learn.
 <https://twitter.com/still_readingme/status/596832995450822658> May 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/still_readingme/status/596832995450822658> Tessa Wooldridge
(@OzKidsYALit) 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> Morris Gleitzman's 
'Once' and 'Then':http://t.co/08C8HI4CjK <http://t.co/08C8HI4CjK> 
pic.twitter.com/m8JoSCa1Py <http://t.co/m8JoSCa1Py>
 <https://twitter.com/OzKidsYALit/status/596795699632611328> May 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OzKidsYALit/status/596795699632611328>  