
Perhaps I shouldn't be telling you this, but 1 April is not only a festival of 
pranks. It is the day each year when journalists get to tell their readers, 
subtly and affectionately, what they really think of them. Each March they ask 
themselves: what crazy nonsense has a chance of being believed this year? So 
they bait their hook with an exaggeration of the stuff their readers usually 
pounce on.

Judging from this year's articles – at least if you read the Mail, the Times, 
the Telegraph, the Independent or, yes, the Guardian – journalists think you 
are very hostile to Scottish independence 2014. If Scots vote yes, you expect 
wackiness to reign, perhaps even including:a secretly approved new flag that 
desecrates "Britain's greatness" 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2593781/Scot-free-Union-Jack-gets-Yes-vote-makeover-Secret-Government-papers-reveal-flag-look-Scotland-votes-independence.html>
 (Mail),coins with Alex Salmond's head on them 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/scotland/scottish-politics/10735711/Alex-Salmond-to-replace-the-Queen-on-new-Scottish-pound-coin.html>
 (Telegraph),coins with some random German's head on them 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/uk/scotland/article4051056.ece> (Times), UN 
peacekeepers preventing hooligan showdowns at the border 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/exclusive-un-draws-up-peacekeeping-plans-in-event-of-scottish-yes-vote-9226892.html>
 (Independent) anda "spiral interchange" to help cars drive on the right in 
Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/01/scotland-driving-on-right-independence-road-scheme>
 (Guardian).

By comparison, the redtops are more far-fetched and less political – 
suggesting that they think their readers, let's say, have a simpler view of 
things. For instance the Sun announced thatthe Queen is planning to allow shale 
gas to be fracked out of the Buckingham Palace garden 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/5543633/Queen-to-get-fracking-drilling-for-gas-in-Buckingham-Palace-back-garden.html>
, while the Mirror includeda picture of a new six-legged lamb 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/weird-news/six-legged-lambs-produced-increase-food-3320559>
 along with news thatOne Direction would be required to get haircuts like Kim 
Jong-un's in order to tour North Korea 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/one-direction-kim-jong-un-north-3320077>
. The Express nicely wound up Spurs and Arsenal fans by reporting thatthe rival 
clubs had agreed to share the Emirates stadium 
<http://www.express.co.uk/sport/football/467974/EXCLUSIVE-Arsenal-and-Spurs-agree-to-STUNNING-Emirates-groundshare>
.

If anything, the starkest reader-mocking is in the specialist publications. 
The Bookseller told readers that Amazon (its hated overlord)has plans to open a 
bookshop on the International Space Station 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/amazon-open-bookstore-international-space-station.html>
. Mumsnet announced to its own overmighty readership that soon the website 
would take over a real maternity ward. The football statistics firm Opta spent 
the whole morning giving substance to football's blokeish clichesin its Twitter 
feed <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe> (eg: "Players who wear gloves in the Premier 
League make half as many tackles on average than those who don't."). Academics, 
many of whom like to deride Michael Gove's cobwebbed views, read in Times 
Higher Educationthat gowns and mortar boards might soon be made compulsory on 
campus 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/gowns-and-mortarboards-could-be-compulsory-under-gove/2012382.article#.UzpXDlm_2Bc.twitter>
.

If any of these hurt your feelings, I apologise. Just be glad you weren't the 
reader who believed that Gove story and registered his fury in the comments.
 