
A couple of years ago I wrote a piece on the Australian actor Alex Dimitriades 
<http://www.themonthly.com.au/meeting-alex-dimitriades-kid-grows-peter-robb-3778>
. Alex had stumbled from high school into a career as a film and TV star a bit 
over 20 years before, and he was still a significant presence on Australian 
screens. But a sense of slippage was growing.

I'd met him a decade before, when we workshopped a play at the Sydney Theatre 
Company <http://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/>. He was an actor of great intuitive 
strength, as good on stage as in his films.Head On 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0138487/> had caused a stir in Cannes a short time 
before. He seemed at the top of his game, and full of promise still. I didn't 
know it, but the brilliant young film actor's career was already beginning to 
slow. The titles alone of the films he made over the next 10 years would be 
toe-curling. After Head On, nothing tested him.

We met again at the end of that decade of diminishing returns, not long before 
the release of of a six-part TV film of Christos Tsiolkas's portrait of urban 
Australia's psyche,The Slap <https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-slap>. Alex 
played one combatant in the confrontation at the story's centre. I hadn't yet 
seen The Slap, but wanted to write about him.

Alex on the verge of 40 projected of inner crisis and brought back in a 
painful rush my own catastrophe of 25 years before. That awful moment seems to 
be more sudden and shocking for men. Overnight you become aware of mortality. 
Specifically, your own. You realize you're on an irreversible downward slide. 
Your judgement goes haywire. Your senses get raw. How much worse it must have 
been for an actor whose looks were valued so stupidly over his art.

I wrote of him that as he nears 40, a man's body begins to die. What followed 
was less bleak, I hope. Everyone's life is complex, none of the story lines are 
straight, not even the downhill one. Then I saw Alex inThe Slap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-slap>, and how he'd harnessed everything 
he'd learnt about the illusions of early success into a powerful and subtle and 
quite harrowing portrait of a rich, successful and desperately insecure man 
heading into middle age. It was a performance that vindicated everything I'd 
intuited in his acting. Alex had turned his crisis into mature art.

A lot of people remarked on that article. All of them were men. And what they 
remarked on was not Alex Dimitriades's newly affirmed skills as an actor, but 
the first line on the death of the body. Men about to pass into what earlier 
civilizations thought of as old age, and those who had already crossed the 
dread threshold, quoted it back to me in tones running from amusement through 
grim relish to sheer horror. A nerve had been struck and the pain blocked out 
the words that followed.

The piece was included in a book 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/elegance-at-every-step-20120525-1z9ql.html>
 and the quoting started again. I'm not sure what to make of it now. My own 
crisis had been protracted and excruciating but the aggravating circumstance of 
a wholly misspent life accounted for that. Surely things must be different for 
men who haven't wasted their first 40 years? The way women experience life and 
its phases seems to me so utterly different that I can speak only of my own sex.

The piece on Alex Dimitriades was one of several on Australian artists of 
various kinds, and the only one in which age raised its head overtly. But as 
the series progressed I was amazed to find that every single one was knocking 
40.

I think it was their age that made these encounters so rewarding. They were 
all — theatre director, video artist, playwright, film maker, dress designer — 
people of real achievement with a lot to say about what they'd done and what 
they were doing now. They were remarkably open and eager to explain themselves, 
to be hesitant, to be frank about their uncertainties.

At first I thought it had to do with my own age. I had a quarter of a century 
on these artists and was old enough not to be even subliminally a threat. They 
could be kind and relaxed around me. Advanced maturity brings its own set of 
challenges, but that is another story.

The artists had clearly not made wrong choices, unlike perhaps their coeval my 
dentist, who has just bought a brace of powerful motorbikes and a set of racing 
leathers, and when not peering into aging mouths seeks the peace of Zen while 
hurtling around a racetrack behind his instructor.

Only later did I think that maybe they too were feeling that tremor of doubt 
and that the sense of mortality lent their responses its slight edge of 
anxiety. Two of them, a few months after our meetings, became fathers to a 
first child in almost exact coincidence with their fortieth birthday.

One of these was the video artist Shaun Gladwell 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/shaun-gladwell/>, whose beautiful 
work mostly involves the aesthetics of great athleticism and high technology, 
from skateboarding to fighter jets. In his last big Australian show — when he 
was 39 — Shaun finished off with an installation exploring the inside of a 
human skull by an endoscopic video camera. Its findings were projected on to a 
wall of water vapour and looked like a very rocky road. He called his memento 
moriEndoscopic Vanitas 
<http://www.annaschwartzgallery.com/works/exhibitions?artist=86&year=2009&work=12380&exhibition=302&page=5&future=&projects=&current=&c=m>
.

Just recently, not long after emailing the first pix of his son Zeno from 
London, Shaun posted me a beautiful image of a human skull, drawn by him in 
cuttlefish ink with a goose quill. It was his fortieth birthday present.
 