
We went on a family outing to see the film of Paddington and all – from 
grandparents down to a two year old – loved it! It made us wonder about other 
popular bears in children’s stories. Can you give us other good books about 
bears?

Bears have long been very popular in children’s books. If you forget that they 
are actually very big and heavy and can be very fierce, they seem to be 
remarkably loveable! Part of their popularity may lie in the fact that they 
walk on two legs and not four which makes them seem closer to humans than some 
other animals.

There are several popular fictional bears from the past. The best-known across 
all media is AA Milne’s Winnie-the-Pooh. AA Milne based his famous bear on a 
stuffed bear called Winnie which belonged to his son Christopher Robin. This 
toy bear was itself named after a Canadian Black bear whose name referenced his 
original home in Winnipeg, which Christopher Robin visited in the London Zoo.

Winnie-the-Pooh made his first appearance in print in When We Were Very Young 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-we-were-very-young.html>, a collection of 
poems for the nursery by AA Milne. This was followed by two collections of 
stories about him;Winnie-the-Pooh  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-5.html>and The House at Pooh 
Corner <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/house-at-pooh-corner-3.html>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaddington-best-books-on-bears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419856650609%2F0e3ab00e-6387-491f-874b-e1d1229b2930-1393x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20are%20the%20best%20books%20on%20bears%20to%20read%20%20after%20watching%20Paddington%20the%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaddington-best-books-on-bears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20are%20the%20best%20books%20on%20bears%20to%20read%20%20after%20watching%20Paddington%20the%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaddington-best-books-on-bears%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419856650609%2F0e3ab00e-6387-491f-874b-e1d1229b2930-1393x2040.jpeg>
 Is there anybody who wouldn’t like to play “Poohsticks: with Winnie the Pooh, 
with Piglet and Christopher Robin? Photograph: Philip Toscano/PA 
For the stories, AA Milne’s created a wonderful cast of other animal 
characters including Rabbit, Kanga, Tigger and Eeyore the donkey. AA Milne’s 
bear was extremely popular from when it was first published and later became a 
household name world-wide as one of Disney’s largest and most-successful 
franchises.

Created at almost the same time but in a very different style Mary Tourtel’s 
Rupert Bear, a humanised bear who dressed like a smart young boy. Rupert first 
appeared in a strip cartoon in a daily newspaper. Like Winnie-the-Pooh, he grew 
to have a loyal following first among readers of the newspaper and later with 
audiences who came across him in other media.

Michael Bond created Paddington in 1958, almost thirty years after the two 
famous forebears but, like them, he quickly attracted a loyal following. 
Paddington was inspired by a bear which Michael Bond saw abandoned on a shelf 
in a shop. His clever representation of the bear as both convincingly “bearish” 
with his origins in Darkest Peru and semi-human with his love for marmalade and 
attempts to live comfortably alongside a family, made him instantly loveable.

More bear but still with human characteristics is Rudyard Kipling’s Baloo, the 
sloth bear who appears inThe Jungle Book 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-jungle-book.html>. In Kipling’s story, and 
especially in Disney’s version on film, Baloo is a kind and fun-loving mentor 
to Mowgli, the boy child. Kipling describes Baloo’s greatest treat as being a 
feast of termites and ants – as a vegetarian he is certainly not as threatening 
as bear as some can be!

Other books about bears include Sheila Lavelle’s Ursula Bear 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6866772-ursula-bear>, the delightful story 
of a little girl who can turn herself into a bear with the help of a magic 
spell she has learnt from a library book and Gill Lewis’sMoon Bear 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/moon-bear.html>, the story of a young boy’s 
fight to save a bear cub from a cruel future on a bear farm.

Of course after watching Paddington at the cinema, you can go on to read his 
other many other adventures in some or all of Michael Bond’s 26 Paddington 
adventure books. His latestLove from Paddington 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-from-paddington.html>, a collection of 
letters from Paddington to his Aunt Lucy (yes Paddington in first person!) 
gives a whole new angle on Padders!

Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
booksjoin here, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 