
My son has read all of the Diary of a Wimpy Kid titles and has loved them. But 
now he wants to find something else. What should he read next?

Your son is far from alone in loving Wimpy Kid. Jeff Kinney’s titles shot to 
the top of the bestseller lists withDiary of a Wimpy Kid 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-wimpy-kid-book-1.html>, the first 
title in the series, in 2008. And with every new book, fromThe Last Straw 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-wimpy-kid-the-last-straw-book-3.html>
 in 2009 to book 9,The Long Haul 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-wimpy-kid-the-long-haul-book-9.html>
, which was published in 2014, the pattern has been repeated.

One of the attractions of the Wimpy Kid titles is the balance between words 
and pictures. Hooking readers into books is essential and illustrations work as 
a great lure for all those who have grown up with the best picture books. 
Whatever their reading ability all children can understand pictures and being 
able to do so gives them the confidence to tackle the words – especially when 
they are in short sections, as with the Wimpy Kid’s diary entries.

If your son has read the books in a short time rather than growing up with 
them and so growing out of them, Liz Pinchon’s Tom Gates titles, starting with
The Brilliant World of Tom Gates 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brilliant-world-of-tom-gates.html>, make an 
excellent follow up. Tom Gates has much in common with Greg Heffley and his 
unchecked love of doodles makes the books look very homely and inviting. With 
much the same tone but more words and a good back-story about running a 
detective agency is Stephan Pastis’Timmy Failure: Mistakes Were Made 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/timmy-failure-mistakes-were-made.html> and its 
sequels, in which the unfortunately named hero shares something of Greg 
Huffley’s accident-prone approach to life and many of his worries.

In Anthony Horowitz’s school-set Groosham Grange 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/groosham-grange.html> and its sequel Return to 
Groosham Grange <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/return-to-groosham-grange.html>
, David Eliot has worries of quite a different kind. Sent there out of 
desperation by his parents, from the moment David discovers that that the new 
pupils have to sign their names in blood it soon becomes clear that this 
ghastly boarding school is not a good place to be, a view that is confirmed 
when pupils start to vanish at night…

For readers who want another story with both words and pictures, Cressida 
Cowell’sHow to Train your Dragon 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-train-your-dragon-6.html> and its many 
sequels about the zany and rollicking adventures of young Hiccup and his 
friends and their attempts to train their pet dragons is perfect. And Hiccup, 
the semi-hero of many of the titles, has some wimpy characteristics that Greg 
Heffley would surely recognise. Dragons also feature in a more straightforward 
and fast-paced adventure – without illustrations this time – as Charlie, hero 
of Charlie Fletcher’sStoneheart Trilogy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/stoneheart.html>, gets his support from the 
wonderful and various good and bad stone dragons perched around London, which 
come alive after he accidentally snaps off the head of one outside the Natural 
History Museum.

What are the best books series for younger children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/17/best-books-series-for-children>
The Baudelaire children from Lemony Snicket’s bestselling A Series Of 
Unfortunate Events first appear inThe Bad Beginning 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bad-beginning-2.html>. Their adversities are 
very different from those faced by Greg Heffley but their adventures – and 
there are 13 volumes of them in total – show equally resilient children. Like 
Jeff Kinney, Lemony Snicket, Cressida Cowell and many others (including Robert 
Muchamore with hisCherub <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/recruit-2.html> 
series, which would also be a next step for Wimpy Kid fans) have written long 
series which enable readers to enter a whole new world and remain happily in it 
for a very long time!

Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>, using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
books sitejoin here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
, we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 