
Sir Terry Farrell CBE <http://www.terryfarrell.co.uk/> – the world-revered 
guru of urban design, adviser to the Mayor of London and unlikely conjurer of 
the"tallest building by a British architect" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/feb/20/kingkey-finance-tower-terry-farrell>
 in China – will undertake an independent review into the UK's architecture 
policy, it was announced this morning.

That should come as something of a surprise, given that we don't have an 
architecture policy. We have policies for planning by the shedload(although 
perhaps not for much longer) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2012/mar/27/planning-system-reforms-live-coverage>
, but that is not part of the review's remit. So might this year-long study 
result in an innovative new piece of legislative guidance – perhaps along the 
lines ofDenmark's architecture policy 
<http://www.dac.dk/en/dac-cities/architectural-policy/>, introduced in 2007, 
which serves to both promote Danish architecture abroad, as well as provide a 
platform for raising standards at home? Somehow, that seems unlikely.

"I haven't anticipated that the report will result in any changes to 
legislation," said culture ministerEd Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, who commissioned the study 
and is himself an enthusiastic champion of architecture and design. So what 
exactly might this year-long review be for?

"It will be a rallying point for the profession," the minister proclaimed, 
assuring that whatever the report's findings, they will be taken to "all 
corners of Whitehall" and championed by DCMS – even if a reshuffle moves him 
elsewhere.

"There hasn't been a proper look at architecture for many years," said Vaizey. 
"This will be a great opportunity to take a snapshot of the profession."

Assisted by an 11-strong advisory panel – which includes philosopher Alain de 
Botton <http://www.alaindebotton.com/> and Olympic cauldron designer Thomas 
Heatherwick <http://www.heatherwick.com/>, as well as housing specialist Alison 
Brooks <http://www.alisonbrooksarchitects.com/>, education architect Sunand 
Prasad <http://www.penoyreprasad.com/> and Hank Dittmar 
<http://www.princes-foundation.org/about-us/trustees> of the Prince's 
Foundation – Farrell will issue a call for evidence next month, with a report 
expected by the end of the year.

"We will focus on architecture and the built environment in the broadest 
sense, as experienced by the general public," said the 74-year-old architect, 
who wasrecently named the decade's greatest contributor to London planning 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/daily-news/terry-farrell-named-decades-greatest-contributor-to-london-planning/8642078.article>
. "It's not just about prestige projects, but the importance of our everyday 
environment – streets, roads and parks – as well as how to increase awareness 
of the benefits of good design through education."

The review has a four-pronged remit, although it still seems broad enough to 
cover almost anything – from the government's role in promoting design, to the 
economic benefits of architecture; from cultural heritage and the built 
environment, to promoting education, outreach, and skills. It will be a 
Herculean task for the "one or two people" working on it full time in Farrell's 
office.

It is the first such review into architecture and urbanism since Richard 
Rogers led New Labour'sUrban Task Force 
<http://www.richardrogers.co.uk/work/all_projects/urban_task_force>, from 
1998–2000, which resulted in the hugely influentialTowards an Urban Renaissance 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CDcQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.urbantaskforce.org%2FUTF_final_report.pdf&ei=HYdQUfCWEcXnOd2kgfgG&usg=AFQjCNF9eZrRW1JjGB4yTbhpn23LpIk8uw&bvm=bv.44158598,d.ZWU>
 report, a document that has dictated the nature of urban regeneration across 
the UK for the last decade.

Rogers' vision – which he continued to promote across the capital as adviser 
to former mayor Ken Livingston – favoured inner-city densification and building 
tall. His influence could be felt in the early plan for the Olympic legacy 
development, a field of chunky perimeter blocks dotted with towers, based on a 
hard-edged European model of city making (as realised in theAthletes' Village 
<http://www.oliverwainwright.co.uk/2012/05/london-2012-athletes-village.html>). 
Farrell's approach is perhaps more pragmatic, contextual and grounded in 
history – aptly reflected in the makeup of his advisory panel. It may be 
coincidence, but as the Livingstone-Rogers regime was toppled by the 
Johnson-Farrell alliance, so too has the Olympic legacy plan been transformed 
into a much lower-rise scheme of traditional London typologies – streets and 
squares, townhouses and mews – a more folksy vision maybe, but it will 
undoubtedly be a better place to live as a result.

So what might we expect to come from Farrell's report, and will it prove to be 
as influential as its predecessor? Will we see useful, concrete proposals, or 
vague back-slapping platitudes?

"Good reports tend to come forward with practical recommendations," said 
Vaizey, who expects Farrell to produce "good practical ideas that can actually 
happen, rather than utopian ideas for a perfect world."

From the future of our schools, to volume house building, from the design of 
our public spaces, to how architecture is taught in schools and disseminated 
through institutions – what do you think the review should focus on? Add your 
comments to the open thread below.

Farrell's team also welcomes initial comments on the review at the following 
email address: FAR@terryfarrell.co.uk
 