
Between 1910 and 1970 the Australian government forcibly removed over a 
100,000 Aboriginal children, some as young as a few months old, from their 
parents. These children, known as thestolen generations 
<http://centralstolengens.org.au/>, were given to white families to raise, or 
sent to orphanages because the government did not think that their parents were 
capable of raising them. At 18, they were released into "white" society, often 
with no awareness of who their biological parents were and with no way of 
finding them.

The first time I heard this story, I had goosepimples. I was also very upset. 
Surely, terrible things happened in life, but this one haunted me for weeks, 
sending me nightmares when I slept. However, as is usual with life, other 
events overtook this and I no longer thought of the stolen children every day. 
Their story became peripheral to other news, so much so that I forgot they 
existed. On the plane down toAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide>, I thought of the heat, 
of beaches, of wild game: everything I associated with the country I was 
visiting for the first time except its indigenous people.

However at the opening event of the Writers' Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2013/mar/08/australian-writing-adelaide-festival-podcast?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+theguardian%2Fbooks%2Frss+%28Books%29>
, I was forced to think of the Aborigines and of that dark period of 
Australia's history when reference was made to the fact that we were standing 
on Aboriginal land. An Aboriginal chief welcomed us and offered up generous 
prayers for us. He was the first Aborigine I ever saw. I wondered if he was one 
of the stolen ones. The goosepimples came back. The anger returned and 
threatened to stop me from enjoying the event.

I have spent all week in Adelaide, at one of the best lit fests I have ever 
had the good fortune to attend, thinking not just of the stolen children, but 
of the Aborigines in general.Marginalised in their own country, wronged on so 
many different levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/06/australias-journey-indigenous-rights>
, theannual "Sorry Day" 
<http://www.nsdc.org.au/events-info/the-history-of-national-sorry-day> seems 
almost farcical. Although I have read some accounts of some Aborigines finding 
consolation and healing in it, I have always thought some things too big to be 
forgiven. Colonisation for example.

I imagined that the Aborigines I came across in the city all looked burdened 
with pain and anger. Their sadness looked infinite. I wondered how anyone could 
think that they could begin to heal. There are things done to me that I could 
not imagine that I could be healed of because I did not think that I could 
forgive.

However, today, an Aboriginal woman came to me to have her book signed at the 
end of my reading event. She was tall, elegant, beautiful. She did not look 
upset. She said how much she enjoyed my session. Then she asked if I had been 
welcomed properly on Aboriginal land. She said a short prayer and welcomed me. 
She said more than once, "this is our land". In her voice was pride rather than 
resentment. Then she told me she was a writer as well. I did not ask her what 
she wrote but I was so intrigued by her that once the last person in the queue 
left, I went and purchased her book.

I am reading that book now. A memoir. A touching story of a young girl taken 
from her family to be raised by white strangers. Her own father, a stolen boy 
raised in a home for boys in the city. Generations separated from their natural 
families by cruel government policies. I am skipping pages, not reading 
chronologically. The last sentence of the book is "Together we will be there 
always, turning the past hurts into healing." I know I will cry. This week in 
Adelaide has touched me much more profoundly than I could ever have imagined.
 