
On 3 October last year an AC-130 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lockheed_AC-130> gunship operating for the US 
Air Force made five bombing runs over a nondescript hospital in the city of 
Kunduz, Afghanistan. Typically loaded with Gatling cannons, howitzers and 
Hellfire missiles, the AC-130 hit 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/09/world/asia/doctors-without-borders-hospital-kunduz-afghanistan.html>
 and destroyed the hospital’s emergency wing.


It quickly became clear that this wasn’t a military success, but one of the 
worst attacks on humanitarian aid workers in history. Médecins Sans Frontière 
(MSF)reported 
<http://www.msf.org.uk/country-region/afghanistan-kunduz-bombing-latest> that 
14 of their staff members were killed, along with at least 24 patients and four 
caretakers. MSF called the attack proof of the global erosion ofthe rules of war
 <http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/article/msf-even-war-has-rules>, and 
many decried the event as evidence that the lives of aid workers are ever-more 
threatened.

The number of aid workers globally has tripled since 2000, and per capita 
attacks have actually fallen slightly.

Incidents like Kunduz appear to show that humanitarian aid work is an 
increasingly dangerous occupation – and not only in hot wars like Afghanistan 
and Syria. Even countries previously considered safe, like Bangladesh, have 
seen extremist groupsbegin to target aid staff 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/world/asia/-isis-bangladesh-cesare-tavella.html>
. And threats ofsexual violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/secret-aid-worker-south-sudan-personal-attacks>
 and widespreadmental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>
 concerns add to the myriad risks aid workers experience. With aid 
organisations increasingly working in riskier environments to reach those most 
in need, 2013 was thedeadliest year on record 
<https://aidworkersecurity.org/incidents/report/summary> for aid workers, with 
nearly 500 attacks.

But digging deeper into the data is important. While any increase in attacks 
is concerning, the number of aid workers globally has tripled since 2000, and 
per capita attacks on aid workers have actually fallen slightly over this 
period. Reflecting this ambiguity, Abby Stoddard, partner at Humanitarian 
Outcomes, cautions against oversimplifying the nuanced data. For agencies, 
there is little systematic information about which underlying environments 
actually place aid workers in greatest danger, and why.

Yet data collection efforts over the past decade have begun to make progress 
in understanding such underlying trends. To try and decipher these puzzles, we 
studied national-leveldata on aid worker attacks 
<https://www.humanitarianoutcomes.org/awsd>, conflicts, security issues and 
development indicators between 1997 and 2014.

Guardian research suggests mental health crisis among aid workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
Our research 
<https://www.academia.edu/19106460/Understanding_Violent_Attacks_against_Humanitarian_Aid_Workers>
 uncovered five key characteristics about the countries where aid workers are 
assumed to be most at risk.


1. Countries at war are more dangerous 

This one wasn’t a surprise. Our findings show that aid workers are much more 
likely to be attacked in countries hosting conflicts than those at peace. Also, 
more violent conflicts see more aid worker attacks. High-intensity conflicts 
(more than 2,000 deaths each year) see roughly twice the number of aid worker 
attacks as medium-intensity conflict (around 400 deaths per year). The lesson 
is clear: conflicts increase risks for field staff; and the more intense the 
conflict, the greater likelihood of attacks. Unfortunately, these are often 
precisely the places where aid workers are needed most.

2. Whether combatants follow the “rules of war” has little impact

While risks to aid workers have been linked to broader issues of civilian 
protection 
<http://www.insecurityinsight.org/files/Report_13_1_Operating_in_Insecurity.pdf>
, and adisrespect for international law 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2014/sc11524.doc.htm>, we found no evidence that 
conflicts where combatants actively target civilians pose a greater risk for 
aid workers. This surprising finding may help to encourage a more sustained 
presence for aid agencies in such countries, where local vulnerabilities and 
needs are often the greatest.

3. Criminal violence doesn’t influence risk of attack

Some suggest that general insecurity can increase risks for humanitarian staff 
<http://www.hdcentre.org/uploads/tx_news/171NoRelief-Surveyingtheeffectsofgunviolenceonhumanitariananddevelopmentpersonnel.pdf>
. However our findings suggest that the national homicide rate (a reasonably 
good measure ofsocial violence 
<http://jpr.sagepub.com/content/49/3/431.abstract>), the presence of criminal 
groups and other “everyday” threats to aid workers is unrelated to aid worker 
attacks. This could be good news for aid organisations. Either countries with 
elevated violence are no riskier for operations or the additional precautions 
that aid actors take when deploying to these countries have been effective.

Secret Aid Worker: After years in the field, I've lost my compassion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/28/secret-aid-worker-after-years-in-the-field-i-worry-ive-lost-my-compassion>
4. An international military presence isn’t riskier – but UN peacekeeping 
forces might be

Some assume <http://www.theglobalist.com/why-aid-workers-are-targets/> that a 
large foreign military presence might increase the incentives for insurgents to 
attack humanitarian workers. Yet we find that where Nato deploys forces, there 
are just as many (or as few) attacks on aid workers as where Nato is not 
present. If anything, our results suggest countries with Nato forces may in 
fact see fewer attacks on aid workers.

However, countries with UN peacekeeping operations have more attacks against 
aid workers – and this risk increases with the size of the operation. The type 
also matters. Countries hosting peacekeeping operations with traditional 
mandates (observing truces or peace agreements, or policing buffer zones) are 
more risky for aid workers.

5. More developed states are safer

As expected, economic and political development usually coincide with lower 
levels of risk to aid workers. More developed countries (as measured in terms 
of GDP per capita) see fewer aid worker attacks; and more democratic countries 
also see fewer attacks than autocracies. Yet, interestingly, “transitional 
democracies” – countries that are neither fully autocratic nor democratic and 
are often at greater risk ofpolitical 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=92181&fileId=S0003055401000119>
 andcriminal <http://jpr.sagepub.com/content/49/3/431.abstract> violence – are 
no more dangerous for aid workers than established western-style democracies.

While tragedies like that in Kunduz are highly visible reminders of the 
dangers of humanitarian work, our findings show that aid worker threats evolve 
from a wide range of factors. With agency security protocolsincreasingly 
scrutinised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/05/steve-dennis-court-case-waves-aid-industry>
 as they undertake a wider variety of development and peacebuilding tasks than 
ever before, a better understanding of the parameters of humanitarian risk is 
essential. Country context is vitally important to see where and why aid 
workers are most at risk and it is crucial the industry gains a better 
understanding of this. Only then will we be able to start working towards 
making a safer and more predictable global environment for aid workers.

Jason Miklian, Kristian Hoelscher and Håvard Mokleiv Nygård work at the Peace 
Research Institute Oslo. Their paper Understanding Attacks on Humanitarian Aid 
Workers can befound here 
<http://file.prio.no/publication_files/prio/Hoelscher,%20Miklian,%20Nyg%C3%A5rd%20-%20Understanding%20Attacks%20on%20Humanitarian%20Aid%20Workers,%20Conflict%20Trends%206-2015.pdf>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
 