
“New York has a trip-hammer vitality which drives you insane with 
restlessness, if you have no inner stabiliser,” wrote Henry Miller after moving 
back to the city following almost a decade in Paris. It could be expected that 
the Brooklyn-born novelist would have been happy to return, yet something 
didn’t sit right:


“In New York I have always felt lonely, the loneliness of the caged animal, 
which brings on crime, sex, alcohol and other madnesses.” Miller didn’t hurt 
for friends or charm – he was married five times – but he saw himself as an 
outsider, “forever and ever the ridiculous man, the lonely soul”, and it was 
his hometown that brought on this fever of loneliness.

Could Miller’s words be evidence that New York – where countless people have 
gone to find fame, work, love and even themselves – is the loneliest city in 
the world? Or is it possible that the person, not the place, was the source of 
Miller’s discontent? And if so, what is the loneliest city?


Urban life is more stressful than rural life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/08/where-world-most-stressful-city-urban-life-depression-anxiety#img-1>
, but whether it’s lonelier is a point of debate among social scientists. A2016 
report by Age UK 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/Documents/EN-GB/For-professionals/Research/Predicting_the_prevalence_of_loneliness_at_older_ages.pdf?dtrk=true>
 noted there are higher incidences of loneliness in cities, but precisely what 
brings it on is surprising. The same report found that gender and education are 
largely irrelevant – except for those with the highest level of education, who 
are often lonelier – and that household income and caring for a pet also have 
little effect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0d719c292757f184a2752c9b0c746870dc17371%2F35_0_3437_2064%2F3437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20world's%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20world%27s%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0d719c292757f184a2752c9b0c746870dc17371%2F35_0_3437_2064%2F3437.jpg>
 Isolation is one of the biggest problems faced by Vancouver residents. 
Photograph: Ben Nelms/Reuters 
What matters is not whether we live alone, but whether we feel alone
Eric Klinenberg 
So what impacts loneliness, and how does that play out in cities? The size of 
a household inversely affects how you feel: the smaller the household, the more 
lonely it tends to be. And people who rent or own a home are lonelier than 
those with a mortgage, perhaps because cities with lots of renters – such as 
London, which is expected to have60% of residents renting by 2025 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/property/property-market/12157946/Generation-Rent-London-to-become-a-city-of-renters-by-2025.html>
 – have greater transience, and potentially lower community engagement. New 
York, Los Angeles and San Francisco have rental figureshovering in the mid-50s 
<http://www.citylab.com/housing/2016/02/the-rise-of-renting-in-the-us/462948/>. 
Renters dominate in German cities, too –a long-term trend attributed to low 
rents and housing policies 
<http://qz.com/167887/germany-has-one-of-the-worlds-lowest-homeownership-rates/>
, but one that may end up influencing neighbourhood engagement.

One thing is certain: the percentage of those who live alone has increased 
dramatically. In the US, 27% of people live alone, up from 5% in 1920, and in 
New York City it’s roughly one third. The same trend is evident in Canada, and 
even more pronounced in Europe – 58% of people in Stockholm live alone, a 
figure that isconsidered the highest in Europe 
<http://www.wilcoproject.eu/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/WILCO_WP3_Stockholm_291.pdf>
. In many cities, the trend is here to stay. The Australian Bureau of 
Statistics estimated that there will be 1.3m more single-occupancy households 
by 2025,a jump of roughly 60% 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/3236.0Main%20Features42011%20to%202036?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=3236.0&issue=2011%20to%202036&num=&view=>
, and one that could crowd major cities and affect access to affordable housing.

‘My neighbour avoids me ... I was very unhappy’: your tales of urban loneliness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/24/my-neighbour-avoids-me-i-was-very-unhappy-your-tales-of-urban-loneliness>
Obscured by those figures, however, is the assumption that living alone leads 
to loneliness – two things the sociologist Eric Klinenberg, author of Going 
Solo, says are often conflated. “In fact, there’s little evidence that the rise 
of living alone is responsible for making us lonely,” hewrote in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/30/the-rise-of-solo-living>. 
“Research shows that it’s the quality, not the quantity of social interactions 
that best predicts loneliness. What matters is not whether we live alone, but 
whether we feel alone.”

The demographic that most reports feeling lonely are older people, and they do 
often live alone. In Stockholm, 35% of people over the age of 75 experienced 
loneliness, while in Bristol 10-15% reported the same. (Hence the slogan “
Bristol: a brilliant place to grow old <http://bristolageingbetter.org.uk/>.”) 
Older people are likely to be more lonely in cities, especially if they are 
poorer, have physical or mental health issues or live in underprivileged areas.


Campaign to End Loneliness suggested that 7% of older people in the UK are 
lonely, while age researcher Thomas Scharf foundthat 16% of older people in 
deprived neighbourhoods in English cities 
<http://www.campaigntoendloneliness.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2011/11/Safeguarding-the-convey.-A-call-to-action-from-the-Campaign-to-End-Loneliness.pdf>
 were “severely lonely”. Manchester fared worse than Liverpool or London, which 
may explain why it is treating loneliness as an urban health issue: it created 
the Valuing Older People programme in 2003 to address, among other issues, 
loneliness and isolation. Similar projects have sprung up in other cities which 
recognise that loneliness runs tandem to issuessuch as segregation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/28/which-is-the-worlds-most-segregated-city>
, housing, healthcare, and isolation among seniors and others vulnerable 
citizens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76c807de1366b05ecd27d9877e1b8108b6b1ada2%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20world's%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20world%27s%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76c807de1366b05ecd27d9877e1b8108b6b1ada2%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The networks of migrant workers in China might help to stifle isolation, but 
living and working conditions can be difficult. Photograph: Andy Wong/AP 
But it’s not only older people who suffer from isolation. In Australia, city 
dwellers have fewer friends than they did two decades ago 
<http://www.citylab.com/design/2012/04/bad-urban-design-making-us-lonely/1777/>
. In the US, a troubling one in five people said they had only one close 
friend. Or consider idyllic-looking Vancouver, on the shores of the Pacific 
Ocean, which struggles not only with affordability (it was recently crowned the
most expensive city in North America 
<http://business.financialpost.com/personal-finance/mortgages-real-estate/in-vancouver-north-americas-most-expensive-city-rich-chinese-take-the-blame-for-skyrocketing-home-prices>
), but also with friendliness.


We can see other people living richer, more populated lives than our own. At 
the same time, we can feel very exposed
Olivia Laing 
The Vancouver Foundation thinktank asked community leaders and charities to 
identify the biggest issues facing Vancouverites and were toldit wasn’t 
homelessness or poverty; it was isolation 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/although%20a%202010%20Mental%20Health%20Foundation%20report%20suggested%20that%20a%20staggering%2060%25%20of%20people%20aged%2018%20to%2034%20often%20feel%20lonely>
. Of 4,000 people from 80-odd ethnic groups who were polled, one third of 
respondents found it hard to make friends – something I discovered firsthand 
when I spent a rainy, grey winter working in Vancouver, wandering Stanley Park 
alone with my dog at weekends and sitting in crowded cafes by myself. In this 
young, diverse city, the newly arrived struggle most: among people who had been 
in Canada for five years or less, almost half (42%) had just two close friends.

A dearth of friendship doesn’t afflict only recent immigrants. Many Tokyoites 
long for friends so dearly that they’re willing to hire them. American writer 
Chris Colin, intrigued by Japanese “affection for hire” industries such as
cuddle cafes 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/iv-drip/japans-first-cuddle-cafe-opens-only-24-to-sleep-with-a-girl-8193661.html>
 andcat rentals <http://www.marieclaire.com/culture/news/a3138/cat-cafe-tokyo/>
, spent time with a service that provides temporary friends. The clientele was 
varied, he wrote: widowers, shy single types, “that one dude who just wanted a 
friend who’d do him the solid of waiting seven hours outside Nike to snag these 
fresh sneakers for him when they went on sale”. The largest of the 
rent-a-friend agencies, Client Partners,has eight branches in Tokyo 
<http://www.afar.com/magazine/the-incredibly-true-story-of-renting-a-friend-in-tokyo>
 alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a0a9e96d1dadf7a3bc1145a9b194c5a6ff79e7c%2F0_168_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20world's%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20world%27s%20loneliest%20city%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Floneliest-city-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a0a9e96d1dadf7a3bc1145a9b194c5a6ff79e7c%2F0_168_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Japanese cat cafes have become popular with people living in urban areas, as 
has the idea of ‘affection for hire’. Photograph: Junko Kimura/Getty Images 
Across the Sea of Japan, there’s a different problem: large-scale migration. 
As rural Chinese move to big cities such as Shanghai and Beijing, they 
encounter isolation on an epic level. As of 2012, a staggering 230 million 
people had migratedfrom the countryside to cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/aug/25/china-rural-migrants-more-respect>
. (More than half the country’s population now live in cities, up from one 
third in 1990.) Known as the “floating population”, they can find themselves in 
low-quality, high-density housing, subject to discrimination and at risk of low 
social participation, especially if they move frequently.

Researchers surveyed Chinese reports 
<http://usj.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/08/12/0042098015598745.full> on 
community social networks, neighbourhood attachments and marginality and 
determined that migrants were more neighbourly – which may help them counteract 
isolation – but faced discrimination and, in some cases, grim living 
conditions: one corporation in the factory city Shenzhen houses more than 
200,000 employees in dormitories,in which there’s been an epidemic of suicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
. The report noted: “The ‘neighbourhood’ for them is likely to be the factory.” 
Yet in Beijing migrants had greater “neighbouring intensity” – in other words, 
they’re better at connecting with their community – suggesting that migrants 
may bring much-needed village values to the lonely urban jungle.

Where is the world’s most remote city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/19/where-worlds-most-remote-city> 
If life in China’s megacities illustrates anything, it might be that 
loneliness is often due to circumstance. This wouldn’t surprise Olivia Laing, 
whose new book, The Lonely City,chronicles a post-breakup stint in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/28/the-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol>
. “The thing with cities is we are absolutely surrounded by people,” Laing 
recently told the Globe and Mail 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/relationships/the-value-of-loneliness-what-we-can-learn-from-a-lack-of-connection/article28962752/>
. “We can see other people living richer, more populated lives than our own. At 
the same time, we can feel very exposed … there are lots of eyes on everyone. 
That is why the loneliness of the city has a particularly distinct tang to it.” 
Loneliness, however, is often like bad weather, “it passes through our lives”.

So are people in Shanghai or Berlin more solitary than those in Stockholm or 
Vancouver? I put the question to one of the field’s leading researchers, the 
University of Chicago’s John Cacioppo, who wrotethe book on the subject, 
Loneliness 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Loneliness-Human-Nature-Social-Connection/dp/0393335283>
. His research disputes the idea that urban life is inherently lonelier than 
rural life, and he declined to play favourites and pick just one city. “You 
raise an interesting question,” he says. “Unfortunately, we have no data with 
which to address it.” Maybe Laing is right that urban loneliness is ephemeral. 
Or perhaps we can learn from Henry Miller’s struggle with New York: in 1944, he 
packed his bags and moved to sunny Big Sur, California.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

• This article was amended on 7 April 2016 to correct the spelling of Thomas 
Scharf’s surname, and some details relating to his research and the Valuing 
Older People programme.
 