
Britain’s best unknown tech business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
 ARM Holdings is being bought by Japan’s SoftBank on the back of the promise of 
the Internet of Things (IoT). But what is IoT, and what has a chip designer 
like ARM got to do with it?

What is the Internet of Things?

The idea behind IoT is to create a home where everything is connected to the 
internet, creating “swarm intelligence” from individually dumb devices. Bins, 
toasters, washing machines and lights will be able to talk to each other for 
automatic, more efficient control and monitoring.

But IoT also describes the use of sensors and smart devices in the wider 
environment to automate processes and give information to human operators, such 
as roads that alert drivers to spots of black ice or recycling bins that tell 
the council when to pick them up.

What sort of things can can you get?

IoT is still in its infancy, but there is a small collection of consumer 
devices and a few commercial devices that actually link into the wider world.

The best known IoT devices are smart thermostats, such as Nest’s Learning 
Thermostat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/03/google-nest-learning-thermostat-third-generation-home-gadget-smart-heating>
, and lighting systems, of which Philips Hue and Lightwave RF are the best 
known in the UK.

Other devices include electronic locks, home-security cameras, various sensors 
for temperature, humidity, water, motion and open or close states. Various 
smart plug sockets are also available that allows users to turn lamps and other 
non-smart devices on and off remotely.

The internet fridge was always the poster child of IoT, but home appliances 
are only starting to be available with IoT built in. Smartwashers, driers, 
dishwashers,bathroom scales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/withings-body-cardio-review-stylish-scales-health-obsessives>
, robot vacuum cleaners,fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/31/dyson-pure-cool-link-air-purifier-wi-fi-internet-of-things>
 and, yes, fridges, are starting to come to market that can talk to each other 
and to the owner.

What can you do with IoT?

Broadly speaking, IoT devices fall into two categories: true consumer devices 
and DIY automation systems.

Smart-thermostats, cameras, scales, gadgets to help you sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/25/how-to-sleep-better-with-technology>
 and other devices, which are easy to install and use either in isolation or 
together with other bits through an app or syncing service, are commonly 
available through traditional retailers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fwhat-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362ffb9c494dda56b53f19ba23f1d88fcd24669a%2F0_0_1286_772%2F1286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20Internet%20of%20Things%20and%20how%20does%20ARM%20fit%20in%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fwhat-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20Internet%20of%20Things%20and%20how%20does%20ARM%20fit%20in%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fwhat-is-the-internet-of-things-arm-holdings-softbank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362ffb9c494dda56b53f19ba23f1d88fcd24669a%2F0_0_1286_772%2F1286.jpg>
 Samsung SmartThings Hub and sensors. Photograph: Samsung 
But with various sensors and interconnected systems available, much more 
advanced setups can be built using more specialist equipment and universal 
protocols such as Z-wave or ZigBee, which allow disparate devices to 
communicate wirelessly without Wi-Fi or the internet. Almost anything from IoT 
security systems to automatic lighting, advanced power management and status 
monitoring, from bins to pantries, can be created, although some need the 
skills of an electrician and coders.

Who are the big players?

The biggest brands in the consumer IoT space include Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/06/samsung-pledges-over-100bn-to-make-an-open-internet-of-things-finally-happen>
, with appliances and itsSmartThings IoT hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/samsung-smartthings-hub-review-internet-of-things>
, Alphabet’s Nest, Google and Amazon, whose IoT Echo speaker – which is capable 
of commanding other devices via voice – has proved popular in the US.

Behind many of these devices, however, are low-power chip makers and embedded 
operating system vendors. Google’s Brillo, for instance, is a cut-down version 
of Android for IoT devices, while low-power processors built usingARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> designs are popular because 
of their electrical efficiency.

What are the challenges facing IoT?

While many connected devices are available to buy, not many of them can 
actually talk to devices made by other brands, and when they do their 
interaction is limited. Each device comes with its own smartphone app, rather 
than there being one to control them all. Companies such as Google, Nest, Apple 
andSamsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> are attempting to 
provide a bridge between devices, but a unified system is sorely needed.

There is also the challenge of privacy and security. IoT devices that were 
originally conceived to be used in isolation or within the home without 
connecting to the internet are now being exposed to the wider world and can be 
ripe for criminal attack.

If appropriate security measures are not taken, a hacker who gains access to 
the data flowing around your home could turn the sensors and appliances into 
snooping devices.

What’s ARM’s link to it?

ARM Holdings is a designer of mobile and low-power chips that can be found in 
devices such as smartphones, smartTVs, smartwatches, tablets and various other 
computing devices. These chips can also be found in many of the IoT devices, 
the servers that connect them to the wider internet and the devices used to 
control them.

ARM doesn’t actually fabricate the processors, but its designs are used by 
companies all over the globe, including Apple, Samsung and Qualcomm, and used 
to drive devices all over the home and in the wider world. As the IoT expands, 
the demand for low-power chips is only likely to increase.

 * ARM Holdings to be sold to Japan’s SoftBank for £24bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/arm-holdings-to-be-sold-to-japans-softbank-for-234bn-reports-say>
 * Samsung SmartThings Hub review: an Internet of Things to rule them all? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/samsung-smartthings-hub-review-internet-of-things>
 * ARM: Britain’s most successful tech company you’ve never heard of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
 * Nest Learning Thermostat third-gen: the simple, effective heating gadget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/03/google-nest-learning-thermostat-third-generation-home-gadget-smart-heating>
 * Withings Body Cardio review: stylish scales for health obsessives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/10/withings-body-cardio-review-stylish-scales-health-obsessives>
 * How to use technology to sleep better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/25/how-to-sleep-better-with-technology>
 