
Q What are my rights when winning something on eBay, going to collect it and 
finding the item is not as described? I refused to take the item and now the 
seller has taken me to the small claims court. She wants payment for the item, 
postage (even though I never had anything posted to me) plus interest on the 
original amount. The seller has also admitted twice in writing that I was right 
on at least one of the three points I made regarding why I refused to accept 
the goods. I received the claim form from the court, but other than filling it 
in and returning it I'm not sure what I need to do. I live near Southampton and 
the seller lives in Oxford. Is it correct that I can have the hearing in my 
county and how do I go about arranging for this?
AC

A You are protected by the Sale of Goods Act, which says all goods sold at 
auction must be as described. The rule applies whether you buy from a private 
seller or a business, but you would need to have dealt with a UK supplier. As 
long as you can prove the misdescription you shouldn't have any difficulty 
defending the action brought against you in the small claims court.

However, you will need to check whether there are any terms in your contract 
exempting liability for descriptions since these will be valid to the extent 
that they are reasonable. You can keep costs down by representing yourself, and 
if you were unfortunate enough to lose you would not usually be responsible for 
paying your opponents legal costs.

You are also within your rights to apply to the court to have the case moved 
to your local county court, but this will be at the discretion of the district 
judge. You will therefore need to make it clear in your application that the 
agreement to buy the goods was made online and that travelling to Oxford will 
be very costly and inconvenient for you.
 