
When all you have is a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail. So 
perhaps its not surprising that when everyone and their dog pops above the 
parapet with a killer idea for how to deal with Isis, they all seem to suggest 
doing much the same thing they are always doing.

For example, if you’re a copyright lawyer, then clearly the answer involves 
using copyright law. Because Isis may be happy to slaughter thousands, but they 
know that home-taping is killing music.

Paul Rosenwig, the founder of homeland security consulting company Red Branch, 
has a cunning plan. “What, if anything, can be done to compel providers to take 
down accounts when they are unwilling to do so voluntarily? The answer, to my 
mind, lies in an analogy to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA).”

You know, the DMCA, the American law which, let’s be honest, hasn’t been 
totally successful in completely removing illegal content from the internet and 
therefore might not be a model piece of legislation for navigating the tricky 
waters of governmental oversight of the internet.

Rosenwig’s idea is elegant, in a way. If you can’t get someone to take Isis 
propaganda down voluntarily, then make it so that continuing to host it is a 
crime. But not just any crime – a crime against copyright law, the worst sort 
of crime on the internet, maybe.

His proposal would allow a government-sanctioned third-party to claim 
copyright on any content associated with a terrorist organisation, and then 
fire off their own take-down notices.

Surely … surely there is a simpler solution than that?

We are legion. We are many. We are never gonna give you up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ>

Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> certainly hopes 
so. It’s taken the hammer/nail cliche to the other extreme: when the hammer you 
have is “the power of arsing around on the internet”, then hopefully you can 
defeat the forces of international terrorism by arsing around in a really 
really targeted way.


After reaffirming its “war” with Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/17/anonymous-war-isis-hacktivist-group-confirms>
 in the days following the Paris attacks, the hacktivist collective has had 
some concrete success at combating Isis propaganda online.

A hundred thousand twitter accounts have been taken down and five thousand 
YouTube videos reported to, and subsequently removed by, the service, since the 
cyberwar began in January. More controversially, Anonymous has also taken to 
bombarding the websites of Isis-affiliated groups with distributed denial of 
service attacks, in an effort to knock them offline.

It’s debatable how much such efforts actually help the larger movement against 
Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2015/nov/20/isis-islamic-state-internet-digital-technology>
, but the amount of effort Anonymous is putting towards the cause is impressive.

But not everyone involved in Anonymous is fully dedicated to riding the world 
of terror. Some have a second motivation: the lulz. Which might explain the 
latest proposed tactic. Anonymousplanned to irritate Isis to death 
<https://twitter.com/opparisofficial/status/666890967086055425> by Rickrolling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/30/apple-siri-rickroll-rick-astley>
 them.
#OpParis (@opparisofficial) 
Our upcoming action: spamming verified ISIS hashtags with rickrolls. Will 
release the list as soon as it's compiled.
 <https://twitter.com/opparisofficial/status/666890967086055425> November 18, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/opparisofficial/status/666890967086055425> 
Given the short attention spans of pretty much everyone who spends too much 
time on the internet – Hal 90210 included – the plan is about as likely to see 
fruition as Red Branch’s weird copyright idea. But we’ll keep you up to date.
 