
I reported yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/30/scientist-complains-to-bbc-about-being-misled-over-radio-4-interview>
 on a complaint by scientist Dame Anne Glover that Radio 4’s Today programme 
had failed to achieve appropriate “balance” in pairing her interview with that 
of another academic.

This problem of broadcasting balance has a long history. Re-reading some old 
magazines the other day I came across an excellent article written byDavid 
Elstein <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-elstein> in the 1970s (I 
think) in which he explored the dilemma facing a TV current affairs producer 
making a documentary on smoking.

Why, he asked, should equal weight be given to those who argued that smoking 
was not harmful when the “overwhelming” medical evidence pointed to it as a 
major cause of cancer?

A similar contention was raised yesterday in a British Medical Journal blog 
<http://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2016/06/30/martin-mckee-fair-and-balanced-science-in-a-post-fact-society/>
 by Martin McKee, professor of European public health at the London School of 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

Just before the referendum campaign got under way, he noted that the assistant 
political editor ofBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> News, Norman 
Smith, had said that the facts on the EU were “elusive.”

Not so, tweeted McKee at the time, 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=No%20%40BBCNormanS%20on%20%40BBCr4today%20The%20facts%20on%20the%20EU%20are%20not%20%22elusive%22.%20&src=typd>
 “they are easy to find. It’s just that#VoteLeave 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/VoteLeave?src=hash> have lied consistently.”

He regarded the Smith statement as a typical example of the BBC’s “fairness 
bias”, an assumption that “claims cannot be objectively verified and everything 
is a matter of opinion.” He wrote:

“Crucially, this approach places the views of people who, by virtue of their 
long years of studying an issue and familiarity with it, on a par with those 
who have only thought about it perhaps a few hours earlier.”

To underline his point he quoted Aaron Sorkin, 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/media/2012/06/aaron-sorkin-media-biased-toward-fairness-126357>
 creator of the West Wing and Newsroom TV series: “If the entire House 
Republican caucus were to walk on to the floor one day and say ‘the Earth is 
flat,’ the headline in the New York Times the next day would read ‘Democrats 
and Republicans Can’t Agree on Shape of Earth.’”

While conceding that it is important to hear all sides of an argument he 
thought viewers and listeners would be misled when one side in a debate “is 
simply implausible or demonstrably untrue.”

During the referendum campaign, for instance, McKee said groups “with a wealth 
of experience lined up to argue the case for remain”, including13 Nobel 
laureates 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2016/06/10/13-nobel-laureates-urge-britain-to-stay-in-european-union/>
, more than 60 former presidents of theMedical Royal Colleges 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/353/bmj.i3373> plus the Royal College of Physicians 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/eu-referendum-doctors-warn-brexit-could-harm-patient-care-and-public-health-a7065571.html>
.

Despite there being no-one of similar stature arguing against these informed 
opinions, Vote Leave’s blanket disagreement was given a measure of credence by 
being quoted.

McKee moved on to consider the “broader implications... especially for those 
communicating health messages.” He citeddenials of links between HIV and Aids  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duesberg_hypothesis>and also climate change 
deniers.

Referring to Farhad Manjoo’s book True Enough: Learning to live in a post-fact 
society 
<https://www.amazon.com/True-Enough-Learning-Post-Fact-Society/dp/1620458403>”, 
McKee concluded:

“This is a profound challenge to the very idea of science. The research 
community needs to come up with a response, and quickly.”
 