
I was abroad when I got the call. There’s been an accident, I was told. You 
need to come home.

You lose your foothold in the world when you learn that someone you love has 
been harmed. I remember the coldness that burned into my bones at first. Then, 
anger. Next, the slow drip of guilt and delusion. I should have been there. I 
know he will survive. I was sitting under a strip light in a hospital corridor 
one morning when I finally realised that my 23-year-old foster brother was 
going to die.

Why I asked the Queen to adopt me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jun/17/why-i-asked-queen-elizabeth-to-adopt-me>
I grew up in north-west Ireland in my biological family, alongside adoptees 
and foster siblings (most of whom had only sporadic contact with their 
relatives or original families). For all of us, the question of how to deal 
with loss was central to our lives. What does it mean to be part of a system in 
which loss and separation are the cornerstones? How do you prepare to be parted 
from the person you never expected to have in your life? Where can we process 
our grief? When a child or adult of the care system is dying, all these 
familiar questions become further amplified.


One of the greatest resources we have for unpacking these questions is the 
relationship between a child’s foster family and original family. Within this 
relationship is the potential to share stories, information and emotional 
support. In my life I have had more than 30 foster siblings and this much I 
have learned: no one understands the love you feel for your foster child better 
than the original family. No one else understands the depth of your hopes, 
fears, and loss. Even in families where violence or abuse has occurred, there 
are always other individuals (grandparents, cousins, in-laws) who pose no risk, 
and who want to participate in a meaningful relationship. It’s vitally 
important that social workers find these individuals and help care families 
establish links.


Yet in Ireland some of the 6,000 children in care (and most care leavers, of 
which there are 20,000) have no social worker.Tusla <http://www.tusla.ie/>, 
Ireland’s child and family agency, has recently reported a massive shortage of 
staff, and in my experience the dialogue between families often happens in ways 
that are unsafe and incoherent, such as via social media. This superficial 
level of engagement, in a society that struggles to understand “different” 
families, spells disaster. It leaves families completely alienated when a 
crisis occurs.


In the hospital, I met most of my foster brother’s relatives for the first 
time. I also saw first-time meetings between biologically-related adults and 
children. It was a strained atmosphere intensified by the fact that we had no 
shared history, and no social work support. All this hindered and coloured the 
very practical business of hospital access, medical care and deciding future 
plans. In hindsight it seems sad and wrong that this is howthe families met for 
the first and only time.

Families must be encouraged to liaise, not least because outsiders to the 
fostering experience may not always understand the unique dynamics around our 
losses. When a child or adult of the care system dies, even the familiar 
blueprint for acknowledging or ritualising death is fraught with complication. 
How does a community console a person whose relationship with the deceased is 
not clear? How do you reach out to a family whose bereavement may be mired in 
regret, stigma, or silence?

When I left my foster home, getting support became a nightmare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/20/foster-care-transitions-support-care-leaver>
On the day of my foster brother’s funeral, I stood in a back pew and watched 
the procession move down the aisle, the coffin carried by members of the 
biological family – some I had barely met. In that moment, I felt daunted by 
how much needs to change in the care system. I did not go to the graveside 
during the burial, partly because I didn’t know if I belonged there, partly 
because I didn’t feel that at such a young age he belonged there, partly 
because I did not have the appropriate support.


Growing up in a foster family, I received no support to deal with my losses. I 
received no proper support to connect with biological families. Yet, I have 
learned along the way that a respectful and transparent relationship is one of 
the best ways to make sense of the complexity of the care experience. Social 
workers have a pivotal role to play in nurturing this relationship. My foster 
brother died as the result of an accident, but I have been left with the 
question: unless families are helped to work together, how can we keep anyone 
safe?

Annemarie Ní Churreáin is a writer and poet from Donegal in north-west 
Ireland. She is an advocate for family diversity and Irish foster care reform. 
Read more of her work onThe Bogman’s Cannon <https://bogmanscannon.com/>

This new series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 