
“Right now, Jim has four sequels. And he’s trying to make it into three. That 
is where I think his effort is going right now. To keep it to three sequels.” 
James Horner there, Oscar-winning composer of the scores for Titanic and 
Avatar, discussing James Cameron’s efforts to keep the number of Avatar sequels 
he plans to film all at once down to a nice manageable three. Three. Only 
someone with the almost despotic self-belief ofJames Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamescameron> would consider filming three 
sequels back-to-back.

Sigourney Weaver back from the dead in all three Avatar sequels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/10/sigourney-weaver-back-for-three-avatar-sequels>
Nevertheless, the man responsible for the two most financially successful 
films of all time isn’t the only one planning to take on the Herculean task of 
filming numerous epics at once. Following Age of Ultron’s inevitable success 
and Joss Whedon’s departure from the franchise, the Russo brothers, who will be 
taking over the affairs of all things Avengers after completion of the next 
Captain America film, plan to film two further sequels simultaneously. 
Financially, this obviously makes sense: the amount of cash needed to get the 
wheels spinning on projects like these is vast. Making twice the profit for 
less than double the initial outlay is a no-brainer. The problem is, with 
regards to the quality of the films themselves, more often than not it all 
tends to go a bit tits up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430395055485%2Fad6dad00-29a8-4cca-8428-3fb5c5e00de1-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20directors%20shoot%20movies%20back-to-back%2C%20who%20wins%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20directors%20shoot%20movies%20back-to-back%2C%20who%20wins%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430395055485%2Fad6dad00-29a8-4cca-8428-3fb5c5e00de1-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Matrix Revolutions, which was filmed directly after The Matrix Reloaded. 
Photograph: The Kobal Collection 
One of the most high-profile misfires were the Wachowskis’ much-anticipated 
Matrix sequels. Almost entirely bereft of the syrupy mystery and 
what-the-hell-was-that magic of the original, The Matrix Reloaded and The 
Matrix Revolutions bogged the efficient ideas of the first down with portentous 
cod-philosophising and the inescapable sense that there simply wasn’t enough 
story to be stretched across two huge movies. The sequels were spectacular, 
certainly, but with the best will in the world, comparatively soulless.

The blockbuster's in decline – here's how to save it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/03/marvel-us-box-office-decline-blockbusters>
Almost exactly the same can be said of the first two stultifyingly rotund 
Pirates of the Caribbean sequels, Dead Man’s Chest and At World’s End. Even 
more so than The Matrix perhaps, the simu-filmed sequels’ narratives were 
disengaging at best and, at worst, at the apogee of the exact meeting point 
between incomprehensible and duller than a birdwatcher’s dishwater. Even Johnny 
Depp looked as though he didn’t know what was going on, and he was paid 
handsomely to do pretty much the opposite.

What unites these examples though, besides narrative guffery, is that they 
were both huge financial successes. The Matrix sequels grossed almost $1.17bn 
between them according to BoxOfficeMojo; the Pirates’ a whomping great $2.03bn. 
So, in these instances, whether you think filming back-to-back works depends 
largely on whether you’re a financier of huge tentpole blockbusters or not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430408549308%2Ffcb8e2d9-1736-4f6a-b61c-532243e948d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20directors%20shoot%20movies%20back-to-back%2C%20who%20wins%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20directors%20shoot%20movies%20back-to-back%2C%20who%20wins%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwhen-directors-shoot-movies-back-to-back-who-wins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430408549308%2Ffcb8e2d9-1736-4f6a-b61c-532243e948d6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Peter Jackson shot the Lord of the Rings trilogy in one go. Photograph: 
Everett/REX Shutterstock 
Peter Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/peterjackson> began shooting 
all three of his Lord Of The Rings (LOTR) movies at once in 1999, and he’s got 
a shelf groaning under the weight of a billion Oscars to support his opinion 
that he did a good job. LOTR was a risk – not the surefire bets that sequels to 
explosively successful originals are – but it is essentially one long story, 
and having the actors and crew take a two-year break between instalments 
wouldn’t have worked.

Cutting The Hobbit down to size: no dwarf-elf flirting, no albino orcs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/21/week-in-geek-tolkieneditor-the-hobbit-edited-version-peter-jackson>
Peter Jackson’s problems only began when he tried to repeat his commendable 
feat with The Hobbit. Like flabby grey cakes, they succumbed to the same 
pratfalls as The Matrix and Pirates: enough narrative plot-points for one film, 
spread out like service stations across the featureless motorways of several. 
The Hobbit films, to date, have grossed over $2.9bn. Because the world is a 
stupid, stupid place.

In recent years, there’s also been a growing tendency to split single films – 
usually the final parts of huge franchises – in two. Harry Potter, The Hunger 
Games and Twilight all did this, were all massive financial bonanzas, and for 
some reason were also quite good. Whether the double finale is a better 
experience for the fans or a cynical ploy to squeeze more cash out of them is 
up to you. Either way, their critical as well as fiscal success may be due to 
the fact they are, like LOTR, one long story. Perhaps it’s the hubris or panic 
that comes with the idea of filming numerous movies at once that causes 
film-makers to drop the ball. Even Robert Zemeckis admitted that wrestling with 
Back to the Future’s second and third parts simultaneously meant he “wasn’t 
able to really fine-tune Part II the way it should have been”.

All this bodes fairly poorly for the Avengers. Considering how all the Marvel 
movies to date have been standalone and, perhaps coincidentally, good, filming 
back-to-back seems like an odd decision – a pretty good way of rounding off a 
trilogy with a baggy, odorous pair of duds. Still, you never know. It does seem 
likeMarvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> simply refuses to make 
bad movies nowadays, which is encouraging.

The same can’t be said of James Cameron, though he does obstinately refuse to 
make unsuccessful ones. It might be worth sticking a tenner on hisAvatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avatar> threequels nudging The Avengers, 
Harry Potter and Fast & Furious 7 out of the highest grossing films of all time 
list, giving him the top five all to himself.
 