Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBacPDrDeY8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBacPDrDeY8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBacPDrDeY8U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Who owns rock? It was a woman, Sister Rosetta Tharpe, who subverted sacred 
music with the secular to forge one of the first rock records,Strange Things 
Happening Every Day <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LzqGq6jiorg>, but it's men 
– specifically that four-white-guys stereotype – that we celebrate as rock's 
ultimate chalice-bearers today. Rock's narrative is written in a way that 
excludes women who noodle, shred and expand the music in new directions. Where 
the roots of rock were sewn by black and female musicians, the genre has been 
whitewashed, evolving its sound but narrowing its gaze, pwnd by the male 
quartet.

Music's cyclical nature means rock flourishes and wanes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/24/rock-music-death-guitar-band>. 
During the ebbs, rock's death knell is proclaimed, mostly by a music press
written by, about and for men 
<http://www.thefword.org.uk/features/2012/02/women_and_the_music_press>, but to 
perceive last year's ebb in the rock-boy-band flow as a some sort of crisis 
ignores the large amount of exciting rock being made by women.

I wasn't alone in appreciating EMA's Past Life Martyred Saints, St Vincent 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/st-vincent>'s Strange Mercy and Anna Calvi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/anna-calvi>'s Mercury-nominated debut. Then 
there was a wonderful album and thrilling live shows fromWild Flag 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/feb/02/wild-flag-review>, and the 
emergence ofthe Alabama Shakes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/aug/18/hail-hail-rock-n-roll>. Those 
artists excited critics and fans with their inventive take on rock. In Anna 
Calvi's circular picking technique, rock took a gothic, grandiose turn, 
swirling with orchestra-sized tensions. In St Vincent's cerebral, film-inspired 
narratives, chords were out and muscular, fret-shattering licks ruled. In EMA's 
Past Life Martyred Saints, droning, Midwest-to-California blues voyages took 
both classic rock and feedback-drenched noise to new heights. As far as I could 
see, rock was being hewn in to huge, fantastical new shapes. Rock sounded 
brilliant, and very much alive, from where I was standing.

When virtuoso female guitarists appear on the rock radar, they tend to gain 
the spotlight in the lulls between dominant, malecentric scenes (Britpop, 
grunge, glam rock), celebrated in isolation as brief, intermittent flashes of 
brilliance that flare up between the wider, collective scenes. When these women 
are innovative enough to operate successfully outside a zeitgeist, and gain an 
audience without the legitimacy and safety of a wider scene, they are seen as 
ancillary to rock's larger, holistic pantheon. They are rounded up for "women 
in rock" trend pieces where "gender is genre", a rock press narrative that 
creates a separate, and implicitly lesser, form of rock.

PJ Harvey <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/pjharvey>'s record-breaking 
contributions to indie rock are redoubtable, but rock's one-in one-out policy 
for women has made her an inescapable comparison for any rock woman standing 
alone with a six string and toe pressed to a distortion pedal. EMA, St Vincent 
and Calvi continually cite male inspirations when interviewed, from Jimi 
Hendrix and Scott Walker to Lou Reed and Bo Diddley, direct, explicit 
statements that they're creating in the tradition of rock gods, yet each of 
these artists have been cast, at one point or another, as indebted to Harvey, 
sometimes in the face of polite protestations.

Creating a separate (slow) lane for women 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/culturepicturegalleries/9124443/Pops-20-greatest-female-artists.html>
, where rock matriarchs, however hallowed, are women's only forebears, keeps 
rock divided. It divorces female musicians from their privileged forefathers, 
denies them their artistic lineage, and creates a system where women with 
electric guitars can only be as good as the women that came before them, 
celebrated on pedestals but never shoulder to shoulder with favoured male 
peers. If rock learned to celebrate more than one image as authentic and 
valuable, maybe that old death bell wouldn't ring quite so regularly.
 