
Not all gambles pay off, clearly, otherwise the bookies would never make any 
money.

But it must be galling for betting operator 888 to take a punt on a joint £3bn 
bid with Rank forWilliam Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill>
, only to see it fall apart in short order when the target refused to play.

Last week, Rank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rankgroup> said it was 
still on the lookout for acquisitions, and on Wednesday 888 has the chance to 
spell out its own plans for the future. After all, this is not the first time 
it has failed in a bid, having lost out on buying Bwin for £1bn a year earlier.

Analysts are still forecasting consolidation in the gaming industry, and 
another tie-up with Rank is not impossible. In the way of these things, 888 
could also be a target itself (as it once was for, yes, William Hill). Morgan 
Stanley said: “In the past two years, 888 agreed to be acquired by William 
Hill, then to acquire bwin.party, and proposed to acquire Rank and William 
Hill. With its strong technology, customer relationship management, content and 
brands, we view 888 as a highly attractive and scarce asset … in a rapidly 
consolidating industry, 888 may not be large enough to compete effectively.”

Without any deals, investors will be hoping for an increased dividend or 
special payout. Morgan Stanley again: “It has a strong record of cash returns, 
with a … yield of 5.5% [in 2015].”

Japanese deal a shot in the ARM for Cambridge

It looks like being the end of an era. From a little acorn – or rather a 
little Acorn Computers – chip designerARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> has grown into one of 
Britain’s biggest technological successes, supplying the likes of Apple and 
Samsung. But this week the company, which was initially spun out of BBC 
computer maker Acorn, will lose its independence again when – barring any 
unlikely last-minute mishaps – a £24bn takeover by Japan’s SoftBank goes 
through.

ARM shareholders meet on Tuesday to approve the deal, with Friday set to be 
the last day when the company’s shares –it’s been a stalwart of the FTSE 100 
since February 2010, although it first joined in 1999 – are traded on the stock 
market.

Still, amid the usual discussions about Britain’s industrial base falling into 
foreign ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/sell-off-british-businesses-must-stop>
, there will be some benefits. Not least for the company’s 4,000 workers, who 
are in lineto share more than £400m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/20/arm-workers-set-to-share-nearly-400m-if-softbank-deal-goes-through>
. Chief executive Simon Segars and chief technology officer Mike Muller could 
receive up to £55m between them.

And at least Softbank has pledged to keep ARM’s base in Cambridge for at least 
the next five years, and to double the size of its UK workforce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2F888-buying-bookies-win-some-lose-some-gambling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfe0f23f1437190a37e4432f650348c4ac423a1%2F6_673_2409_1446%2F2409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20buying%20bookies%2C%20you%20win%20some%2C%20you%20lose%20some.%20Just%20ask%20888&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2F888-buying-bookies-win-some-lose-some-gambling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20buying%20bookies%2C%20you%20win%20some%2C%20you%20lose%20some.%20Just%20ask%20888&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2F888-buying-bookies-win-some-lose-some-gambling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfe0f23f1437190a37e4432f650348c4ac423a1%2F6_673_2409_1446%2F2409.jpg>
 ARM’s chief executive Simon Segars will share a payout of about £50m with his 
chief technology officer. Photograph: Albert Gea/Reuters 
Tooling up for Speedy merger


Martin Hughes, the fund manager dubbed “the rottweiler” in the City, is not a 
man to take lightly, as directors at equipment rental groupSpeedy Hire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/speedyhire> are finding out.

Hughes – a former City analyst who now runs asset manager Toscafund and is 
said to be worth about £375m – is demanding a merger with rival HSS and that 
company group chairman Jan Astrand step down. He has requisitioned a 
shareholder meeting for September.

Speedy Hire and HSS were in talks earlier this year before Speedy pulled the 
plug – something Hughes, who has stakes in both businesses, believes is a 
mistake. In a letter to Speedy Hire’s chairman he said: “You oversaw prolonged 
talks with regard to a potential merger with HSS Hire Group plc, which you 
inexplicably halted without consultation with the shareholders. You are aware 
that the advisers were comfortable with £20m annual synergy benefits above and 
beyond cost savings that would be achieved in the ordinary course of business. 
The merger would have been at least 70% accretive to the annual profit of 
Speedy Hire and the benefits would have insulated the company from the effects 
of a possible UK economic slowdown.”

On Friday Speedy Hire took some action of its own, selling its fleet of large 
excavators and rollers for $14.4m.

Against this background, HSS’s half-year results, due on Wednesday, could make 
for an interesting occasion. Analysts at Peel Hunt said: “We expect the HSS 
trading outlook to remain cautious given competitive pressures in the core hire 
activities and another cool summer.” HSS wants to focus on its own business and 
will update us on new initiatives including a new national distribution centre 
opened in March. But the Toscafund plan is likely to be a key talking point, 
both at HSS’s results and its subsequent shareholder roadshow.
 