
A seven-year-old girl whose Twitter account offered a glimpse into the 
violence and loss in besieged eastAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> has been evacuated from the city 
following worldwide concern about her safety.


Fears for Bana al-Abed’s safety spiked when her account, run by her mother, 
Fatemah, was temporarily shut down earlier this month and it was unclear if the 
family were caught in warfare or captured by forces loyal the Syrian president, 
Bashar al-Assad.

The last message from east Aleppo, signed on Sunday night by her mother, was a 
plea to bring the family to safety: “Please please please make this ceasefire 
work & get us out now. We are so tired.”

Hours later, as a stalled evacuation resumed, a Turkish NGO said Bana had made 
it safely out. “This morning @AlabedBana was also rescued from Aleppo with her 
family. We warmly welcomed them,” the Humanitarian Relief Foundation (IHH) 
wrote on its Twitter account on Monday, sharing an IHH aid worker’s selfie 
picture with the girl.
İHH (@ihhinsaniyardim) 
Halep'teki zulmü Twitter hesabından dünyaya duyuran @AlabedBana 
<https://twitter.com/AlabedBana> da Halep'ten tahliye edilenler arasında. 
Elhamdulillah.pic.twitter.com/MFu4CoXBPG <https://t.co/MFu4CoXBPG>
 <https://twitter.com/ihhinsaniyardim/status/810753943114547201> December 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/ihhinsaniyardim/status/810753943114547201> İHH 
(@ihhinsaniyardim) 
Ekiplerimiz Halep'te yaşananları dünyaya duyuran ve bu kafilede tahliye edilen 
@AlabedBana <https://twitter.com/AlabedBana>'yı karşıladı. 
pic.twitter.com/rHsy1Af0nZ <https://t.co/rHsy1Af0nZ>
 <https://twitter.com/ihhinsaniyardim/status/810801140124315648> December 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/ihhinsaniyardim/status/810801140124315648> 
Tarakji Ahmad, president of the Syrian American Medical Society, also posted a 
picture of Bana with an aid worker.

Ahmad Tarakji, MD (@tarakjiahmad) 
.@AlabedBana <https://twitter.com/AlabedBana> and many children arrived to 
#Aleppo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Aleppo?src=hash> countryside. @sams_usa 
<https://twitter.com/sams_usa> @UOSSM <https://twitter.com/UOSSM> and partners 
arr coordinating the response plan there.pic.twitter.com/k3iAohYbFY 
<https://t.co/k3iAohYbFY>
 <https://twitter.com/tarakjiahmad/status/810741000855425024> December 19, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/tarakjiahmad/status/810741000855425024> 
Bana and Fatemah appeared in a video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/19/i-left-my-soul-in-aleppo-mother-of-tweeter-bana-speaks-out-after-evacuation-video>
 posted online on Monday, in which the mother said she was glad to have reached 
safety but regretted being forced out of her home city. “Me and Bana want to 
tell all the world how much kids and all people in east Aleppo, how much they 
are suffering from bombs and everything – because there is no life there,” 
Fatemah said.

“So we created our Twitter to tell all the world what is happening there. We 
are happy because our voice reached all the world. We are free.

“I am sad because I leave my country. I left my soul there. I want to take our 
freedom there, not be like a refugee in other countries.”

Bana has amassed hundreds of thousands of followers and has become a symbol of 
the tragedy unfolding inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. Her 
account has chronicled the realities of life in a once-teeming metropolis, by 
posting pictures of the ongoing destruction, including those of her own 
rubble-littered street.

Hours before the account was shut down, Bana and Fatemeh tweeted a farewell 
message saying forces loyal to Assad were bearing down on their neighbourhood. 
“We are sure the army is capturing us now. We will see each other another day 
dear world,” read Sunday night’s tweet.

The mother and daughter, who were interviewed last month by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/i-need-peace-seven-year-old-bana-tweets-her-life-in-besieged-aleppo>
 in a video call over Skype while planes flew overhead and machine gunfire 
raged, had apparently received death threats in the days preceding the 
account’s closure. “When those bombs strike, our hearts shake before the 
buildings do,” Fatemah told the Guardian at the time.

JK Rowling is among those following Bana and Fatemah on Twitter and she sent 
ebooks of her Harry Potter novels to the girl after she said she liked to read 
“to forget the war”. Following the closure of the account, the British author
retweeted several messages <https://twitter.com/jk_rowling> asking after her, 
using the hashtag “Whereisbana 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Whereisbana?src=hash>?”


 At least 15,000 children are among the more than 300,000 people who have been 
killed in Syria’s five-year war. Thousands of others have been displaced in the 
ongoing fighting between rebels and forces loyal to the Syrian government. 
Residents of east Aleppo have spoken of relentless bombings and shelling, cuts 
in basic services such as water and electricity, and dwindling supplies of food 
and medicines.

Evacuations restarted on Monday after delays over the weekend. A source with 
knowledge of the evacuation dealtold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/aleppo-refugees-reach-safety-held-at-government-checkpoint>
 that roughly 1,000 civilians in 25 buses had been evacuated overnight into the 
western Aleppo countryside, and another 20 are still stuck at the government 
crossing in the district of Ramouseh.

“I want for my kids a good future, but this is the matter here, Fatemah said 
on Monday. “When we got out, we had a lot of suffering, because we stayed 
almost 24 hours in a bus without water and food or anything. We stayed like a 
prisoner, a hostage. Finally, we arrived here and we thank God and we thank all 
our friends who have supported us.”

 Bana’s last tweet with her mother before the evacuation appealed to the 
Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and foreign minister, Mevlüt 
Çavuşoğlu, to put the ceasefire back on track. “Dear @MevlutCavusoglu & 
@RT—Erdogan please please please make this ceasefire work & get us out now. We 
are so tired,” it said.

 Responding in a tweet Monday, Çavuşoğlu wrote: “Difficulties on the ground 
won’t deter us sister. Rest assured that we are doing all to get you and 
thousands of others to safety.”

The Islamic charity IHH is playing a large role in the transport of aid for 
Aleppo as well as the transfer of evacuated Syrians into camps in Idlib 
province near the Turkish border. An IHH spokesman told AFP that Bana was 
“likely to be transferred to the camps in Idlib province”.
 