
As anyone who caught our Antony and the Johnsons music site takeover 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/series/antony-and-the-johnsons-takeover>
 will know, Antony Hegarty knows a thing or two about artful curation. That's 
why we're excited by the prospect of the New York singer's Meltdown 
directorship. There will be shows from the operaticDiamanda Galás 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/apr/10/diamanda-galas-exile>, Bolton-born 
electronic artistPlanningtorock 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/oct/12/planningtorock-review> and 
previous Meltdown directorLaurie Anderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/laurie-anderson>. Hegarty has also invited his 
friend and previous collaboratorLou Reed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/lou-reed> to perform, and will be performing 
himself.

The Meltdown festival has been held at London's Southbank Centre every year 
since 1993, with a different high-profile figure from the music world chosen as 
director each time. Previous directors have includedJohn Peel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/johnpeel>, Patti Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/patti-smith>, Lee "Scratch" Perry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/lee-scratch-perry>, Scott Walker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/may/10/scott-walker-worlds-strongest-man>
 andJarvis Cocker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/jarvis-cocker>.

Ahead of this year's festival, which runs from 1–12 August, the Observer New 
Review will be collecting some of the highlights from the last 20 years of 
Meltdowns – and we'd like to hear your nominations. If you've attended any 
memorable Meltdown performances, let us know about them in the comment thread 
below, or tweet them to@guardianmusic <https://twitter.com/guardianmusic>.
 