
Which are the best owls in children’s books?

 Surprisingly, since most children may never see one, owls are popular in 
children’s books. Perhaps it’s useful that children have little first-hand 
experience of them, as it means they can be invested with a range of 
characteristics.

New Harry Potter covers – in animated gifs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/04/new-harry-potter-covers-animations-jk-rowling-jonny-duddle>
Owls have had starring roles in many titles but Hedwig, Harry Potter’s 
personal owl in JK Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-philosopher-s-stone-19.html>
 (and sequels) is currently the most famous. Given to Harry on his 11th 
birthday by Hagrid, Hedwig is Harry’s vital link between his ghastly 
circumstances in the Muggle world and the magical world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426499077276%2F0f06af95-9196-4e21-bd78-8d560a9b32ad-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20are%20the%20best%20owls%20in%20children's%20books%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20are%20the%20best%20owls%20in%20children%27s%20books%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426499077276%2F0f06af95-9196-4e21-bd78-8d560a9b32ad-1020x612.jpeg>
 The lovely Hedwig is a source of great comfort to Harry Potter. Photograph: 
HO/REUTERS/Warner Bros 
But Hedwig, a snowy owl, is more than just a messenger for Harry; she is also 
a great source of comfort for him when he is alone and downhearted. There are 
many other owls at Hogwarts and each plays an important role in its owner’s 
life. Scenes of them bringing letters from home – including the brilliantly 
imagined “Howlers” that so disturb the breakfast table and embarrass their 
recipients – are especially memorable.

Owls feature in other magical or witchy worlds, as in Helen Nicholl and Jan 
Pienkowski’s Meg and Mog series. Initially, Owl played a lesser role than 
either Meg or Mog but he soon became a useful third of the triumvirate and has 
his own titleOwl at School 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/meg-and-mog-three-favourite-stories.html>.

The idea that owls are a bit wiser or clever than those around them has its 
roots in classical mythology and has led to them often being given a superior 
place in woodland hierarchy. That is true in AA Milne’s imaginary Hundred Acre 
Wood inWinnie-the-Pooh <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/winnie-the-pooh-6.html>
. Unlike Winnie-the-Pooh himself or Tigger or Kanga or Eeyore, all of whom were 
based on real toys in young Christopher Robin’s nursery, Owl was an invention 
of the author. And he invested him with particular skills. Owl is a benign and 
helpful figure who uses what he sees as his superior intelligence to help 
inform and educate the other animals.

But, much to young readers delight, Owl is not as smart as he thinks he is. 
Although he can read and write which Pooh can’t, Owl’s grasp is shaky even when 
it comes to writing his own name which he spells as “Wol” from which, after his 
house has blown away, he names his new home “The Wolery”. He struggles even 
more when Pooh comes to ask for writing help a birthday greeting for Eeyore; 
Owl tells Pooh that the message will read “A very happy birthday with love from 
Pooh,” but he actually writes is “HIPY PAPY BTHUTHDTH THUTHDA BTHUTHDY.” 
Fortunately, Pooh – and Eeyore – are quite happy with it. Owl is only rumbled 
when Rabbit, who can read, realises that Owl cannot read the note that 
Christopher Robin has left, a difficulty he gets round by getting rabbit to 
read the note.


 In The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tale-of-squirrel-nutkin.html>Beatrix Potter 
also gives the owl Old Brown a high place in the hierarchy – although in his 
case, Old Brown’s superiority lies largely in his control over the place with 
the largest supply of the nuts the squirrels so crave. This owl is powerful and 
dominating; he frightens the squirrels who make offerings to him in order to 
gain permission to collect the nuts on his land – and to provide him with 
something tasty while they are doing so that he doesn’t eat them up too.

But day after day, Squirrel Nutkin can’t resist taunting Old Brown with a 
tricksy riddle. Finally Old Brown’s patience snaps, he pounces on Squirrel 
Nutkin and threatens to skin him alive. Nutkin escapes but only just and with 
part of his tail missing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426497868348%2Facef7376-ba47-4777-9a31-675c032b4581-1020x713.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20are%20the%20best%20owls%20in%20children's%20books%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20are%20the%20best%20owls%20in%20children%27s%20books%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fthe-best-owls-in-childrens-books-hedwig-harry-potter-owl-babies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426497868348%2Facef7376-ba47-4777-9a31-675c032b4581-1020x713.jpeg>
 Edward Lear’s Owl and the Pussy Cat is most beautifully reimagined by 
illustrator Charlotte Voake. Photograph: Charlotte Voake 
Edward Lear’s owl in his poem The Owl and the Pussy-Cat  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/owl-and-the-pussy-cat-3.html>is an altogether 
different kind of creature. Having set off on their voyage in a pea-green boat, 
the Owl is introduced in the lines “The Owl looked up to the stars above,/ And 
sang to a small guitar,”. It is a description which shows him to a poet and a 
romantic who woos the Pussy-Cat with song and dance – and his natural elegance.

The one thing everyone knows about owls is that they can see in the dark. All 
owls except Plop, a young barn owl and the star ofThe Owl Who was Afraid of the 
Dark <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/owl-who-was-afraid-of-the-dark-6.html> 
written Jill Tomlinson and illustrated by Paul Howard. Gradually Plop begins to 
learn about some of the wonderful things that are out there in the dark – 
especially the stars – in a touching story that calms fears while also 
introducing some astronomy.

 The best owl family is in Martin Waddell and Patrick Benson’s Owl Babies 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/ookshop.theguardian.com/owl-babies.html>
. Sarah, Percy and Bill live in a tree trunk with their owl mother. One day 
they wake up and find she has gone. They know that she has gone hunting for 
them and they know how dangerous that can be. The three owl chicks spend a 
long, long night waiting for her return. How they keep their spirits up and 
survive until Owl Mother returns is stunningly shown in Patrick Benson’s 
evocative illustrations which capture all small children’s terror at the 
disappearance of their mum!

Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>, using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
books sitejoin here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
, we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.

 