Where would you feel least comfortable?  In a crowded city  In a dark, 
unfamiliar wood  Being sent to a cold, new country far from home  Somewhere out 
in the open with no food What makes you feel stronger and better about yourself?
 Goat’s milk and mountain air  Curiosity and exploring  Seeking out the nearest 
boat  A good helping of honey What type of game are you most like to play?  
Throwing sticks into a river  Capsizing boats  Running around in the fresh air  
Skipping with a rope outside Which animal would you most like to befriend?  A 
robin  A goat  A water rat  An owl In your free time what would you rather do?  
Plant some flowers in the garden  Enjoy some lunch by the side of a river  Play 
with your friend on the mountainside  Walk around in the shade with your 
friends and visiting neighbours What sound do you prefer?  Woodpigeons cooing  
The tinkle of goats' bells round their neck  The splashing of oars in a river  
A bird singing What type of food would you like to be most readily available?  
Berries  Fresh fish  Cheese  Afternoon tea Where would you rather have a nap?  
Lying in a boat floating down a river  Under the shade of a tree  On lush green 
grass under a vast expanse of sky  On a garden bench surrounded by the perfume 
of flowers What are you most like to be impressed by?  A fiery red sunset  
Flowing, sparkling water  A homely birthday message painted by a friend  A 
beautiful selection of plants and flowers in the spring If you were an animal 
where would you most like to live?  In a cosy hole in a tree  In a soft nest  A 
snug den in a river bank  In a mountainside cave  You got…  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  