
102 Dalmatians

Who's the designer? Jean-Pierre Le Pelt (GÃ©rard Depardieu), the fur-loving 
designer who is frequently covered with red paint by protesters. Whether that's 
outrage at his use of fur or horror at his Fred Flintstone-meets-Billy Ray 
Cyrus personal appearance is not clear.

Hmm, sounds familiar, reminds me of ... John Galliano on a bad day, with a 
dash of Jean Paul Gaultier.

What are the designs like? Either gigantic fur coats not seen since the 
passing of the Notorious BIG, or ballgowns apparently made with the EuroDisney 
market in mind.

Best prima donna quote? "Cruella De Vil! My inspiration, my idol, my show!"

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? Psychotic 
savagery and a threat to all that is decent, loving, good and furry.

Credibility as a designer? Not very high, though Depardieu's designer is 
slightly better than Ioan Gruffudd's strange homage to Lennie from Of Mice and 
Men.

The Devil Wears Prada

Who's the designer? James Holt (Daniel Sunjata), the very trendy young New 
York designer in whom magazine editors take a keen interest.

Hmm, sounds familiar, reminds me of ... Marc Jacobs.

What are the designs like? Marc is unlikely to feel complimented: ugly 
ballgowns with big 80s bows in the middle, beaten-up leather bags.

Best prima donna quote? "This season really began for me with a meditation 
between east and west."

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? Not so much 
designers but fashion as a whole is something that only really spoilt women 
like because they don't recognise the important things in life (namely, being 
at the beck and call of one's boyfriend or husband).

Credibility as a designer? Low - those clothes really are bad.

 Zoolander

Who's the designer? Mugatu (Will Ferrell), the poodle-quiffed designer who, 
for reasons that are best described as tenuous, recruits male models to kill 
the prime minister of Malaysia.

Hmm, sounds familiar, reminds me of ... Now that would be libellous.

What are the designs like? We don't see much of his late work but he launched 
his career with the invention of the piano-key necktie.

Best prima donna quote? "I'm sorry, did my pin get in the way of your ass? Do 
me a favour and lose five pounds now!"

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? Murderous world 
power.

Credibility as a designer? As anyone who's seen Lagerfeld Confidential, the 
documentary about Karl Lagerfeld, knows, the reality is far stranger than the 
fiction.

The Incredibles

Who's the designer? Edna Mode, the sharply bobbed no-nonsense grande dame 
behind all the superheroes' costumes.

Hmm, sounds familiar, reminds me of ... Anna Wintour.

What are the designs like? What aren't they like? She can do bulletproof, she 
can do elasticated, she can do invisible, but there is one thing she won't do: 
"No capes!"

Best prima donna quote? "Milan, dahling, Milan, with the supermodels. Ha! 
Nothing super about them, puffy little stick insects who only think about 
themselves."

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? The highest 
pinnacle of human achievement. Without them the world would come to an end.

Credibility as a designer? With that hairstyle, we daren't voice any doubt.

Pret-a-Porter

Who are the designers? First off, there's Cort Romney (Richard E Grant), the 
queeny British designer with a strange kiss-curl hairdo and a fondness for 
Edwardian dress mixed with punk details. Then there's Cy Bianco (Forest 
Whitaker), the super-cool underground British designer who mixes streetwear and 
couture references in his very sexy clothes.

Hmm, they sound familiar, they remind me of ... Vivienne Westwood, sex change 
notwithstanding, and Alexander McQueen, respectively.

What are the designs like? In the case of Romney, go to any Westwood shop. 
Look at the clothes. There, you've got it - big tartan dresses and teetering 
spectator shoes. As he says, "Pregnant is not my silhouette this season, the 
bustle is at the back." As for Bianco's designs, they're gross. All those 
stretchy mini-dresses and weird cycling shorts are testament to the truth that 
nothing dates faster than desperately trendy clothes, particularly those from 
the most recent decade.

Best prima donna quotes? Romney: "Shoulders are very fresh again. And legs. My 
woman does not have to have legs but it's fabulous if she does." And Bianco? 
With that cod British accent, it's hard to understand anything he is saying.

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? Shallowness, 
superficiality but, you know, that's not a bad thing.

Credibility as a designer? For Romney, high in terms of clothes, low in terms 
of personal life - we're meant to believe this guy is married to a woman?! All 
that can be said of Bianco is that he probably does well in the denim market.

Sweet Home Alabama

Who's the designer? Melanie Carmichael (Reese Witherspoon), the hot young 
designer in New York with a fondness for off-the-shoulder dresses and anything 
that ends at a really unflattering length.

Hmm, sounds familiar, reminds me of ... Um, someone who works for a catalogue?

What are the designs like? Absolutely hideous. Of particular note is a 
one-shoulder black top with thick red ribbon piping along the top and bottom 
seams, tied in a bow in her armpit, for no obvious reason.

Best prima donna quote? "I don't 'make' clothes; I design them. There's a 
difference!"

What, in this movie, does being a fashion designer represent? Yankee 
shallowness and a loss of perspective on what's really important in life.

Credibility as a designer? Absolutely nil. In one scene she wears a denim 
jacket with jeans. Eww!
 