


I have an ancient laptop that needs replacing as soon as possible. I have a 
desk at home and do not need the portability of a laptop, but I would like an 
all-in-one to stop me hunching over the screen. I will use it for web browsing, 
sending emails, collating photos, and tasks like my ancestry research. What 
would you recommend?Kate

All-in-one computers generally use much the same technologies as laptops, but 
they are packaged differently. You are correct in thinking that all-in-ones are 
much better ergonomically, and they usually have bigger screens than laptops – 
typically 20-30in rather than 10-17in.

All-in-one PCs are much tidier than desktop PCs, especially if you use a 
wireless keyboard and mouse. Also, they take up less room and are easier to 
move around. However, they are not as easy to repair or to expand. Buying more 
power and more memory than you need will provide some future-proofing.

Either way, I recommend you visit a retailer than stocks all-in-ones, such as 
John Lewis or Currys PC World, so that you can check the screen, construction 
quality and finish first hand. The keyboard and mouse are not so important as
you can easily upgrade these later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/oct/13/which-keyboard-and-mouse-should-i-buy-for-my-pc>
.

Recommended systems

For best results, go for an all-in-one with an Intel Core processor, 8GB of 
memory, a 1TB or larger hard drive, and Microsoft Windows 10. You should be 
able to do everything you want with a Core i3, but if you can afford it, it’s 
better to have a Core i5. You don’t need to pay for the extra power of a Core 
i7.

At the time of writing, I’d go for the Asus Zen AiO 
<https://www.asus.com/uk/AllinOne-PCs/Zen-AiO-Pro-Z220IC/Performance/> ZN220IC. 
This has a 21.5in touch-screen with a resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels, a Core 
i3-6100U processor, 8GB of memory and 1TB hard drive, all for£579.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/asus-zen-aio-21-5-touchscreen-all-in-one-pc-10146124-pdt.html>
. The same AiO PC is also available with a faster Core i5-6400T for£665 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Z220ICUT-21-5-Inch-Desktop-Windows-Touchscreen/dp/B017YQAWLY/>
 orless 
<http://www.laptopsdirect.co.uk/asus-intel-core-i5-6400t-8gb-1tb-integrated-graphics-bt-cam-no-odd-23.6-to-z220icut-gg009x/version.asp>
. Prices and services vary so shop around.

There’s also a version with a Core i3 and only 4GB of memory for £499.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/asus-zen-aio-21-5-all-in-one-pc-10146349-pdt.html>
. If that’s as far as your budget stretches, it will do the job.

The Zen AiO is built like an Apple iMac all-in-one – from the back, they look 
almost identical – but cheaper. The main drawback is that it’s extremely 
difficult to open, to add more memory or a faster hard drive.

Don’t like the Zen? Dell sells a similar but less stylish all-in-one, the 
Inspiron 22 3000 <http://www.dell.com/uk/p/inspiron-22-3263-desktop-aio/pd>, 
with a Core i5-6200U, 8GB of memory and 1TB hard drive for £649 including 
delivery. Be careful not to confuse it with the older model, which had a
kick-stand 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/dell-inspiron-22-3000-21-5-all-in-one-pc-10147063-pdt.html>
. HP offers theHP Pavilion 23-q252na 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/hp-pavilion-23-q252na-all-in-one-desktop-pc-intel-core-i5-8gb-ram-2tb-23-/p2789163>
 with a Core i5-6400T, 8GB of memory and a 2TB hard drive for £749.95. I 
suspect that’s too much for you.

Budget options

If you want to spend as little as possible, look at the Lenovo C20. It has a 
19.5in non-touch screen, an Intel Celeron J3160 processor, 4GB of memory, a 1TB 
hard drive and a built-in DVD for £319.99 atPC World 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-c20-19-5-all-in-one-pc-10146496-pdt.html>
,Argos <http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Product/partNumber/5532212.htm> and other 
stores. It’s obviously not a premium product, but it’s terrific value for money.

It has two drawbacks. First, the screen resolution is only 1366 x 768 pixels. 
Like your old laptop, it’s HD instead of Full HD. Second, the Celeron J3160 is 
fairly a slow processor, roughly equivalent to an Intel Atom x7-Z8700. The 
J3160’s main advantage is on-chip support for H.264 and VC1 encoding and 
decoding, which helps when playing videos.

There’s a slightly cheaper version of the Lenovo C20 with a 500GB instead of a 
1TB hard drive for£299.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-c20-19-5-all-in-one-pc-10146063-pdt.html>
. There’s also a slightly more expensive version (£349.99 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-c20-19-5-all-in-one-pc-10146065-pdt.html>
) with a Pentium J3710 processor. However, this is basically the same chip with 
a slightly faster graphics unit. In Intel branding terms, Pentiums are better 
than Celerons, but in this case, it’s not really worth the extra cost. However, 
both the Celeron J3160 and Pentium J3710 are better than the oldCeleron N3050 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/lenovo-c20-19-5-all-in-one-pc-10141697-pdt.html>
, which only has two processor cores instead of four.

John Lewis also offers a C20 variant with the slightly better Pentium J3710 
processor and 8GB of memory instead of 4GB, which is reasonable value at£379.95 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/lenovo-c20-all-in-one-desktop-pc-intel-pentium-8gb-ram-1tb-19-5-black/p2915903>
.

However, at that level, you’d be better off paying £399.99 for the 21.5in HP 
22-b020na <http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Product/partNumber/5483268.htm>. This 
has a Full HD screen (1920 x 1080 pixels), a Pentium J3710 processor, 8GB of 
memory, 1TB hard drive and DVD. It looks nicer than the Lenovo C20, and the 
extra £80 buys some significant advantages: much better screen resolution, 
twice the memory, and a slightly faster processor. (Note: be careful not to buy 
anHP 22-b000na 
<http://www.pcworld.co.uk/gbuk/computing/desktop-pcs/desktop-pcs/hp-22-b000na-22-all-in-one-pc-white-10146433-pdt.html>
, which has a dual-core Celeron J3060 instead of the quad-core chip.)

Upmarket all-in-ones

There are plenty of options for users with up to £2,000 to spend on an 
all-in-one PC. The extra money usually buys you high-resolution 24in, 27in or 
larger screens, faster Intel Core i5 or i7 processors, dedicated graphics 
cards, 16GB or 32GB of memory, and very responsive SSD (solid-state disk) 
drives instead of slow rotating hard drives.

There are lots of more powerful versions of the Asus Zen AiO, up to and 
including theZ240 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/asus-zen-z240-all-in-one-pro-desktop-pc-intel-core-i7-32gb-ram-1tb-hdd-512gb-ssd-23-8-ultra-hd-4k-touch-screen-icicle-gold/p2961908>
. This has a 4K (3840 x 2160-pixel) screen, an Intel Core i7-6700T with 32GB of 
memory, an Nvidia GeForce GTX960M graphics card with 4GB of memory, a 1TB hard 
drive and a 512GB SSD for £1,999.95.

HP’s Envy range also has some interesting widescreen models. The Curved 
34-a090na 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/hp-envy-curved-34-a090na-all-in-one-pc-intel-core-i7-8gb-ram-1tb-128gb-ssd-34-quad-hd/p2311206>
, for example, has a 34in widescreen with a resolution of 3440 x 1440 pixels, a 
Core i7-6700T processor and 8GB of memory for the same £1,999.95 price.

For people who prefer the macOS operating system, there are several all-in-one 
iMacs. The entry level model has a 21.5in screen with a resolution of 1920 x 
1080 pixels, a Core i5, 8GB of memory and a 1TB hard drive for £899. A 4K 
Retina display and a faster Core i5 pushes the price up to £1,119. You can also 
get iMacs with 27in 5120 x 2880-pixel screens, Core i5 processors and 8GB of 
memory for £1,449 to £1,849. Upgrading the top model to a fast Core i7, 32GB of 
memory etc enables you to spend from £2,500 to well over £3,000.

However, Apple is launching some new PCs next Thursday (27 October) in San 
Francisco. I’m not expecting the iMacs to change dramatically, but best wait 
and see. The Apple event will take place one day later than a Microsoft launch 
in New York. This could include a rumoured Surface AIO all-in-one, but it won’t 
be cheap.

Have you got another question for Jack? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com 
<mailto:Ask.Jack@theguardian.com>

 * Which keyboard and mouse should I buy for my PC? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/oct/13/which-keyboard-and-mouse-should-i-buy-for-my-pc>

 * Which laptop should I buy my YouTube-friendly 14-year-old? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/sep/01/which-laptop-should-i-buy-my-youtube-friendly-14-year-old>

 * Can I still upgrade from Vista to Windows 10 or should I buy a new PC? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/aug/04/can-i-still-upgrade-from-vista-to-windows-10-or-should-i-buy-a-new-pc>
 