
Music streaming is on the rise: in 2015 in the UK fans played 26.8bn songs on 
audio-streaming services alone, with another 26.9bn streams of music videos on 
services like YouTube.


There are a cluster of services competing for our time and cash. But which is 
the best for your listening habits? We’ve compared five of the best known 
on-demand music-streaming services.

Some features are standard: catalogues of 30m-40m tracks (except Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Prime Music); themed playlists 
created by in-house teams of tastemakers; and the ability to store tracks on 
your mobile devices for offline listening.

 But what other features tip the balance? Read on for our comparison, as well 
as a summary of some of the other contenders worth trying.

Spotify
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2409c2da710a9104e04dae43861539ca455982%2F0_0_1523_780%2F1523.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a2409c2da710a9104e04dae43861539ca455982%2F0_0_1523_780%2F1523.jpg>
 Spotify 
Price: Free or £9.99 a month

It’s perhaps no surprise that Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> is the most well-rounded 
streaming service: it launched in 2008 and has been steadily improving since 
then. Many of the new features added in the last year or two have focused on 
helping you discover music.

Playlists are key to that: Spotify has a wide range that are updated with new 
songs every week, but it also has a deep catalogue of playlists created by 
outsiders: labels, media, musicians and fans. Follow a few, and you’ll have a 
regular supply of new tunes.

Every Spotify user gets their own Discover Weekly playlist too, updated every 
Monday with 30 new songs that its recommendation algorithms think you’ll like, 
based on your own tastes and those of people like you. It’s an excellent idea.

On mobile, Spotify’s Now feature suggests playlists based on your habits and 
the current time of day, while its Running mode will play you tracks that match 
your jogging pace.

It has added audio and video podcasts as well as YouTube-style short-form 
video shows recently, although the jury is out on whether people want to watch 
Spotify as well as listen to it.

Spotify has better social features than its rivals, with the ability to add 
friends and see their playlists and listening, as well as a built-in messaging 
system to ping music back and forth. Creating and sharing your own playlists is 
easy too.

Another strength is the system for following musicians’ profiles and getting 
notifications when they have new music out. A recently introduced Concerts feed 
shows you upcoming, nearby gigs by artists you’ve listened to, which is useful.

It has good support for devices beyond the desktop and mobile: it’s available 
on Sony’s PlayStation 4, Sonos hi-fis and through Google’s Chromecast and 
Amazon’s Fire TV, while its mobile app plays nicely withApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> TV too.

Spotify’s free tier has audio advertising, but is missing offline listening 
and – on mobile – the ability to pick tracks on-demand, although you can play 
an artist’s catalogue on shuffle mode. Pay £9.99 a month, and you get full 
access (including offline), no ads, and a higher-quality streams option.

Where Spotify falls down is its family plan, which is more expensive than 
rivals. You can add up to four extra accounts for £4.99 each, but that means 
you’ll pay £29.95 a month for a family of five compared toApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> and Google Play’s £14.99 
for six.

Verdict: the best of the bunch for now, especially for music discovery, with 
new features being added at a rapid pace.

Apple Music
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f2d291d933736731c530aa9ea30fb607f354766%2F0_0_1507_835%2F1507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f2d291d933736731c530aa9ea30fb607f354766%2F0_0_1507_835%2F1507.jpg>
 Apple Music 
Price: £9.99 a month

Apple Music launched with great expectations in the summer of 2015, but early 
gremlins involving people’s iTunes collections and unflattering comparisons 
with Spotify drew criticism.

Even so, Apple raced to 10 million paying subscribers six months after launch 
– a milestone it took Spotify nearly six years to reach – so Apple Music is 
catching on. It’s also much better than its harsher critics claim.

Its programmed playlists are a strength, with a deep collection of playlists 
from Apple’s own staff and guest curators that mines some refreshingly-unusual 
niches. The introductions to specific bands’ back catalogues are particularly 
good.

The more you use Apple Music, the more it gets to know your tastes, serving up 
album and playlist suggestions in its For You section with relatively few 
clunking-great misfires. The way it integrates your existing iTunes collection, 
now that the early bugs have been fixed, is good too.

Live radio station Beats 1 may not be a massive revelation to Brits used to 
the BBC’s specialist radio output – it’s part Radio 1’s evening shows and part 
6Music – but elsewhere in the world this has been a breath of fresh air. Shows 
helmed by artists like Josh Homme, St. Vincent, Dr Dre and Q-Tip are well worth 
tuning in to – and more so now that you can access them on-demand, which you 
couldn’t at launch.

Another unique feature, Apple Music Connect, remains a misfire. It could be 
brilliant: a mix of Twitter, Instagram and SoundCloud where musicians post 
exclusive stuff including raw demos. Few are using it to that extent yet, 
though.

Dedicated iTunes haters won’t enjoy Apple Music’s interface, but navigating 
your way around isn’t too hard, even if creating playlists is a pain. It’s less 
social than Spotify too: there’s very little sense of what your friends are 
listening to.

Apple was early on to the family plan idea: pay £14.99 a month and you can 
have up to six people on your account. Needless to say, Apple Music works well 
on Apple TV, its recent launch on Sonos was welcome, and contrary to 
expectations, its Android app is pretty slick too.


Verdict: room to improve, but for heavy iTunes users firmly embedded in 
Apple’s ecosystem, it’s made a good start.

Google Play Music
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925fb5a3b4c90017252706730589cbe06457b43e%2F0_0_1615_960%2F1615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925fb5a3b4c90017252706730589cbe06457b43e%2F0_0_1615_960%2F1615.jpg>
 Google Play Music 
Price: £9.99 a month

Google’s biggest music-streaming service is YouTube, but its audio-only Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play Music is building its own 
following.

The service has a neat, stripped-down design: plenty of white space in 
contrast to Spotify’s darker design. Searching artists, albums and tracks is 
easy, as is creating your own playlists.

There’s a good introduction feature that asks you for your favourite genres 
and artists, which will help tune Google Play’s recommendations for playlists, 
albums and radio-style stations. The playlists and stations are good, based – 
like those on rivals – around specific genres, themes and activities.

Google Play mirrors Spotify’s Now feature in the way it will suggest playlists 
for the current time of day: a Thursday afternoon might throw up Sitting In A 
Coffee Shop, Focusing While You Work and Boosting Your Energy as themes, for 
example. Pick one, and you’ll be asked for a genre, and then given a choice of 
three suitable playlists.

Like Apple Music, Google Play’s stations can be surprisingly specific: Ambient 
Scandinavian Stargazing, Sad Rappers and Girl Hold My Earrings – the latter 
specifically for women spoiling for a fight after someone has stolen their man. 
Contrary to what you might expect of Google, there’s a veryhuman touch to all 
this.

More stereotypical is the lack of many social features beyond the ability to 
share your playlists on social networks. As with Apple Music, what your friends 
are listening to and recommending is something you’ll have to find elsewhere.

For anyone using Google’s cloud-music storage service, Google Play Music works 
seamlessly with that: you can upload your downloads collection – most easily by 
dragging and dropping it in the Chrome web browser – with space for up to 50k 
songs.

A nice touch is the way it pulls in music videos from YouTube: for example, 
when you’re listening to an album, it suggests the videos from its tracks.

In the UK, after its three-month free trial, Google Play Music costs £9.99 a 
month, although in the US it has a free tier focusing on the radio-style 
stations, which may launch elsewhere in the world soon. Its 
£14.99-for-six-people family plan matches Apple’s, and is available in the UK, 
Australia, Canada, France, Germany and the US.

Verdict: neat design and some characterful playlists to discover, although it 
could be more social.

Deezer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89047c79308253bb00633b48970f3ac44ff337bf%2F0_0_1644_855%2F1644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89047c79308253bb00633b48970f3ac44ff337bf%2F0_0_1644_855%2F1644.jpg>
 Deezer 
Price: Free - £9.99 a month

Until Apple Music’s 10m milestone, Deezer was the second biggest on-demand 
streaming service. It’s the one with the widest global reach, and has signed up 
many of its users through deals with mobile operators bundling it into mobile 
contracts.

Deezer does all the basics well, and has improved on the recommendations side, 
albeit not as rapidly as Spotify. The service promotes playlists from its own 
editors, outside labels and other curators, organising them by genre.

Its Mixes feature is useful too, blending the songs you like with its own 
recommendations. These radio-style stations are based on genres and themes, 
like its rivals: Happy Hour, Sad Songs and Cosy Fireplace among more standard 
themes.

If you prefer simply hitting the play button and sitting back, Deezer’s Flow 
feature is welcome: a mix tuned to your tastes based on the songs and artists 
that you’ve favourited, which learns from the tracks you mark as liked or 
unliked while it plays. It’s less of a pipeline for brand new music than 
Spotify’s Discover Weekly, but more about a flow of familiar tracks and artists.

Deezer works on Sonos and Chromecast, and will play through your Apple TV from 
its iOS app too. If it has a unique selling point in 2016, it might be its push 
into non-music content.

It has a good collection of news and entertainment podcasts, for example, and 
has even moved into football – the first music-streaming service to do so. In 
the UK, Germany and 14 other countries, you can listen to live match commentary 
provided by radio partners like TalkSport.

Football is one of the “apps” available through Deezer – essentially 
sub-sections of its website created by other developers – including 
music-discovery startups and some artists (David Guetta for instance). They’re 
usually another route into playlists.

Deezer recently launched a family plan in France matching Apple’s: €14.99 a 
month for up to six people. It’s launching elsewhere in the coming months. For 
Sonos owners, meanwhile, there’s the Deezer Elite hi-res version – the 
equivalent would be Tidal’s HiFi tier – for better audio quality.

Verdict: worth a look, but has some catching up to do with Spotify on features.

Amazon Prime Music
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71142591a2f6d73ff03e20e49c9a1fc4758a6863%2F0_0_1632_900%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20is%20the%20best%20music%20streaming%20service%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhich-is-the-best-music-streaming-service-spotify-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71142591a2f6d73ff03e20e49c9a1fc4758a6863%2F0_0_1632_900%2F1632.jpg>
 Amazon Prime Music 
Prime Music isn’t a standalone streaming service. Instead, it’s part of 
Amazon’s £79-a-year Prime membership scheme, along with the Prime Video TV and 
film-streaming service, one-day delivery on products you buy on Amazon, and the 
Kindle e-book lending library.

Prime Music also stands apart from rivals in other ways. Its catalogue is much 
smaller for example: around 1.4m tracks rather than the 30m+ elsewhere. When 
searching for the latest albums from artists you like, you’ll often end up 
being pointed towards Amazon’s MP3 store to buy instead.

Amazon, however, isn’t going after the same kind of music fans as Spotify, 
Apple Music and the rest. Prime Music is pitched at an even more mainstream 
audience: people who’ll be as happy listening to an 80s Rock Anthems, Acoustic 
Commute or Whitney Houston’s Top Songs playlist as they are searching for 
specific music.

These curated selections are divided into Stations and Playlists, with the 
former based on specific genres and artists, with the latter adding in 
activities and moods too: the idea being to supply a stream of music to 
accompany what you’re doing right now.

One of Prime Music’s advantages is that it integrates everything you’ve ever 
bought from Amazon, including digital downloads but also CDs and vinyl if they 
fall under its AutoRip feature. Prime also sits alongside Amazon’s existing 
Amazon Music service, where you can store your downloads collection.

Although you can create your own playlists, the focus is more on adding songs 
and albums to your library – it’s a traditional-style music collection at 
heart. Amazon also commissions the odd exclusive, such as its Indie for the 
Holidays Christmas compilation, and a pair of children’s albums.

Amazon’s stations and playlists – if not its exclusives – are mirrored on the 
other streaming services, so keen music fans will likely go elsewhere. But this 
is an accessible option for everyone else, particularly if they already have a 
Prime membership.

Verdict: limited compared to standalone rivals, but knows its audience well.

Also worth a listen

Tidal is now co-owned by a starry group of artists, and is trying to make 
headway against its richer rivals. The odd exclusive from Prince and Rihanna 
aside, its main appeal is its higher-resolution tier – good for audiophiles.

Napster’s illegal days are long behind it: now twinned with US streaming 
service Rhapsody, the pair have 3m subscribers around the world, providing a 
decent alternative to Deezer in the middle-class of the streaming world.

SoundCloud remains free for now, with plans to launch a subscription tier 
later this year. It’s a hotbed of remixes, mash-ups and raw demos from artists 
and DJs, many of which aren’t available on the other streaming services.

8tracks and Mixcloud focus more on playlists and mixes, with the latter adding 
in spoken-word radio shows too.

Bandcamp made its name as a platform for independent artists to sell music 
directly to fans. It’s still that, but its app also enables you to stream all 
the music you’ve bought: a great way to support the indie artists you love.

YouTube is the world’s biggest music-streaming service by far, from music 
videos alone. In the US, it’s already launched the subscription-basedYouTube Red
, which bundles in a Google Play Music subscription.

• Which is the best TV and movies streaming service? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/02/which-is-the-best-streaming-service-netflix-amazon-google-play-itunes>

 