
Is William Hague, Rotherham’s pint-necking drinks purveyor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/aug/10/williamhague.uk>-turned Tory 
party elder statesman, really the greatest living Yorkshireman? Geoffrey 
Boycott doesn’t think so, accusing the prime minister of having a “lapse in 
memory”.

But rather than nominating himself, the bluff cricketer – not renowned for his 
humility – told the Telegraph it was another sportsman, Sebastian Coe, who 
deserved the honour.
Hannah Furness (@Hannah_Furness) 
Geoffrey Boycott: "William Hague?? I'm amazed. He's had a lapse in memory. I 
might write to him tomorrow." (He votes Seb Coe instead)
 <https://twitter.com/Hannah_Furness/status/517279221170061312> October 1, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/Hannah_Furness/status/517279221170061312> 
Yet Coe, now a peer, was born in London, only moving up to Sheffield for 
secondary school, so scratch that.

There is no shortage of athletes who would be in with a shot at the title over 
that side of the Pennines, however. As Tykes will never tire of telling you, 
particularly if you’re a Lancastrian, Yorkshire would have come 12th in the 
medals table in the 2012 Olympics if it had been a country (to which a 
Lancastrian would point out:Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> isn’t even one county – it’s 
four, so button it).

Nonetheless, the young Brownlees from Horsforth in Leeds 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-19210250> would almost certainly 
lay claim to the title of Yorkshire’s greatest living brothers, after 
dominating the sport of triathlon in recent years.

Jessica Ennis-Hill, Sheffield’s golden girl, would qualify if we broadened the 
category to “Yorkshirefolk” – along with Betty Boothroyd, the tiller girl 
turned steely parliamentary Speaker, and of course Dame Judi Dench, who is 
originally from York.

Still on the arts front, Jarvis Cocker would be a contender, even though he 
recently told the Guardian that he had lived away from Sheffield so long that 
he got lost whenever he returned home.

How about Alex Turner of the Arctic Monkeys? Another Sheffield lad, who 
managed to shoehorn into one of his hits a dig at local Yorkshire rivals – 
“You’re not from New York, you’re from Rotherham”, he told a try-hard hipster 
in Fake Tales of San Francisco. But Turner now lives mostly in Los Angeles and 
dates supermodels, so has arguably moved too far from his roots to deserve the 
accolade.

Then there’s Alan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>, 
another blunt Yorkshireman who has abandoned the white rose county for London.

Could a more authentic choice be David Hockney, son of Bradford, now residing 
in Bridlington? The painter recently demonstrated classic Yorkshire chippiness 
when he threatened to “give up” on his home city after council wallahs 
suggested they’d have tosell off the art collection to counteract government 
cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/30/david-hockney-threatens-bradford-sells-art-collection>
 .
 