
Q I run a small freelance accountancy business and will writing business. Last 
year I purchased a franchise business with a company. The fee was £6,950 plus 
VAT - a total of £8,166.25. I paid £5,000 towards this on my credit card and 
the balance by HSBC banker's draft. The company was subsequently wound up by 
the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform (formerly the 
Department of Trade and Industry) in May this year. I made a claim for the 
£5,000 against my credit card company and was refunded. I also tried to claim 
the balance of £3,166.25 from HSBC, but they refused my claim. Can I claim the 
outstanding figure from my credit card company even though I didn't pay the 
balance by card - via section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, whereby it states 
that transactions do not apply only to a deposit? Or should I go back to HSBC?
SJ

A Under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act, when you buy goods or services 
costing between £100 and £30,000 with a credit card, the credit card company is 
equally liable if the supplier is in breach of contract. So if, as in your 
case, the supplier goes bust, you can claim compensation from the credit card 
company.

Somewhat surprisingly though, the law allows you to claim all your losses from 
the credit card company even if you paid only the deposit by card. This is 
because the amount you can claim is not limited to the amount of the credit 
card transaction. It is assessed solely on what you are entitled to claim for 
the supplier's breach of contract. So you are right to think that you can claim 
the £3,166.25 balance of the amount you paid for the franchise from your credit 
card company.
 