
From George Clooney’s Enough Project <http://www.enoughproject.org/>, rapper 
Akon’s newly launchedLighting Africa <http://akonlightingafrica.com/> to the 
viralKony 2012 <http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/events/kony-2012> campaign, 
there’s no doubt celebrity activism has gone mainstream.

Mother Jones recently published an ironic map  
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2010/03/africa-celebrities-madonna-oprah-brangelina-george-clooney>
of the African countries celebrities have “claimed” through their charity work: 
Richard Branson, Oprah and Will Smith have South Africa, while Botswana is Kim 
Kardashian’s.

But this kind of celebrity advocacy isn’t new, either. At the turn of the 20th 
century, the prominent British journalist, author and politicianEdmund Dene 
Morel <http://archives.lse.ac.uk/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=MOREL> and 
Anglo-Irish diplomatRoger Casement 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/britain_wwone/casement_01.shtml> 
successfully challenged King Leopold of Belgium’sviolent and autocratic rule of 
the Congo Free State <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/3516965.stm>. 
They did so with the help of notable friends: writers Arthur Conan Doyle and 
Joseph Conrad, and chocolate magnate William Cadbury.

Causes are to celebrities what corporate social responsibility is to business

Between the 1930s and 1950s, suffragette Sylvia Pankhurst 
<http://www.sylviapankhurst.com/her_campaigns/sylvia_&_suffrage/sylvia_the_suffragette.php>
 fought for a fascist-free, and later independent, Ethiopia, and a few decades 
later Bob Geldof andBand Aid <http://www.bobgeldof.com/content.asp?section=31> 
raised £30m for the victims of the country’s famine.

The latest generation of American celebrity activists 
<http://www.carnegiecouncil.org/publications/ethics_online/0100> has most 
commonly knocked at the doors of western governments, demanding changes in 
policy towards their chosen cause célèbre. But what are the consequences, and 
is this something we necessarily want to promote?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcelebrity-activism-africa-live-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436368542577%2F35070da8-a9dd-4a60-b251-6bc596dc5fe5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20really%20benefits%20from%20celebrity%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcelebrity-activism-africa-live-aid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20really%20benefits%20from%20celebrity%20activism%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcelebrity-activism-africa-live-aid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436368542577%2F35070da8-a9dd-4a60-b251-6bc596dc5fe5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 British politician William Hague with actor and UNHCR special envoy Angelina 
Jolie in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Photograph: LA(Phot) Iggy Roberts/AP 
Just causes vs personal brands

Should we question the motives of celebrities who hire expensive PR experts to 
“sell” their convictions? As Daniel Drezner writes in “When foreign policy goes 
glam <http://danieldrezner.com/research/glam.pdf>”, engaging in humanitarian 
causes clearly benefits the Clooneys, Jolies and Damons of the world. It 
provides them with access to new outlets – political talk shows or 
international forums – and helps polish their personal brands.

Causes are to celebrities what corporate social responsibility is to business 
– every established name has to have at least one.

And while celebrities undoubtedly help bring serious issues to a larger 
audience – often encouraging pledges from governments, policymakers and 
businesses – the problem lies in that they are much less effective at 
transforming all this into appropriate, tangible policies.


Academic Darrel West suggests that the fascination for celebrities 
<http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Events/2007/8/01sustainable-development/2007west.PDF>
 raises the risk that “there will be more superficiality and less substance in 
our political process”.

A stark example of this is provided in the new documentary, We Will Win Peace 
<http://www.wewillwinpeace.com/>, which tracks the impact of Section 1502 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/05/dodd-frank-democratic-republic-of-congo-117583.html#.VZpdynkVjIU>
 of theUS’s Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/05/dodd-frank-democratic-republic-of-congo-117583.html#.VZ0T75TF-Jd>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fondemand%2Fwewillwinpeace&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fondemand%2Fwewillwinpeace>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2Fondemand%2Fwewillwinpeace&media=>
Introduced in 2010 and championed by celebrities from Ben Affleck to Nicole 
Richie, the ruling required companies to disclose their use ofconflict minerals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/conflict-free-minerals-drc-companies-stay>
 originating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or an adjoining country.

It was presented by the Enough Project <http://www.enoughproject.org/> as an 
essential precursor to preventing conflict and sexual violence in the DRC. But 
the new documentary, alongsideother pieces of research 
<http://www.cgdev.org/files/1425843_file_Seay_Dodd_Frank_FINAL.pdf>, shows the 
very real and devastating effect of this simplified rendering of the facts.

With de facto international boycotts on minerals from the DRC, and a 
government ban on artisanal mining, tens of thousands of miners and businesses 
ended up unable tomake a living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/02/conflict-minerals-law-congo-poverty>
. This pushed many individuals either towards the illicit mining industry or a 
rebel group, paradoxically exacerbating the very violence it set out to reduce.

The Dodd-Frank Act should have asked local activists, populations and mining 
experts about mineral supply chains

So what went wrong? In an article for the World Peace Foundation 
<http://fletcher.tufts.edu/world-peace-foundation>, writer Alex de Waal 
<https://sites.tufts.edu/reinventingpeace/2013/04/30/reclaiming-activism/> says 
there are fundamental pillars of activism which should always be followed, most 
of all, the act of responding to and collaborating with local people, rather 
than imposing outside agendas.

The Dodd-Frank campaign should have involved asking local activists, 
populations and mining experts in the eastern DRC about mineral supply chains, 
he writes, to check whether they could be altered to improve the situation.

De Waal also argues that activism should speak to power, but also stand firmly 
against it, and should not presume that all change is possible from within.

A simple, catch all, solution?

As recent research 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2012.01293.x/abstracthttp://example.com/>
 has shown, the problem with celebrity causes is that they tend to 
de-politicise activism. They too often obscure the complex dynamics of power 
and socioeconomic relations in favour of a simple, catch all, solution.

Celebrities speaking truth to power, rather than half-truths that may 
inadvertently serve the interests of power, may be a more promising way forward 
if celebrity advocacy is to lead to meaningful socioeconomic change.

The rise of the digital saviour: can Facebook likes change the world?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/18/digital-saviour-saving-lives-internet-age-save-darfur>
The advocacy circuit for change in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> lacks celebrity participation in 
bottom-up movements, as opposed to top-down campaigns..

Yet if the cycle of simplified celebrity messages leading to ineffective – 
even harmful – African policy is to be broken, genuine engagement with, and 
commitment to, the people they advocate on behalf of is critical.
 