
Following the success of I Am Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/23/zlatan-ibrahimovic-autobiography-review>
, the footballing superstar's collaboration with the Swedish novelist David 
Lagercrantz,Roddy Doyle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roddydoyle> has 
teamed up withRoy Keane <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-keane> to 
write the former Manchester United and Ireland hardman's memoirs. Doyle's name 
sets the bar high for future match-ups, so in the following suggested 
author-athlete partnerships all bar one writer is a Man Booker or Orange prize 
winner.

Julian Barnes

The 2011 Booker winner follows "many, many sports", and his thoughts on Roger 
Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> sound like an appeal 
for a chance to work with him: "I adore him: his range of shots, his elegance, 
his utter lack of that awful strutting male bullshit, the way both his emotions 
and his steely determination are hidden by a calm exterior." Remind you of 
anyone?

AS Byatt

Not usually seen as sporty, but she watches football as if it was "a kinetic 
sculpture or abstract light show. Quadrilaterals, round balls, and the shifting 
lines of force and energy made by the players' movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jun/29/euro20081>." The ascendancy 
of "tiki-taka" a la Barcelona and Spain will have pleased her, and her sporting 
soulmate is surelyPep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola>, the former Barcelona 
manager now at Bayern Munich – his Byatt-like cosmopolitanism is also a plus.

JM Coetzee

Coetzee wrote to Paul Auster <https://www.theguardian.com/books/paulauster> of 
spending most of a Sunday watching Test cricket on TV, despite his awareness 
that "it is a waste of time … I learn nothing. I come away with nothing 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2013/03/the-better-player-paul-auster-jm-coetzee-sports.html>
". An astute publisher would bring him together with a boring cricketer, for 
whom playing is or was an equally Beckettian exercise in futility: perhaps
Jonathan Trott <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jonathan-trott>, but Geoffrey 
Boycott would also be a contender.

Margaret Atwood

She appeared in the Canadian film Score: A Hockey Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/15/margaret-atwood-ice-hockey-musical>
, and can be found onYouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJg_Q31SkiI> (in 
full kit) giving tips on playing ice hockey goalie. Publishers have no doubt 
tried to hook her up with her hockey superstar compatriot Wayne Gretzky, but a 
more Atwoodian connection might be with Vladislav Tretiak, the great Russian 
goalie who was disasterously substituted in the 1980 Winter Olympics US v USSR 
'Miracle on Ice' game in which a bunch of American amateurs and college kids 
unexpectedly ended over a quarter of a century of Soviet dominance.

Thomas Keneally

A rugby league fanatic, but anyone who only plays the 13-a-side version won't 
float a publisher's boat. More appealing is the All Blacks union starSonny Boy 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sonny-bill-williams>, who shuttles 
between the two codes, has an ethnic makeup reflecting a newly diverse 
New Zealand, and has had spells in the media doghouse.

Hilary Mantel

The double Booker winner has said she owns "stacks of cricket books 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/books/review/hilary-mantel-by-the-book.html?_r=0>
", and her Tudor trilogy suggests the natural fit is with behind-the-scenes 
fixers rather than players: think former and current Australian team managers 
Bob Simpson andDarren 'Boof' Lehmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-lehmann>, or England coach Andy Flower
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower>, whose rise and fall has a 
Cromwellian shape.

Salman Rushdie

The apparent feud between Rushdie and Imran Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/imran-khan>, the Pakistan 
all-rounder-turned-party-leader, shouldn't prevent the former – who has 
depicted other subcontinental politicians in his fiction – ghosting Khan's 
autobiography, with or without permission. Such a project, calledSatanic 
Reverses and crediting Khan with pioneering reverse-swing bowling, was unveiled 
on a website, only to be later revealed as a hoax 
<http://www.dawn.com/news/704630/salman-rushdie-to-write-book-on-imran-khan>.

Lionel Shriver

The 2005 Orange winner has written novels about snooker and tennis, and her 
latest (Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/25/big-brother-lionel-shriver-review>
, about obesity) essentially details an insane training regime. A driven, 
apparently joyless, tennis champion, such asAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> or his coach Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ivan-lendl>, might work, but the masochism 
of cyclists such asBradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>, Chris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome> and Victoria Pendleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoriapendleton> looks more her cup of tea.

Zadie Smith

She excels at almost every discipline she attempts. At times her face seems to 
be everywhere. She's a poster girl for Britain, and for mixed-race achievers. 
So there's an obvious contender to co-create a second, jazzier autobiography 
withJessica Ennis-Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jessica-ennis> , even 
if that means embedding Jess's story within many other narratives, some of them 
linguistic experiments. And the heptathlete might have to leave Sheffield for 
north London or Boston.

Tom Wolfe

A semi-pro baseball pitcher in the 50s before becoming a journalist, Wolfe 
could easily be paired with recent legends in his own field, but it would be 
more original to put him together with a star exponent of another kind of 
ball-hurling such as England's moody nemesis, the Australian fast bowler
Mitchell Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>.
 