
The alternative vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/02/gordon-brown-electoral-reform>
 is a small but significant step forward in the ongoing campaign for a fair 
electoral system fit for the 21st century. On a good day. Maybe.

In many ways, AV is the perfect electoral system for Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/02/vote-to-give-politics-back-brown>
. It enables him to look in two directions at once: supporting a system which 
ensures that fewer votes are wasted while being resolutely non-proportional. 
Superficially it sounds like a big deal, but in most elections it will probably 
only change the result in a handful of seats. And, like all Gordon Brown 
policies, it has a fair chance of blowing up in his face; because of AV's habit 
ofexaggerating swings 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/blog/ourkingdom-theme/stuart-weir/2009/06/09/brown-and-the-av-stitch-up>
, the system is as liable to decimate the Labour party as much as the 
Conservatives.

There appears to be an expectation that the Liberal Democrats would welcome 
this move. The reality is rather more complex. As well as AV not being 
proportional, it also falls far short even of the system Labour dangled briefly 
in front of Paddy Ashdown in the late-90s,AV+ 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_Vote_Top-up> (which combines AV with 
a slightly proportional element). Over the last ten years of Labour's repeated 
botched and abandoned attempts to reform the political system, it is hard to 
get excited by this sudden reformist zeal for a system which isn't that 
earth-shattering itself.

But don't be entirely fooled by the bravado 
<http://libdems.org.uk/latest_news_detail.aspx?title=Liberal_Democrats_will_fight_for_proportional_representation_says_Huhne&pPK=700bb819-e9c5-443f-9d77-8612c33044fa>
 coming from the Lib Dem front bench. For one thing, the AV "project" has been 
something which a handful of Labour and Lib Dem politicians have been working 
quietly on for years. Several senior Lib Dems – notably Lembit Opik and Simon 
Hughes – are opponents of proportional representation, while supporting AV. The 
party, wrongly in my view, has failed to make the case for PR for the past 
decade out of a fear that it is perceived as only having a single issue. Last 
but not least, it is an open secret that the one party which is most likely to 
do well out of AV are the Liberal Democrats (if you look at the devolved 
assemblies in Scotland, Wales and London, the Lib Dems have consistently failed 
to adapt their campaign tactics to suit a PR ballot).

So while you might see a lot of Lib Dem huffing and puffing over the next few 
weeks, there is no doubt that they will support Labour in getting the measures 
through. Whether there is enough time for the amendment to pass all the stops 
and become law before the general election is another matter. On this subject,
Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> has raised his 
characteristic dithering up to an art form and his decision to come off the 
fence now may well prove to be too late.

But the real question is what happens after the general election. In the bill 
is enacted and the Tories go on to win they will no doubt attempt to repeal it, 
but may find spending their first few weeks in office blocking an attempt to 
make politicians more accountable will cost them much needed political capital. 
If no party can form a majority after the election, all bets are off. Will Nick 
Clegg content himself with the AV referendum, push for a more proportional 
system, or repeat his call for a citizens' convention to decide the matter? It 
is likely he feels he cannot afford to spell out his intentions and risk 
getting embroiled into endless questions about coalitions. We are unlikely to 
get much more out of him than coded messages but any attempt to water down the 
party's historic commitment to PR is unlikely to be accepted by the grassroots 
without a major fight.

Finally, there is the question of the referendum itself. Very few people who 
think AV would be an improvement are actually passionate about it, so who will 
fight the campaign for a "yes" vote? Labour's botched attempt to introduce a 
regional assembly in the north-east in 2004 is instructive here. Despite polls 
indicating that the overwhelming majority of people supported anassembly 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/1883944.stm>, the eventual proposals 
were so weak that the 'yes' campaign lacked any passion and theballot was lost. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/nov/05/regionalgovernment.politics> 
If Labour are serious about winning this referendum, they have got to give 
people a reason for getting out of bed to campaign on it. If Brown's system of 
choice bores campaigners, what hope is there of inspiring the public?
 