
As the calendar flips from August to September we go from the dog days of 
summer to the stretch run of the wildly long 162 game regular baseball season. 
What better time to take stock of exactly where we are with some 30 games 
remaining. Before we begin in earnest, let's take a look at the teams that are 
more or less "playing out the string" as they say - clubs that are much closer 
to an offseason of golfing than reaching the postseason. They are:

Toronto Blue Jays
Chicago White Sox
Minnesota Twins
Seattle Mariners
Los Angeles Angels 
Houston Astros
Philadelphia Phillies
New York Mets
Miami Marlins
Milwaukee Brewers
Chicago Cubs
Colorado Rockies
San Francisco Giants
San Diego Padres

Now that we've taken out the trash, a pile that includes the 2012 World Series 
champs, the San Francisco Giants, andthis year's offseason champs 
<http://nesn.com/2012/12/r-a-dickey-blue-jays-will-have-already-won-american-league-east-by-going-for-it-where-other-teams-wont/>
, the Toronto Blue Jays, who were nothing short of a monumental bust, lets take 
a snapshot of the 53.4% of Major League Baseball teams that still have a chance 
at reaching the playoffs.

Note - it's worth remembering that this is the second season of the expanded 
playoffs system 
<http://baseball.about.com/od/seasonstructur1/tp/playoffsformat.htm>, so five 
teams in each league will head to the postseason. The winners of the three 
divisions in both the National and American Leagues, plus the two teams with 
the best records that don't win their respective divisions will face off in a 
one-game duel to decide who reaches the divisional round in each league. So it 
goes without saying that you want to avoid the crazy wildcard play-in death 
match at all costs.

American League 

Virtual lock for the playoffs

Detroit Tigers

77-55, 1st place AL Central, 5.5 games up, 98.5% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=DET&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

If only the Tigers were as lucky as they are good. Based on their number of 
runs scored and runs allowed, Detroit should actually be six games better off 
than their record indicates. Regardless of their ill-fortune, the Tigers are 
the best team in the American League, hands down. Justin Verlander (even if 
he's not quite himself these days 
<http://detroit.cbslocal.com/2013/08/28/denny-mclain-says-verlanders-in-decline-we-all-get-old/>
), Max Scherzer and Anibal Sanchez are operating as a one, one-a and one-b at 
the top of the rotation this season, while the lethal solid Joaquin Benoit has 
made Detroit's closing woes a thing of the past. The well documented lineup 
features Miguel Cabrera and Prince Fielder, not to mention the surprisingly 
potent veteran Torii Hunter and a versatile supporting cast. To put it simply, 
the window is open for Detroit - they must win it all, now.

Boston Red Sox 

79-55, 1st place AL East, 2.5 games up, 95.4% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=BOS&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

A year ago Boston were cleaning house, now they're on the verge of going worst 
to first. John Farrell's rebuilt Red Sox combine a well rounded offense that is 
the best in the AL with an improving patchwork bullpen and a rotation that's 
humming right now with the exception of the run-leaking Ryan Dempster. Now 
they've added the excitement of promoting a can't miss prospect at shortstop in
20-year-old Xander Bogaerts 
<http://fullcount.weei.com/sports/boston/baseball/red-sox/2013/08/28/for-xander-bogaerts-some-noteworthy-firsts/>
 in what has unexpectedly become a memorable season at Fenway Park. Even ifClay 
Buchholz returns from injury 
<http://www.boston.com/blogs/sports/columnists/kaufman/2013/08/could_clay_buchholz_be_trusted_in_the_bullpen.html>
 and struggles to match his pre-disabled list form, it's hard to imagine Boston 
not returning to the postseason for the first time since 2009, even if scarred 
Red Sox fans will believe it when they see it.

Contending

Texas Rangers

78-55, 1st place AL West, 2.5 games up, 95.8% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=TEX&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

A year ago the struggling San Francisco Giants lost one of their best players 
inMelky Cabrera to a drug suspension 
<http://latino.foxnews.com/latino/sports/2013/05/14/san-francisco-giants-to-give-melky-cabrera-world-series-ring/>
 and then somehow came together as a team, riding the hottest of late season 
streaks to a World Series title. Now, I'm not saying it's exactly the same 
situation for the Texas Rangers, but since one of their main power threats, 
Nelson Cruz, was suspended for his connection toBiogenesis of America, the now 
defunct wellness clinic accused of supplying MLB players with 
performance-enhancing drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
, the Rangers have been white hot, going 15-5, putting up the most runs in the 
AL in August. In a season during which the Rangers have had, at times, seven 
starters in the disabled list, Ron Washington has a very good baseball team and 
lot to be proud of - a team that has overcomeboth mental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/06/baltimore-orioles-texas-rangers-al-wildcard-live>
 and physical setbacks over the previous few seasons. That they are even in 
this position is a real testament to the Rangers organization. However,because 
of that past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/28/rangers-cardinals-world-series-live-6>
, I'm not prepared to make them a postseason lock just yet, despite their high 
chance of making the playoffs.

Oakland Athletics

75-57, 2nd place AL West, four games up in the second wildcard spot, 84.5% 
chance <http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=OAK&sn=2013> of 
reaching the playoffs

Take a look at A's pitchers and you'll get an assortment of beards and mohawks 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/athletics/ci_23964897/activate-brett-anderson-from-disabled-list>
 - all par for the course out in Oakland, where the counter-culture Athletics 
continue to combine fun with winning. August has been a bump in the road for 
eclectic Oakland, but after impressively cruising past Detroit at home in three 
straight games, it seems that whatever was ailing the A's this month is a thing 
of the past. Pitchers Bartolo Colon and Grant Balfour and hitters Josh 
Donaldson and Brandon Moss are on the verge of leading Oakland to back-to-back 
90-win seasons for the first time in a decade, and now that opening day starter 
Brett Anderson is back in the fold in time for the stretch run, their 
postseason bid will only grow stronger.

Tampa Bay Rays

75-56, 2nd place AL East, 4.5 games up in the first wildcard spot, 77.9% chance
 <http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=TB&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Will the real Rays please stand up? Their pitchers were lights out in July, 
putting up a 2.54 earned run average. In August, their ERA is over four, and 
when you look closer, you notice that July was their only decent pitching month 
of the season.Missing Matt Moore 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9601221/matt-moore-tampa-bay-rays-rejoin-rotation-next-tuesday>
 and David Price for multiple starts hasn't helped, all while the now-demoted 
former Rookie of the Year Jeremy Hellickson and Roberto Hernandez got hammered. 
Closer Fernando Rodney pitched his best in theWorld Baseball Classic in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/19/wbc-puerto-rico-dominican-republic-live>
. Their offense is better than expected even if they've cooled down a bit in 
August in concert with the pitching. What can you say about the Rays other than 
they're like a box of chocolates...

Baltimore Orioles

70-61, 3rd place AL East, 4.5 games out out of a wildcard spot, 14% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=BAL&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

They field the ball better than any team in baseball, and we all know they are 
blessed with hitting talent - Chris Davis and his league leading46 home runs 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/21/chris-davis-46th-home-run-orioles-rays-video_n_3792985.html>
, Manny Machado - a doubles machine, Adam Jones - yet another power threat. 
Even shortstop J.J. Hardy has 23 homers. With all that offense, General Manager 
Dan Duquette had to do better than acquiring pitchers Francisco Rodriguez, 
Scott Feldman and Bud Norris at the trade deadline - he just had to. It's all 
there for Baltimore, but you're not going to make the playoffs when your
starters rank just ahead of Toronto and Minnesota 
<http://www.masnsports.com/school_of_roch/2013/08/orioles-starters-need-to-pitch-in.html>
 in American League ERA, and that's a shame because this team is a whole lot of 
fun to watch.

Cleveland Indians

71-61, 2nd place AL Central, four games out of a wildcard spot, 22.2% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=CLE&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Terry Francona has his remade Cleveland Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-indians> fighting for a playoff 
spot, and they're anything but a long shot. A year ago Cleveland had one of the 
worst offenses in baseball, but today, the Indians can put up sacks of runs 
thanks to the likes of Carlos Santana, Jason Kipnis and Ryan Rayburn. 
Meanwhile, their pitchers have trimmed well over a run off their team ERA in 
the second half. We know the Tribe are streaky, and they finish with the White 
Sox, Astros and the Twins as they try to make up ground and sneak into the 
postseason.

New York Yankees

70-63, 4th place AL East, 5.5 games out of a wildcard spot, 6% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=NYY&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Joe Girardi found a way to keep the New York Yankees competitive all season 
long despite a AAA lineup. Now that they have Derek Jeter, Alex Rodriguez, 
Robinson Cano, Alfonso Soriano, Ichiro Suzuki, Brett Gardner, Curtis Granderson 
- real live major leaguers in their batting order, yet they have a hard time 
beating the Toronto Blue Jays. The pitching that allowed them to hang around is 
falling off, in particularHiroki Kuroda, who played the ace all season but has 
given up 10 runs in his previous 11.2 innings pitched. 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/horrid-kuroda-torched-yanks-fall-jays-article-1.1439986>
But hey, any baseball fan knows full well what this franchise is capable of, 
and so it's not hard to imagine the Yankees and theA-Rod circus heading deep 
into fall, despite their low percentage chance of getting there. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez>

Pretending

Kansas City Royals

68-64, 3rd place AL Central, seven games out of a wildcard spot, 5.5% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=KC&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Are the Royals out of it? Hardly. However, when 2013 is all said and done, 
they'll look back at the progress they made as a franchise and call the season 
a success, even if that doesn't include a place in the playoffs. They tradedWil 
Myers to Tampa in the offseason for starting pitchers James Shields and Wade 
Davis. 
<http://www.kansascity.com/2013/08/26/4438534/kc-fans-wear-out-former-top-prospect.html>
 So far, that's a deal that looks to favor the Rays, especially when you 
consider that it's the Kansas City bullpen which has carried the staff to the 
best ERA in the American League and that the Royals are in dire need of another 
bat, especially one in the hands of a super-prospect. Whatever - there is 
finally something to build on in Kansas City after many years of incompetence 
and stagnation.

National League

Virtual lock for the playoffs

Atlanta Braves

80-52, 1st place NL East, 13 games up, 99.9% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=ATL&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Wow! Where did that come from? I mean, we knew the Braves would compete for a 
wildcard spot, but run away with the NL East? All while B.J. Upton and Dan 
Uggla hit in the .180's? That rotation leader Tim Hudson would go down with a 
gruesomeseason-ending ankle injury 
<http://deadspin.com/tim-hudson-suffers-gruesome-ankle-injury-taken-off-fie-903482242>
 and it wouldn't matter? That Atlanta, who were supposed to play second fiddle 
to the Nationals, would trash their division rivals, beating them in 12 of 16 
games? Not me. Not anyone. Almost everything about this team is good -the 
bullpen is actually great, the class of baseball 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/mlb/news/20130826/atlanta-braves-bullpen-craig-kimbrel/>
 - opponents are hitting .216 against the group leg by Craig Kimbrel and his 
0.99 ERA (gulp). They also hit a ton, and are first in home runs - eight 
players are in double digits in the long ball department. What's most 
impressive? They've got the best record against teams that are above .500 in 
the NL - 37-22, so don't let their weak division fool you. So now what? Well, 
the Braves have this reputation, earned over time, of cleaning up in the 
regular season and then going out in the first round of the playoffs, so even 
after a stellar season, there's still plenty to prove.

Los Angeles Dodgers

78-55, 1st place NL West, 9.5 games up, 99.3% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=LA&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Don't let the Hollywood storyline fool you - the Dodgers were supposed to be a 
great team. The reason they've become such a huge story is because they sucked 
and then managed to turn their season around in dramatic fashion, unlike their 
neighbors down in Anaheim. The Dodgers, once healthy, were as good as 
advertised, with Hanley Ramirez not only returning to prominence, but actually 
putting up the best numbers of his career, ones that feature a four digit OPS. 
Adrian Gonzalez' power returned, Yasiel Puig came up in June and immediately 
began wrecking the NL. Their pitching is so fine tuned right now that they 
don't even have to score much - the starters have knocked more than a run off 
their first half ERA since the All-Star break, the bullpen more than two. 
Clayton Kershaw is basically unhittable, Zack Greinke has given up more than 
two runs in a start just once since July 3rd. Closer Kanley Jansen has given up 
five runs since late May. More good news -Matt Kemp is playing rehab games 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/9607219/matt-kemp-los-angeles-dodgers-return-wants-play-every-day>
. The only thing that passes for controversy right now is Puig's rough and 
ready style that just needs a bit of tinkering - he seems receptive to it, 
saying all the right things after beingbenched on Wednesday after his latest 
on-field escapades. 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/baseball/mlb/dodgers/la-sp-dwyre-dodgers-20130829,0,5497097.column>
 Would you bet against them right now?

St Louis Cardinals

78-55, 1st place NL Central, 0.5 games up, 99.4% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=STL&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

There are 14 hitters in the NL hitting .300 or above - four of them are 
Cardinals. With Yadier Molina, Matt Carpenter, Carlos Beltran and Allen Craig 
leading a high powered offense that's putting up the most runs in the league, 
well, pitchers can relax more.Adam Wainwright has 15 wins 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/STL/2013-pitching.shtml> and just 27 
walks, Rookie starter Shelby Miller, while not quite as good now as he was out 
of the gate, is still sporting a sub 3.00 ERA, while young Joe Kelly has jumped 
intot he rotation and been better than solid. Closer Edward Mujica has more 
than made of for the loss of Jason Motte for the season. They pitch, they hit, 
and they field, with five Cards in the top five in their position in fielding 
percentage in the National League. This is a key period for St Louis - a 
stretch that featuresseven games against division rivals Cincinnati and six 
against Pittsburgh 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/STL/2013-schedule-scores.shtml>, who 
they are battling to more or less avoid the wildcard spots. So far they've 
beaten the Reds in two of three games. It's worth noting that while the Pirates 
and Reds finish with six games on the road, the Cards will complete their 
regular season with six home games.

Pittsburgh Pirates 

77-55, 2nd place NL Central, three games up in the first wildcard spot, 97.3% 
chance <http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=PIT&sn=2013> of 
reaching the playoffs

The Pirates lost three in a row earlier this week and you could just feel 
there wassomething of a panic in the Steel City 
<http://isportsweb.com/2013/08/16/pittsburgh-pirates-no-collapse-on-the-horizon-this-year/>
. After suffering through late collapses in each of the previous two seasons, 
you could imagine little beads of sweat forming on their fans foreheads, even 
if it would take a complete meltdown for them to miss out on the postseason. 
There was bad news whenStarling Marte went down with a hand injury 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/23302808/pirates-place-starling-marte-on-dl-with-hand-injuries>
, one that will prevent him from swinging a bat for two weeks, but Pittsburgh 
pivoted nicely, acquiring reinforcements Marlon Byrd and John Buck from the 
Mets on Tuesday. Byrd, enjoying a wildly unexpected stellar season, hit a home 
run in his first game for Pittsburgh on Wednesday, one that helped the Buccos 
get off the slide and relax the fan base. Also on Wednesday, closer Jason 
Grilli played a simulated game while rehabbing a right arm injury and will 
rejoin the relief core that's been picking up a group of starters that haven't 
been quite as crisp in the second half. Pittsburgh are just four victories away 
from guaranteeing a .500 record, a dream two decades in the making - they're 
thinking much bigger now.

Cincinnati Reds

75-59, 3rd place NL Central, six games up in the second wild card spot, 88.6% 
chance of reaching the playoffs

The Reds are as unlucky as the Pirates have been lucky. Both teams pythagorean 
win-loss record suggests that they should be swapped in the standings, 
Cincinnati in second, the Pirates in third. That's the kind of season it has 
been for these Reds, whose soft underbelly is a bullpen that ranks ninth in 
ERA. The starters help make up for their shortcomings, the best in the league 
bar the Dodgers, even with Jonny Cueto unlikely to return from his latissimus 
dorsi muscle injury. The bats don't blow you away but they have managed to 
score the third most runs in the league, mostly thanks to Joey Votto, Shin-Soo 
Choo and Jay Bruce. Then there'sBrandon Phillips, who took on a local reporter 
on Wednesday 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/1753966-brandon-phillips-rips-into-reds-reporter-for-on-base-percentage-comments>
 who dared to ask him about his on-base percentage being lower this season. 
Phillips is well known for sounding off, but generally speaking the team must 
be frustrated that they are not in a better position. Luckily for the Reds, the 
turkeys chasing them have little chance.

Contending

None

Pretending

Arizona Diamondbacks

68-64, 2nd place NL West, six games out of a wildcard spot, 9.7% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=ARI&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Why aren't the Diamonbacks going to the postseason? How about because only the 
Houston Astros have a worse save percentage than the D'Backs, whose closers 
have been leaking runs all over the place since April - never mind that their 
starters rank 10th in staff ERA. Yes, they can hit, and thatPaul Goldschmidt is 
a hell of a player <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/g/goldspa01.shtml>
, but it's only because the Dodgers were so bad for so long that they were able 
to spend 81 days in first place.

Washington Nationals

67-65, 2nd place NL East, seven games out of a wildcard spot, 5.6% chance 
<http://www.coolstandings.com/baseball_team.asp?id=WAS&sn=2013> of reaching the 
playoffs

Baseball keeps waiting for this team to catch fire and play like they did in 
2012 and they're going to keep waiting until next season. They've only managed 
to score the 11th most runs in the NL, the chief source of their problem. It 
also hasn't helped that their bullpen has been downright awful since June, 
Rafael Soriano never becoming that shut down closer they needed while Drew 
Storen has been nothing short of abysmal. There's a lot of abysmal in D.C. 
right now actually and the team stinks too. I'm sure it doesn't help that Bryce 
Harper and his agent Scott Boras is speaking publicly about a 12-year deal 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2013/08/27/bryce-harper-scott-boras-and-fun-with-12-year-contracts/>
 right now during the most important part of the season. They have a better 
shot than Arizona to catch those NL Central teams but that's not saying much.
 