
There was a distinct lack of embarrassment among our politicians, I thought, 
when a UN body published its report earlier this month criticising the UK's 
"general climate of intolerance andnegative public attitudes towards children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/04/justice.youthjustice>". The 
Geneva-based Committee on the Rights of the Child was scathing about the way we 
"demonise"our young <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> and said 
that as a matter of urgency we should ban all physical punishment in the 
family, including smacking. All we got from the children's minister Beverly 
Hughes however, was a prim comment that she would give the report "careful 
consideration" and she blithely went on to justify a practice that should have 
been criminalised years ago.

"If we put a ban on smacking into legislation it would mean in practice that a 
mother who gives her child a mild smack on the hand when they refuse to put 
back sweets picked up at the supermarket checkout could end up facing criminal 
charges," Hughes said. But that is a spurious argument as far as I am 
concerned. Presenting a seemingly innocuous scenario with which many people 
would be familiar and probably deem acceptable is a classic strategy of 
political rhetoric when a government is too weak to be effectively decisive in 
any particularly sensitive issue. Hughes deftly avoided any attempt to define 
what precisely constituted a "mild smack", for example. She then refuted any 
notion that it is an act of violence. Perhaps, as many supporters of this type 
of "chastisement" would claim, she regards it as an act of love? Tough love 
perhaps? A perverse spin on aggressive behaviour if ever I heard one.

It was ironic, however, that in the government's defence she should have 
quoted critics who arguechildren <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> 
"enjoy less protection than prisoners". Ironic, because currently we have 
almost 3,000children in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/youthjustice> in the UK, more than any 
other western European country. And what of those children? Is it acceptable to 
subject them to "mild smacking"? Well we already know the answer to that.

Let us never forget what happened to 14-year-old Adam Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/30/children.youthjustice> 
when he refused to go to his room in Hassockfield secure centre one night in 
August four years ago. Subjected to "restraint" which included the notorious 
"nose distraction technique", by four adult "carers", Rickwood, 5ft 1in and 7st 
7lb, bled for an hour afterwards. Six hours later he hanged himself with his 
shoelaces, and in doing so became the youngest person to die by their own hand 
in penal custody in living memory. Pertinently there was no countrywide outcry 
after Adam Rickwood's death. A number of articles appeared in the press, 
notably in the Guardian. But otherwise it was just another prison news item.

For me, our response to Adam Rickwood's death summed up our attitude generally 
to children in this country. When they are babies they can do no wrong. We love 
them and cherish them, almost to the point of worshiping them. And why not? 
Babies deserve all the love in the world. But something happens as they grow, 
something changes in our attitudes towards them. It seems we forget so easily 
that how a child grows and develops is almost totally dependent on the 
circumstances it finds itself in when it is born, involuntarily, into this 
world. A baby has no choices. But as soon as the child begins to show 
non-conforming behaviour, we blame the child. And too often we resort to 
violence â€“ whether it is "reasonable chastisement" as the Victorians called it, 
or "mild smacking" as described by Beverly Hughes.

There should never be any condoning of child assault, as attempted by Hughes 
or anyone else. I believe it is this acceptance of "mild smacking" that led 
directly to our acceptance of the "restraint technique", used onAdam Rickwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-rickwood> by the so-called "adult carers" 
at Hassockfield. It is the same acceptance that has led to our record child 
prisoner population. In 2006, over 5,000 children aged between 15 and 17 
entered prison; during 2005-06, 824 children under 15 were imprisoned, only 48 
of whom were convicted of crimes considered "grave".

Hughes fears criminalising "smacking" because she believes that "most parents" 
are in favour of it. But in this case she should be leading, not following. 
Legislation to ban smacking would send the message that all violence against 
children is wrong.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> 
everywhere deserve that much.
 