

Hold the frontpage ... Alfie Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alfie-allen> in Equus. Photograph: Rex 
Features

In his excellent new book Flat Earth News 
<http://books.theguardian.com/reviews/politicsphilosophyandsociety/0,,2251390,00.html>
, Nick Davies examines the way that newspapers have gradually been overrun with 
stories planted by PRs, reprinted by journalists with scarcely enough time to 
fact-check. Generally these take the form of "news items" created largely to 
draw attention to the product that the PR in question is trying to flog.

Theatre publicity machines operate no differently. After all, few journalists 
spend their time loitering around the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> buttonholing actors and stage 
management, cultivating contacts at the Donmar and having off-the-record 
lunches with back-benchers from the Royal Court. And quite right too: theatre 
isn't parliament. So theatre PR companies have to resort to the same sort of 
shameless sensationalism as those trying to flog brand-awareness of a chocolate 
bar.

A particularly vile example cropped up recently in the Mirror's 3AM section, 
noting that "Actor Alfie Allen is ordered to trim back his, erm, undergrowth 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/showbiz/3am/2008/01/31/actor-alfie-allen-is-ordered-to-trim-back-his-erm-undergrowth-89520-20303884/>
". Allen is taking over Daniel Radcliffe's role in a tour of Equus. The story 
boils down to the fact that the actor had apparently been encouraged to trim 
his pubic hair for the role. News! A couple of days later, one of the London 
freesheets was offering an inch-by-inch comparison of the two actors.

You could scarcely ask for a better illustration of the low end of the British 
mentality. The impossibly puerile nudge-nudge attitude toward nudity, coupled 
with (minor) celebrity nakedness is a sure-fire way of getting coverage for an 
art form otherwise ignored or derided by the popular press. Last year was much 
the same, with yards of print expended on the fact that Radcliffe and Sir Ian 
McKellen bothspent time on the stage without clothes 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/theatre/2007/03/onstage_nudity_lets_grow_up_no.html>
. Already in the US this year, column inches have been frittered away noting 
the trivial matter of a playwright objecting tosome nudity that he wrote into a 
play being ignored by its current director 
<http://leisureblogs.chicagotribune.com/the_theater_loop/2008/02/no-new-nudity-a.html>
.

This creates a whole selection of vicious circles. The papers continue to 
ignore theatre except when nudity is involved; the childish attitude to onstage 
nudity continues to sensationalise it, making audiences uncomfortable with it.

At first glance, it seems remarkable that any newspaper so rammed full of 
pictures of assorted near-naked models, pop stars and Z-list "celebs" can still 
manage to generate any interest in an undressed actor. In fact, quite the 
reverse is true: this sort of coverage seeks to bring down to the level of smut 
something which is not remotely smutty, and at the same time attempts to smear 
any attempts to create or portray something that does not fit in with the 
narrow one-dimensional vision of the human body propounded by such papers. That 
theatre PR agencies are colluding in such efforts with the hope that such 
coverage might put more bums on seats is deeply depressing.
 