
Author: Barry Hines (b1939) was born into a mining family in Hoyland Common, 
near Barnsley, and attended grammar school where he excelled at sport, 
representing England at schooboy level. He became a secondary-school teacher, 
and then switched to a PE course at Loughborough Training College, where he 
wrote the draft of his first novel, The Blinder (1966), the story of a 
schoolboy footballer. A Kestrel for a Knave (1968) was his second novel and its 
success allowed him to embark on a career in writing. Hines subsequently 
alternated novels with plays, TV dramas and film scripts. The next decade saw a 
broadening of his interest in social-issue themes, and Threads (1984) was an 
award-winning TV drama about the consequences of a nuclear war (set in 
Sheffield, to where Hines had relocated). He is currently an honorary fellow at 
Sheffield Hallam University.

Story: The central idea of A Kestrel for a Knave - a boy keeping a hawk in a 
shed at the bottom of the garden - was inspired by Hines's brother Richard, who 
had done exactly that. But Hines also wanted to make a political point, about 
the failures of the pre-comprehensive education system. Billy Casper, an 
archetypal misfit, is shunned at home and victimised at school. A seemingly 
hopeless case, he finds purpose by training a hawk he finds in a nearby field. 
He makes a fateful mistake, however, by failing to put money on a horse for his 
older brother Jud; when Jud realises the bet was never laid, he takes it out on 
Billy by killing the bird.

The film-maker: Like Hines, Ken Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-loach> (b1936) was a miner's son and went 
to grammar school (in Nuneaton). In 1963 he joined the BBC, and made his name 
with a string of radical dramas in the Wednesday Play slot, notably Up the 
Junction (1965) and Cathy Come Home (1966). Loach set up an independent company 
with his producer Tony Garnett, and Hines's book was their first project. The 
Â£165,000 funding from an American company fell through at the last minute, but 
Loach and Garnett secured backing from Tony Richardson's Woodfall Films, still 
riding high on the back of Richardson's success with Tom Jones (1963).

How book and film compare: Loach is studiously faithful to the content of 
Hines's original, preserving nearly all the key scenes. Hines's ending, where 
Billy breaks into an abandoned cinema and meditates on his life, was considered 
unworkable, so the film stops at the point where Billy buries the kestrel under 
the hedge. The title was also changed: initially it was called A Pocket of 
Silence, but Richardson came up withKes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kes>, 
Billy's name for the bird. However, Loach took the bold step of keeping the 
cast's broad South Yorkshire accents, leading one of the film's American 
backers to comment: "I would have preferred it in Hungarian."

Inspirations and influences: Loach has often commented that his principal 
cinematic inspiration was the Czech new wave, which combined a loose, 
semi-documentary filming style with a slyly satirical approach to its subject 
matter, attacking pomposity and siding with the underdog. Loach's cameraman, 
Chris Menges, had just finished working on Lindsay Anderson's If ... (1968) 
with Czech legend Miroslav Ondricek - cinematographer on Milos Forman's 
groundbreaking A Blonde in Love (1965) and The Fireman's Ball (1967).
 