
My mother was once interviewed as part of an exhibition called Italian 
Memories in Wales. At the time I presumed that she would be nervous and find it 
difficult to express herself. I was very wrong. What I hear in those interviews 
is an articulate woman very able to remember the smallest details of her 
arrival in Wales in 1950: the arduous two day journey and the frightening 
crossing of the English channel during a storm – she was used to the placid 
Venetian lagoon; she recalls her landlady who had pictures of tombstones on the 
walls and lived in candle light – “What happiness!” she says with a chuckle. My 
mother is proud of her struggle to survive and build a new life. “It takes 
guts!” she says with a strong Welsh accent.


Think history's all boring dates? Try social history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/25/think-historys-all-boring-dates-try-social-history>
The clash of culture and landscape coming from Venice to the Rhondda valley 
must have been a shock. She was frightened and “lost”, something I guess every 
immigrant must feel. As I listened to her I realised the opportunity I had 
missed by not recording the oral history of my father while he was alive. He 
travelled to Wales six months before my mother, with a very basic grasp of 
English and the promise of work with the National Coal Board.

I do, of course, remember many conversations I had with him about the hardship 
both below and above ground. After just a few years, and birth of their first 
child, he contracted tuberculosis and was hospitalised. My mother had to take 
my sister back to Italy to be cared for by her parents while she returned to 
the sanatorium in Wales to look after my father. Tuberculosis was a disease 
that needed a long recuperation. He came close to death and was given the last 
rites, but after two years he recovered to begin a new career as a photographer 
(not to mention having two more children, including me). He told me that his 
near-death experience gave him the boost to gamble on an uncertain profession 
and it paid off.

The recorded interview of my mother was the impetus for me to write a book 
based on an immigrant Italian family in Wales and their cafe,Sweet Pizza 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408960/>. Italian 
cafes became a community focal point all over the UK. The sub-plot of the book 
is the story of Joe Merelli’s granddad and the turbulent days during the second 
world war when Italians living in the UK were interned.

Lifeboat: children's illustrators raise money for refugees – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/may/27/lifeboat-childrens-illustrators-refugees>
As I wrote the book I became conscious of the parallels with the “hot topic” 
of immigration today. I wonder how I would have coped if I had found myself in 
an unknown country in my twenties, unable to speak the language. The nearest I 
came to that was leaving Wales at 18 to study in London, which was no more than 
millions of students do year in year out, and I was lucky to live in a time 
when I received a comfortable grant.

The story is not autobiographical, but it struck me that my mother’s oral 
history is repeated by immigrants that preceded and followed them from all over 
the world – I was at school with the offspring of immigrants from India, the 
West Indies and Eastern Europe. Being the child of an immigrant makes you 
question who you are and where you’re from a little sooner than most – was I 
Welsh or was I Italian? I certainly remember going through an “Italian phase” 
when I supported Italy against England in football (fortunately I don’t 
remember Italy ever playing Wales). These days it’s more clear-cut – I’m proud 
of my cultural heritage, but I feel Welsh. When Wales play England in the Six 
Nations I oh-so want them to win, and when Wales play Italy? Well, I hope Italy 
put up a gallant battle and lose by just a few points (if Italy ever beat 
England I think I’ll cry with joy).

Waterstones children's book prize 2015 – shortlist announced!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/12/waterstones-childrens-book-prize-2015-shortlist>
My mother now lives in Italy (to be near my sister and her grandchildren), but 
she always tells us she left her heart in Wales. She has a wonderful live-in 
carer, Tatiana from the Ukraine, who has her own story to tell. The story of 
immigration continues.

Oral histories shape our future, and they need to be recorded. It’s so simple. 
All you need is a recording device (pen and paper will do), you sit down with 
your parents, grand-parents or guardians and begin. We all have a history to 
tell.

 * Sweet Pizza by GR Gemin is available from the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408960/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Frecord-the-stories-of-your-parents-gr-gemin-sweet-pizza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619ff892b4940dbaf0576da772ec9d816160eb84%2F0_0_1522_2339%2F1522.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20you%20should%20record%20the%20stories%20of%20your%20parents%20or%20grandparents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Frecord-the-stories-of-your-parents-gr-gemin-sweet-pizza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20you%20should%20record%20the%20stories%20of%20your%20parents%20or%20grandparents&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Frecord-the-stories-of-your-parents-gr-gemin-sweet-pizza%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619ff892b4940dbaf0576da772ec9d816160eb84%2F0_0_1522_2339%2F1522.jpg> 