
This weekend, one of the most exciting music festivals for years was due to 
take place in London. It was called Jabberwocky, and was two days featuring 
everyone from Mercury prizewinner James Blake, to indie legends Neutral Milk 
Hotel. Now, it won’t.

At 4.30pm on 12 August – just three days before the event was due to start – 
the much-feted promoter behind it,All Tomorrow’s Parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/all-tomorrows-parties>, issued a statement. 
“Despite healthy ticket sales, all our efforts could not take [them] to the 
point that we needed,” it said. “If we had gone ahead; it would have 100% been 
the end of [us].”

To many who had bought tickets, the news was a shock. “WHAT THE ACTUAL FUCK? 
It is NOT UNDERSTANDABLE to cancel an ENTIRE EVENT three days before,” saida 
typical post on ATP’s Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/atpfestival>. “I 
have many friends who have bought plane tickets, paid for accommodation to come 
along.”

Such reactions were perhaps understandable given ATP’s status – it’s renowned 
for starting the trends of festivals at holiday camps, and of bands playing 
classic albums in full. The music website Pitchfork and Spanish festival 
promoter Primavera were also involved in promoting Jabberwocky, giving it a lot 
of credibility.ATP also tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/atpfestival/status/489032178802905088> this in July: “We 
are already looking into acts for next year’s Jabberwocky. No chance this one 
is getting cancelled!”

But to many music industry watchers, the cancellation was met less with 
surprise than with a resigned, “I told you so.” For a start, there was the 
venue. Jabberwocky was initially meant to be held at the Olympic Park in 
Stratford – ATP even briefly sold tickets for it there (the Mayor of London’s 
office said they never received a booking). But then the event was re-announced 
at the ExCel Centre in Docklands in east London, a conference venue more known 
for dental industry showcases than gigs. Few people who had traipsed there for 
work were going to want to return for a festival. Would it be any surprise if 
ticket sales were poor?

On 7 August, ATP posted on its website 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:qONW61ffo-4J:www.atpfestival.com/newsview/1407312033.php+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
 answering criticisms of the venue, in an apparent last-ditch attempt to boost 
sales. It pointed out the toilets had Dyson Airblades, so there would be no 
“broken hand-dryer nonsense”.

Another reason some felt a cancellation was on the cards was ATP’s recent 
business history. In 2012, the firm’s directors, Barry Hogan and Deborah 
Higgins, put the company then running ATP’s gigs and festivals into 
liquidation. That firmowed creditors more than £2.6m 
<http://www.thestoolpigeon.co.uk/features/feature-tomorrows-world.html> at the 
time. The losses were principally caused by poor ticket sales for festivals.

The directors quickly set up a new firm to run its events, called Willwal Ltd, 
as well as three other companies to “ensure that ATP will be around for many 
years to come”. But if the firm kept on running festivals, featuring similar 
bills to the ones it had previously been putting on, surely there was the 
chance it would run into similar problems? It stopped doing its traditional 
events at holiday camps last Christmas, but even an urban festival like 
Jabberwocky was a risk: last year, itcancelled an event at Alexandra Palace 
<http://www.nme.com/news/grizzly-bear/71843> headlined by Grizzly Bear.

It’s been difficult to assess the state of Willwal’s finances under its new 
structure as the firm has so far only filed one set of accounts, to May 2013. 
It filed them late, just last week, and they showed the firm had net debts of 
£15,000 at that time – hardly a great sum. But you did not need to see the full 
accounts to be concerned. Credit ratings agency reports showed Willwal had 
received court judgments at least twice ordering it to pay debts. In July, the 
company handling Jabberwocky’s PR also stopped handling calls about the event, 
because Willwal owed it many thousands of pounds.

ATP still has 10 concerts listed on its website 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/events.php>, including a festival in Iceland next 
year, headlined by Belle & Sebastian. ATP says all of them will go ahead. But 
will people trust the firm enough to buy sufficient tickets? The company 
survived its last liquidation with its reputation intact among music fans and 
bands, as they saw it as a company trying its best, but running into problems. 
But few fans lost money then. This time, some might. ATP has told fans who 
bought tickets from a company called Dash to contact it for a refund; Dash is 
telling people that ATP has their money. “We are very keen to learn where the 
money has gone!”Dash says in a statement on its Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/dashticketsuk> page. It is considering legal action 
to get the money back.

Update: ATP has now released this statement on their Facebook page:
 ATP Facebook statement 
So, can ATP survive this latest setback? Will you be buying tickets for their 
upcoming shows? And are you having any luck getting refunds? Please post below.

The only good news to emerge from the cancellation so far is that many of the 
bands who were meant to play Jabberwocky are trying to arrange alternative gigs.
Go here for a list <https://www.facebook.com/events/1457615354501369/>.
 