
Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145386/mission> is yet another sad 
example of a once-punchy title getting saddled with needless punctuation and 
verbiage. As for the film itself – the first act's a blast, the second is 
gripping, the third is … meh, proving it's not just the title that suffers from 
an anticlimactic tail-off. But would you look at me, talking in "acts" like 
that. Anyone would think I was an action movie screenwriter!

At one point Ethan Hunt (if only they'd called him Derek) and his buddies are 
accused of blowing up the Kremlin. (Not a spoiler since it's in the trailer.) I 
started thinking: "Heh heh, how on earth are those scallywags going to get out 
of Russia now?" But then, suddenly, they're in Dubai! The film skips from one 
act to the next other without even bothering to join up the dots and tell us 
how they got there!

I'm not saying this is necessarily a Bad Thing; there's only so much amusement 
to be had from watching people trying to sneak through airport lounges or past 
border control. But if that's the case, why bother paying lip service to plot 
at all? Why not just serve up three action setpieces with chapter headings, the 
way Quentin Tarantino sidestepped the pesky narrative-flow problem in
Inglourious Basterds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128690/inglourious-basterds>? Why not 
just give us Act I: Moscow; Act II: Dubai; Act III: Mumbai?

You could probably extend this policy to all the other action movies ever 
made. For example, you'd have Act I: Trapped in an Elevator! Act II: Trapped on 
a Bus! Act III: Trapped on a Runaway Tube Train! (Speed being an exemplary 
title that had no need of pesky punctuation.) You wouldn't even need to go 
through the motions of developing your characters since they're all archetypes 
anyway – Hero, Villain, Girl, a Disposable Sidekick or two. If there were 
problems telling them apart, you could give Villain a big moustache.

It's true that the three-pronged narrative seems natural, since what all 
stories have in common is a beginning, middle and end (if not necessarily in 
that order). But I'm not sure Syd Field had this reductio ad absurdum in mind 
when he first outlined the setup-confrontation-resolution paradigm in 
screenwriting guides that have convinced generations of would-be William 
Goldmans that the three-act structure is the only way to go.

But after Ghost Protocol I got to thinking, why not junk the third act 
altogether? Action films would end on a high and we'd go home feeling 
satisfied, instead of underwhelmed and slightly fractious, like children fed on 
too many E numbers. Do we really need to see the narrative resolved? Don't make 
me laugh; there is no narrative, just a series of action setpieces strung 
together with sundry MacGuffins and wisps of back story. Just as there are no 
characters, only Cruise and a bunch of stooges handpicked to make him look good.

Come to think of it, many 2011 blockbusters would have worked better if they'd 
had their third acts lopped off:X-Men: First Class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141950/x-men>, Captain America: The 
First Avenger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142811/captain-america>, 
In Time <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143564/in-time>, Contagion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142865/contagion>, Source Code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140826/source-code> are just some that 
spring to mind. Losing the third act would not only prevent films from 
overstaying their welcome, it would also bypass that inevitable post-action 
tristesse when the third act fails to live up to its predecessors by delivering 
a coup de grace that is bigger and better than anything we've seen in the film 
so far, and by extension anything we've seen in the cinema, ever. You'd go home 
thinking "Wow, I wish I could get more of that," instead of "That would have 
been good, if only it had been 20 minutes shorter."

The makers of action movies seem to think what we want is more spectacular 
action and faster running and bigger explosions, whereas no, those are things 
we know we'll be getting anyway. What we'd really like is for them to work a 
bit harder on the nuts and bolts that are supposed to be holding the action and 
running and explosions in place – character, motivation, plot.

Or I guess I could just learn to walk out before the film has ended.
 