
Of all those rubbish ideas dreamt up by major-label record honchos frantically 
trying to balance their ailing books, the pop star – often fading, but not 
necessarily – sings jazz standards album feels the most desperate. Like sitcom 
writers who think sending their much-loved characters to Torremolinos for a 
feature-length “special” is the best way to re-oxygenate a programme whose days 
are numbered, the success rate of popster jazz is virtually nil.

Jazz is a serious and noble pursuit, with a culture and history of its own, 
fed by a pool of nuts-and-bolts techniques that can to outsiders feel as 
obscure and nebulous as the formula for Coca-Cola. And however keenly Rod 
Stewart,Robbie Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams>, 
Paul McCartney, and now Lady Gaga and Annie Lennox, think kicking it with a 
zooty big band can varnish their careers in the mystique and musical 
sophistication of Ella Fitzgerald, Frank Sinatra or Sarah Vaughan, they are 
deluding themselves. The context is all wrong; take Mrs Slocombe’s pussy away 
from Grace Brothers and the joke is lost.

Lady Gaga’s duet album with Tony Bennett, Cheek to Cheek, which appeared last 
month, andAnnie Lennox’s Nostalgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/23/annie-lennox-nostalgia-review>, 
which is released this week, are both salient reminders of the pitfalls. Gaga’s 
gallop through evergreens such as Anything Goes, I Can’t Give You Anything But 
Love <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNh7xyLwwLc> and Let’s Face the Music and 
Dance deserves a merit badge for trying. She’s head-over-heels in love with 
this music clearly; but her rhythmically square, shouty delivery is more 
generic Broadway than anything convincingly to do with jazz. Bennett’s supple 
games with rhythm – strong beats displaced, keynote harmonies momentarily lent 
on to give them new and unexpected meanings – is the real jazz deal. The close 
juxtaposition with Gaga does her few favours.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFg1meK-IgOM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFg1meK-IgOM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFg1meK-IgOM&media=>
Riding the rhythm is a requisite requirement. Robbie Williams’ 2013 homage to 
Sinatra might have been called Swings Both Ways but Williams demonstrates that 
he couldn’t swing if he was in a playground, whilePaul McCartney’s Kisses on 
the Bottom <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AI9oVAHEpJY> – standards by Tin Pan 
Alley songsmith masters like Harold Arlen, Johnny Mercer and Irving Berlin – 
feels laboriously and painfully schooled. Macca wants to get it right – and 
good on him. But you can’t learn an authentic swing feel in the weeks leading 
up to a recording session any more than you can suddenly speak Chinese.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHGFo7fRIqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHGFo7fRIqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzHGFo7fRIqc&media=>
One thing is clear. Jazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> and the 
rock-star ego tend to prove incompatible. Williams deploys his trademark celeb 
swagger in an attempt to persuade us to suspend our disbelief. His hired big 
band holler and snarl. He puts on a show – a good one, but he’s an actor 
playing the part; McCartney’s album, with its cheeky title and smiley 
arrangements, confirms my image of him as a man who desperately needs to be 
liked.

Jazz can shine revealing lights where you least expect and Annie Lennox’s 
record gets sunk by another strain of rock-star ego altogether. Nostalgia is a 
curiously cheerless, dour album that wants you to know how seriously she is 
taking the project.Strange Fruit, inexorably linked to Billie Holiday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h4ZyuULy9zs>, with its vivid imagery of Ku 
Klux Klan lynchings – bodies hanging from trees, the strange and terrible fruit 
of deep south racism – appeals to that side of Lennox happy to describe herself 
as a “singer and activist”. But this feels uncomfortably like opportunistic 
freeloading – pushing emotional buttons by invoking Billie Holiday. And 
musically the album fails to find a credible jazz groove. Each number is 
under-ridden by a heavy-handed pianist’s dogmatically spelling out of each 
fundamental chord. The jazz musician’s instinct is to bolster such basic chords 
with sexed-up harmonic alternatives. Lennox dodges the swing issue by 
noticeably avoiding up-tempo swing numbers where either you have good jazz time 
or you don’t.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkKo-jXl2CQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkKo-jXl2CQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUkKo-jXl2CQ&media=>
Nostalgia’s final track is Mood Indigo which, in its final moments, has real 
jazz musicians improvising over Duke Ellington’s original theme. But then 
disaster – as their improvisation hits its peak, someone took the unwise 
decision to fade their hot jazz towards bland ambient reverb, which about says 
it all.

My unsolicited advice for future pop singers who fancy their chances with a 
jazz record? Check out the ever-admirable Debbie Harry whose work withThe Jazz 
Passengers <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Jazz_Passengers>, a crunchy 
downtown NYC jazz group known for the noisy frenzy of its reinvented bebop, 
finds her immersed in vocal improvisation, her voice stretched in ways 
antithetical to the demands of fans who want to hear hits sung as they already 
know them. If the persona she created for Blondie was in part a whimsical 
fantasy, is this, perhaps, the real Debbie Harry? Jazz always was about finding 
yourself – and not Frank Sinatra – there in the music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcAEEpFe96JI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcAEEpFe96JI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcAEEpFe96JI&media=> 