
One of the striking things about Blizzard, the superstar developer behind some 
of gaming’s biggest hits, including World of Warcraft, Diablo and Starcraft, is 
how little it actually does.

That’s not to say the company’s employees aren’t constantly at work, although 
the Kendo lessons taking place on the lawn outside its headquarters in Irvine, 
California, on the sunny spring day I visit could give that impression.

The HQ is a hive of industry, even if most of that industry is hidden behind 
doors marked Secret: No Visitors. But that list of smash hits above constitutes 
fully half of the franchises Blizzard is developing. Those three are stalwarts 
at the company: World of Warcraft is celebrating its 10th anniversary, 
Starcraft II is six years old and two expansion packs into its life, and Diablo 
III is enjoying a second wind as an acclaimed couch co-op game four years after 
it first launched.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ea03492e8c039270567577403cf5b5b9219f54e%2F447_423_3585_2151%2F3585.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ea03492e8c039270567577403cf5b5b9219f54e%2F447_423_3585_2151%2F3585.jpg>
 A statue of an orc riding a dire wolf commands the centre of Blizzard’s HQ. 
Photograph: Alex Hern for the Guardian 
By contrast, Blizzard’s other three games are newbies on the scene. 
Hearthstone launched in 2014; Heroes of the Storm, a MOBA (“multiplayer online 
battle arena”, an ugly acronym coined to describe a relatively new genre of 
team-based tactical games) drawing in characters from across Blizzard’s other 
games, launched last year; and Overwatch, the company’s first fully new 
intellectual property since StarCraft launched in 1998, is a team-based 
first-person shooter with Valve software’s mega-hit Team Fortress 2 firmly in 
its crosshairs.

Focused products with consistent quality 

That focus means that Blizzard is a very different beast from almost every 
other company in its industry. Even its biggest direct competitor, Valve – a 
company notorious for its own intense work ethic and with a similarly focused 
pool of titles – still has a raft of side projects and other distractions, from 
the Steam gaming platform to the Vive, its VR headset co-created with Taiwan’s 
HTC.

To find the best comparator for Blizzard you have to look outside gaming to 
track down another company noted for its focused product line, polished 
offerings and consistent quality. Blizzard is the Apple of games.

There’s another angle to that comparison, though. For all that Apple and 
Blizzard both pride themselves on their innovation, the companies are notorious 
for coming late to almost everything they do. That’s not to say that they 
aren’t enormously influential, and often successful in overturning conventional 
wisdom and reinventing the markets they enter, but Blizzard no more invented 
the concept of the MMORPG any more than Apple invented the idea of an MP3 
player.

Blizzard’s best hits take genres and concepts that previously existed, and 
relentlessly refine them, sanding the rough edges off the concepts and trimming 
excess fat until they emerge sleek, accessible – and, inevitably, extremely 
popular.

Reinventing Blizzard’s audience

If Blizzard is gaming’s Apple, then, Hearthstone looks set to be its iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/hearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin>
: the hit product that comes along and upends its business model, reinvents its 
audience, and makes it a heck of lot of money.

Hearthstone: how a game developer turned 30m people into card geeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/hearthstone-blizzard-strategy-trading-cards-greg-austin>
And just like the iPhone, Hearthstone owes a huge debt to what came before it. 
The most obvious inspiration is the venerable physical card game Magic: the 
Gathering Magic has a very similar setup: players summon and control minions, 
which take turns whacking each other and the player characters themselves in an 
attempt to kill the opponent before they kill you.

Magic is an obvious starting place for any collectible card game to build off: 
designed by Richard Garfield in 1993, it singlehandedly created the genre, and 
although other, better games have been produced since (such as Garfield’s 
follow-up, Netrunner), Magic remains the most popular one in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb062dcc123fa2ed3593ff5a8671c62010da5d69%2F0_144_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb062dcc123fa2ed3593ff5a8671c62010da5d69%2F0_144_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Magic, The Gathering cards. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
That let Blizzard build a game which would immediately be accessible to any 
one of Magic’s 20 million players – an important advantage, because at the time 
of Hearthstone’s launch, card games hadn’t made much of an impact in the 
digital space. You can show almost any gamer a first-person shooter and expect 
them to be able to pick it up in seconds, but that sort of baseline literacy 
didn’t exist for Hearthstone’s genre.

Inspired by World of Warcraft

You won’t hear about it from Blizzard’s designers, but there’s also another 
inspiration for Hearthstone: the World of Warcraft trading card game, which ran 
from 2005 to 2013. Mechanically, the game was very similar to Hearthstone as it 
stands today, albeit vastly more fiddly to play. (Part of the reason for 
consigning it to the memory hole may be the fact that it conflicts with the 
official story for the game’s origin: that two designers, left alone due to 
“crunch” overtime on Starcraft II, hammered out the entire game in three weeks.)

The World of Warcraft trading card game wouldn’t have happened without Magic 
and, directly or indirectly, Hearthstone also draws a lot of its DNA from the 
seminal game. That DNA has laid the groundwork for the future of Hearthstone 
from day one. And that planning is paying off for Blizzard this spring, with 
the introduction of “rotation” to Hearthstone.

In any card game with a growing pool of cards, eventually the number of cards 
which can be played becomes unmanageably big. That keeps new players out, 
because the burden of building a playable collection is huge; it makes the game 
harder and more about rote memorisation, because being able to predict what 
your opponent will do is tricky; and it presents logistical challenges for the 
publisher, either having to keep physical cards in print indefinitely, or 
having to manage an increasingly complex digital storefront to enable players 
to buy what they want.

Of course, there’s also a more commercial angle: the developer of a 
collectible card game wants players to keep buying new cards, but they can only 
do that if the new cards are sufficiently interesting and useful to replace old 
ones. That very quickly results in a concept known as “power creep”, where a 
never-ending arms race destroys the balance of the game.

Keeping it simple

So Magic, in 1995, introduced the concept of rotation. Long-term players could 
still use their entire collections (or nearly all of them, at least – some 
cards were banned for being over-powerful to the point of being broken) in 
“Type 1”, eventually renamed Vintage, but new players were encouraged into 
“Type 2”, now called Standard, where only the newest cards were allowed.

It was always clear that Hearthstone was going to have to tackle the same 
problems as Magic did, but when Blizzard announced that rotation was coming, 
the move was almost surprising purely for the extent to which it followed the 
pre-set playbook. Like Magic and other paper card games, Hearthstone’s rotation 
sees two older packs being moved out of the Standard game each year, keeping 
the size of the main playing pool steady at around 700 cards.

Rotation came earlier than some had expected, leaving the Hearthstone card 
pool small compared with its predecessors – a choice that executive producer 
Hamilton Chu says came about from a desire to keep everything about the game 
streamlined. “We really do put a high value on that sense of simplicity … We 
wanted it to easily fit on one screen, and if someone asks a friend ‘argh, what 
am I supposed to buy’, it should be a very simple answer. So we really did want 
to keep that experience good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6bc3c37fe3ea432ee82bb68c8d58cdcca0084a5%2F0_10_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6bc3c37fe3ea432ee82bb68c8d58cdcca0084a5%2F0_10_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
 A screenshot of the video explaining the launch of standard and wild formats. 
Photograph: Blizzard 
But other than that, rotation was achieved through a very old-fashioned 
method. There were no fancy digital shenanigans, just one set of virtual packs 
being virtually taken out of print as another hit the virtual presses. That 
decision was not made without much consideration, Chu says – though he declines 
to go into further detail, for fear that talking about paths not taken could 
lead to players trying to second-guess the developer.

When I asked Chu if there was a conscious decision to keep Hearthstone 
grounded in the physical world, though he said that if anything, the team had 
been fighting to ensure the opposite. “We had to really be very conscious to 
keep telling ourselves this is a digital game, because there just weren’t a lot 
of digital card games like this. At least by percentile our experience was 
vastly in the physical world, so it would have been very easy to stay there.

“In a sense I’m happy that you’re asking this question, because I think it 
means you’re taking a bunch of what we do for granted, in the good way.” He 
went on to list a number of cards which would be borderline impossible to do in 
a physical setting. “Arcane Missiles would just be horrific to do, let alone 
like Piloted Shredder. You’d have to have some big table and then every time we 
added some content we’d have to errata the table for you. Cards like Ysera 
would be a lot more complicated, and doing all the things that we do with 
tokens would be a lot more complicated, things like Thoughtsteal, where we’re 
copying cards around… it’s cool, it’s cool that you’ve forgotten all that, 
because that means it feels very natural.”

Even building Hearthstone as a card game was itself something the team 
questioned initially.

“For a long time, Hearthstone wasn’t a card game. Because of this thing I’m 
talking about, we said to ourselves, ‘It doesn’t need to be a card game! Card 
game is for the physical world, where you have pieces of paper that you cut 
out. We can be more than that.’

“But after a lot of experimentation, there’s a lot of power in being a card 
game. People know what cards are, people know what a hand of cards is, people 
know what shuffling cards is, people know what draw and discard is. And if you 
go with any other metaphor, you’ve got to explain that.

“And maybe it’s not hard to explain, like, ‘draw a stone from your pouch of 
stones’ or whatever, like, it’s not the end of the world. But you’ve still 
gotta teach that. Whereas if you say ‘draw a card’, everybody knows what that 
means, because of their past history with card games but also just some of that 
tactile understanding of how the game works.”

Long-term thinking

In what is typical for Blizzard, the development of Hearthstone was a long 
process, perhaps belied by the simplicity of the finished product. But once 
Standard and Wild are implemented, in a move that Chu says is “the biggest 
change to the game since launch”, that’ll be it for major changes to 
Hearthstone for a good long while. From here on out, it’s up to the team to 
shepherd the game and its community to the highs of Blizzard’s previous 
successes.

“One thing we say is that Blizzard has this habit of making games that go on 
for a long time,” Chu says. “WoW just hit its 10th anniversary, Diablo hit its 
20th, so there’s this pretty high bar that’s been set, and we certainly don’t 
want to be, like, the one that let the rest of the team down.

“Blizzard’s been able to be successful that way because there’s been this very 
long-term thinking. And we try to make decisions that will keep the game viable 
for that long, and will keep players enjoying the game for that long.”

Overwatch launch planned for May
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673cb111190a305c0589e431e423d92d9c167df5%2F0_192_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Apple%20of%20gaming%20went%20from%20World%20of%20Warcraft%20to%20iPhone%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fblizzard-gaming-apple-hearthstone-iphone-overwatch-heroes-storm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F673cb111190a305c0589e431e423d92d9c167df5%2F0_192_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Tracer, from Overwatch, strikes a pose in a statue at Blizzard’s HQ. 
Photograph: Alex Hern for the Guardian 
And for Blizzard as a whole, it’s not resting. Since Hearthstone was released, 
it has launched another major franchise, Heroes of the Storm, and is preparing 
Overwatch for release in May. Both games represent a new ground for Blizzard, 
with the company foregrounding its top-tier professional multiplayer play like 
never before. While Starcraft and World of Warcraft each have intensely popular 
competitive gameplay modes (particularly in Korea, where Starcraft and its 
sequel are practically the national sport), it took Hearthstone for Blizzard to 
try releasing a game that was purely competitive.

It seems to have worked. If Blizzard really is gaming’s Apple, and Hearthstone 
its iPhone, then Overwatch and Heroes of the Storm are… what? Hopefully the 
iPads of the metaphor, and not the Apple Watches. But either way, the future of 
the company looks like it could be heavily influenced by its smallest game.

• Alex Hern attended a press event in Los Angeles, with travel and 
accommodation costs met by Blizzard.
 