
Today I give my annual lecture about politics and the media to my City 
University London post-grad students.

It is built around the undeniable reality of the nexus between politicians and 
journalists, overlapping elites who appear to much of the public as separate 
and mutually antagonistic.

But the majority of journalists at Westminster are employed by Britain’s 
national newspapers and, as such, are not free agents. Proprietors call the 
tune.

Although these men - and, yes, they are all men - are unelected, their 
newspaper ownership grants them rights of access to the people who are elected.

So, surely, the elect should ensure there is complete transparency in their 
dealings with the gentlemen of the press?

Instead, down the years, prime ministers and their cabinet colleagues have 
sought to conceal their relationships with media magnates. And civil servants 
have aided them in their concealment.

According to Kevin Rawlinson’s article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/24/george-osborne-meetings-media-rupert-murdoch-telegraph>
, Treasury records have failed to record talks between the chancellor, George 
Osborne, and various press owners.

They include News Corp’s Rupert Murdoch, Telegraph Media Group’s Aidan Barclay 
and Murdoch Maclennan, and Independent Print’sEvgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>. In addition he met the 
BBC’s director general, Lord Hall, and the corporation’s director of strategy, 
James Purnell.

And we know that Osborne attended Murdoch’s Christmas party last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/22/cameron-osborne-and-murdoch-back-together-at-moguls-christmas-knees-up>
, also attended by News UK’s chief executive, Rebekah Brooks.

The cabinet office guidance about when such ministerial meetings should be 
recorded is wholly inadequate. To warrant a mention, discussions must lead to a 
policy decision, require follow-up action, or - and this is a killer - the 
expression of a view that could be construed as useful to someone not present.


Is it not blindingly obvious that the first two criteria are too specific 
while the third is hopelessly imprecise?

The very fact that a minister is meeting and exchanging views with a person 
who owns or controls media outlets is, of itself, reason to place it on the 
public record.


Readers, viewers and listeners - the public, the electorate, British citizens 
- should not be in the dark about such meetings, no matter how apparently 
innocent they might be.

It is plausible to argue that the relationship of the twin elites is a 
political reality. But that is no reason for secrecy or, less pejoratively, 
opacity.

I note that editors also met Osborne, including the Guardian’s Katharine Viner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katharine-viner>. Again, although it may be 
understandable, it is not necessary to keep the fact under wraps.

So I agree with the call by Transparency International UK 
<http://www.transparency.org.uk/> for ministerial links with media executives 
to be made public. One cavil, however. It appears that its sole concern about 
such meetings is that they amount to a form of lobbying.

When it comes to press chiefs, that is only one aspect of those contacts. 
Given the influence of media, what matters as much, if not more, is the 
potential effect on editorial output.
 