
A wild and dangerous ride.

That’s a quotation from a blogger’s review of my book, Kook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385536/>. A response 
to the risky, and sometimes illegal, activities the characters get up to. Set 
in a world of die-hard Cornish surfers, Kook is about a young guy (Sam) falling 
for a girl who is, in every way, trouble. Jade is obsessed with riding the 
biggest wave she can find, as soon as she can find it. Whether she’s ready to 
or not. And that’s only part of what Jade and her crew get up to. It’s not just 
the surfing. It’s fighting, raves, drinking, getting into trouble with the 
police.

Brian Conaghan's top 10 controversial teen books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/apr/16/brian-conaghans-top-10-controversial-teen-books>
All of which raises a question around showing such things in YA fiction. How 
do you write aboutthat? More to the point – should you?

In my view, yes. These things are a part of the teen experience. That makes 
them not only valid to write about, but actually things that need to be 
explored. Because this stuff happens. These are things young people will 
experience and have to form views about, whether they are active participants 
or not.

I wanted to write about a hinterland of youth and out-of-season sea-side life: 
how the teen characters react to it, both creatively and destructively. Living 
in rural, or out-of-season coastal settings, young adults can find themselves 
adrift. Too old for youth clubs, too young for pubs and clubs, and without the 
distractions and facilities of urban life, they find themselves “nowhere.” So 
they look for stimulation; some way to spend all that energy. Because they’re 
burning and fizzing with it. As well as curiosity and bravado. All fine 
qualities. But they can become dangerous if fuelled by boredom.

The amazing life of a surfer - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/may/02/the-amazing-life-of-a-surfer-in-pictures>
Hence young people can, and do, find their own rites of passage. They can, and 
do, find trouble. Or make it.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff54deacb84a601b2367200c78dd2f68afcc0d611%2F0_292_1533_920%2F1533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20shouldn't%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20shouldn%27t%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff54deacb84a601b2367200c78dd2f68afcc0d611%2F0_292_1533_920%2F1533.jpg>
 Chris Vick: We have to give teen readers credit for knowing the difference 
between truth and fiction, right and wrong, safe and dangerous. Photograph: 
HarperCollins Children's Books 
In Kook, there is running motif: a piece of graffiti, showing Red Riding Hood, 
with a basket full of spray cans, painting on a wall:Fear makes the wolf look 
bigger. It speaks to teens facing fears and assessing risk. Something they both 
do and are biologically ill-equipped to (the part of the brain that properly 
assesses risk does not develop till we are in our twenties). And it also speaks 
to rites of passage. As Sam’s grandma tells him: there are no more wolves to 
kill. Young adults create their own. In Kook, that’s to surf the legendary 
Devil’s Horns reef.

Free read! Kook by Chris Vick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/ng-interactive/2016/apr/11/extract-kook-chris-vick>
To show all this is fine. What is perhaps more controversial is to show how 
much fun all this can be; how attractive. In Kook it’s all wrapped up in the 
girl. Sam is drawn to Jade. But also to the life she offers: thrills lacking in 
his previously urban, studious life. Things he doesn’t even know he is missing, 
until he experiences them.

The secondary question is how to write about these themes of danger and 
thrills.

Kook is about learning to surf, being drawn to dangerous things, getting in 
trouble and severely out of your depth. But Kook would be a one-dimensional 
book if surfing were the only metaphor for these themes and the only way of 
exploring them. So there is a certain amount of drugs, violence and 
law-breaking. This is not new in literature or even YA. It’s a tradition, fromA 
Clockwork Orange <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/clockwork-orange-4.html> to 
Melvin Burgess, Kevin Brooks, Lucy Christopher, Stephen Chbosky and Sherman 
Alexi.

Why I've written a book for teenagers about taking drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/08/teenage-drugs-books-katie-everson>
Yet even with this tradition, did I think (twice) about including all this? Of 
course. Actually, I think you can write about pretty much anything in books for 
young adults. But… (and here I take a deep breath, because I cringe at the idea 
of ‘guidelines’ for authors) I had to set myself some rules:

Realism - Are the situations that the characters find themselves in, where 
they may experience or come into contact with sex, drink, drugs, violence etc, 
likely? Are they part of the landscape of the character’s lives, and does their 
inclusion drive the plot forward in some way?

Why I explore rape culture in my new book for teens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/02/rape-culture-teen-book-louise-oneill>
Don’t be gratuitous or explicit – Much can be inferred. The imagination is 
powerful. Emotional truth and impact is the point, not shock.

Show consequences – drink and drugs can destroy lives, dangerous activities 
can lead to injury or death.

Show complexity – whilst showing the impacts – and yes, appeal – of activities 
that may be dangerous or illegal, don’t celebrate the activity. But don’t 
condemn the characters either. No-one likes a wagging finger.

Get close up to my main character – he only gets to ‘know’ anything through 
experience, making up his own mind, regardless of the confusing and conflicting 
pressures of media, school, parents and friends. Oh, and use your own memories 
(I did; in fact the writing got hijacked by them, though they morphed and 
twisted into parts of the story).

Why Melvin Burgess's 'dangerous' books aren't dangerous at all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/30/melvin-burgess-interview-censorship-junk>
Of course, the problem with exploring any of these subjects is that they are 
fraught with the danger of misinterpretation. These are subjects – especially 
drugs – that light fires and push buttons. There’s a danger if you explore 
these matters at all, people assume what you think. They will believe you are 
‘saying’ this, or that. But you’re really not. You’re writing a story. There is 
an argument that if you explore, but don’t condemn, you must be condoning. But 
that’s a flawed logic. It’s a novel, not a polemic.

We have to give teen readers credit for knowing the difference between truth 
and fiction, right and wrong, safe and dangerous. Arguably, fiction is actually 
a good place for young people to explore such themes and to undergo vicarious 
rites of passage. And not always through a filter made from vampires or SF 
dystopia.

I wanted to show a myriad of experiences and consequences. People having fun, 
sure, but also good times quickly turning sour, and the implications of being 
out of control.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab098a81515aa2ec31a7c1ef4caa15df7f9d7f2%2F0_0_1500_2268%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20shouldn't%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20shouldn%27t%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab098a81515aa2ec31a7c1ef4caa15df7f9d7f2%2F0_0_1500_2268%2F1500.jpg>
All of this is in Kook. The good, the bad, the ugly; the fun, the attraction, 
the highs, and lows. To cut to the chase: I wanted to be honest about stuff 
that really happens. But to showing consequences too.

Chris Vick’s Kook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385536/> is our 
current Teen book club read. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/series/teen-book-club>.

Live chat with authors including Louise O’Neill and Melvin Burgess 
#Gdnteentaboo

Discuss writing about sex, drugs and pushing boundaries in teen/Ya with a 
bunch of controversial authors live on Twitter using #Gdnteentaboo! It’s 
happening this Sunday 15 May from 5-6pm BST on@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>. So who’s going to be there? We have 
Louise O’Neill (@oneilllo <https://twitter.com/oneilllo>), Melvin Burgess (
@MelvinBurgess <https://twitter.com/MelvinBurgess>), the author of this great 
article Chris Vick (@chrisvickwriter <https://twitter.com/chrisvickwriter>), 
Non Pratt (@NonPratt <https://twitter.com/NonPratt>), William Sutcliffe (
@Will_Sutcliffe8 <https://twitter.com/Will_Sutcliffe8>), Raziel Reid (
@razielreid <https://twitter.com/razielreid>), Katie Everson (@ksleverson 
<https://twitter.com/ksleverson>). If you don’t tweet or can’t be there you can 
email your questions to childrens.books@theguardian.com, but make them short so 
we can tweet them! We’ll be live blogging the chat on theGuardian children’s 
books site <https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa18aff5afbd02a3c3356cf2c94f9f73a6b1e367a%2F0_412_2771_1662%2F2771.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20shouldn't%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20shouldn%27t%20protect%20teenagers%20from%20controversial%20issues%20in%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fteenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa18aff5afbd02a3c3356cf2c94f9f73a6b1e367a%2F0_412_2771_1662%2F2771.jpg>
 Louise O’Neill, author of Only Ever Yours and Asking For It will be live on 
Twitter on Sunday 15 May 5-6pm for #Gdnteentaboo Photograph: PR company handout  