
Before he was the Hulk <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hulk>, Ruffalo played 
the coolest conman since Redford in this timeless caper, writing himself and 
his brother into grand adventures – and looking unbelievably sharp as he did it.

Make room, make room, for The Brothers Bloom! Soon-to-be Star Wars director 
Rian Johnson madeThe Brothers Bloom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/03/the-brothers-bloom-film-review> 
in 2008 after his high school/film noir mash-up Brick, but before his 
timey-wimey melon-twister Looper or the episode of Breaking Bad with the fly. 
An old-fashioned caper that left audiences cold – if not outright baffled – 
this featherlight delight of a movie nonetheless features Mark Ruffalo as the 
coolest conman since Robert Redford donned a newsboy cap.

Ruffalo turns his rumpled charm up to eleven as Stephen, one of the titular 
brothers along with a soulfulAdrien Brody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adrien-brody>. The Blooms are conmen with an 
irresistible sibling bond and an infectious flair for the dramatic. Stephen is 
the brains. He puts the art in con artist, crafting not scams but stories. He's 
a beguiler without a trace of guile. Sure, in his cons the brothers get rich, 
but the mark leaves richer – spiritually, anyway. In Stephen's stories, 
"everyone gets exactly what they want".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJTZEjg5sflk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJTZEjg5sflk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJTZEjg5sflk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTZEjg5sflk>

Each of Stephen's cons is an intricately constructed house of cards, both 
impossibly clever and comically close to collapse. Yet you never know if that 
endearing wobbliness is part of the plan, like his penchant for 
accidentally-on-purpose flubbing card tricks. In the end, Stephen's fate is 
open to interpretation, but that's what Stephen is all about: writing yourself 
into a grand adventure, all beautiful women and wordplay and steamships to who 
knows where. As a writer I'm always imagining cool things that might happen, 
dreaming up the perfect turn of phrase … and then I have to get on the bus and 
pay my council tax and buy toothpaste. No wonder I'd like to write my life the 
way Stephen writes his con games.

But more importantly, as he weaves his schemes he looks the absolute business. 
Dressed by costume supervisor Beatrix Aruna Pasztor, the Blooms' co-conspirators
Rachel Weisz <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-weisz> and Rinko Kikuchi 
go from stunning outfit to stunning outfit, while the brothers look impeccable 
throughout in near-matching black and white suits frequently topped with hats 
and cravats. The black and white could represent the handwriting running their 
lives, devoid of the colour of spontaneity, or it could just look ace. So 
stylish are the black-clad Blooms, every time I dig out the DVD I find myself 
spurning colour in my wardrobe, often to the local charity shop's benefit.

With his artfully loosened ties, signature battered porkpie titfer and 
ever-present deck of cards – not to mention a hip flask that almost certainly 
never "stopped a bullet at Normandy" – Stephen is the embodiment ofsprezzatura, 
the effortlessness that's the holy grail of men's style. As the heat of summer 
on the 35 to Elephant and Castle sweatily mocks any possibility of keeping 
things smart and tailored, Stephen shows how it's done when he boards a steamer 
for Europe in a dazzling white suit – accented, of course, with a black tie and 
pocket square.
 Fifty shades of black, white and grey … Mark Ruffalo and Adrien Brody in The 
Brothers Bloom 
What's more, Stephen's various dark waistcoats and suits in contrasting shades 
of black and grey put him bang on-trend for this year. Years ahead of the 
current fashion for what Esquire calls the "broken-up suit", Stephen was mix 
and mismatching coat, waistcoat and trews in different shades, colours or 
textures.

There's a flash of steel behind the white suit and twinkly eyes: threaten his 
brother and Stephen is capable of sudden unhesitating violence. Even when 
cornered by a couple of enormous goons, he rolls up his sleeves and charges 
headlong into the inevitable pasting with the rallying cry "Have at thee, you 
ham-headed bastards!" It's that joie de vivre, that unquenchable desire to 
write every day as an adventure, that makes me want to be like Stephen Bloom.

Or at the very least dress like him.

• Why I'd like to be … Jennifer Connelly in Labyrinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/12/jennifer-connelly-labyrinth-why-id-like-to-be>
• Why I'd like to be … Samuel L Jackson in Do The Right Thing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/11/samuel-l-jackson-do-the-right-thing-why-id-like-to-be>
• Why I'd like to be … John Cusack in Grosse Pointe Blank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/08/why-id-like-to-be-john-cusack-grosse-pointe-blank>
 