
Every year the Edinburgh fringe throws curve balls. A new comedy icon comes 
out of nowhere and turns out to be exactly what we never knew we always wanted. 
And it happened again this year. But even in the "expect the unexpected" world 
of the fringe, who thought feminism would be the next big thing in comedy?

Yet so it was. Bridget Christie winning the Foster's Edinburgh Comedy award  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/28/bridget-christie-edinburgh-comedy-award>
with her standup set A Bic for Her has made the most noise. But other shows 
also gave this year's fringe a feminist flavour. Christie's venue, local comedy 
lynchpin The Stand, had three shows that fit the bill. All were hugely popular 
and very funny indeed.

With A Bic for Her, Christie has found a rich seam of comedy that mocks 
misogyny; her set – which comes toLondon's Soho theatre from mid-November 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/bridget-christie-a-bic-for-her> – 
delivered a satisfying, cathartic and very funny hour of standup about her 
battles with everyday sexism, from sports reporters to lads' magazines. And she 
sold out Stand One at 11am, even before the shortlist for the award was 
announced.

Meanwhile Nadia Kamil <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nadia-kamil>'s 
debut Edinburgh, Wide Open Beavers, was did extremely well across the road in 
Stand 4. The show's title, Kamil claimed, was meant to distract people from the 
dour topic. But her show wasn't dour for a second. It was the exact opposite, 
weaving puppets and games around set pieces – which included a rap about going 
for a smear test and a burlesque act where slogans about equal pay were all 
that was revealed. Kamil even took on that most divisive concept in current 
popular feminist chatter,intersectionality 
<http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Intersectionality>, explaining it with a 
catchy jingle.

Mary Bourke, Gráinne Maguire, Sara Pascoe, Kate Smurthwaite and Dana Alexander 
all made shows that discussed feminist ideas. AndAdrienne Truscott's show 
tackling rape jokes, Asking for It 
<https://www.edfringe.com/whats-on/comedy/adrienne-truscott-s-asking-for-it-a-one-lady-rape-about-comedy-starring-her-pussy-and-little-else>
, won the Foster's award Panel prize. Comic performance art was also in on the 
act, with Figs in Wigs taking an off-kilter look at female objectification in 
We Object, while in the charming but disturbing show Credible, Likeable 
Superstar Role Model, Bryony Kimmings and her nine year old niece Taylor, 
created an alterative aspirational pop star – complete with dance moves – to 
look at the sexualisation of tween girls.

This explosion of feminist-fuelled entertainment is welcome. Too often, 
standup is reactionary, laddish and boorish. The ethics of rape jokes wouldn't 
have become a hot topic here and in the US if comics didn't rely on them for 
edgy lulz. Meanwhile, TV comedy panels shows notoriously exclude women, or edit 
them so we know they did more than laugh at the jokes the men made. When the 
mainstream is this bloated and homogenous, and when every comic tells the same 
boring and often depressingly sexist jokes, we desperately need an alternative. 
Suddenly the rise of feminist comedy doesn't seem so sudden after all. I can't 
wait to see what Christie and her patriarchy-smashing pals do next.
 