
When I first heard that a publisher was interested in resurrecting my series 
for teenagers calledHeartbreak Café  <http://www.heartbreakcafe.la> I was 
surprised. After all if anyone in the world is only interested in the here and 
now, the latest fashion, the current boy band, it is teenagers.

Why would they possibly want to read about a group of teens back in the 80s? 
For them that probably counts as ancient history, one step away from the Romans 
and the Great Plague. And yet one of the reasons the series was successful at 
the time and will still have meaning for today's teens is that the stories are 
timeless and universal. Take away the big hair,Abba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/abba>, and 80s fashions and you have young 
people battling the same problems as today's teen.

The 1980s really marked the beginning of Young Adult (YA) literature. It's 
hard to believe but before then there were virtually no books written for and 
about teenagers and focusing on their own lives and their own problems.

Books were bought for children by adults – parents, teachers, librarians, 
doting aunts. And they were stories that adults thought that they should read.

Then around 1980 publishers in the USA had a bright idea. They began 
publishing paperback series, aimed at teenagers, mostly girls. These were books 
about other teens, like themselves. About ordinary girls, problems with which 
every teen could identify, romances every teen believed could be possible… and 
usually happy endings (although most of us do like a good cry too). Some of the 
books were funny, some were sad, just like real life.

What this meant was that for the first time the reader was the consumer. Teens 
could let publishers know what they wanted to read. Every teen had enough money 
to buy the books for about the same price as a movie ticket, and they bought 
them in hundreds of thousands.

Of course some teachers and librarians complained that they weren't Jane Eyre. 
So what?

Some of them were well written AND it meant that teens who would not have been 
readers were devouring books. It was rather like the Harry Potter phenomenon 
when every child was suddenly reading 700 page books.

I was lucky to be in at the beginning of this revolution. I wrote one of the 
first six books with which Bantam launched as theSweet Dreams series 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sweet_Dreams_%28novel_series%29>. It was an 
amazing time – not at all unusual to go through a printing of 100,000 in a week.
 Janet Quin-Harkin 
One of my books, Ten Boy Summer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sweet_Dreams_%28novel_series%29>, became a number 
one bestseller in the United States. And the interesting thing was that it 
wasn't as much a romance as a spool on romance. It was funny. Embarrassing 
things happened and things went wrong, as they do in real life.

I became known for this blend of romance, real life and humor and started 
writing my own series. The most successful of these wasHeartbreak Café 
<http://www.heartbreakcafe.la>. It takes place in a beach-side teen hangout, 
where surfers mix with city kids. The thing that makes this café special (and 
the series appealing and timeless) is that it is a place at a crossroads, 
outside of normal society, a place where anyone can go and not be judged or 
compartmentalized.

I can remember the attraction of the bar in the old TV show Cheers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheers> – the place where everyone knew your 
name, where the postman and the post-graduate could rub shoulders. I think we 
all long for a place like that in our lives, where we can go to to be ourselves 
and not have to fit in to what other people want us to be. Doesn't everyone 
want to get away from having to please their parents, to do what their family 
and tradition expect of them and to find out who they really are?

I think Harry Potter showed us that the book is not dead, that the video game 
and iPad will not replace the joy of reading and escaping to another world, 
sharing another person's life for a while. It will be interesting to see if 
today's teens will embrace these characters from the 1980s… characters who were 
just like them, except that they didn't have mobile phones or text each other. 
They actually had to talk, face to face. How amazing – the books really are 
historical!

• Janet Quin-Harkin's Heartbreak Cafe No Experience Required 
<http://www.heartbreakcafe.la> is out now. Read XoXo, Bookworm_98's review here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/aug/29/review-heartbreak-cafe-janet-quin-harkin>
.
 