
 I write comedy teen fiction.

And I feel like I need to start with that statement, because apparently 
authors like me don’t exist.


A recent national newspaper feature bemoaned – with surprising ferocity and 
not a little generalisation – the “darkness” of current teen fiction: 
complained about the absence of anything joyful or humorous currently being 
offered to children. It was an article that, frankly, left quite a few authors 
looking curiously down at our own laps and wondering if we’d become invisible 
overnight, or had perhaps spontaneously evaporated out of the literary canon 
along with our vast book sales.

Because while it’s true that the media may like to sensationalise and focus on 
the darker books at times (as do, let’s be honest, a few of the awards panels), 
children don’t. Children go – as children always have – where they like. They 
read what they like, they explore any world that appeals to them at that 
moment. And they love - with intensity, with loyalty, with passion - a million 
different types of book, infinite types of narrative, of life, of story, all at 
once. That fluidity - an imagination and ability to adapt and adjust - is what 
makes them children. It’s what makes us love writing for them, above and beyond 
anyone else.


Holly Smale: It’s dangerous to think that because feminism is familiar it 
means we’ve 'done it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/03/holly-smale-feminism-interview-geek-girl>
 So-called “dark” books - those that touch on “dangerous”, “sensitive” or 
“subversive” subjects - are, no matter what anyone says, important. They allow 
children and teens to delicately explore topics that fascinate them in their 
own space and at their own pace: to empathise with people who live other lives, 
or to find themselves reflected if they are suffering privately. Life is not 
always easy. It’s not always simple, or straight-forward, and a lot of 
excellent books reflect that struggle perfectly. They allow us to cry, to hurt, 
to feel and discover, in safety and peace, and they do so beautifully, and 
poignantly: with grace and art.

 But just as the dark is essential for children, so - too - is the light.

 As a writer of nearly 30 years (my first story was a rhyming poem about a 
unicorn, aged five: inexplicably, it has yet to obtain a film deal), I was 
desperate to be taken seriously. I wanted to be heard: for my intelligence to 
be acknowledged, for my name to be spoken in hushed, revered tones (preferably 
whilst being bowed to).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9269de5a3beb9aadb2a8575b894ffc37d41772a%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20children%20and%20teens%20need%20funny%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20children%20and%20teens%20need%20funny%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9269de5a3beb9aadb2a8575b894ffc37d41772a%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Holly Smale: For the first time in a life spent writing, I let humour, joy and 
laughter in where they needed to be. Photograph: Modopublishing 
Particularly as a woman, I wanted to be respected. So my first attempt at a 
book was a very long novel about teenage depression and suicide, in which whole 
pages were dedicated to descriptions of water droplets. I worked at it for 
nearly three years, until every one of its 120,000 words had been selected, 
mulled over and replaced to within an inch of its life.

 And it wasn’t until I got to the end that I realised that - in the process of 
my Quest for Literary Glory - I had killed it. In my egotistical desire to be a 
Great Writer, I had put myself and my pride first and the story second. Not 
because darkness can’t be written beautifully - it can and frequently is - but 
because it just wasn’tme. I had crushed the narrative to fit into who I wanted 
to be - into a self-important role I wanted to fill - and as a consequence my 
book was… lifeless. Stale and joyless. And I couldn’t sell it for toffee.

Jim Smith's top 10 funny books for kids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/dec/12/jim-smith-top-10-funny-books>
 So I tried again. Except this time I stopped trying to be anything: I focused 
on putting the story first. For the first time in a life spent writing, I let 
humour, joy and laughter in where they needed to be: I let the story tellme how 
to tell it. And this time, pathos entered in its own pace. As did pain and 
hurt; heartbreak and loss, bullying and anxiety. But they came naturally, with 
happiness, with lightness, with joy, with the qualities that finally breathed 
life into my characters, and into my books.

 And then - irony of ironies - I won awards and sold the proverbial shedload: 
probably because I was no longer actually trying to and people can always tell.

 Life is darkness and light, and we are all a combination. And - in the same 
way - so every story comes with its own way of telling it: its own way of 
existing, of living, of breathing. Sometimes that way is sombre, and 
thoughtful, and touching, and sometimes it is lighter and sunnier, with 
laughter and wit. Frequently - much like life - it comes with both.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 But I can say with some assurance that we are all very much here. Authors, 
telling our different stories, in both lightness and darkness. Putting the 
books first, instead of ourselves. And writing for children, who deserve it 
all: the humour and the sadness, the pain and the joy. Who are capable of 
reading and loving every shade of it.

 And who have - and should always have - the freedom to choose what they want 
to read.

All Holly Smale’s fabulous Geek Girl series are available to buy from the 
Guardian bookshop:Geek Girl <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/geek-girl.html>, 
Model Misfit <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/model-misfit.html>, Picture 
Perfect <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/picture-perfect-10.html>, All That 
Glitters <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/322758/> and 
her latest (and fifth in the series):Head Over Heels 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367456/>. There is 
also a Christmas specialAll Wrapped Up 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/371058/> and summer 
special due out this summer:Sunny Side Up 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408788/>. 

You can see Holly Smale live at the Hay festival this year, interviewed by the 
Guardian children’s books site’s very own Emily Drabble at 5:30pm on Saturday 
28 May at The Starlight Stage, Hay festival. Book ticketshere 
<https://www.hayfestival.com/p-10581-holly-smale.aspx>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc729cfeb2dc1c8007f0675ecf9eb42b49839ef0e%2F0_0_1500_2405%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20children%20and%20teens%20need%20funny%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20children%20and%20teens%20need%20funny%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fwhy-children-and-teens-need-funny-books-holly-smale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc729cfeb2dc1c8007f0675ecf9eb42b49839ef0e%2F0_0_1500_2405%2F1500.jpg> 