
Dear young adult reader,

If you pick up a copy of my book The Deepest Cut 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394779/> and scan the 
blurb, you’ll read a few key words; suicide, traumatised, argument... murder.

Murder. With that word, you’re going to be expecting some violence within the 
book’s pages, right?


Of course you are. 

I’ve written a book about knife crime, leaving out the bit where he was 
actually stabbed would be the ultimate betrayal to you as my reader. I can 
imagine the conversation between us if you got to the end to find I’d censored 
it out of the book.


You: Yeah, but what actually happened when he was stabbed? 


Me: Oh, I’m sorry, that’s too graphic for me to tell you. 

You: Serious?

Me: Uh-huh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6760d1dd529f5e186247b222b8c0e57997f922d5%2F0_577_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20you%20need%20to%20hear%20the%20truth%20about%20knife%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20you%20need%20to%20hear%20the%20truth%20about%20knife%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6760d1dd529f5e186247b222b8c0e57997f922d5%2F0_577_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
 Natalie Flynn: I’ve written a book about knife crime, leaving out the bit 
where he was actually stabbed would be the ultimate betrayal to you as my 
reader. Photograph: PR 
You: I’m not six. *hands book back and never speaks to me again*

However, violence needs to be written with authenticity to be affective for 
you, so you know what would also have been a betrayal? If I’d made it more than 
it was, over dramatized it; sensationalized it.


I can imagine the conversation between us if you got to the end to find that 
I’d over-hyped the violence and made it so much more than it should have been.


You: For real?


Me: *laughs* Yeah, was good, wasn’t it?

You: Err, no. That character would never have done that. 

Me:

You: You’re a rubbish writer. *hands book back and never speaks to me again* 

Can reading children's books help tackle knife crime?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/05/knife-crime-childrens-books-myron-yarde-alex-wheatle>
It’s a matter of balance. Too toned down, or too hyped up and it will 
completely invalidate the characters and the story for you in an instant, 
you’ll lose faith in what you’re reading and in me as an author. That’s not 
what I want, so I didn’t leave out the bit where he was stabbed. It’s in there 
in black and white. I’ve not watered it down and I’ve not hyped it up. It is 
what it is. It’s paramount to the story. It’s true to the characters. It’s 
being true to you.


Being true to you is important to me, my reader. You’re not stupid. You’re 
clever and wise. You live this stuff day in and day out, either first hand or 
through stories; through the media, through TV and films. You can sniff 
anything false a mile off. You can tell when you’re being patronised or 
preached to and you don’t take kindly to it and rightly so. Why should you? 
You’re looking for authenticity. You’re looking for truth and answers in a 
world that is often upside down and hard to make sense of. You’re looking for 
validation and guidance through characters you can connect to, characters who 
are like you. You want to pick up a book and show your friends that bit of 
dialogue on page 47 and laugh because you lot are exactly the same. As an 
author, it’s my duty to give you that.


Why we shouldn't protect teenagers from controversial issues in fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/may/10/teenagers-controversial-issues-fiction-chris-vick>
So it’s not just violence that deserves to be written with truth. It’s 
everything. It’s sex and periods and emotions. It’s heartbreak and friendship 
and annoying parents. It’s how unbelievably boring school can sometimes be and 
how your best mate is not as good as you at Call of Duty, no matter what he 
says. It’s the little things you go through on a day-to-day basis and it’s the 
big stuff too. It’s violence, suicide, drugs, abuse, teen pregnancy, bullying, 
death and mental health. It’s the consequences of the choices you make. It’s 
the responsibility you have as a member of society. It’s what happens when 
things don’t go right. It’s how to find your way out of situations you’ve got 
no idea how you got yourself in. These might be experiences you’ve had and can 
relate to. Or they might be experiences you’re in the midst of dealing with and 
we’re potentially guiding you to the right help or the solution you need. How 
can we do that with anything other than the truth?


It’s important to you that if you go looking for answers and guidance within 
the walls of your local bookshop, what you find there is nothing other than the 
truth. It’s what you deserve.


Jennifer Niven's top 10 teen books to save your life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/01/top-10-teen-books-to-save-your-life-jennifer-niven>
So as the author of those sorts of books, here is my pledge to you: I promise 
I will always do my best to write with authenticity and truth. I promise I will 
not water things down, or sugar coat them, nor will I hype them up. I promise 
I’ll do my best to put it all down on paper realistically and fearlessly, 
mirroring back your world to you so that it feels like you’re being listened 
to. So you’ll feel like someone gets it, because, and I know I’m not just 
speaking for myself when I say this but we do. We really do.


Natalie Flynn’s The Deepest Cut  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/394779/>is dedicated 
to the memory of knife crime victim Rob Knox who was killed on 24 May 2008. Rob 
Knox played Marcus Belby in the film Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince 
before he was killed in London aged just 18.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2fa5021a2ecd59d408436be361adf3bb1f040da%2F0_0_1600_2532%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20you%20need%20to%20hear%20the%20truth%20about%20knife%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20you%20need%20to%20hear%20the%20truth%20about%20knife%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Ftruth-about-knife-crime-teen-books-natalie-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2fa5021a2ecd59d408436be361adf3bb1f040da%2F0_0_1600_2532%2F1600.jpg> 