
Behind the usual bland, and apparently friendly, exchanges in today's official 
confirmation ofWill Lewis's departure from the Telegraph Media Group is an 
uncomfortable truth.

Though there were smiles as Lewis shook hands with chief executive Murdoch 
MacLennan and is reported to have said: "You've done the right thing, Murdoch", 
the split comes after months of frustration on both sides.

Media Guardian,  in breaking the story last night, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/05/will-lewis-telegraph-media-group>
 couched Lewis's leaving in terms of him being "pushed out" after a 
disagreement with MacLennan, but that appears to be a somewhat one-sided 
spinning of the reality.

MacLennan certainly made the decision that Lewis should go. But he acted for 
reasons that have been hinted at widely in rival media outlets (including
Private Eye) in the past two months. Namely, that nothing concrete was 
happening at Lewis's digital venture in Euston.

The much-vaunted project, announced in November last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/30/telegraph-digital-will-lewis-euston-project>
 was projected to have a staff of 50 and "a budget north of Â£10m."

It was seen in terms of a business venture, with Lewis becoming its managing 
director, while retaining his newspaper editor-in-chief title.

But, as the months have passed, I understand that MacLennan and other senior 
executives - including chairmanAidan Barclay - have become frustrated by the 
lack of clarity about Lewis's operation. They did not believe things were 
moving forward as expected.

The other bone of contention was that MacLennan (and the owners) wished the 
Euston operation to be the digital arm of the Telegraph. Lewis took a different 
view, believing it should be an independent business, producing its own revenue 
stream.

Despite several pleas to Lewis, no business plan was drawn up. The failure to 
provide one brought matters to a head and MacLennan, an initial enthusiast for 
the strategy, decided to take action.

He is said to remain convinced in the credibility of the project, and the unit 
is not being dismantled in spite of Lewis's departure.

It is, said one TMG manager I spoke to, "an exceptionally sound vision... the 
whole idea of a digital research and development division separate from the 
production of a daily newspaper was excellent."

Needless to say, Lewis sees matters very differently. He believes he did not 
get the support he deserved, and blames MacLennan - one of his greatest 
supporters over the past five years - for this.

He is especially miffed after having so recently enjoyed the spotlight by 
receiving the newspaper of the year prize at the British Press Awards for the 
Telegraph's exposure of MPs' expenses.

But it is a conspiracy theory too far to suggest that his replacement as 
Telegraph editor byTony Gallagher, a former Daily Mail executive, is part of 
some MacLennan "power grab" to staff TMG entirely with former Mail employees. 
After all, Maclennan has the power already, he hardly needs to grab it.

Nor, it should be said, is there any split between him and the owners, the 
Barclay brothers,Sirs David and Frederick, or David's son, Aidan. I cannot 
imagine that Lewis departed without all three being in agreement with MacLennan.

Finally, it should be noted that journalists often fail to make a go of 
businesses. Lewis, who went on an advanced management course at Harvard 
business school last summer, is not the first editor to take that route and end 
up wishing they had stuck to journalism.

I recall that Nick Lloyd hated being thrust into a management position at News 
International after Harvard andDavid Yelland didn't show any benefits from his 
Harvard experiences either.

Lewis is young, at 41. He is a non-stop bundle of energy. He will come again 
in Fleet Street somewhere. I rather imagine one of his first calls will be from
Rupert Murdoch. He will not be short of income for long.
 