
So it turns out that Alicia Keys, whose comeback has been based around the 
concept of being makeup-free, isn’t quite as untouched as she claims to be. 
Last week, in an interview withW magazine 
<http://www.wmagazine.com/story/alicia-keys-no-makeup-glowing-complexion-secrets>
, her makeup artist Dotti revealed that Keys wears brow definer, self-tanning 
anti-ageing serum and mattifier that total more than £300. The singer also 
applies cucumber pulp and does “ice work” on her skin (rolling an ice stick on 
her face until the blood rushes to the surface) to achieve the bare, 
fresh-faced naturalism she is after. “It practically makes her skin say, ‘Hi. I 
love you,’” Dotti explains.

Keys has been lauded for her #nomakeup look and it has been central to a new 
album campaign, underscored by tastefully shot black-and-white photos. In May, 
she penned aletter for Lenny 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/style/a410/alicia-keys-time-to-uncover/> (Lena 
Dunham’s online newsletter) explaining why she was ditching heavy cosmetics. 
“In one song I wrote, called When a Girl Can’t Be Herself,” Keyes wrote. “It 
says: ‘In the morning from the minute I wake up / what if I don’t want to put 
on all that makeup / who says I must conceal what I’m made of / Maybe all this 
Maybelline is covering my esteem.’ I don’t want to cover up any more. Not my 
face, not my mind, not my soul, my thoughts, not my dreams, not my struggles, 
not my emotional growth. Nothing.”

A video posted by @adele <https://www.instagram.com/p/BJOhkG-jCYB/> on Aug 17, 
2016 at 3:41pm PDT

Keys has tapped into the humblebrag movement of the moment. Adele, Gwyneth 
Paltrow, Kylie Jenner, Gigi Hadid, Beyoncé and Laverne Cox have all posted 
#nomakeup selfies on social media to make a statement about the tyranny of 
contemporary beauty ideals. Neatly, of course, while showing up how 
ridiculously good-looking they all are.

Balenciaga. No make up today. <https://www.instagram.com/p/BLD408djiT4/>

A photo posted by Kim Kardashian West (@kimkardashian) on Oct 2, 2016 at 
5:35am PDT

Last week, Kim Kardashian tweeted: “Think I’m gonna wear no make up today at 
the Balenciaga show.” Her appearance was notably toned down and seems to signal 
a new beauty phase for the reality star, who made contouring her trademark look 
and inspired endless Youtube beauty tutorials. Of course, the construction of 
“real” in 2016 is a complicated one. On the surface, it implies that long-held 
conceptions of beauty are false and dated, but on a deeper level it upholds 
another aspirational standard of appearance that is just as difficult to 
maintain. The overall impression is that actually, not much has changed at all.




 