
A blog post by a private school headteacher claiming reading fantasy such as 
Harry Potter and The Hunger Games can damage children’s brains has set the 
internet ablaze. Here’s a nice long quote from it:

Neil Gaiman: 'my parents didn’t have any kind of rules about what I couldn’t 
read'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/29/neil-gaiman-banned-books-censorship-interview>
I want children to read literature that is conducive to their age and leave 
those mystical and frightening texts for when they can discern reality, and 
when they have first learned to love beauty. Harry Potter, Lord of the Rings, 
Game of Thrones, The Hunger Games, and Terry Pratchett, to mention only a few 
of the modern world’s ‘must-haves’, contain deeply insensitive and addictive 
material which I am certain encourages difficult behaviour in children; yet 
they can be bought without a special licence, and can damage the sensitive 
subconscious brains of young children, many of whom may be added to the current 
statistics of mentally ill young children. For young adults, this literature, 
when it can be understood for what it is, is the choice of many!

Buying sensational books is like feeding your child with spoons of added 
sugar, heaps of it, and when the child becomes addicted it will seek more and 
more, which if related to books, fills the bank vaults of those who write 
un-sensitive books for young children! –Graeme Whiting

Alex Wheatle: I was mesmerised by Tolkien’s inventiveness of language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/mar/15/alex-wheatle-tolkien-language-liccle-bit-crongton-knights>
And now fantasy writer Samantha Shannon tells us why she thinks Graeme Whiting 
is wrong, so wrong:

It’s difficult to isolate the strangest part of a recent blog post by a 
headteacher in Gloucester, entitled ‘The Imagination of the Child’ 
<http://www.theacornschool.com/news/the-imagination-of-the-child/>. That anyone 
could seriously believe that books like Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings 
cause mental illness, and could feel comfortable making that claim without a 
shred of evidence; that anyone could seriously consider Shakespeare, of all 
people, more suitable for children; that anyone could wonder at why people are 
allowed to buy fantasy books without a “special licence”; that an educator 
could write any of these things on a school’s website.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbd0346bcb744a3fb4e42e51ade2f16d203c90bf%2F656_0_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20headteacher%20who%20believes%20reading%20Harry%20Potter%20causes%20mental%20illness%20is%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20headteacher%20who%20believes%20reading%20Harry%20Potter%20causes%20mental%20illness%20is%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbd0346bcb744a3fb4e42e51ade2f16d203c90bf%2F656_0_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Samantha Shannon: I cherish my freedom to write and read whatever I choose, 
and how grateful I am that my parents and teachers only ever encouraged me to 
do so when I was still at school. Photograph: Tal Cohen/REX 
As an author of dystopian fiction, my senses tingle when anyone – educators 
and politicians most of all – launch into these sorts of attacks on popular 
books. Having said that, I’m not here to convert anyone to the unhallowed ways 
of us fantasy lovers, or call for an apology.


What I am going to do is try to ascertain the difference between what Mr 
Whiting calls the “old-fashioned values of traditional literature” and the 
“dark, demonic literature” that drips from every corner of our modern world.


Women in fantasy – the children's books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2016/feb/26/teen-young-adult-fantasy-women>
Let’s take Shakespeare as our main example. If you’re not familiar with Titus 
Andronicus <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/titus-andronicus-3.html>, one of 
the Bard’s earliest plays, you should know that in it, Lavinia, daughter of 
Titus, is brutally raped. To ensure that she can betray her rapists’ identities 
to no living soul, they take her hands and tongue. Her rapists mock the silence 
they inflicted: “So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak, / Who ‘twas that 
cut thy tongue and ravish’d thee”. She is eventually able to name them only by 
gripping a stick in her mouth, steadying it with the stumps of her arms, and 
scratching their names in the dirt. She lives long enough to see them murdered 
by her father – who then murders her, in turn, out of shame that she was raped. 
Titus then has the rapists baked into a pie. If that’s not going to damage the 
“sensitive subconscious brains of young children”, nothing will. When I tried 
to think of an instance of similar grotesqueness inHarry Potter, the closest I 
could remember with was the scene inHarry Potter and the Goblet of Fire 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-goblet-of-fire-14.html> 
in which Wormtail slices off his own hand, providing the necessary “flesh of 
the servant” to resurrect Voldemort. Grim, yes – but let’s face it, it’s not 
quite in the same league as the image of the silent, violated, mutilated 
Lavinia.


Does Titus Andronicus 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/titus-andronicus-3.html> push the 
“old-fashioned values of traditional literature” – and if so, what exactly are 
they? I’ll be generous: perhaps Mr Whiting was referring to a different 
Shakespeare play, likeA Midsummer Night’s Dream 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/midsummer-night-s-dream-32.html> or The 
Tempest <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tempest-36.html> – but surely they’re 
as “carefully sprinkled with ideas of magic” asHarry Potter, and could lead our 
fragile children down the path of the occult? Prosperois a sorcerer, after all. 

I’d be here all day if I were to continue plucking examples of fantasy from 
Shakespeare, but it’s worth noting that some of Mr Whiting’s other alternatives 
to the darkness of sensational literature include Keats and Shelley. (I’m going 
to assume he doesn’t meanMary Shelley, because her fiction is, you know, quite 
dark.) I’m no Keats scholar, but I have read ‘Lamia 
<http://www.bartleby.com/126/36.html>’, and good luck trying to explain the 
story behind that one to a nine-year-old. The problem here is selective 
perception about how many writers have made use of fantastical and magical 
ingredients in their work over the centuries. They are as inescapable in the 
classics as they are today.


I’ll leave you with this quote from Mr Whiting’s blog post:


“Imagination is so rich and important that I cannot understand why any parent 
would not actively prevent exposure to modern-world electronic gadgets, 
screens, films and literature that will encumber the minds and especially the 
imagination of their children.”


I will treasure this piece of writing. I’d like it framed to remind me of how 
much I cherish my freedom to write and read whatever I choose, and how grateful 
I am that my parents and teachers only ever encouraged me to do so when I was 
still at school. The logic of dictators and book-burners throughout history, 
crystallised in all its nonsensical glory: that imagination can only flourish 
when it’s kept inside a cage.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2bced2ff6d4118bd00806e038027e2c714d989%2F0_0_1249_1920%2F1249.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20headteacher%20who%20believes%20reading%20Harry%20Potter%20causes%20mental%20illness%20is%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20headteacher%20who%20believes%20reading%20Harry%20Potter%20causes%20mental%20illness%20is%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fharry-potter-causes-mental-illness-graeme-whitling-samantha-shannon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2bced2ff6d4118bd00806e038027e2c714d989%2F0_0_1249_1920%2F1249.jpg>
Samantha Shannon is the author of The Bone Season 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bone-season-2.html> and The Mime Order 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/309288/>, both of 
which are available from the Guardian bookshop.

Got any thoughts on this subject? Let us know on Twitter @GdnChildrensBks or 
by email childrens.books@theguardian.com
 