
On Tuesday, the United States should be celebrating its 95th Armistice Day, 
pausing as a nation to think about the terrible costs of war – including the 
loss of so many lives. Unfortunately, we replaced it with a very different 
holiday.

On 1 June 1954 <http://www.history.com/topics/holidays/history-of-veterans-day>
, less than a year after America exited the Korean Warin defeat 
<http://kasamaproject.org/history/2387-19korean-war-june-25-1950-u-s-beaten-by-revolutionary-war>
, the US congressgot rid of Armistice Day 
<http://www.va.gov/opa/vetsday/vetdayhistory.asp>, which was established in 
1919, and started Veterans Day. In place of what had been acelebration of peace 
<http://www.ppu.org.uk/whitepoppy/>, Congress instituted an annual veneration 
of those who fought in war. America would ever after celebrate not the beauty 
of peace, but its purveyors of state violence in World Wars I and II, Korea, 
Vietnam, the Dominican Republic, Lebanon, Grenada, Kosovo, Somalia, Libya, 
Iraq, Afghanistan and more.

Governments had meant to do the opposite in 1919: if you go back and read the 
newspapers of the time closely enough, you can almost hear thecollective sigh 
of relief and jubilation <http://hometownbyhandlebar.com/?p=7745> on the first 
Armistice Day. Millions celebrated peace andrenounced 
<http://www.amazon.com/World-Outlawed-Christopher-Naylor-Swanson/dp/0983083096> 
war on that November day, a year after the violence in Europe had ended: after 
the mustard gas stopped burning off soldiers’ skin; after Gatling guns stopped 
mowing down young boys frommostly poor and working class families 
<http://surface.syr.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=soc>; after 
fighter planes stopped streaking the sky; and after bloody bayonets were wiped 
clean. In the wake of so much carnage, it was then clear to millions of people 
that wars were not about valour or romantic ideals, but about empire, which 
benefits a few at the expense of many.

It took only two more wars fighting for empire before the Americans buried 
that day’s history as a celebration of peace.

Kurt Vonnegut, a World War II veteran, wrote 
<http://www.amazon.com/Breakfast-Champions-Novel-Kurt-Vonnegut/dp/0385334206> 
in 1973:

Armistice Day has become Veterans’ Day. Armistice Day was sacred. Veterans’ 
Day is not. So I will throw Veterans’ Day over my shoulder. Armistice Day I 
will keep. I don’t want to throw away any sacred things.

Armistice Day was sacred because it was intended to evoke memories 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/wilfred-owen> of fear, pain, suffering, 
military incompetence, greed and destruction on the grandest scale for those 
who had participated in war, directly and indirectly. Armistice Day was a 
hallowed anniversary because it was supposed to protect future life from future 
wars.

Veterans Day, instead, celebrates “heroes” 
<http://www.nationalww2museum.org/learn/education/for-students/ww2-history/at-a-glance/veterans-day.pdf>
 and encourages others to dream of playing the hero themselves, covering 
themselves in valour. But becoming a “hero 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/07/20/stop_calling_soldiers_heroes_it_stops_us_from_seeing_them_as_human_and_dismisses_their_experience/>
” means going off to kill and be killed in a future war – or one of our 
government’scurrent, unending wars 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-29961084>.

I am more angry and frustrated with each passing Veterans Day – this is my 
tenth since leaving the US Army Rangers as a conscientious objector – because 
it gets clearer and clearer that Veteran’s Day is less about honouring veterans 
than it is about easing the guilty consciences of those who have sent (and 
continue to send) others to kill and die for reasons that havevery little to do 
with democracy or freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/earth-insight/2014/mar/20/iraq-war-oil-resources-energy-peak-scarcity-economy>
. I can’t seem to shake the feeling that the day is more of a slap in the face 
than a pat on the back to those who served, despite theendless thank yous 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175912/tomgram%3A_rory_fanning,_why_do_we_keep_thanking_the_troops/>
, parades, and concerts supposedly held in our honour.

This might be the biggest Veterans Day yet: Metallica, Rihanna, Eminem and 
Bruce Springsteen are headlining a hugeConcert for Valor 
<http://www.theconcertforvalor.com> on the National Mall in Washington DC, 
sponsored by Chase Bank, Starbucks and HBO. Hundreds of smallerparades 
<http://nypost.com/2014/11/08/military-dogs-to-be-honored-in-veterans-day-parade/>
,ceremonies 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/post/175912/tomgram%3A_rory_fanning,_why_do_we_keep_thanking_the_troops/>
,sporting events 
<http://www.nba.com/pacers/news/save-and-support-honor-veterans-day-pacers-11/11-back>
 andconcerts 
<http://www.nbcwashington.com/entertainment/the-scene/Free-Concert-to-Honor-Veterans-Comes-to-DC--278665801.html>
 will be held across the country in the shadow of the 14th year of the Global 
War on Terror.

The Armistice-turned-Veterans Day celebrations will be held in a country that 
has668 military bases 
<http://www.haymarketbooks.org/pb/The-Changing-Face-of-Empire> around the 
globe. They will be held in a country that has conductedmilitary operations in 
two-thirds 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175794/tomgram%3A_nick_turse,_secret_wars_and_black_ops_blowback/>
 of the world’s countries since 9/11. They will be held in a county that spends 
three quarters of atrillion dollars 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/study-iraq-afghan-war-costs-to-top-4-trillion/2013/03/28/b82a5dce-97ed-11e2-814b-063623d80a60_story.html>
 each year on its military – more than thenext thirteen countries 
<http://www.haymarketbooks.org/pb/Shadow-Government> combined. They will be 
held in a country that has takenhundreds of thousands 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/study-iraq-afghan-war-costs-to-top-4-trillion/2013/03/28/b82a5dce-97ed-11e2-814b-063623d80a60_story.html>
 of lives around the world these past 14-years, and which showsno sign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/us-troops-afghanistan-2024-obama-bilateral-security-agreement>
 of slowing down.

What do the millions of people in Afghanistan 
<http://www.tomdispatch.com/blog/175837/>, Iraq 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/10/15/iraq-death-toll_n_4102855.html> and 
many other 
<https://firstlook.org/theintercept/2014/11/06/many-countries-islamic-world-u-s-bombed-occupied-since-1980/>
 countries who have lost loved ones to America’s wars think of these 
celebrations? What should veterans coping with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, 
dealing with traumatic injuries or struggling with chronicunemployment 
<http://www.militarytimes.com/article/20131108/JOBS/311080004/10-percent-unemployment-October-Post-9-11-veterans>
 think of these events? What do the families of those soldiers and veterans who 
havetaken their own lives 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/09/21/us/22-veteran-suicides-a-day/> feel?

I suspect it’ll be difficult to even hear those questions in your head while 
Metallica is shredding on stage – and maybe that’s the point.

Still, many soldiers are beginning to question America’s wars and their tolls 
at home and abroad. According to journalist Matt Kennard,more than 40,000 US 
soldiers 
<http://www.amazon.com/Irregular-Army-Recruited-Neo-Nazis-Criminals/dp/1844678806>
 have declared their own personal Armistice Days by becoming conscientious 
objectors since 9/11 – and I wasone 
<http://www.haymarketbooks.org/pb/Worth-Fighting-For> of them.

Once I left the military as a conscientious objector and began speaking about 
it, the personal “thank-yous” from strangers started to dry up – apparently, 
it’s more heroic to kill people under orders than to demand that you be allowed 
to stop. But there are many ways to cover yourself in valour and act the hero, 
even if there’s only one way sanctioned by a federal holiday.

If we really wanted to honour veterans, we would abolish Veterans Day and 
replace it with a day that celebrates peace, not war. Peace is a better way to 
honour the sacrifice of veterans like me than a day designed to recruit the 
next generation of soldiers we’ll have to thank for their service in yet 
another war.
 