 Not amused. Photograph: Max Nash/AP 
Somebody who knows James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> well enough to dine with him 
tells me that it is the opposition of the Barclay family to News Corp-Sky deal 
that has really irked him. After all plenty of the other objectors are pretty 
predictable – whether Trinity Mirror, the BBC, or dare one say it, Guardian 
Media Group, parent company of this very newspaper. But the assumption the 
Murdochs made was the Barclays were like them – risk-taking businessmen who 
believe that people should reap the rewards if they have staked and defeated 
rivals. The Barclays, in short, should be on their side.

Come to think of it, that is an interesting question, because the Barclay 
family and their Telegraph Media Group are one of the two objectors that make 
the politics of the News Corp-Sky takeover a right pain in the derriere for the 
Conservative party. The other, of course, is the Daily Mail and General Trust, 
and its leading editorial light, Paul Dacre. But Dacre is a journalist, not a 
plutocrat – and it is the low profile Barclays whose motivations are altogether 
harder to divine. These are not people who hold press conferences, but seem 
prepared to mix it with the liberal half of the British media they otherwise 
have little in common with.
 So, what's their plan then... 
In these situations it is entertaining to speculate though. There may still 
linger memories of a time when the Times ran several pieces investigating their 
finances shortly after Sir David and Sir Frederick took over the Telegraph. 
(Full disclosure: I helped write them. Later, following a subsequent article 
about their business affairs, I was sued by both men in a French court, an 
action that was subsquently dropped in return fora printed clarification 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2007/feb/09/whybarclayswerewrongtosue?INTCMP=SRCH>
). Those who were around at the time will know those articles generated plenty 
of ill feeling from the Telegraph camp, with phone calls of complaint (and the 
lawsuits) coming from Telegraph towers over to Wapping.

Other theories abound. Is the hope that the end result of this will be that 
the Murdochs would be asked to sell the Times titles to get the News Corp-Sky 
through the regulators? That is an optimistic thought – one would have to 
wonder if that was a price that Rupert Murdoch would ever reckon be worth 
paying. You'd have to ask if any new owner of the Times titles would invest so 
heavily in their journalism/stomachtheir losses 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/may/13/james-harding-times-losses-unsustainable>
. And, it would be hard to believe that the owners of the Telegraph could ever 
buy the Times titles*. So maybe the calculus is that any new owner of the Times 
won't be up to Murdoch standards and would make a poor fist of it.

Yes, the thinking sounds a little convoluted, but you never know...

* Mind you, Rupert Murdoch did once tell Times types that when the Telegraphs 
were for sale, he was approached by some private equity types who were 
interested in bidding for the Telegraph titles. Their idea was that they would 
shut the Sunday Telegraph, in return for Rupert shutting the Times – leaving 
the field clear for theDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and the Sunday Times. A 
reminder why money men should never be allowed near newspapers.
 