
James Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> was admiring the 
Mercedes 300S of the villainous Sir Hugo Drax – “one of only half a dozen in 
England” – when his mind turned to the German company’s fabulous exploits on 
the race track. “There was something ruthless and majestic about the cars, he 
decided, remembering the years from 1934 to 1939 when they had completely 
dominated the grand prix scene.”

The author of those words knew his stuff. In that passage from Moonraker, the 
third of the Bond books, published in 1955, Ian Fleming had 007 recalling some 
of the team’s famous drivers of the pre-war era: the German aces Rudolf 
Caracciola, Hermann Lang and Manfred von Brauchitsch, and thedoomed English 
hero Richard Seaman 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/osm/story/0,6903,782811,00.html>. Bond could 
remember “the days when he had seen them drifting the fast sweeping bends of 
Tripoli at 190, or screaming along the tree-lined straight at Berne with the 
Auto Unions on their tails”.

The secret agent is lost in his memories when Drax emerges to lead him into 
Moonraker’s next plot-twist. This is the book from whichAnthony Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/anthony-horowitz-apologises-idris-elba-too-street-bond>
 picks up the mention of Bond having “once dabbled on the fringe of the racing 
world” for his own “continuation” 007 novel, Trigger Mortis, published this 
month. In an early section of the book, Bond transforms himself into a grand 
prix driver.

Trigger Mortis is set in 1957, at the height of the cold war. As part of a 
plan to attack western technological supremacy, Russia intends to dominate
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> with a driver named 
Ivan Dimitrov and a car called the Krassny. Dimitrov has already served a ban 
for pushing a fellow driver off the track. Now his target is the only man the 
Russians do not feel confident of beating: the English champion Lancy Smith in 
his Vanwall.

As Bond prepares for the showdown, which will take place at the Nürburgring, 
he is sent for lessons at a private track in southern England, where he takes 
the wheel of a Maserati 250F. To his instructor, a woman, he reveals that his 
previous experience includes races at Goodwood, Silverstone and Albi, the 
airfield circuit in south-west France. She suspects that this won’t be enough 
to enable him to cope with the demands of the Ring’s 14 miles and 174 bends. 
Arriving at the German track, he is shown round it by Smith – a composite of 
Stirling Moss, Peter Collins and Mike Hawthorn – in an MG sports car. “Smith 
drove expertly,” Horowitz writes, “taking the corners at about 70 miles an 
hour”. What, all of them? The hairpins as well as the high-speed curves?

A note of uncertainty has been introduced that deepens with Horowitz’s 
description of the Krassny, a black-painted job which “quickly betrayed its 
origins: half a dozen production Soviet cars bastardised to produce this one 
ugly creature”. The thought of making a competitive grand prix car out of bits 
of Moskvitch and Volga saloons is funny but not very realistic.

Fernando Alonso looks to stay upbeat amid McLaren’s F1 toils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/17/fernando-alonso-mclaren-f1-jenson-button>
Nor is the layout of its engine, described by Bond as having 16 cylinders in 
two banks of eight, with a two-stage supercharger. From 1954 to 1960 all 
Formula One cars had 2.5‑litre engines with between four and 12 cylinders, and 
no supercharging. If a manufacturer wanted to build a supercharged engine, the 
regulations stipulated that its capacity could be no more than 750cc. 
Understandably, no one tried.

Let us set such pedantry aside – although perhaps not until after questioning 
Horowitz’s description of Bond preparing for the start of the race by 
tightening his “seat belt and shoulder straps”. It would be more than 10 years 
before F1 cars were fitted with safety harnesses. Nor were the gearboxes of 
racing cars in the 1950s equipped with synchromesh. And was any section of the 
Ring’s track ever cobbled?

But Bond does have one good idea. In order to catch Dimitrov and Smith from 
his position on the fifth row of the grid and thus carry out his mission of 
foiling the Russian’s murderous plan, he gets his mechanic to drain the 
Maserati’s tank, leaving only enough fuel for a couple of laps. By 
significantly reducing the car’s weight, he is able to charge through the pack 
and save the nation’s honour.

Cars always interested Fleming and he was good at describing them: the “cheeky 
iron rattle” of a VW Beetle is just right, as is the “pom-pim-pom-pam” of a 
pre-war Alfa Romeo’s four-tone air horn. According to his biographer, Andrew 
Lycett, he exceeded 100mph for the first time while taking someone’s Bugatti 
for a spin near his family’s home in Henley as a young man in the 1930s. His 
own cars, once the money from the Bond films started coming in, included a Ford 
Thunderbird and a Studebaker Avanti. His fictional creation, although now 
better known for the Aston Martins featured in the films, cherished a series of 
Bentleys.

In Casino Royale (1953), the first of the books, Bond drives a 1930 4.5-litre 
supercharged Bentley coupe that he had bought before the war and which is 
destroyed two books later while chasing Drax on the Folkestone Road. Its 
replacement is a more modern Bentley, a Mark II Continental which he bought as 
a wreck for £1,500 before investing in a new two-seater convertible body. Two 
years later, in On Her Majesty’s Secret Service, the car has been fitted – 
against his garage’s advice – with a supercharger. But it is not nimble enough 
to keep up with Tracy di Vicenzo as they race each other through the French 
countryside; she is at the wheel of a white Lancia Flaminia Zagato Spyder, the 
car in which she dies as they are leaving their wedding ceremony, killed by a 
shot fired from a Maserati.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-singapore-ayrton-senna-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442501552353%2FKP_476126_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Hamilton%20happy%20to%20match%20the%20late%20Ayrton%20Senna%20in%20F1%20wins%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-singapore-ayrton-senna-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Hamilton%20happy%20to%20match%20the%20late%20Ayrton%20Senna%20in%20F1%20wins%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-singapore-ayrton-senna-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442501552353%2FKP_476126_crop_640x360.jpg>
Fleming would surely seize on the modern grand prix circus as the perfect 
setting for a Bond adventure, and not just because the current Mercedes cars 
are once again demonstrating that old ruthless majesty. The staged collision 
that Horowitz describes would have been unthinkable in 1957, but half a century 
later such a thing actually took place whenNelson Piquet Jr was persuaded to 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/16/nelson-piquet-singapore-flavio-briatore-inquiry>
 in order to help his Renault team-mate Fernando Alonso win the 2008 Singapore 
Grand Prix.

Singapore, a spectacular night race around floodlit harbourside streets over 
which the 2015 edition takes place this weekend, would make a perfect location, 
as would the new circuits of Abu Dhabi, Austin and Sochi. Perhaps that was part 
of Bernie Ecclestone’s global-expansion strategy all along. And when it comes 
to casting an amusingly sinister villain, it’s easy to imagine who might be at 
the front of the queue.
 