
Iggy Azalea <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea> has been the 
most divisive popstar of 2014.

The Australian-born 24-year-old rapper has an ongoing beef with her 
contemporary Azealia Banks – Banks thinks “Igloo Australia’s” appropriation of 
black culture and lack of care and empathy for black issues is despicable. She 
has called out Azalea on social media, accusing her of masquerading as a part 
of black culture with her aesthetic. There’s even a blog,piggyazalea.tumblr.com 
<http://piggyazalea.tumblr.com/>, dedicated to the rapper’s allegedly racist 
social media presence.

More recently, Snoop Dogg attacked Azalea’s looks, saying she resembles one of 
the Wayans Brothers in the movie “White Girls”. Pretty harsh, considering the 
Wayans wore white plastic masks to portray two Hilton-esque socialites.

Then there’s the issue of Iggy’s actual musical talent and her authenticity as 
a rapper. Many (including Nicki Minaj) have accused her mentor TI of writing 
all her rhymes for her, an accusation he denies.

The reason Iggy is a target for great criticism and even greater commercial 
success is evident before she even opens her mouth. She’s a beautiful, 
voluptuous white woman from Australia who throws her accent to rap like a 
Southern-born black dude. Essentially, she’s a white girl playing the rap game 
and she’s ripe for criticism. But the latest Iggy-bashing came last week via a 
gossip/conspiracy website calledHuzler 
<http://huzlers.com/iggy-azalea-reveals-actually-born-male-named-cody-read-details/>
 – “Iggy Azalea Reveals She Was Actually Born A Male Named Cody”, read the 
headline.

In response, Iggy took to Twitter 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6405650/iggy-azalea-rumor-born-man-cody-twitter>
, jokingly asking her followers, “Will I still be able to get my Billboard 
Women in Music Award?” She added that if she were a man, she would never be 
called “Cody”, but instead opt for Liam.

Accusing female pop stars of being born male isn’t anything new – just a weak, 
obvious attempt at a put down. It’s happened to many women in the spotlight 
(hello,Jamie Lee Curtis 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/what-s-up-with-all-those-rumors-about-jamie-lee-curtis-being-a-hermaphrodite>
). Most recently, R&B star Ciara had the tag attached to her, as did Lady Gaga. 
Each singer dealt with it in her own way: Ciaradenied the rumor 
<http://bossip.com/107477/ciara-isok/> and attempted to brush it off as just 
silly gossip, while Lady Gaga looked at it as a compliment,saying 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/05/24/lady-gaga-i-love-the-herm_n_587666.html>
 she “loved the rumor that she had a penis” because her sold-out shows proved 
that her fans support her art no matter what.

It was almost too predictable that the next attack on Azalea would be the 
accusation that she was born with a penis. What else is left to hurt her with? 
The formula for female celebrity hate follows the formula for love. Everything 
is up for scrutiny: her voice, her performance, her ass, her tits, her hair, 
her femaleness. Even the authenticity of her vagina is challenged.

Women never escape a disbelief that they wrote their own songs, produced their 
own records, or performed live without a backing track. In the documentary The 
Punk Singer, Kathleen Hanna states, “There’s this certain assumption that when 
a man tells the truth, it is the truth. But as a woman, when I tell the truth, 
I have to negotiate how I will be perceived. There’s always this suspicion 
around a woman’s truth.” Compound the disbelief in a woman’s talent and skill 
with the social pressure to have the poise, grace, beauty, and perfection of a 
doll.

Women are always going to endure harsher criticism of our physical selves than 
any other group experiences; the type and degree of criticism depends on class, 
race, and sexual orientation within the female identity. I think Azalea handled 
the ridiculous accusations that she was born a man the only way she knows how: 
by laughing it off. Of course, it probably hurt her a little. It made her feel 
down for a second, stare in the mirror at her make-up-free face for an extra 
two minutes – but that’s par for the course when you become a successful female 
pop star.
 