
I have it on good authority that Amélie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89588/amelie> turned Montmartre into a 
"tourist shithole". TheCafé des 2 Moulins 
<http://www.qype.co.uk/place/51043-Cafe-des-2-Moulins-Paris>, the film's key 
location, was flooded with sightseers, and sold on. Someone put a banner over
Rue Lepic <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rue_Lepic> reading "Welcome to the 
quartier of Amélie Poulain". Megaphones pumped out accordion music in the 
street, turning the area into some kind of Marcel Marceau wet dream. Amélie has 
that kind of effect. Watching it for the second time on the eve of its 
10th-anniversary re-release, I still findAudrey Tautou 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0851582/>'s boulevard busybody simpering to the 
point of psychosis. (As our ownPeter Bradshaw 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2001/oct/05/1> said of her flat-rearranging 
antics: "Does the director know that this is precisely what Charles Manson 
claimed to love doing?").

But lots of people like that kind of thing. Amélie had its fair share of raves 
when it came out, and eventually clawed up$173.9m worldwide 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=amelie.htm>, with a hefty $33m of that in 
the US (on an initially limited release, too). Opening there in November 2001, 
it might have benefited from a kind of post-9/11 need for syrupy escapism, but 
its success can't be dismissed as mere circumstance. It made happy faces at the 
box office in Germany, Italy, the UK, Australia, Taiwan and Argentina in 
particular, on top of its $44m French haul. It became the third highest 
grossing foreign-language film worldwide, behindCrouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/86383/crouching.tiger.hidden.dragon> and 
Life Is Beautiful <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77063/life.is.beautiful>
 (though Spirited Away, Hero, The Passion of the Christ, Bienvenue Chez Les 
Ch'tis and Ponyo have since pushed it further down the list).

Resistance to the idea, like the girl, is futile: Amélie was a significant 
film. It was one of the clearest signs of the expansion in non-English-language 
mainstream cinema in the noughties. If even the notoriously subtitle-phobic 
American market <http://screenville.blogspot.com/2011/10/hollywood-emigres.html>
 was increasingly paying out the jackpot to foreign-language films (Ang Lee's
Crouching Tiger had done $128m 
<http://boxofficemojo.com/genres/chart/?id=foreign.htm> there the year before), 
then they wouldn't go short of opportunities in the rest of the world – if they 
were accessibly plotted and glossily directed. They were no longer dependent on 
the once-a-decade hit (the last French-language hit on a similar scale had been
La Cage aux Folles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/84943/cage-aux-folles> 
in 1979) in the US market, or the best foreign film Oscar connection, to make a 
name. The new breed of slick foreign film had the boominginternational box 
office scene 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/aug/11/hollywood-international-box-office>
 to milk, and the range and frequency of non-Hollywood-originated mainstream 
hits that followed Amélie was a revelation:Kung Fu Hustle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/106562/kung.fu.hustle>, The Motorcycle 
Diaries <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/101700/motorcycle.diaries>, The 
Lives of Others <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/apr/13/worldcinema.drama>, 
Oldboy <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102821/oldboy>, Downfall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/105032/downfall>, District 9 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/sep/03/district-9-review>, Slumdog 
Millionaire <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126911/slumdog-millionaire>, 
to name just a few. It was out of the arthouse, and into the multiplex.

Amélie's American jaunt confirmed this broadening appeal. But, in 2001, it 
lingered on a kind of threshold. While Jean-Pierre Jeunet's funky directorial 
style,as Andrew Pulver noted in his reappraisal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/oct/13/amelie-film-review>, was 
forward-looking, Amélie was at heart an old-school export picture – packaging 
up iconic French culture (the Sacré-Coeur, Renoir, bistros, crème brûlée) as 
dutifully as an open-top bus tour. It relied on the tried-and-tested pull of 
beautifully photographed exotica that madeThe Last Emperor 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77920/last.emperor> and Cinema Paradiso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76427/cinema.paradiso> crossover darlings 
in the 80s.

Many of the global non-English-language brigade that followed Amélie binned 
this tourist's take and opted for grittier routes into their cultures. City of 
God began with thechicken's-eye view 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZKSyXpLIWA&feature=related> of the favelas, 
and didn't get much more elevated than that. Directors from Danny Boyle to 
Alfonso Cuarón chose to take the back-alley route through their milieus, 
shooting in the shaky, handheld idiom that seemed more appropriate for 
capturing the on-the-fly dynamism of globalisation. Something shifted during 
the decade, with export cinema getting down'n'dirty and closer to the local 
point of view. Not everyone adjusted quickly: even Miramax, while they were 
giving Amélie the marketing spritz in 2001, pulled out of financing City of God 
up front because, says its director, "they didn't believe in it".

Amélie didn't bother to adjust to the 21st century at all. It revelled in its 
Eurodisneyfication of Montmartre,as Libération's Philippe Lançon put it 
<http://www.liberation.fr/tribune/0101375904-le-frauduleux-destin-d-amelie-poulain>
. At the start of a decade of strife and realpolitik, it was already a film out 
of time, for the dreamers only. There is apivotal scene 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HYoHmxZcsTo> where Audrey Tautou realises there 
is a banal explanation for the man who appears repeatedly in the album of 
discarded photobooth headshots: he is a photobooth repairman. This 
peek-behind-the-curtainfeels like a Wizard of Oz homage 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZR64EF3OpA>, but unlike Dorothy, it doesn't 
liberate Amélie. She still needs someone else to shove her out of clotted 
fantasia, even when it threatens her happiness. She probably didn't even notice 
when the film was beaten to the foreign-language Oscar in 2002.

And yet it's Amélie, not the victor, Danis Tanovic's tough No Man's Land 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/90230/no.man.s.land>, that's back in 
2011, when strife and realpolitik seem to be all we have. Those squirrely eyes 
are clamouring from cinema billboards once again. Perhaps nostalgia and dreams 
always win.
 