
 It’s 30 years since the use of corporal punishment was outlawed in British 
state schooling.

Although I was never caned, the fear of physical punishment was an everyday 
part of my school life. This was permitted because the idea ofin loco parentis, 
meant teachers were seen as authority figures and granted the same rights as 
parents. In its official form, the punishment was a cane or a slipper, usually 
a single blow but sometimes more, delivered to the hand or buttocks. In 
reality, teachers were free to use whatever punishment they saw fit and as 
students it was commonplace to have pieces of chalk or wooden board rubbers 
thrown at us. There were more unusual punishments too – a boy made to stand at 
the front of the class with his arms out wide as the teacher placed heavy books 
on each hand or a technical drawing ruler with the word OUCH written backwards 
in chalk so you were marked for the day. Teachers chose their slippers 
carefully - the gym shoe was a favourite – and they often gave them names.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcorporal-punishment-jon-walter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2bd5664231ebc6b7a880a5b60df64de6ef3f300%2F0_301_852_511%2F852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I'm%20glad%20corporal%20punishment%20is%20now%20only%20found%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcorporal-punishment-jon-walter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%27m%20glad%20corporal%20punishment%20is%20now%20only%20found%20in%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fcorporal-punishment-jon-walter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2bd5664231ebc6b7a880a5b60df64de6ef3f300%2F0_301_852_511%2F852.jpg>
 Jon Walter: the fear of physical punishment was an everyday part of my school 
life. Photograph: PR 
There was a one particular incident that became infamous and it didn’t involve 
just one child; it was a punishment of epic proportions. I was 12 years old 
when this happened, so still in my first year of secondary school. It began as 
I was leaving school one afternoon. A fight had broken out near the school 
gates. There was a ruck of boys and I tried to get closer to see what was 
happening. As the school emptied, the crowd grew until it spilled out onto the 
road and it took the arrival of the police to disperse us.

The next morning, our headmaster called an emergency assembly. He was a little 
man with a booming voice and a previous career in the military. He stood at the 
front of the sports hall and asked for anyone who had witnessed the fight to 
come forward. He pledged that nothing would happen to the boys that volunteered 
but if he found out later that we hadn’t owned up then we’d be for the high 
jump. He pulled a few boys out to the front and, slowly, other boys were 
encouraged to join them. After five minutes there were maybe 50. But the 
Headmaster appealed for more. He said he’d seen the size of the crowd himself, 
so he knew there were others, but I stayed where I was, my shaking legs still 
crossed in front of me.

Jon Walter: I had an idea, a scene of a boy believing he’d been kidnapped by 
God
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/14/jon-walter-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize-longlistee-interview>
I remember a point when everything changed, when the atmosphere turned from 
being very serious to a bit jokey. More boys were going to the front. They were 
thinking it must be all right if there’s this many of us. He can’t punish us 
all. It began to look cool to be up there and there were boys I knew who hadn’t 
been at the fight but were still standing up.

And I was thinking: What’s the best thing to do? Shall I go with the rest of 
them? But I still didn’t budge.

In the end there must have been 200 boys crowded at the front of the hall. 
They were looking smug. Some of them were giggling. The headmaster called for 
silence. He told us he’d never been so ashamed of his school as he had been 
yesterday. And then he said he’d cane every last one of them.

First chapter! My Name's Not Friday by Jon Walter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/ng-interactive/2015/jul/14/extract-my-names-not-friday-jon-walter>
The rest of us were sent back to our lessons as the slaughter began. Every 
classroom had boys who were missing. I was in French with Dr Franolic, a 
likeable man that let you stare out of the window during his lesson and I 
watched the boys drift back in ones and two’s, holding their hands against 
their chests.

And I was more scared than I’d ever been.

I was sure someone would tell on me. I expected a runner to come knocking on 
the classroom door and ask for me by name and I knew my punishment would be 
worse for not coming forward with the others. Guilt and the fear of punishment 
can be a powerful mix. I was bound to be caught. It was only a matter of time. 
And so I made a deal with God.

I hadn’t had a particularly religious upbringing but I was at that age when 
you begin to think about these things. Did God really exist? What did religion 
have to do with right and wrong? Anyway, I prayed. I told God, if you get me 
out of this, it’ll prove you exist and then I’ll believe in you. That means 
I’ll try to be a better person. It’ll work for both of us.

Top 10 first lines in children's and teen books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/aug/10/top-10-best-opening-lines-children-teen-books>
And my prayers were answered! No-one came to the door looking for me. No-one 
snitched that I was at the fight. I got away with it.

I continued to struggle with the existence of God throughout my teenage years 
and though I no longer believe there is a God, I’m interested in what people 
believe and why. And I think teenagers are interested too. So I used that story 
as one of the starting points forMy Name’s Not Friday 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/416165/>, and it’s 
part of the wonderful process of writing that I managed to take my experience 
from a London suburb in the 1970s and use it in the American civil war of 1860.

The book features Samuel, a free black boy living in the South. In a moment of 
stress, Samuel makes a similar bargain to mine - though he does it to save his 
brother rather than himself. Unlike me, Samuel has to suffer the consequences 
of his actions when he’s taken from his orphanage and sold into slavery. Things 
don’t improve much for him either, as the civil draws ever closer.

So the book is about how we come to believe the things we do – not only 
religious belief but also cultural. I wanted to know how plantation owners 
justified themselves and how the same God served both master and slave.

The ban on corporal punishment came into force in 1986 in British state 
schools (private schools took a while longer: until 1998 in England and Wales, 
2000 in Scotland and 2003 in Northern Ireland). It didn’t feel that significant 
at the time but now I can see that it sent a message, loud and clear, that it’s 
not okay to hit children and that the promotion of fear and anxiety is not a 
strategy for teaching.

Thirty years later and it feels like history, something children will only 
come across in books. And that’s the proper place for it.

Jon Walter’s Guardian children’s book prize longlisted My Name Is Friday is 
now available in paperback from the Gaurdian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/416165/>. 
 