
Colombiana <http://www.colombiana-movie.com/> is the sort of film in which a 
caring dad yells "Hurry! Men are coming to kill us!" before dallying for 10 
minutes to tell his daughter he named her after an orchid. Nine-year-old 
Cataleya gives her parents' murderers the slip via the now-obligatory parkour 
tour of the favela, and grows into a sexy contract killer whose boyfriend 
doesn't know what business she's in. Meanwhile, on the sly, she's wreaking 
revenge on the sort of mobster whose idea of interior decor is a glass floor 
over a shark tank.

It's a film that, officially, is neither remake nor sequel – and yet, in a way 
(and not just because every beat of it is familiar as old socks) it's both. The 
director may be Olivier Megaton, but the co-writer and producer isLuc Besson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/mar/23/guardianinterviewsatbfisouthbank1>
, and he's relating the grown-up adventures ofthe little girl played by 
12-year-old Natalie Portman in Léon <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SQCdSpSaGUE>
. Besson planned a sequel called Mathilda (not to be confused with Roald Dahl's 
Matilda) but it fell by the wayside owing to rights issues. Now Mathilda has 
undergone a makeover and re-emerges as Cataleya, played by Zoe Saldana.

Léon was already a sequel of sorts, developing the intriguing minor character 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZCaCk2rzeo> played by Jean Réno in an even 
earlier Besson film, Nikita – another story about an assassin whose boyfriend 
doesn't have a clue what business she's in, and whose character arc travels 
along a similar trajectory as Cataleya's. Mind you, there's a shortage of 
character arcs for hitpeople; it's either carry on killing or develop a 
conscience, usually after meeting a child or a blind person.

Hitmen are such a fixture of modern movies that I'm waiting for contract 
killing to be touted in schools as a viable career option, but it's the 
hitwoman films, adding a hint of ovarian spice to the action formula, that 
attract most of the attention. Isn't that always the way? Jason Statham and 
company can juggle with A-K 47s and no one blinks, but give a girl a teeny-tiny 
handgun and the media erupt into debates about whether this is female 
empowerment, or entertainment for guys who like watching Chicks Who Love Guns 
videos.

The latest wrinkle is to lower the age so the hitwoman is more of a hitgirl, 
as inKick-Ass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/31/kick-ass-review-film> and Hanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141512/hanna>. Given we're told 
criminals are getting younger, that seems fair enough. At this rate, we'll soon 
be having films about hitbabies packing Glocks in their nappies, which I reckon 
is no more unfeasible than Saldana or Angelina Jolie (in Mr & Mrs Smith) or 
Mélanie Laurent (inRequiem Pour une Tueuse 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5kbxyRbBcpM>) playing stone-cold killers, even 
though their arms are so skinny they look as if they'd snap if they tried to 
squeeze the trigger on a Sig Sauer P229. It's for this reason I'm looking 
forward to Steven Soderbergh's Haywire, starring a real-life muay thai expert 
(Gina Carano) who actually looks chunky enough to be capable of giving the 
likes of Statham a proper going-over.

But then, let's face it, hitwomen need to be hotwomen, or even fitwomen in the 
latterday sense of the word "fit"; we'll never be treated to the character arcs 
ofRosa Klebb <http://www.jamesbondwiki.com/page/Rosa+Klebb> or Irma Bunt 
<http://jamesbond.wikia.com/wiki/Irma_Bunt>, which is a shame. If a female 
contract killer isn't prepared to go braless in skinny vests and micro-minis 
and Louboutins, or smuggle herself into the villain's lair disguised as a 
scantily clad hooker, the movie world isn't interested.

So whither the hitwoman? Is she stuck in a Colombiana/Nikita character arc 
forever? Maybe she should look east to the sort of exploitation that can be 
enjoyed by both sexes. I'm thinking of Japan'sLady Snowblood 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mMlONL-BR2M>, one of Tarantino's inspirations 
forKill Bill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96752/kill.bill>, which 
features levels of gushing blood that wouldn't look out of place in, say, Sam 
Peckinpah's Salad Days. Or Hong Kong'sNaked Killer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gD8OrDsQC84> films, in which the assassins 
aren't technically naked, of course, but wear sexy romper suits, keep rapists 
chained up in their basements for killing practice, and have plenty of hot 
lesbian action in the swimming pool. As The Warriors learned to their cost, the 
chicks are packed.
 