
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> at Euro 2016 
is a force on the wane. A three-times world player of the year, the headline 
act for Portugal is entering the zone marked high-end functional footballer as 
with each outing the dazzling performer who wrests contests his way recedes in 
the distance.

Ronaldo has a nightmare as Ireland bring out the devil in Belgium – Euro 2016 
Football Daily
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/jun/19/ronaldo-has-a-nightmare-as-ireland-bring-out-the-devil-in-belgium-euro-2016-football-daily>
At 31 this is understandable. Unlike England’s 1966 World Cup triumph, a 
sonnet by Shakespeare or a burgundy grand cru, elite athletes do not age well. 
Ronaldo’s spluttering stop-start display in thisgoalless draw with Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
 was the latest evidence. As a presence Ronaldo, with his matinée idol grin, 
Tarzan physique and aura of other, remains the numero uno, le grand fromage.

In this regard the modest demeanour and for-the-team-first ethos of Lionel 
Messi is a pale shadow of the man from Madeira. But Messi remains the central 
figure in games because of his play rather than his reputation and sideshow 
antics. The Argentinian still demands the ball in all areas because the first 
thought is: “I can hurt the opposition from anywhere.” This was once the 
Ronaldo way but not any more. His is now the safer sentiment of: “My moment 
must be chosen carefully.”

Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> may be the 10th-ranked 
nation in the world but would a defence of Florian Klein, Sebastian Prödl, 
Lukas Hinteregger and Christian Fuchs really have stymied the powers of a 21-, 
25- or 28-year-old Ronaldo?

Because this is what Marcel Koller’s back four did at a canter here in 
Saturday’s late kick-off. There was a wait to see if Ronaldo would drop deep 
from the No9 position in which Fernando Santos fielded him, in an attempt to 
pull the match round but he stayed in the same role for the full 90 minutes.

For Manchester United and then Real Madrid the in-pomp Ronaldo was never 
passive. He was a fearless bucking bronco of a forward who with ease and great 
delight tore through teams at will to ensure their challenge became one of mere 
damage limitation.
Ronaldo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Cristiano%20Ronaldo&team=Portugal&isSimple=true>
In Real’s scruffy 1-0 Champions League semi-final defeat of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/real-madrid-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 last month Ronaldo was peripheral. In theSan Siro showdown with Atlético Madrid
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 that ended in penalty shoot-out victory and an 11th European Cup for Real, 
Ronaldo was peripheral.

Well, he was until the lottery of the spot-kicks. For the decisive penalty up 
stepped Ronaldo to give Jan Oblak no chance with a bullet that beat Atlético’s 
goalkeeper to his left. Yet when Ronaldo did become a factor against Austria to 
winPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> an 80th-minute 
penalty, converting this one proved beyond him.

Now was the time for the No7 to mark his record 128th cap by grabbing the 
glory with a late winner. But the manner in which the effort came off Robert 
Almer’s right post and went safe was a neat precis of where Ronaldo now is: 
still a riveting watch but not the universe beater of days of yore.

Santos, as all good coaches do, is backing him to bounce back instantly. “If 
there is a penalty in the next game, Cristiano Ronaldo will take it and he will 
score,” he said on Sunday. “He is used to scoring goals, he is a winner and he 
also reacts well when he makes a mistake. That is what we expect from him.”

After the match Ronaldo said of his appearance record: “It’s a reason to be 
proud. It was a goal to be the most capped international player and to be the 
national team’s top scorer. But I’m a bit sad because this wasn’t the way I 
wanted to break this record. We wanted to win. This was not how I envisaged it.

“We had a lot of chances and we did well but we weren’t able to finish. I also 
missed some chances – a penalty and some others. But that’s part of football. 
We need to continue to believe, and once again we thank the Portuguese fans who 
were here and also the ones who were supporting us from elsewhere. I’m sure 
Portugal will give their best in the next match and, if you try, you’ll always 
make it.”

Cristiano Ronaldo’s missed penalty thwarts Portugal against Austria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
Portugal’s record after two matches here is no wins, one goal, two draws and 
two points, as they head to Lyon on Wednesday knowing a win over Hungary is a 
must.

“We, the players, need to think that it’s still possible,” Ronaldo added. “If 
we win, we qualify. And also the Portuguese people, the fans who love Portugal, 
they also have to believe. The bad won’t last for ever, so we need to believe 
that things will get better.”

They could, indeed, still do it. But on the personal level that has always 
driven Ronaldo, it appears the best of times are gone. CR7 is still the most 
hypnotic of dramatis personae but for differing reasons now. The Ronaldo 
sideshow is becoming the main event.
 