
When the shadows dip behind a churchyard somewhere in England's shires, it 
would be no surprise to glimpse David Gower on his way to evensong with 
Sebastian Coe and Tim Henman. They are great English sportsmen all, but 
possessed of those sovereign and gentlemanly qualities that elevate them above 
mere excellence. Last week,Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> joined them. The young, dark 
and beautiful Essex left-hander has left his shimmering mark on this most 
anointed of Ashes series, providing figures that could melt the egg stains on 
an MCC member's tie. It can't be long before he's knighted and he's a shoo-in 
for Sports Personality of 2011.

To become an English sporting hero, you must become what so many other 
Englishmen aspire to be. You don't even need to be an outright winner, just 
display effortlessness and nobility. Not for Cook the slightly vulgar 
embellishments and accoutrements of that Pietersen fellow. Just straightforward 
application, concentration and selflessnessâ€¦ like an archer at Agincourt.

You must be morally upright and of steadfast rectitude. Or, at least, appear 
so. There are exceptions, of course, like poor, bewilderedPaul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne>, whose transgressions we 
will yet remember with fondness if he could only be healed of his illness. And 
then there are people such as Frank Bruno, Henry Cooper and Ian Wright. They 
are from the soap opera neighbourhoods and England confers heroic status upon 
them too, but only if they know their place.

Yet why is it that elsewhere we seem to prefer our sporting heroes to be cast 
from a rougher mould? In Scotland and Ulster, we make statues to commemorate 
Jimmy Johnstone and Jim Baxter. In Belfast, an airport is named afterGeorge Best
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/george-best>. We still weep for Benny 
Lynch and Alex "Hurricane" Higgins. In Fife, they still talk in hushed tones of 
Jocky (Lord of the Oche) Wilson. For, while God lavished extravagant gifts upon 
His Celtic heroes, they were also visited by demons and addictions. Their 
careers were brilliant but brief; undone by wine and whisky.

The winters in Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> are longer 
and darker, so hard, warm liquor provided light and respite, no matter how 
transitory. When a sporting prince is raised up from among them he will be less 
well-equipped to handle the relentless scrutiny and demands to perform. So, we 
indulge them when they tumble from the carousel. Cook, Henman and Coe may peer 
out at us from Thomas Gray's "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard", but in 
the land of the Celts our scabrous heroes are fighting in a Hieronymus Bosch 
painting. It would be impossible to have a Scottish or Irish equivalent of 
Henman or Cook in the same way that there could never be an English Billy 
Connolly. Yet the Celts would have embraced those 70s carousers, Frank 
Worthington and Stan Bowles.

In England, assorted lifetime privileges accrue to those who attain the status 
of sporting royalty. An MBE, perhaps, or knighthood. Even an appearance on
Desert Island Discs and the chance to be part of England's cursed World Cup 
bids. And when these golden weeks in Perth, Sydney and Adelaide have passed 
into folklore, Matthew Macfadyen will be summoned to portray Alastair Cook.

At the Celtic fringes, an early death and a pauper's grave too often await our 
sporting princes. And while England admired George Best's talent, it never 
understood his affliction.
 