
“Don’t despair,” came the resounding cry from the earnest, energetic left on 
Friday. Despair is, after all, the enemy of action. They say that we – by which 
I mean “the left” – must, in the aftermath of defeat, regroup and reassess,find 
out what went wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/10/labour-soul-searching-modernisers-attack-miliband-mistakes>
, then prepare, and fight. But despair? Despair breeds inertia, leaves us 
vulnerable and weak – and so we mustn’t just curl up and cry.

Except many of us did. This weekend has, for me, been like the most savage of 
hangovers. Waves of despair, punctuated by panic, anxiety, paranoia, and fear. 
A profoundweltschmerz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/16/time-dust-off-word-weltschmerz>
 and a curious lack of appetite, not to mention a high-pitched monotone in my 
left ear that sadly, this time, cannot be put down to our decrepit fridge. I 
keep remembering and then forgetting; a welcome pleasant thought will be 
interrupted by the terrifying reminder of what they are going to do to the 
Human Rights Act. As my father said, “It’s all too awful.”

I wonder how many of you, up and down the country, have been trying to hold it 
together too. I retained my composure for most of Friday, despite no sleep, 
despite returning home with the birdsong to tell my boyfriend, a public sector 
worker, the bad news, which he met by rolling over, saying sleepily but with 
cold certainty, “Well that’s my job gone, then.” I held it together on College 
Green during a BBC World Service segment and, later, as I jokingly discussed 
with friends which sunny, socialist paradise we would decamp to before they 
shut the borders. I finally broke down properly at around 6pm on Friday, when I 
allowed myself, finally, to think about my little brother, who is severely 
disabled, and what might happen to him. Whether I should grab him and run for 
the hills so that we could camp down together under warm, soft blankets and not 
come down again until the bad people have gone.

You might not even know anyone personally affected by the cuts but simply 
exhibit that most vital of traits: empathy

I would say sorry for the lack of nuance, but I’m not sorry. I’m just scared. 
This morning, we hear that Iain Duncan Smith is back in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/10/iain-duncan-smith-conservative-cabinet-david-cameron-welfare-cuts>
, pushing ahead with £12bn of welfare cuts. What exactly they will entail, we 
do not know. We do know thatofficials at the Department for Work and Pensions 
have drawn up proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/05/revealed-coalition-plans-to-slash-welfare-for-sick-poor-young-and-disabled>
 which include removing incapacity benefit for those under 25, increasing some 
aspects of the bedroom tax, and introducing stricter fit-for-work tests. 
Considering how benefits cuts under the coalitionhave already been blamed for 
people’s deaths 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/government-benefit-cuts-are-already-being--blamed-for-the-deaths-of-three-vulnerable-people-and-there-may-be-60-more-9942735.html>
 (it is hard to know how many as the DWP does not keep records on this and the 
government denies any links), you can’t help but fear the repercussions of 
further cuts.

You can call me bitter. I’m not exactly thrilled that my best childbearing 
years will take place under a government that considered getting rid of 
statutory maternity pay and does not seem to think affordable housing for young 
people is of any real importance. You can even call me a sore loser, if that is 
what it means to be scared that the vulnerable will lose everything.

There’s something vaguely embarrassing about crying about the government. It 
buys into a stereotype of left-leaning people as overly emotional and childlike 
in their naive idealism and belief that there is a better way to run the 
country than cutting services to the bone.

But those of us who cried over the election result should not feel 
embarrassed. Perhaps you have an auntie who is facing the bedroom tax, or a 
child requiring hospital treatment. Perhaps you have a friend who works for a 
disability charity, who has posted on Facebook that they are having to direct 
people towards the Samaritans following the election result, perhaps you have a 
disability yourself and the creeping fear of abandonment and destitution that 
you so fiercely hoped would vanish returned, on Friday, in all its potent, 
mundane horror. You might not even know anyone personally affected by the cuts 
but simply exhibit that most vital of traits: empathy. It’s an emotion so often 
derided as a weakness of the left, but it is our strength. We mustn’t abandon 
it.

Labour’s leader is not the problem. The party’s missing soul is | Zoe Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/11/labour-missing-soul-burnham-umunna-cooper-disconnected-values>
Despite the Tories’ efficient media facade, it’s obvious that much of their 
campaigning was predicated on emotion. It relied on fear, jealousy and 
suspicion of other members of our communities (why is he, my neighbour, sitting 
at home when I am working every hour that God sends to support my family? Why 
am I out of work, when she, an immigrant, is earning a regular wage?) In 
contrast, Labour’s campaign was curiously emotionless. There were some great 
policies, policies I agreed with: the mansion tax, removing non-dom status, 
raising the minimum wage,abolishing zero-hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/01/very-difficult-to-live-on-zero-hour-contract-says-george-osborne>
. This was all good stuff, and yet as a party Labour still failed to connect 
with thousands of voters.

There are some who are saying that Labour was too left-wing, yet unlike the 
SNP, it failed to challenge austerity in any meaningful way, failed to 
encourage the passionate pride we should be taking in our welfare state. It 
failed to tell the stories of those who suffered most. It failed to listen. 
Instead, it said: “Labour is not the party of people on benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/17/labour-vows-to-reduce-reliance-on-food-banks-if-it-comes-to-power>
,” repeating a mantra about “working people” that failed to understand that our 
communities are made up of both groups of citizens – that people on and off 
benefits live side by side, queuing in the same post offices, visiting the same 
shops, sending their kids to the same schools. That most working families are 
only14 days away from the breadline 
<http://www.legalandgeneral.com/library/protection/sales-aid/Q40994.pdf> should 
they lose their main breadwinner. It failed to realise that a significant 
proportion of people in this country refuse to look over their garden fences 
and ask, “Why him? Why her? Why my taxes?” because they have more heart than 
that.

And it’s that, I think, that makes the whole thing so sad. Aside from the fear 
that we or our loved ones will struggle to survive this time around, it’s also 
all the people out there in this country who did not want this government, 
whose hearts, whose empathy, whose compassion have all gone to waste.

• This article was amended on 11 May 2015 to remove an incorrect statement 
that in 2014, government figures showed that 10,600 people had died within six 
months of being found fit for work byAtos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos>.
 