
Human beings crave the familiar: almost anything that disrupts routine 
stresses us out in a major way. When Guardian readers woke up to a spanking 
new, re-launched website last year, they filled feedback forms with protest. A 
new iPhone operating system is released and forums quickly flood with 
complaints. Facebook updates its app, and the sky is falling. Then, at some 
point, and we can’t really say exactly when or why this happens, the new 
becomes the normal and everything is just fine, setting up the reaction for the 
next change (rinse and repeat).

Bryce Harper will make baseball fun again. You better believe it | DJ Gallo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/07/bryce-harper-making-baseball-fun-mlb>
For a sport that has moved slowly over the years, on and off the field, 
baseball has been going through a period of rapid change. While talent engage 
in acivil war over the right to self expression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/07/bryce-harper-making-baseball-fun-mlb>
, instant replay has continued to evolve, there’s been a crack down on
time-wasting <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bOItMY3osQ>, and now, following 
the 2014 “Buster Posey” blocking home plate rule change, players have been 
instructed further on how to slide, this time into second base. The new“Chase 
Utley” sliding rule <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iL2KsomXxbU> has rattled 
the cages of fans, players and managers, mostly because they can’t handle the 
disruption to the way the game has been played for over 125 years, which is 
understandable.


A few years back a Guardian editor, an Englishman new to baseball, asked me 
“why a fielder has to touch every base except second to get a runner out [on a 
force play]?” It was a great question, and the answer was, if shortstops or 
second basemen don’t get away from the bag as quickly as possible, they risk 
getting completely and totally obliterated by a runner seeking to break up a 
double play. Until now, I never gave much thought as to the logic behind the 
answer, which, I suppose was my default into baseball is a “hard nosed game” 
mode. Suddenly, it’s never been more clear, that actually, we’ve been playing 
the game incorrectly for over 125 years.

One more time, for clarification, here’s the rule:

 * Runner may contact the fielder in the course of a legal slide 
 * Legal slides require runner to slide before base and attempt to stay on base
 * Runners may not deviate from path to initiate contact with fielder 
Yes, shortstop and second basemen should be permitted to fulfill their 
baseball obligations by touching second base without the risk of being creamed 
by an incoming runner, regardless of the noise that has been emitting from 
stands, studios, dugouts and clubhouses.
Jon Weisman (@jonweisman) 
Personally, I believe the "Chase Utley Rule" should be called the "It Happened 
to a New York Team Rule."
 <https://twitter.com/jonweisman/status/718643090613886977> April 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jonweisman/status/718643090613886977> John Jastremski 
(@john_jastremski) 
Another game ends because of this ridiculous slide rule.... Absolute joke!!
 <https://twitter.com/john_jastremski/status/718641544773763072> April 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/john_jastremski/status/718641544773763072> Pedro Martinez 
(@45PedroMartinez) 
Four days into the season I'm sure MLB's committee is already sitting down 
about the slide rule. This is too much and is costing games
 <https://twitter.com/45PedroMartinez/status/718644292269522944> April 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/45PedroMartinez/status/718644292269522944> 
It’s not easy to disagree with Pedro, believe me.

It took well over a century, and a controversial play by Chase Utley, breaking 
the leg of Ruben Tejada in the NLDS last October, not to mention theChris 
Coghlan’s rolling into the Pirates’ second baseman Jung-ho Kang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEj7slTe7a4&nohtml5=False>, but here we are, 
finally set to eliminate a senseless act of disrupting a double play in a way 
that can break ankles and snap ligaments, and there isnothing messy 
<https://twitter.com/YESNetwork/status/718846547631349760> about that. 

What’s been less discussed in baseball circles is that aside from turning 
yourself into a torpedo, if a runner times his slide right, as the rule says, 
he can still contact and interfere with the fielder. That means a runner can 
still break up a double play, and do it in a “hard nosed baseball way” - you 
just can’t mangle someone with a ridiculous wild aggressive slide. And for the 
baserunner there could be even more opportunity break up a double play because 
the neighborhood play is now reviewable: that means the fielder actually has to 
be on second base to touch the bag or risk a manager challenging an out call.

The change does mean that players are re-learning methodologies that have been 
with them since high school or earlier. Some players, like Chase Utley, who was 
back at it on Opening Day,gunning for a catcher on a slide at home 
<https://twitter.com/richhsu/status/717139445573685248>, are going to have to 
figure out how to play this game without risking their colleagues careers with 
reckless actions. So far, we’ve seen three incidents: two have cost ballgames. 
It’s an unfortunate side-effect, but that is why MLB began going through this 
adjustment during Spring Training and into the regular season, with the hope 
that incidents decline into October and the playoffs.

Big League brass are not going to change this rule 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/baseball-s-slide-rule-isn-t-changing-anytime-soon--and-players-need-to-accept-it-030946988.html>
 and they should not change this rule. At some point, the early slide will 
become routine, and making a mistake on timing will be seen as absent minded as 
forgetting the infield fly rule, an embarrassment for the perpetrator. It may 
take a season or two, but eventually, it will become the new normal. Baseball 
and its players will all be better for it.

Scully says

Iconic broadcaster Vin Scully was honored before his 67th home opener in Los 
Angeles on Monday before the Dodgers faced the visiting Diamondbacks. Scully, 
now 88 years of age, had Dodger Stadium’s street named after him and was joined 
on the field by other legends including Sandy Koufax and Don Newcombe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drwv7nLT5_Y4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drwv7nLT5_Y4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Drwv7nLT5_Y4&media=>
 It was Vin Scully’s final opening day, 67 years after his very first call in 
1950 for the then Brooklyn Dodgers. 
All of this means is that the beginning of the end is underway and for many in 
LA and across the baseball world who idolize the Voice of God, the freakout has 
begun. There are any number of superlatives that I could drop here to speak of 
the importance of Scully, who began his career when the Dodgers were in 
Brooklyn and Harry Truman was in the White House, but none of them would really 
be enough. Instead, here’s a quote from the Dodgers’ president Stan Kasten, via 
theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/sports/baseball/a-few-words-about-vin-scully-a-storyteller-who-has-seen-it-all.html?_r=0>
, that really says it all:

“Now, here’s the thing,” Kasten said. “[Brooklyn president and GM] Branch 
Rickey, before he was an executive, was a major league player. He broke in with 
the St. Louis Browns in 1905. So Vin Scully has discussed baseball with major 
leaguers who were here from 1905 through yesterday, O.K.? Who can do that? No 
one. There’s one person on the planet. It’s Vin Scully.”

I’m sure that I am not alone when I say that I’ll be listening to as many 
Dodgers games as I can this season. I’ll also jott down the most Scully-ish 
bits and bytes for use in this space. Feel free to send your favorites to
david.lengel.freelance@theguardian.com 
<mailto:david.lengel.freelance@theguardian.com>


It’s only April but...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fmlb-slide-rule-stop-whining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f29ba3567414994a350a6c6e21fb2579cf8bc9%2F0_82_2680_1607%2F2680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20it's%20time%20to%20stop%20whining%20about%20MLB's%20new%20slide%20rule%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fmlb-slide-rule-stop-whining%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20it%27s%20time%20to%20stop%20whining%20about%20MLB%27s%20new%20slide%20rule%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fmlb-slide-rule-stop-whining%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f29ba3567414994a350a6c6e21fb2579cf8bc9%2F0_82_2680_1607%2F2680.jpg>
 In the face. Photograph: Rob Carr/Getty Images 
1. Before suffering their first loss of the season Wednesday to Boston, the 
Baltimore Orioles flew off to a 7-0 start as they bid to reach the post-season 
for the third time in five seasons. The O’s miraculously managed to hang on to 
first baseman Chris Davis, catcher Matt Wieters and reliever Darren O’Day while 
trading for outfielder Mark Trumbo and adding starter Yovani Gallardo to 
replace the departed Wei-Yin Chen - so far so great. No one will be shocked to 
hear they lead the AL in several offensive categories, but so far,O’s hurlers 
have the third best team ERA in the league 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/baltimore-orioles/post/_/id/652/maybe-its-time-to-start-believing-in-the-baltimore-orioles>
, which is certainly unexpected.

2. Jonathan Papelbon has yet to reach for his junk as the Dusty Baker era got 
off to a badly needed fast, 6-1 start in Washington 
<http://www.sportsonearth.com/article/171940402/dusty-baker-perfect-for-nationals-busy-bee>
. After a handful of games the lineup is basically newly acquired Daniel 
Murphy, who already has two jacks, and reigning MVP Bryce Harper. A lack of 
cohesive offense has been boosted by Stephen Strausburg, Gio Gonzalez, Max 
Scherzer and company, who along with a stingy bullpen look a lot more like DC’s 
more formidable 2014 staff.

3. The Mets look a lot more like the run-starved June version 
<http://www.newsday.com/sports/baseball/mets/mets-offense-suffering-from-a-common-cold-1.11675252>
 than the juggernaut that jumped into the playoff race in July. That said, the 
vibe around the franchise this spring,one buoyed by hot rods and horses 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/Cespedes-Rides-to-Practice-on-Hot-Rods-Horse--370644921.html>
, has been taken down a notch. The post-passed blood clot Matt Harvey is still 
working his way into form, Jacob deGrom, following the birth of his first son, 
may be heading to the disabled list with lat issues, and Steven Matz got lit up 
on Monday. On Wednesday, Terry Collins managed the eighth game of the season 
like it was October, running out Jeurys Familia for a five out save. After 
scoring just six runs in four straight home losses, New York got the must-win 
they absolutely had to have, barely, 2-1. But forget the win, it’s clear that 
the Mets’ season-long coronation has hit a hitch … already.

4. You may have heard, Billy Hamilton set a very prestigious “Stat Cast” record
 <http://m.mlb.com/cutfour/2016/04/11/171796076> on Monday, rounding the bases 
in 16.2 seconds during the Reds’ loss in Chicago on the Cubs’ opening night.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRcUsHfe8dEM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRcUsHfe8dEM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRcUsHfe8dEM&media=>
 Billy Hamilton is fast. 
5. Before stunning the circuit with seven home runs in his first six games, 
Trevor Story was a mid-level prospect known for walking little and striking out 
a lot. Now the rookie with a historic achievement in his back pocket is living 
up to that billing, with the inevitable, expected, and really, completely and 
totally fine decline underway.He whiffed three times 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/15194172/trevor-story-colorado-rockies-falls-earth-hitless-game-vs-san-francisco-giants>
 on Tuesday against Jeff Samardzija and the Giants and failed to connect for 
another home run on Wednesday, which again, is fine.

6. Meanwhile, Robinson Cano has been knocking chips off his shoulder and into 
the stands with regularity <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P3Ou7WjTDmQ>. The 
Mariners’ second baseman, who suffered through an abysmal first half of the 
season in 2015, is out to prove his woeful campaign was nothing but a bad 
dream, and hit his fifth homer on Wednesday off of Texas’s Alex Claudio. He’s 
definitely angry, and at least for the moment, is on pace to hit 90 home runs ( 
I couldn’t resist).

7. On Monday, the scorching hot, 7-1, Kyle Schwarber-less Chicago Cubs walked 
into their newly renovated digs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fted_NBIE6I&nohtml5=False> deep under Wrigley 
Field and discovered that they no longer have aJUCO-level 
<http://www.njcaa.org/sports/bsb/index> clubhouse. The gorgeous, circular 
shaped room allows everybody to see everyone so that they can hold each other 
accountable, together, as a team, when they fail to win a World Series for the 
108th year. Included among the amenities is a post-game dance-party room that 
will be available to host bar mitzvah celebrations in early October.

8. ICYMI: down four runs to the Braves early and on the verge of their worst 
start to a season in forever, legions of St Louis Cardinals-haters were 
ecstatic, knowing that this could be the start of their season of misery, the 
one they’ve waited years to watch and enjoy.Just innings from being 0-4 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/ATL/ATL201604080.shtml>, St Louis 
somehow connected for an MLB record three pinch hit home runs, from the likes 
of rookie Aledmys Diaz, Greg Garcia, and another rookie, Jeremy Hazelbaker, out 
of absolutely nowhere, and rallied to win 7-4. Then St Louis ripped off three 
more wins while thumbing their noses at naysayers while business as usual 
returned to Busch Stadium.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOI7hcb89U1k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOI7hcb89U1k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOI7hcb89U1k&media=>
 It never happens, but for St Louis it happens all the time. 
9. Zack Greinke was back in LA as Arizona on Monday for the Dodgers home 
opener. The righty hurler who left town to sign a six-year $206m deal with the 
Diamondbacks was quick to point out he didn’t leave because of an alleged issue 
with Cuban outfielder Yasiel Puig, saying “Honestly, that had zero to do with 
anything.” More obvious were his remarks after getting hit by the Cubs his last 
time out. “I’ve got to start pitching better here on out.” Greinke gets another 
shot on Friday when Arizona face the Padres in San Diego.

Click here for the Major League Baseball standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp>
 