
Almost any story is almost certainly some kind of lie," says Orson Welles in F 
for Fake <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F_for_Fake>. That goes double for 
soi-disant documentaries that test the viewer's credulity.Exit Through the Gift 
Shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/04/exit-through-the-gift-shop-review>
,I'm Still Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/im-still-there-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and Catfish leave you wondering who is fooling whom. Unless the film-makers 
fess up, it's hard to spot where fact ends and fiction begins, but the debate 
generates column inches, which is gold dust for a film without a big marketing 
budget.

Such documentaries are playing on a long tradition of juggling degrees of 
truth, or weighting it for propaganda purposes. Robert Flaherty was 
retrospectively criticised for having faked elements ofNanook of the North 
<http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20050925/REVIEWS08/509250301>
 (Nanook's two "wives", for example, were played by the film-maker's own 
girlfriends), but in the 1920s it was accepted practice for documentarians 
to stage or recreate scenes.

While it's not as simple as cooking up the sort of literary hoax perpetrated by
Chatterton <http://www.cbc.ca/arts/books/hoaxes.html>, Vian 
<http://www.stewarthomesociety.org/sex/tam.htm> or Frey, the techniques of 
cinema might have been designed to encourage deceit; events that appear to be 
shot in one place are filmed elsewhere, while dubbed sound, editing and special 
effects manipulate the raw material. Documentaries, like historical epics and 
biopics, are often faulted for twisting the facts, but it's hard to define 
facts in a medium that requires its practitioners to make creative choices and 
impose structure in order to make a watchable film.

Welles, of course, became one of the godfathers of modern sham in 1938, with 
the Mercury theatre's radio adaptation ofThe War of the Worlds 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_War_of_the_Worlds_(radio)> as a series of 
simulated news bulletins; he flirted with the truth again in F for Fake, which 
was part hoax, part true story. The legend "Based on a true story" is an 
established convention of fictional drama, from The Amityville Horror toThe 
Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/the-social-network-review>, but 
the vogue for mockumentary, from Zelig onwards, and faux-found footage, 
prefigured inCannibal Holocaust 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cannibal_Holocaust> and Snuff, went into 
overdrive with the increased affordability of camcorders, since this is a type 
of storytelling that thrives on amateur production values. The spread of 
internet access further muddied the waters by enabling the makers of, for 
example, The Blair Witch Project to drop prerelease hints that their horror 
story was not a figment of the imagination, but really did happen.

All the world loves a hoax, and today's pop cultural conmen are acclaimed 
rather than condemned: Paul Kaye, Chris Morris and Sacha Baron Cohen have all 
assumed aliases to make chumps out of interviewees in postmodern variations on 
Candid Camera. It's but a short step to the faux-or-not doc; though if the 
French-born film-maker featured in Exit Through the Gift Shop is a fictional 
character, as some believe, it would have taken years of meticulous planning to 
establish his back story, a process which begins to smack ofDavid Maurer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Maurer>'s "big con", and echoes the rubber 
realities depicted in The Matrix or The Truman Show, in which life itself is 
exposed as a fraud.

Fakery is now so ingrained in popular culture that we've become suspicious of 
anything claiming to present truth. The French documentaryOceans 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xjy5rlYNvK0> was full of astonishing images of 
long and winding sea snakes, or trillions of tiny fish arranging themselves 
into shimmering spheres. Yet when, at the end of the credits, one reads that 
footage of a shark getting its fins cut off and being flung back into the ocean 
to die was "reconstitué", it makes us question everything else we've seen.

Likewise, we're continually questioning the authenticity of what happens in a 
film such as Catfish. But now we've started using those same bullshit detectors 
to look at everything, whether it's TV talent shows with rigged results, or 
news items about Germans castrating their daughters' boyfriends in towns that 
may or may not exist. At its most extreme, suspicion can tip over into paranoid 
conspiracy theorising, but it also encourages us to look at events such as the 
royal engagement with a sceptical eye, and ask how much is being stage-managed 
to divert attention from more important news stories. Of course, that just 
leaves us with the problem of working out which of those news stories are 
"Based on a true story" and which are mockumentaries.
 