
The image of a buttoned-down Tim Cook kicking the pimped-out tyres of Jay Z’s 
most expensive vehicle may seem an anomalous one, but according to the Wall 
Street Journal it could actually happen as the Apple CEO considers making a bid 
for the music streaming serviceTidal <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tidal>.

While still at the speculation stage, it initially reads as counterintuitive. 
Why would Apple, whose own Apple Music has gone from a standing start a year 
ago to 15 million subscribers, want to buy a service that is a fraction of its 
size? Tidal claims to have 4.2 million subscribers, but there are questions as 
to how many of them will stay the distance as they were hooked in with a hat 
trick of exclusives this year from Beyoncé, Kanye West and Rihanna, plusholding 
some of Prince’s back catalogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/07/tidal-uploads-rarities-from-prince-back-catalogue>
. As Apple has proved with the iPod, iTunes, the iPhone and the iPad, its skill 
lies in taking existing ideas and products, perfecting them and catapulting 
them into the mainstream. The history of Tidal would suggest it is in desperate 
need of being perfected.

Apple considering takeover bid for Tidal, Jay Z's music-streaming service – 
reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/01/apple-tidal-jay-z-takeover-bid-music-streaming-service>
Originally launched in Scandinavia as WiMP, it was a niche but well-regarded 
service whose parent company Aspiro was acquired by Project Panther, an 
investment group fronted by Jay Z, for $54m last March. Its public launch as 
Tidal was a ludicrous carnival of megalomania, where Jay Z wheeled out his 
famous friends – including Madonna, Daft Punk, Rihanna, Drake and his wife,
Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> – to sign a “declaration” 
saying they would support the service and give it exclusives. They also got 
equity in the service as part of the deal.

This folly of a launch proved an omen for how things would subsequently play 
out. Madonna immediately premiered her video for Ghosttown on live-streaming 
app Meerkat instead of Tidal. After that, Drake defected to Apple, which 
bankrolled his Hotline Bling video and he returned the favour by giving Apple 
Music the initial exclusive on his Views album in April this year. In October, 
during atrial relating to sampling on his Big Pimpin’ track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/21/jay-z-wins-copyright-infringement-case-big-pimpin-sample>
, Jay Z was asked to list his business interests. He failed to mention Tidal 
and when it was brought up said, “Yeah, yeah. Forgot about that.”

On and on the calamities barreled. Its first big exclusive in 2016 was 
Rihanna’s Anti in January, but it went live early, was pulled, then reappeared 
with Samsung bankrolling 1m free downloads of a release that was supposed to 
promote streaming. In February, Kanye West put his The Life Of Pablo album on 
Tidal, saying it would be never be available anywhere else.That lasted until 
April when other services got it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/01/kanye-west-life-of-pablo-stream-download-spotify-itunes-tidal>
. Some stability returned later that month with the release of Beyoncé’s 
Lemonade,which was a genuine event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/26/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-becky-pop-culture>
, but there was a growing sense that Tidal was turning into the punchline to a 
gruesome joke. That could all have dented its value, and perhaps Apple now sees 
an opportunity here where others see catastrophe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fapple-buying-tidal-jay-z-beyonce-music-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15535943efb04da24d79d32b86cff4ff24bbfe3%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20would%20Apple%20want%20to%20buy%20Tidal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fapple-buying-tidal-jay-z-beyonce-music-streaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20would%20Apple%20want%20to%20buy%20Tidal%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fapple-buying-tidal-jay-z-beyonce-music-streaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15535943efb04da24d79d32b86cff4ff24bbfe3%2F0_111_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Rihanna, Nicki Minaj, Madonna, Deadmau5, and Kanye West onstage at the Tidal 
launch event. Photograph: Jamie McCarthy/Getty Images North America 
After so many public disasters, why would Apple, given its obsession with 
control, want to buy something that looks increasingly less like a Porsche and 
more like a clown car?

The first and most obvious reason would be to bulk up its market share and 
close the gap on Spotify, with its 30 million paying subscribers (out of 100 
million total users). But that is a short-term solution, a bit like hailing a 
taxi for half a mile at the start of a marathon. The longer play would appear 
to be around getting access to some of the biggest artists in the world and 
persuading them to backApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> and not, plucking a name 
out of the air totally at random, Spotify.

There was a growing sense that Tidal was turning into the punchline to a 
gruesome joke

This is not unchartered territory for Apple, as it proved with its $3bn 
acquisition of Beats in 2014, which provided the chassis for what was to become 
Apple Music. Its strategy there was as much about buying talent as it was about 
buying technology, as with Beats came the addition of Dr Dre, Jimmy Iovine and 
Trent Reznor to Apple’s team. This time it could scoop up many of the biggest 
names in pop in one move.

Spotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> has suffered publicly 
in the past from attacks by artists like Thom Yorke and Taylor Swift while 
Apple has, ever since the massively misjudged step of trying to offer 
three-month trials to Apple Music without paying royalties, been conducting a 
charm offensive among the artist community. Buying up Tidal, which has been 
trying to brand itself as the artist-friendly streaming service, could 
immediately give it the ears of the biggest pop stars on the planet. Plus, they 
will all, because they have equity in Tidal, get a windfall – which was clearly 
always the end goal with Tidal and will only further sweeten any deal with 
Apple.

Will Tidal be the next music streaming service to drown?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/tidal-next-music-streaming-service-drown>
Tidal’s value is perhaps not as high at this stage as Jay Z envisioned for it 
but, like opportunistic couples with limited DIY skills buying dilapidated 
houses to quickly flip them, he perhaps is admitting to himself that he can 
only take it so far. The streaming market is incredibly tough, with Rdio 
collapsing last year and everyone else running up huge debts as they burn 
through their funding.Jay Z <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jayz> and his 
friends might get their payday, but Apple will get the celebrity ammunition it 
hopes will crash Spotify out of the race.

The exclusives to date on Tidal have felt, primarily because of its small 
market size, like damp squibs. However, with Apple’s enormous marketing budgets 
behind them they could shoot into the sky like the Fourth of July fireworks 
while, in the corner, Spotify sits glumly holding a sparkler.
 