
It’s the nightmare scenario for pitchers: a blistering line drive off the bat 
of a big leaguer, leaving no time for hurlers to move their head or swing the 
glove up for defense.

Matt Shoemaker has surgery to stop bleeding on brain after line-drive hit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/matt-shoemaker-brain-surgery-hit-by-line-drive>
It doesn’t happen often, but when it does, it makes for chilling video and it 
makes you wonder why, with just 60 feet and six inches of space between batter 
and pitcher, why only one of those players is wearing a helmet. When you 
consider that Statcast now informs of the triple-digit speeds a ball blasts off 
of a bat, it makes you wonder even more.

We don’t have the film of Cleveland’s Herb Score being battered by Yankee 
batter Gil McDougald <http://m.mlb.com/video/topic/6479266/v7892215> in 1957, 
but we’ve seen enough of Alex Cobb, Brandon McCarthy, and the five who were hit 
in the 2015 season to get the idea just how gruesome a scenario it is. Now 
we’ve witnessed the latest pitcher to be victimized by a line drive, Matt 
Shoemaker, who was hit on Sunday by a Kyle Seager laser beam at a staggering 
105mph, fracturing his skull and forcing emergency surgeryfor subdural hematoma 
<http://www.espn.com/mlb/story/_/id/17470954/angels-matt-shoemaker-surgery-head-taking-liner>
.

Yet, when you consider the slow moving history of headgear in baseball, it’s 
not surprising that despite the threats that pitchers face daily, exactly zero 
pitchers are wearing the latest offering from Boombang, a California-based 
company working on a joint helmet development plan along with MLB and the 
Players Association. Some20 pitchers were offered the chance to try 
<http://www.espn.com/mlb/story/_/id/14765775/mlb-players-association-work-together-develop-more-protective-pitching-hat>
 the carbon fiber caps in the spring, none of whom elected to wear them during 
the regular season. The Astros pitcher Collin McHugh wears a product that 
hasn’t been tested or approved by MLB or the union, and it does not protect the 
ears.

In 1920, Indians shortstop Ray Chapman died after being hit in the head by a 
ball from Yankees pitcher Carl Mays. Major LeagueBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> banned the spitball and ordered 
dirty balls to be replaced to keep them from darting unpredictably, yet the 
first plastic inserts didn’t arrive until the 1950s, and helmets weren’t even 
mandatory until 1971.

A single ear-covering flap wasn’t standard until 12 years later, and it wasn’t 
until 2013 that we even had a batting helmet capable of withstanding speeds of 
100mph. Giancarlo Stanton was among the first to don a helmet capable of 
blocking pitches bound for the face after he was hit by Mike Fiers in 2014, but 
the custom build hasn’t caught on.

Sixty-odd years after helmets were introduced to hitters, adding on to what 
already exists represents an easier change. Pitchers are basically starting 
from ground zero – they’ve rarely worn anything but soft caps on their heads.

Even while first and third base coaches stand on the sidelines wearing head 
protection, even when dugouts have been reinforced with mesh fencing to protect 
them from line drives, even as teams begin to install more comprehensive 
netting to protect the fans from bats and balls flying into the stands, there 
is the pitcher standing solo on the mound, a sitting duck, unleashing a force 
that can come back at him even quicker than he can deliver it.

Pitchers will not make the change on their own because pitchers have a 
one-track mind – it’s not about their head, it’s not their face, it’s all about 
their arm. Tom Seaver made his wife sleep on the left side of the bed so if she 
rolled over she’d hit the left arm, not the right one which won three Cy Young 
Awards. They’re worried about Tommy John surgery and shoulder issues. A line 
drive to the face? By their decisive inaction they’ve shown that they’re 
willing to take their chances rather than add on equipment that changes routine 
and forces any adjustment.
Pirates Prospects (@pirateprospects) 
How Many Pitchers Will Wear a Weird Looking Helmet For Extra Safety? - 
https://t.co/roomjdGcvZ <https://t.co/roomjdGcvZ> #Pirates 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Pirates?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/O1EUaMR3B4 
<https://t.co/O1EUaMR3B4>
 <https://twitter.com/pirateprospects/status/701509979438784516> February 21, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/pirateprospects/status/701509979438784516> 
Reliever Mark Melancon, then with the Pittsburgh Pirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/pittsburgh-pirates> and now with the 
Washington Nationals, experimented with the caps back at spring training.

“It looks funny,” Melancon told the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review 
<http://triblive.com/sports/pirates/10013113-74/hughes-headgear-melancon> in 
February. “Just because of the looks, it might not be something that I wear 
during the season. As shallow as that seems, and I’m definitely not that guy … 
I don’t know. I’m just not there yet. Give me a little time, and maybe I’ll get 
there.”

Melancon never got there, and either did any other pitcher besides McHugh in 
2016.


In the NFL there is no concussion-proof helmet. In cricket there is no 100% 
effective form of protection, as we sadly saw when Australian batsman Phillip 
Hugheswas tragically killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/27/phillip-hughes-dies-hit-ball-cricket-match>
 after being struck by a ball just below the ear. Sports will never be 100% 
safe and all risk will never be eliminated.

However, when you’re playing blackjack, if the dealer has a face card and you 
have 16, the book says to hit, and that’s because even though the odds are well 
against you, you must give yourself the best chance to win. A pitcher wearing a 
helmet gives them the best chance to save them from a fluke tragedy, one that 
could happen at any moment. And since it seems that pitchers will never 
voluntarily wear them en masse, Major League Baseball and the Players’ Union 
must now make the decision to save them from themselves.

Video of the week

Knocking the cover off the ball is both a baseball expression and something we 
watched in The Natural <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlNLhuxeDJQ>. This 
week, it really did happen, thanks to the Mets’ Jose Reyes, albeit in less 
dramatic fashion:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWyXI55ExVlc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWyXI55ExVlc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWyXI55ExVlc&media=>
 Jose Reyes does his best Roy Hobbs impersonation. 
Quote of the week


The fourth inning, I was still pitching good in the fourth inning...

That’s Arizona “ace” Zack Greinke, who told the truth on Monday after facing 
his old team, in his old stomping grounds for the first time since leaving LA.


Then Adrian Gonzalez went deep, and then Joc Pederson, Corey Seager, Justin 
Turner and Yasmani Grandal went yard in the fifth inning. Greinke, suffering 
through the worst season of his big-league life, showed he maintains warm 
feelings for his old ballclub, allowing a career worst five home runs while the 
Dodgers compete for a playoff spot.

Who’s closer to victory: Donald Trump or the Cubs?

By now we all know that the Cubs are who we thought they were, which is a 
dominant baseball franchise on their way to over 100 victories for the first 
time since they lost the World Series in 1935. Theoretically, Chicago could 
have the NL Central wrapped up early next week, leaving us a good chunk of 
September to come up with multiple hypothetical scenarios of how their title 
hopes will blow out of the Windy City for a 108th consecutive season.

There’s no key September stretch run for the Cubbies, but Labor Day does mark 
the start of the sprint to the White House. Trump, busy touring while tweaking 
a lineup of offensive gestures and controversial remarks ahead of debate 
season, has been relatively quiet this week. However, David Ortiz did take time 
out of his retirement tour to address Trump’s dealings with the Latino 
Community.

“Latin people here in the United States are the spark plug of the country’s 
economy,” said Ortiz. “Whoever opposes that is going to lose. And not just 
Latin people, but immigrants. I’m talking about people who come from Africa, 
from Asia, other places. All those people come here with one goal, to realize 
the American dream, and you have to include them in our group.”

Getting smoked by Big Papi won’t help you win anything, so the Cubbies get the 
edge this week.


How did the kids piss off Goose Gossage this week?


Goose Gossage got more than an earful this week from the Canadian agricultural 
community: the Hunter Brothers Farm in New Brunswick unveiled a corn maze 
immortalizing the very same Jose Bautista ALDS bat flip that at least partially 
inspiredGoose’s spring time rant 
<http://www.espn.com/mlb/story/_/id/14943065/goose-gossage-rips-jose-bautista-toronto-blue-jays-nerds-ruining-baseball>
. The next Hunter Brothers creation? A corn maze depicting geeky pencil necked 
baseball executives evaluating data.

CHSJ News (@chsjnews) 
ICYMI: Hunter Brothers Farm celebrates @BlueJays <https://twitter.com/BlueJays>
 40th Season with corn maze:https://t.co/xeTTtWu1du <https://t.co/xeTTtWu1du> 
#NB <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NB?src=hash>. pic.twitter.com/X7Hx1rf1I3 
<https://t.co/X7Hx1rf1I3>
 <https://twitter.com/chsjnews/status/771268172586553344> September 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/chsjnews/status/771268172586553344> 
Nine thoughts in order

1) Baseball’s ridiculously bizarre system of 1 September roster expansion is 
back, once again allowing teams to test drive prospects and bring along 
reinforcements during the most important time of the season. Why baseball teams 
are suddenly playing by a different set of personnel rules - the roster can 
swell from anywhere between 26 and 40 players - than those which governed the 
first five months remains a mystery, one that ranks up there with the NBA rule 
that allows a team to advance the ball to half court after a timeout with two 
minutes or less in the game.


If such a system is a must have, why not allow expanded rosters in April while 
teams continue to evaluate their rosters, asformer manager Bobby Valentine has 
suggested in the past 
<http://www.cbc.ca/sports/baseball/mlb/bobby-valentine-not-a-fan-of-september-call-ups-1.1140080>
. In an era of pitching limits, that would also allow a chance to go with 
six-man rotations for a month. Yes, wins in April count the same as they do in 
September, but it’s farcical to change the way of doing business during pennant 
races.

2) Baseball fans outside of Los Angeles and throughout the world have been 
feasting on Dodgers coverage, if only to enjoy the iconic voice of Vin Scully 
during his final season of broadcasting. Some fans inside LA have been iced out 
of Scully’s last season thanks to a long running struggle between SportsNet LA, 
the Dodgers’ television network and Time Warner Cable, which has not carried 
the channel since 2014 due to contractual issues. Now, there is peace in our 
time, sort of: Charter Communications, the group operating Time Warner Cable 
after a merger, announced on Friday that it will broadcast the final six games 
of the season on KTLA, a free to air terrestrial channel, in order to make sure 
all in the area can hear Scully before he calls it quits.


3) Meanwhile, those regular season games may not be Vin’s final calls, if LA 
makes the playoffs and Scullyelects to do radio during the post-season 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/05/sports/baseball/vin-scully-farewell-tbs-television.html>
. The Dodgers, already in a strong position in the NL West, will get a boost 
after learning that Clayton Kershaw will return to the hill on Friday against 
the Marlins following a rehab stint. LA’s ace posted a 1.79 ERA and 145 
strikeouts in 121 innings in the first half of the 2016 season, and somewhat 
amazingly, the injury battered Dodgers survived well without him. Kershaw, who 
has been among the most durable arms in baseball, comes back with a guarantee:


“I’ll never get hurt again,” said the three-time National League Cy Young 
Award winner on Sunday. “It’s awful.”

4) The Pittsburgh Pirates are rapidly spiraling out of the playoff hunt. Their 
defeat on Tuesday after St Louis overcame a one-run ninth inning deficit 
courtesy of three rapid fire home runs. Despite such a frustrating stretch, the 
Buccos were seen dancing in the dugout this week.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnM5fWupv-iM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnM5fWupv-iM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnM5fWupv-iM&media=>
 The Pirates will be adding golfing to their dance routine shortly. 
Clint Hurdle either needs to dump the post-game spread or get Goose Gossage in 
to let the Buccos in on another unwritten rule: dancing in the dugout is dandy, 
as long as you’re winning.

5) The Miami Marlins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/miami-marlins> are 
another team sliding out of the wild card race. Giancarlo Stanton, lost to 
injury since the beginning of August, returned ahead of schedule on Tuesday, 
but it’s likely too late. That’s because August pain also came in the form of a 
staggering 11 one-run losses. So far in September they’ve lost just two, 
one-run games. Some of those losses came to the Padres, White Sox, Reds and 
Phillies, the kind of teams contenders feast on during the dog days of summer. 
With the Mets struggling, Miami could’ve separated themselves from their NL 
East rivals and focused on the Cardinals. Instead, these fish are fried and 
their fans are reflecting on injuries and deadline deals for players such as 
Fernando Rodney and Andrew Cashner that went wrong rather than a chance at the 
playoffs.

6) It’s a different story in Detroit where the Tigers are in the thick of a 
tough AL playoff race. They’ve won 11 of their previous 16 games as Justin 
Upton sizzles: the outfielder who has posted an OPS of over 1.110 over the past 
two weeks is making up for a lackluster start to the season while becoming a 
key piece to a deep lineup featuring Miguel Cabrera, Ian Kinsler, JD and Victor 
Martinez. Detroit ripped up the Royals, White Sox and Twins in fighting the 
Orioles, Red Sox, Blue Jays, Astros and Yankees in a crowded playoff race. 
Meanwhile, the pitching staff has jumped from 13th to second in AL team ERA 
since the All-Star break as Detroit head into the stretch run knowing they 
still have seven games remaining with the AL Central leading Indians, who they 
trail by 5.5 games.


7) The Mets may not have pitchers Matt Harvey, Steven Matz and, for the time 
being, Jacob deGrom but they do have Seth Lugo. Mets fans who wondered who the 
pitcher wearing a spring training number was just a few months back now count 
the hurler as one of the reasons for their sudden reversal of fortune. More 
specifically, it’s Lugo’s curveball that has Mets fans oggling, but they’re not 
alone: his hook is the darling of those curious enough to wonder what spin rate 
is, and Lugo has the highest rpm all of baseball sinceMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb>.com introduced statcast.

#Statcast (@statcast) 
What does the #Statcast <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Statcast?src=hash> era's 
highest-spin curveball look like?@seth_lugo <https://twitter.com/seth_lugo> 
demonstrates.https://t.co/pRKaD34Fsl <https://t.co/pRKaD34Fsl> 
pic.twitter.com/EjlbYpIECV <https://t.co/EjlbYpIECV>
 <https://twitter.com/statcast/status/771004639713955841> August 31, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/statcast/status/771004639713955841> 
Lugo was a 34th round pick in 2011, but despite being rocked at Triple-A Las 
Vegas for over 70 innings this season, he’s excelled on a big league level, 
posting a sub 1.00 WHIP and a 2.38 ERA in over 40 innings in Queens.

8) Are the Giants trying to lull us all into a false sense of security? San 
Francisco, who have won three titles in six seasons, all even years, are in 
danger of falling out of the playoff race despite the fact that ‘16 is 
divisible by two. The Giants looked like they were going to run away and hide 
before the All-Star break, enjoying a 6.5 game lead over the Dodgers on 10 
July. Since then they’ve gone 17-31 during a season where their bullpen has 
blown some 23 games. Can they turn it around? Well, consider this: the 2014 
Giants that beat Kansas City in seven games also backed into the playoffs, 
using a few hot months to reach the playoffs. That team went just 45-51 from 8 
June on, made the wild card with 88 wins, handed the ball to Madison Baumgarner 
and, well, the rest is history. So yes, we’d all be crazy to count out the 
Giants now, but they do need to start turning it around now, with the Dodgers, 
Mets and Cardinals winning nearly every day.

9) And finally, Minnesota’s Brian Dozier is on a career roll, hitting three 
home runs on Monday against the Royals:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPv0cONo8-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPv0cONo8-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPv0cONo8-w&media=>
 Brian Dozier hit home runs no36, 37 and 38 on Monday. 
Then on Tuesday he hit another against KC - his seventh in five games - which, 
well, is a lot. Dozier is up to 39 now, trailing Baltimore’s Mark Trumbo by two 
during a season in which he’s eclipsed his career high by 11 blasts. From an 
organizational point of view, it’s amazing to consider that, if and when Dozier 
hits his 40th home run, he will be the only player in the 116 year history of 
the franchise not namedHarmon Killebrew 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/killeha01.shtml> to reach that 
total.

 