
The US drama Mad Men has made celebrities of a fictional group of advertising 
men, but on this side of the Atlantic real-life ad execs are emerging as the TV 
industry's off-screen stars. Theappointment of Adam Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-chief-executive>
, the former Royal Mail chief executive who ran Saatchi & Saatchi, as ITV boss, 
one of the most powerful jobs in television, illustrates the influence that the 
image-makers now bring to bear.

His appointment came less than a week after David Abraham, who co-founded the 
fashionable advertising agency St Luke's, wasunveiled as the new C4 chief 
executive. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/22/channel-4-david-abraham-chief-executive>
 He replaces Andy Duncan, a former marketing man. And it is not just in 
commercial television that brand managers are coming to the fore.Tim Davie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/23/interview-tim-davie-bbc>, once 
responsible for safeguarding Pepsi's image in the UK, runs BBC radio and is 
tipped for a bigger role, probably as a channel controller. All were once 
employed by the big multinationals whose commercials and "idents" bankroll 
commercial television.

Comeback kid

Crozier is no stranger to media brands — his clients at Saatchi & Saatchi 
included Sky, News International and theDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> — and those who know him say 
he will have no difficulty glad-handing talent or stroking the egos of 
programme-makers.

"There is a certain coldness about him, but he is also able to switch on the 
wit and charm," says one former Saatchi colleague. Another says: "He is astute 
and very good at managing his own PR. He is a very good operator. He is like 
Mandelson, a comeback kid, and it doesn't seem to matter if he does anything 
slightly dodgy." Mandelson, of course, owes his government position to his 
skills as a media manipulator who transformed the image of the Labour party.

Why have the commanding heights of the British broadcasting industry fallen 
into the hands of a group of slick advertising men? Partly because, like 
chocolate bars or deodorant sprays, there are so many TV channels to choose 
from, and success in a crowded marketplace depends on differentiation. In the 
multichannel era, only those with the strongest hold over viewers can prevent 
them reaching for their remote controls. That is even more important when a 
dazzling array of devices – theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> iPad is just the latest – 
compete for eyeballs and consumers can also choose "time-shifted" TV.

"In a world where there is lots of noise we need clarity and an understanding 
of brands," says a programming chief. The former chairman of a major agency 
adds: "TV companies are becoming more oriented towards looking at what it is 
that consumers out there today really want. It is a rebalancing from an old 
system where it was 'hey, we make great programmes and the rest will just 
follow'. That was fine when there were only a few TV channels and viewing – and 
revenue – was a cornered market." Although Crozier is better known for his two 
most recent jobs – includingmanaging the FA during negotiations over sports 
rights <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/apr/08/itvdigital.clubsincrisis> 
– it was advertising where he first shone, becoming the agency's youngest board 
director and then the joint chief executive at the age of 31. He had worked at 
the Telegraph in media sales.

One of Abraham's main qualifications for the Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> job was the fact that, when 
running UKTV, he had successfully repositioned its family of channels, 
including UK Gold, by giving them offbeat names such as Dave and Alibi.

He replaces Duncan, a marketeer who began his career at Unilever before 
breathing new life into a free-to-air digital TV platform by calling it 
Freeview. Davie worked for Procter & Gamble and Pepsi, negotiating a famous 
deal with the Daily Mirror, which turned its masthead from red to blue in 1996 
to mark the relaunch of the soft drink, before he was poached by the BBC's 
director general,Mark Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/markthompson>
. He became the director of marketing, communications and audiences – filling 
the job Duncan had left to run Channel 4.

Television companies cannot be run in the same way as companies promoting soft 
drinks or margarine, however, and there are those who worry that the rise of 
the admen reflects a commensurate decline in the influence of programme-makers. 
Crozier's appointment has raised eyebrows because, like the ITV chairman,Archie 
Norman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, the Scotsman lacks 
broadcasting experience.

Cutting jobs

Leslie Hill, who retired in 2002 after eight years as the chairman of ITV, 
describes Crozier's appointment as: "A strange one. Someone who was more 
directly exposed to the creative industries would be more appropriate." Hill 
argues that ITV has lost many of its best programme-makers after repeatedly 
cutting jobs and trimming budgets. "That is why shows likeThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> are owned by someone 
else, and when they are sold abroad ITV doesn't get money for them," he says.

At least one member of the executive double act needs an instinctive 
understanding of the product the company is selling, he adds, and an empathy 
for those who make it. "What I think ITV needs most of all is for someone to 
understand the way creative people work and to look after them. Norman says 
Crozier has 'steely resolve'. Well great, but my experience is you have to give 
the creative people a good deal of freedom to fail … or their creativity will 
be stunted."

A senior advertising industry executive describes ITV's management duo as "an 
unbalanced team". "Archie and Adam don't know the industry. They're both quick 
studies, don't get me wrong, but people are understandably worried that there's 
going to be too much focus on cost."

When he announced Crozier's appointment on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv-transformation-norman>
, Norman addressed that issue, arguing that ITV already had plenty of 
"broadcasting stars", and mentioning the director of programmes, Peter Fincham 
– regarded by many as a candidate for the chief executive's job – by name. 
Besides, the ITV workforce has already been cut by more than 1,000 in the wake 
of a fierce recession. Programmes have been axed too, andCrozier's track record 
at the Royal Mail, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/28/adam-crozier-itv1> together with 
Norman's comments last week about the need for "a change in culture and 
organisation as well as business direction", have raised fears of further 
efficiency savings.

"The difficulty in getting the balance between financial controls and allowing 
people to be creative is very difficult to achieve," says Hill, adding: "TV has 
become more and more about business and financial controls." That is because 
broadcasting in general, and ITV in particular, is no longer the cash cow it 
was in the terrestrial era.

Norman and Crozier have fans as well as detractors among those who have 
already tried to remake ITV in the light of this new reality. One of the few 
former ITV executives happy to go on the record was Charles Allen who says: 
"Adam and Archie are very experienced and talented executives with a strong 
track record in a range of businesses. I hope that their complementary skills 
and knowledge coupled with the talent of all the people at ITV will enable the 
company to develop to the next stage and prosper."

Allen was an industry outsider who was famously upbraided by John Cleese as a 
"upstart caterer". Perhaps if he had been an account director at a Soho 
advertising company he would have received a warmer welcome.

Crozier celebrated his 46th birthday on Tuesday, the same day he handed in his 
notice atRoyal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail>. Asked if 
landing the ITV job was the best gift he had received, he said that honour had 
been claimed by his daughters, who presented him with a pair of football boots. 
Salvaging ITV would represent a far bigger prize for Crozier, and it would also 
represent a victory, of sorts, for the UK advertising industry.
 