
One day scientists will work out a way to meet the entire world’s electricity 
needs by harnessing my intense dislike forGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>.

But that day is not here yet. In the meantime we will have to use the 
comparatively puny power source known as the sun.

Given my feelings for the chancellor, why am I standing at 6am on a freezing 
December day outside his constituency office bearing Christmas gifts?

Because, my friends, my gifts are solar panels, and unlike the 80% of the UK 
public who love solar panels, George apparently hates them! Why didn’t I give 
him any of the other things he hates that most other people love, like 
compassion, kittens orthe happy laughter of children 
<https://vine.co/v/OvEm7Ljwmtv>?

Because back in August, the government sneaked out a consultation to cut 
support for solar, wind and hydro power by 87%. There are strong indications 
the driving force behind these cuts is the Treasury, not the Department for
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Change. 

If the cuts go ahead as proposed, 20,000 solar jobs are at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/03/homeowner-solar-power-subsidy-cuts-threaten-20000-jobs>
, andseveral solar companies have already had to close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/16/solar-firm-blames-subsidy-cuts-for-uk-exit>
. And,reading a leaked letter from the energy secretary, Amber Rudd 
<http://www.theecologist.org/News/news_analysis/2986190/leaked_letter_rudd_admits_25_green_energy_undershoot_misled_parliament.html>
, it looks like we’re now not going to meet our legally binding EU renewables 
targets for 2020.

This is why David Cameron’s presence at last week’s climate summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/10/paris-climate-talks-uk-leadership-role-lost-due-axeing-green-policies-home>
 in Paris was such a national embarrassment. These cuts have been questioned by 
everyone from theCBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/cbi-chief-lambasts-government-approach-to-green-economy>
 toAl Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/al-gore-puzzled-by-ukcuts-to-renewable-energy-support>
 to theNational Farmers Union 
<http://www.nfuonline.com/science-environment/energy-and-renewables/nfu-lobbies-against-feed-in-tariff-cuts/>
 to theUN’s chief environment scientist 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-34555821>. Everyone else at the 
summit wasannouncing awesome solar projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
 while Cameron rocked up with nothing, pushed to the front of the photos 
shouting “I’m also helping somehow!” (and stole all of the good canapés).

India unveils global solar alliance of 120 countries at Paris climate summit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
The UK’s first solar home celebrated its 20th birthday this summer 
<http://www.solarpowerportal.co.uk/editors_blog/the_uks_first_solar_home_20_years_later_3425>
. Back in the 1990s it was a bit of a pioneer. Now it’s normal. There are so 
many British solar homes now it works out as about two per street (in fact, 
that data is a year old, it might well be loads more). Aside from the 
environmental benefits, solar is empowering. Communities all over the UK have 
been turning their rooftops into power stations, pouring profits back intojobs 
<http://keepfits.org/stories-1//warm-homes-decent-jobs-and-a-better-christmas-in-warrington>
,education <http://solarschools.org.uk/> and tackling fuel poverty 
<http://keepfits.org/stories-1//next-stop-warmer-homes> (not the pockets of 
fatcats). 

But it’s not too late. A formal decision on these cuts is expected this week.

Which is why I ended up rigging scaffolding on to the outside of the 
Conservative constituency office in Knutsford, Cheshire, at 6am, with a solar 
installer ready to hook George up with a small 1.5kWp solar rig (six panels).

By scrapping support for solar, the government is depriving the British people 
of one of the few significant ways we can take ownership and responsibility for 
the fate of the planet. Without solar, what are we left with? A bunch of 
promises from the very same people who told us they wouldn’t cut the NHS.

You’re reading the Guardian, you’re probably a moderate, you don’t want to 
hear more of my hippy talk about green stuff, so – to use Cameron’s words – 
let’s talk economics. It’s a myth that renewables get more subsidies than 
fossil fuels.

According to the IMF, Britain subsidises fossil fuels by a whopping £400 per 
person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/g20-countries-pay-over-1000-per-citizen-in-fossil-fuel-subsidies-say-imf>
. That’s over seven times as much as we subsidise renewables 
<http://www.renewableuk.com/en/news/press-releases.cfm/2015-08-04-imf-stats-show-uk-fossil-fuels-still-get-billions-in-subsidies-while-renewables-slashed>
. In fact, Britain under Osborne is nowthe only G7 country to be increasing 
subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/uk-breaks-pledge-to-become-only-g7-country-increase-fossil-fuel-subsidies>
 to fossil fuels. Plus, unlike planet-screwing fossil fuels, solar could 
actually be subsidy-free in a few years. At this crucial stage for the 
industry, it makes no sense to pull the plug.

It would be funny if it wasn’t devastating and stupid.

So this is why we delivered an early Christmas present from the Keep Fits 
campaign <http://keepfits.org/> on behalf of the 80% of British people who 
support solar power 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/public-attitudes-tracking-survey>.

We thought maybe Osborne just thinks he doesn’t like solar power because 
he’s ideologically opposed to anything or anyone under 20 years old. So we 
wanted to give him an opportunity to try it out before he makes his mind up 
about destroying the entire UK solar sector.

Sadly, the gift was refused. So we’ve offered the panels to Boris Johnson’s 
constituency office instead. Let’s see if Boris has a better eye for a deal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0npogdP6zVI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0npogdP6zVI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0npogdP6zVI&media=>
 Josie Long tries to install solar panels at George Osborne’s constituency 
office  