
George Osborne's abolition of national pay bargaining for teachers 
<http://www.teachers.org.uk/node/17148> is a drastic policy. It sweeps away 
mandatory pay scales and makes "cost of living" increases discretionary for 
most teachers. At a time when growing numbers of teachers areleaving the 
profession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/nov/16/teaching-problem-schools>, 
this is an astonishing move.

Osborne's idea is to allow headteachers to set pay based on individual 
assessments –performance-related pay 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-18089505>. The rationale for pay based on 
assessments, as opposed to collective bargaining, is that the best workers will 
be attracted to workplaces where their hard work and skills will be rewarded. 
They also respond better to what their employers consider important, thus 
improving performance.

There are a number of problems with such schemes, which often result in their 
being short-lived. Having been attempted previously in the 19th century, 
performance-related pay was reintroduced into schools in England first in 1991, 
when it was applied to headteachers, then to teachers in a number of schools in 
2001. When the policy was extended by New Labour,the experience of headteachers 
in administering the system was surveyed 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0267152032000048550> extensively by 
theTeachers' Incentive Pay Project 
<http://www.tes.co.uk/article.aspx?storycode=347716> at Exeter University. Most 
headteachers were opposed to the practice, feeling that it made little 
difference to how teaching was conducted, and were dyspeptic about the narrow, 
numerical methods of measuring student progress.

The main problem with performance-related pay, however, is that it rarely 
works – even on its own terms.A comprehensive review 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CDEQFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Feric.exeter.ac.uk%2Frepository%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%2F10036%2F47116%2FPerformance-related%2520pay%2520and%2520the%2520teaching%2520profession.pdf%3Fsequence%3D1&ei=I-7BULEe04jRAcSngIgL&usg=AFQjCNFno8iwNow5JJr3KybUAom-5MwBpQ>
 of the scholarly literature on this subject from 2002 noted that among its 
disadvantages was the "neglect of unrewarded tasks", as people cease doing 
parts of the job that can't be evaluated. It also undermined co-operation in 
necessarily co-operative roles, introducing competitiveness over goals and 
attainment. It led to less openness about failure, since few would admit to 
screwing up if it cost them money. Finally, there was the cost of 
administration and the problem of demoralising those who weren't rewarded.

This is the essence of the problem. Free market ideology assumes that people 
are fundamentally driven by competition and rewards. This might work in a 
high-stress sales environment, where what matters is the number and value of 
deals. But most jobs don't work like that. They require complex systems of 
co-operation on qualitative aspects of labour that can't be easily measured or 
attributed to any one worker. Other advantages for employers which are not so 
widely advertised are the weakening of unions, the strengthening of managers 
and the potential reduction of wages.

Osborne's announcement comes after he was forced to concede that there would 
not be regional pay awards for public sector workers, which would have 
accelerated the "north-south divide". So the measure could be seen as an 
alternative way of attacking the union and reducing teachers' wages. But it 
also follows a neoliberal tradition with global reach. Everywhere that the 
neoliberal prospectus has been implemented, there has been an attempt – 
strongly informed by public choice theory – to model public services on 
markets, using statistical benchmarks to suppress costs and create internal 
competition.

For example, Wisconsin governor Scott Walker became the centre of a furious 
wave of strikes, protests and occupations when he outlawed collective 
bargaining rights for public sector workers. Walker's supporters insisted that 
this policy would improve student performance. This is the last stand 
justification for such measures – if you're against us, you're against the 
children. In response to Walker's measures, American liberals argued that far 
from helping students, union-busting states seemed to do far worse by them – 
the five states that outlawed collective bargaining being amongthe poorest 
performers in SAT scores 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica/2011/02/unions>. More 
rigorous analyses 
<http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3069621?uid=3738032&uid=2&uid=4&sid=21101531505887>
 show either that the abolition of collective bargaining leads to no 
improvement at all for students or that it results in a significant loss of 
performance.

One must tread very carefully in interpreting such figures, however. If jobs 
are rarely susceptible to statistical assessments, because of their qualitative 
and collective aspects, this is all the more true of learning. Learning is not 
a linear process in which students incrementally acquire facts and ideas, and 
nor are its results always measurable. Take reading and comprehension, for 
example. For any student to really grasp a text likeThe Owl and the Pussycat 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171941>, for example, they must be 
capable of reflecting on the historical context in which Edward Lear was 
writing, as well as the meaning of money, marriage, travel and so on. Such 
reflections do not easily yield testable slabs of knowledge and it would be in 
the spirit ofGradgrind <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradgrind> to try to turn 
such a reading experience into a method for Ofsted to measure the comprehension 
of adjectives, nouns and verbs. So much the worse if a teacher's income depends 
on such trivia.

Teaching <https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> and learning are 
complex, collective processes which are corroded rather than enabled by the 
neoliberal demands for endless ranking and competition. The government's 
measures are good for neither teachers nor students.
 