
Tastes may change and mature over time, but we are all influenced by the 
culture we grew up in. As a teenager growing up in the 90s, developing my film 
knowledge with as many rented and recorded VHS tapes as I could find, American 
cinema seemed absurdly exciting. Particularly thrilling to me was a new wave of 
directors with an independent sensibility, who were just hitting their stride. 
Quentin Tarantino, David Fincher, the Coens, Paul Thomas Anderson… it seemed a 
new celluloid hero emerged every week with worlds, stories and characters that 
we're equal parts light and dark.

One of the most vivid was Robert Rodriguez's El Mariachi, as portrayed by 
Antonio Banderas in 1995'sDesperado <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0112851/> – 
Rodriguez's retread/sequel of his breakthrough indie hit, the appropriately 
titledEl Mariachi <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0104815/>. Like his creator, the 
character of El Mariachi is a one-man army of sorts – a guitarist whose playing 
ability is lost after he is shot in the hand, and the woman he loves is shot 
dead. Now a shadow-dwelling, black and white-suited renegade hell-bent on 
revenge, he comes to a small town in Mexico and raises the body count – all in 
search of the villainous crime boss, Bucho.

The most attractive element of the Mariachi's characterisation is its 
simplicity – he's coming for revenge, one dive bar at a time. It's this 
straightforward objective that puts him in a classic pulp-hero mould – tortured 
by the past, and heading towards his objective by any means necessary, means 
that usually involving putting several large holes in an endless procession of 
bad guys. There's little angst, there's no moralising about how many lives can 
make up for the one he lost, it's a solo mission with two options: either he 
dies, or Bucho does.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxZdZv3kT9xk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxZdZv3kT9xk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxZdZv3kT9xk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xZdZv3kT9xk>

Of course, the latter scenario is a lot more likely given that the Mariachi is 
nothing short of a guitar-strumming Superman. Almost impervious to bullets (he 
does get the customary blow to the shoulder – nothing Salma Hayek's 
traffic-stopping bookseller can't fix), he has several elaborate death- and 
physics-defying bar-room brawls. The perfect example of this is the film's 
signature sequence, where the Mariachi is uncovered by a gang of heavies. 
Sparked by Banderas's hissed "not yeeet …", what follows is part bar fight, 
part interpretive dance recital, with baddies being dispatched from all kinds 
of camera-friendly angles, observed by Tarantino's fast-talking pick-up guy. 
The result is a large pile of dead bodies, and an amusingRaiders of the Lost 
Ark-style moment of comedy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3I_Ds2ytz4o> where 
Banderas, unable to find a loaded gun to dispatch his final foe, snaps his neck 
with a frustrated "fuck you!"

So, he's got purpose, and he can handle himself in a gun fight, but my final 
reason for wanting to be this character may say more about me than him. While 
not the most complicated man in the world, I think the Mariachi is unbelievably 
cool. An homage to the grand cinematic tradition of heroes who let their 
actions do the talking, a book written and rewritten by the likes of Steve 
McQueen and Clint Eastwood, so much of the character's image is what makes him 
entertaining. A slightly worn black and white suit, piercing eyes obscured by 
his long hair, and, oh yeah, a guitar case full of guns! The Mariachi is also 
the narrator of his own myth. Spread by Steve Buscemi's sarcastic sidekick, 
it's a legend that makes the toughest men in Mexico look over their shoulder.

There are characters that have more depth, a better arc, that are more 
serious, but there are few I find more fun than the hero ofRodriguez's Mexico 
trilogy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexico_Trilogy>. So, if there is an 
opportunity to step into the shoes of a movie character, I'll meet you in a 
small town where I'll be raising hell in the name of vengeance. Just don't 
forget to bring your guitar…

• Why I'd like to be … Scarlett Johansson in Lost in Translation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/01/why-i-would-like-to-be-scarlett-johansson-lost-in-translation>
• Why I'd like to be … Gregory Peck in To Kill a Mockingbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/24/gregory-peck-to-kill-a-mockingbird-atticus-finch-role-model>
• Why I'd like to be … Julie Christie in Billy Liar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/julie-christie-billy-liar-role-model>
 