
The news that Channel 4 is going to spend millions on the London 2012 
Paralympics and give it 150 hours of coverage is a landmark moment. The BBC did 
a fantastic job of increasing the Paralympics' profile, but it usually ended up 
on BBC2 – second fiddle to the Olympics. I only found out about the Paralympics 
when I was 14 – before then I didn't know it was possible for someone in a 
wheelchair to compete in a global sports event. The C4 coverage will forever 
change the way people look at the competition.

Over the next two years they are going to bombard the public with quality 
programming about the athletes themselves, which will help the public to get to 
know people like David Weir, one of our best wheelchair atheletes. This year he 
did the marathon in an hour and 37 minutes – nearly 30 minutes faster than the 
able-bodied men's world record.

Great Britain has got a really good history in Paralympic sport. We're 
definitely in the top two. I think the men's basketball team is one of our best 
opportunities to win a gold. Gaz Choudhry, Jon Pollock and Ian Sagar will be 
key. In women's basketball there's Helen Freeman, who is only 19, and I think 
she's going to make a huge impact.

Having competed in two Paralympics, I'm concentrating on my broadcasting work 
for Channel 4. When I was growing up, there weren't any black presenters on 
television, let alone ones with disability. It's brilliant that 50% of the 
Paralympic presenters will be disabled. If you watch Match of the Day, you're 
going to listen to what Gary Lineker has to say because he's an ex-footballer. 
Why shouldn't former Paralympians be doing the same?

• Ade Adepitan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ade-adepitan> is a 
wheelchair basketball player and TV presenter. That Paralympic Show starts on 
28 August on Channel 4
 