
I have no intention of going to see The Iron Lady 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>. This is not for 
political reasons (though there is that) but because it's bythe same director 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/jan/05/phyllida-lloyd-iron-lady?newsfeed=true>
 asMamma Mia! <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125168>, which was like a 
drunken Club Med hoedown shot through a sock. Worse, I hear they've softened 
Margaret Thatcher in an effort to make her seem human and vulnerable. Again, I 
don't object to this for political reasons (though there is that) but because 
it's not what I want from a movie about one of the most powerful women of our 
time.

No, what I really want is for screenwriters to go Shakespearean on Thatcher's 
ass. I don't care if we're tricked into empathising, even sympathising with 
her, just so long as we get hamartia, hubris and anagnorisis as well. I want 
the whole antihero package, and all they're giving me is a bit of pathos. What 
a waste! But this is not the first time we've seen Great Women of History 
watered down in the cockamamie belief it'll turn them into feminist role 
models. It's not long since bothBathory 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126326/bathory> and The Countess 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lNiRcgp75l0> attempted to depict Erzsébet 
Báthory, history's most notorious female serial killer, as misunderstood. I'm 
sorry, but we already have quite enough female victims in the movies. Give me 
wallowing in the blood of virgins any day.

This week we have another historical bad girl whose most interesting 
attributes have been glossed over in a misguided bid to stop us hating her. 
The Wallis Simpson of Madonna'sW.E. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142869/w.e> survives a kicking from her 
first husband to become a social X-ray with such fabulous taste in frocks and 
earrings that Edward VIII renounces his throne for her, while, elsewhere in the 
same film, her ghost pops up in 1988 to offer sisterly solidarity and sartorial 
inspiration to a beleaguered namesake. Hello? Did Bette Davis live and die in 
vain? I don't give two hoots about this vapid clothes horse, even if she can 
rustle up a mean dry martini; I want to see Wallis in all her domineering, 
adulterous, twice-divorced, Nazi-loving glory – especially if it makes her seem 
like a total bitch. I want to see the Wallis who declared, upon hearing in 1940 
that the British were getting the crap bombed out of them: "I can't say I feel 
sorry for them."

If it's female paragons you're after, you can always trot along to share a 
couple of hours of house arrest withThe Lady 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139986/lady>, and welcome to it, but I'm 
saving myself for Charlize Theron inYoung Adult 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ar_-v7dEEoo>, who with screenwriter Diablo Cody 
and director Jason Reitman pulls off with a fictional character what these 
yellow-bellied biopics cannot. Theron plays Mavis Gary, a deluded, 
alcohol-addled, self-centred career girl who sets about winning back her 
high-school sweetheart, and doesn't give a fig that he's a happily married man 
with a new-born baby. As a big city girl in a small town, Theron pulls off the 
sort of deliciously misanthropic reaction shots we haven't seen since those 
friendly rubes kept chirping "Good morning!" to Linda Fiorentino inThe Last 
Seduction <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gvJFgixTAxM>.

Mavis is the kind of badly behaved woman you're more likely to find in French 
cinema than in Hollywood, where they've got a tedious fixation on redemption. 
In particular, she reminds me of Karin Viard inLa Nouvelle Eve 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCB_2WSHngk> – a scatty singleton who 
frequently gets roaring drunk, has casual sex and tries to seduce happily 
married men, all without ever being punished for her sins. She's so badly 
behaved she even manages to start a fight at a lesbian birthday party.

But Mavis comes across as more human and vulnerable and credible a character 
than the subject of these half-baked biopics, and is bags more fun to watch 
into the bargain. Some commentators think that unless female characters are 
irreproachable icons of empowerment, they're sexist stereotypes, but they're 
wrong – it's our flaws that make us real. If you really want to show Thatcher 
or Simpson as human and vulnerable, you don't do it by making them frail, 
giving them a puppy, or retro-fitting them as role models. You make them more 
like Mavis. Pretend they're fictional, if need be, but never, ever soft-pedal 
their vices.
 