
Instant reaction on Wall Street said that Rupert Murdoch will be back for 
another go at buying Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/05/rupert-murdoch-withdraws-80bn-bid-time-warner-takeover>
 when tempers and share prices cool. Really? That script seems very unlikely.

First, 21st Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> 
was in danger of squashing its own share price if it had tried to improve its 
plainly inadequate $80bn (£47bn) bid. Second, Warner boss Jeff Bewkes had said 
he viewed non-voting shares in Fox as an unacceptable second-class currency; in 
effect, he was asking Murdoch to surrender family control of Fox, which was 
always going to be a deal-killer for the 83-year-old titan.

On the first score, Murdoch's problem was that his reputation as an 
empire-builder who is not afraid of overpaying (exhibit A: Dow Jones) went 
before him. Share prices ran away from him on day one. Warner's stock 
immediately shot above the level of Fox's $80bn bid as the market guessed 
whether the serious offer would be $95bn or $100bn.

Naturally, Fox's share price wobbled in anticipation. But then it kept 
falling. From $35.50 before the news of the adventure broke last month, Fox's 
stock had slipped to $31.50 before Tuesday's abandonment. That 11% tumble put 
Murdoch in the traditional bind facing all bidders offering part-payment in 
their own shares: the higher the bidding goes, the more cash the target 
shareholders will want.

The traditional escape from such a squeeze is to whet shareholders' appetites 
by talking about cost savings. But here they were just $1bn – tiny in the 
context of the size of the deal. The strategic benefits were arguably superior 
since there is a plausible argument that content-led media companies should 
bulk up to protect their pricing power against merger-obsessed US cable 
companies. But the cable threat is hardly grave. Fox's shares had still managed 
to improve 60% since the demerger of the newspaper assets after the hacking 
scandal.

As for Warner, its stock was on a roll. As Bewkes pointed out, the total 
shareholder return was 150% since 2008 amid the separation of the cable assets,
AOL <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> and Time Inc. The spin-offs 
had made Warner itself smaller, and thus an easier prey in theory, but the need 
for salvation in the arms of Murdoch was never obvious.

Bewkes's real curve-ball was to question the value of the non-voting Fox 'A' 
shares being offered alongside the cash component. Quite right too. To British 
eyes, it is baffling that US investors tolerate unfair voting arrangements 
which too often go hand-in-hand with bad boardroom governance.

In the case of Fox/Warner, the Murdoch clan would have emerged with 40% of the 
votes but just 9% of the economic interest. That would have been taking to 
extremes the belief that a swashbuckling boss with a free hand, gets the best 
results. Fox/Warner would, in effect, have been a new company. All non-Murdoch 
shareholders would surely have wanted the power to sack the boss – or his 
children – if things went wrong.

It is (just about) conceivable that the stars could come into alignment to 
revive the deal. Warner's go-it-alone strategy would have to be seen to fail; 
Fox's shares would have to outperform; and the market would have to be happy to 
endorse Fox's unfair voting arrangements with James or Lachlan at the helm. 
It's hard to imagine all three happening. If Murdoch wants one last big deal, 
he may have to pay cash – that means smaller targets thanTime Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner>.
 