
The Queensland government has reached a new solution in its ongoing bid to get 
Wicked Campers vans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/17/annastacia-palaszczuk-calls-for-queensland-boycott-of-wicked-campers>
 and other vehicles with offensive slogans off the state’s roads.

Yvette D’Ath, the attorney general, has announced plans to introduce 
legislation holding commercial vehicle registration holders to determinations 
by the Advertising Standards Bureau.

This would mean the registration of any commercial vehicle with slogans deemed 
to be offensive, or that otherwise failed to comply with the ASB’s standards, 
could be cancelled.

D’Ath said the slogans on some Wicked Campers vehicles were the subject of 
“community concern” and frequent complaints to the ASB.

Queensland setting catch limits for endangered sharks based on ‘dodgy data’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/21/queensland-letting-commercial-fisheries-to-catch-endangered-sharks-says-reviewer>
It upheld 49 complaints against the Queensland-based company in the five years 
to 2015 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-11/wicked-pickets-protest-vulgar-language-used-on-wicked-campers/6385958>
, some of which have been cited in the board’s determination summaries on
discrimination and vilification 
<https://adstandards.com.au/products-and-issues/discrimination-and-vilification/types-discrimination>
,violence 
<https://adstandards.com.au/products-and-issues/violence/violence-issues> and 
sex, sexuality and nudity 
<https://adstandards.com.au/products-issues/sex-sexuality-and-nudity-determination-summary>
. Several were met with no response from the company.

“When the ASB has deemed those slogans to be offensive, the typical response 
from the holders of those commercial vehicle registrations has been deafening 
silence,” D’Ath said. “Now, if they refuse to remove the offensive slogans, 
their vehicles will be off the road.”

She hoped the laws enforcing the arrangement – a collaboration with the ASB 
and the state transport bureau – would be put before parliament by the end of 
the year but urged owners of vehicles that might be affected to “see the 
writing on the wall” and remove the catchphrases before then.

Guardian Australia has contacted the attorney general and Wicked Campers for 
comment.

In a joint statement, the ASB and the Australian Association of National 
Advertisers welcomed the move.

Fiona Jolly, chief executive of the ASB, said it had been working with the 
state government “for some time to find a way to get vans with offensive 
slogans and images off the road”.

The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, called for a boycott of Wicked Campers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/17/annastacia-palaszczuk-calls-for-queensland-boycott-of-wicked-campers>
 until it removed vehicles with offensive and derogatory slogans from its fleet 
in May.

“It is unacceptable to have those vile slogans on those vans,” she said at the 
time.

This new strategy was reached after a parliamentary committee inquiry, carried 
out in 2014 under the Campbell Newman government,recommended that either 
advertising body 
<http://www.parliament.qld.gov.au/documents/hansard/2014/2014_02_13_WEEKLY.pdf> 
be given greater powers of enforcement. But opinion on whether Wicked Campers’ 
inflammatory slogans should be a government issue is split.

Earlier this week Tasmania’s Break O’Day council voted against a motion to ban 
Wicked Campers from caravan parks on the state’s east coast.

“We’ve got to put things into perspective – it’s not a council issue,” the 
mayor, Mick Tucker,told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-18/break-o-day-council-votes-against-banning-wicked-campers/7639384>
.

The New South Wales premier, Mike Baird, said in April the issue wasn’t 
“something that the state government should be getting involved in”.
 