
The widow of Alexander Litvinenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> has called for all 
Russian intelligence agents to be thrown out of the UK and for further economic 
sanctions against Moscow, after a public inquiry found that Vladimir Putin and 
his top spy chief had “probably approved” her husband’s murder.

Marina Litvinenko said it would be unthinkable for the government to ignore 
the findings of Sir Robert Owen, whose report into Litvinenko’s 2006 killing 
was more critical than expected. Owen concluded that two Russian killers – 
Dmitry Kovtun and Andrei Lugovoi – had carried out the murder “under the 
direction” of Russia’s FSB spy agency.


In a frank letter to David Cameron, Marina Litvinenko called for a firm 
response. She demanded travel bans and sanctions on at least twelve 
individuals. The list included Putin, Nikolai Patrushev, the FSB’s boss at the 
time, and other Russian state entities. She also intends to sue the Russian 
government in the British courts.

The home secretary, however, signalled that the government had little appetite 
for imposing punitive measures onRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, though she acknowledged that 
Litvinenko’s murder amounted to a “blatant and unacceptable” breach of 
international law. The probable involvement of Putin’s Kremlin came as no 
surprise, Theresa May told the Commons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmay-litvinenkos-death-an-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=May%3A%20Litvinenko%E2%80%99s%20death%20an%20unacceptable%20breach%20of%20international%20law%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmay-litvinenkos-death-an-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=May%3A%20Litvinenko%E2%80%99s%20death%20an%20unacceptable%20breach%20of%20international%20law%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fmay-litvinenkos-death-an-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law-video&media=>
May: Litvinenko’s death an unacceptable breach of international law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jan/21/may-litvinenkos-death-an-unacceptable-breach-of-international-law-video>
May told MPs she would be asking Interpol to issue European arrest warrants 
for Lugovoi and Kovtun but proposed no wider action against the Russian state. 
“This was an act of murder that took place in the streets of London and it was 
state-sponsored,” she said. “The conclusion that the Russian state was probably 
involved in the murder is deeply disturbing.”

The Guardian view on the Litvinenko inquiry: a price must be paid in Moscow | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/21/the-guardian-view-on-the-litvinenko-inquiry-a-price-must-be-paid-in-moscow>
However, May added that there was a wider national security interest in 
retaining a guarded engagement with Russia, including working with Russia to 
bring about a peace settlement in Syria. She pointed out that it was impossible 
for Britain to seek to impose a travel ban on a head of state, and said Britain 
had no illusions about the state of Russia.

The government’s response also included a Treasury freeze of Lugovoi and 
Kovtun’s assets. But Litvinenko’s legal team said the gesture was largely 
symbolic; her lawyer Ben Emmerson said it would be “craven” of the prime 
minister not to take further action, after what Emmerson dubbed an act of 
nuclear state terror on the streets of London.


Cameron, speaking from the world economic forum in Davos, said the murder was 
a shocking event but said it was necessary to continue to work with Russia. “Do 
we at some level have to go on having some sort of relationship with them 
because we need a solution to the Syria crisis? Yes, we do but we do it with 
clear eyes and a very cold heart.”

Dmitry Peskov, Putin’s press spokesman, dismissed the inquiry as a 
“quasi-investigation”. He ridiculed the judge’s use of “probably” and called 
his report an example of “subtle British humour”.

The foreign office summoned Russia’s ambassador in London, Alexander 
Yakovenko. Speaking afterwards, the ambassador declared the case a “gross 
provocation” which would hurt bilateral relations, adding that the inquiry had 
whitewashed the incompetence of Britain’s spy agencies.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fwidow-alexander-litvinenko-calls-for-further-sanctions-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24e3f5d8d46f6cdce5d3072cfab14101761eb73d%2F0_124_4925_2956%2F4925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Widow%20of%20Litvinenko%20calls%20for%20further%20sanctions%20against%20Russia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fwidow-alexander-litvinenko-calls-for-further-sanctions-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Widow%20of%20Litvinenko%20calls%20for%20further%20sanctions%20against%20Russia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fwidow-alexander-litvinenko-calls-for-further-sanctions-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24e3f5d8d46f6cdce5d3072cfab14101761eb73d%2F0_124_4925_2956%2F4925.jpg>
 Russia’s ambassador in London, Alexander Yakovenko, declared the case a ‘gross 
provocation’. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/PA 
Lugovoi, who is now an MP with a nationalist political party in Russia, said 
the inquiry’s findings were absurd. He told Interfax: “The results released 
today just show London’s anti-Russian position once again; the 
narrow-mindedness and lack of desire among the British to find the real reason 
for the death of Litvinenko.”

Key findings: who killed Alexander Litvinenko, how and why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/key-findings-who-killed-alexander-litvinenko-how-and-why>
Thursday’s report brings to an end a near 10-year saga of high-level 
international intrigue and cold war-style recrimination. Scotland Yard’s 
investigation into Litvinenko’s murder was one of the most extensive in British 
criminal history. Presenting his findings in the high court, Owen said the 
Metropolitan police had done an “exemplary job”.

There were stunned cries of “Yes!” from the public gallery when Owen said that 
Russia’s president had “probably ordered” Litvinenko’s poisoning. His report – 
a 328-page book – concluded that Kovtun and Lugovoi had no personal motive for 
murder. Rather, they were “acting on behalf of others”, using a radioactive 
poison they barely understood.

Owen’s damning conclusions appear to be grounded on secret evidence heard last 
year in closed inquiry sessions. At the time of his death Litvinenko was 
working as a part-time consultant forMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>. 
The judge said he received a considerable quantity of classified documents, and 
took “closed” evidence from witnesses, likely to be intelligence agents.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-putin-orders-judge-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Litvinenko%20probably%20poisoned%20on%20Putin's%20orders%2C%20says%20judge%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-putin-orders-judge-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Litvinenko%20probably%20poisoned%20on%20Putin%27s%20orders%2C%20says%20judge%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Flitvinenko-putin-orders-judge-video&media=>
Litvinenko probably poisoned on Putin’s orders, says judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/21/litvinenko-putin-orders-judge-video>
Putin has already ruled out any possibility of extradition in blunt terms. In 
2007 the then foreign secretary, David Miliband, expelled four Russian 
diplomats in protest. Now a deputy in Russia’s Duma, Lugovoi told Interfax the 
inquiry was “pathetic”. It dispelled, he said, the “myth” of impartial British 
justice. Kovtun made no comment.


The British home secretary said she was writing to UK intelligence agency 
partners and Nato, emphasising the role of the Russian security service in the 
Litvinenko case. But she did not propose an end to all relations between 
Russian and UK intelligence agencies.

Under questioning from MPs, May said she would meet the Litvinenko family to 
discuss their request for imposing sanctions on a much larger group of Russian 
agents.

Putin's disturbing message for the west: your rules don't apply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-vladimir-putin-russian-exceptionalism>
The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, called for the expulsion of Russian 
intelligence operatives and a review of whether the UK should press for Russia 
to be prevented from staging the 2018 football world cup.

He said the government’s response did not “go anywhere near enough in 
answering the seriousness of the findings” and “could send a dangerous signal 
to Russia that our response is too weak”. He said the report was “one of the 
most shocking and disturbing reports ever presented to parliament”.

David Davis, who was shadow home secretary at the time of the murder, said the 
report meant that in a civil UK court Putin would be found guilty of complicity 
in murder. He said: “We need to go after the financial assets of Putin in the 
Bahamas and in Cyprus. Eventually you get to a point when with a dictator you 
have to draw a line as we did in the 30s.”

In his report, Owen praised Robert Service, a former professor of Russian 
history at Oxford, who gave expert evidence to the inquiry, including on the 
links between Putin and the Russian mafia.

Speaking from the high court, Service said of the report: “I was gobsmacked 
... Anglo-Russian relations are not going to be easy for the next few weeks, 
years or months.”

 He added: “One thing the inquiry shows is the autonomy of the judicial 
process.”

Alex Goldfarb, Litvinenko’s friend, who helped him escape from Moscow to 
Britain in 2000, said he was pleased. “This restores my faith in the word 
justice,” he said.
 