
 Tense times for the administrators of the Commonwealth Writers Prize, who 
learned this week thatAmitav Ghosh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/amitav-ghosh> - whose The Glass Palace was 
awarded the Best Novel in the Eurasian section - has withdrawn from the 
competition. Ghosh objects to the term "Commonwealth" and the unfairness of the 
prize's English-language requirement. Given that "Eurasia" yokes together, 
among others, India, Malta and the UK, one can see his point. But what now for 
the runners-up, one of whom will surely be called on to step into the breach? 
Will J G Ballard, Kazuo Ishiguro and Jane Stevenson support Ghosh? And will 
Zadie Smith, winner of best first novel, follow suit?

 Blame the relentless winter if you will, but publishers seem to be falling 
prey to an uncommon number of cock-ups at the moment. When Canongate decided to 
publish David Margolick's Strange Fruit - a "biography" of Billie Holliday's 
song of the same name - it must have seemed like a great idea to reproduce the 
lyrics on the back cover, and to bring the book out on Holiday's birthday. 
Alas, the latter has gone for a Burton because of a spectacular error in the 
former. "Here is a strange and bitter crop," ends the song, describing a 
lynching in the Deep South. "A strange and buffer cry", the words that appear 
on the book, lack the same impact. What would a buffer cry sound like? 
"Tally-ho", presumably.

 With countryside literary festivals under threat of cancellation owing to 
foot and mouth, the city is the safest place for publishers to exhibit their 
wares. So the Loafer will be toddling off to the London Book Fair this weekend, 
despite the fact that the opening day encompasses both the clocks going forward 
and Mother's Day celebrations. Apparently, however, there will be an emissary 
from the more rugged side of life: Alan Gallop, author of Buffalo Bill's 
British Wild West, who has promised to don fringed leather bucksins, boots and 
Stetson to publicise his book. (Buffalo Bill himself performed at Olympia in 
April 1903, drawing even Edward VII to his spectacular show.) Luckily, Gallop 
is not planning to bring any cloven-hooved animals - although the Loafer 
wouldn't rule out disinfectant baths for some of publishing's less salubrious 
elements.

 Absinthe and Babycham do not mix. In particular, they do not mix with the 
notoriously thirsty ranks of booksellers, who gathered at a party to celebrate 
the launch of The Look: Adventures in Pop and Rock Fashion. There they stood, 
sipping like fury in duffel coats and tank-tops, while fashionistas including 
Wayne Hemingway and Mark Powell swanned about. And the never did the twain 
meet, until the close of play when the venue reverted to its original purpose 
and turned into a strip club, complete with pole dancing. The Loafer thinks it 
best to draw a veil over what followed next.

 You need a certain amount of nerve to make a speech at your own launch 
party, but if anyone has the bottle, you would imagine it to be Esther Rantzen. 
And thus she duly thanked, praised and flattered at the gathering for her 
autobiography in a swish hotel in Park Lane. Shame, then, that an insistent 
voice threatened to eclipse the great woman's words with idle chatter. Who 
could it possibly be? None other, the Loafer's most reliable spies report, than 
the effervescent Vanessa Feltz, fresh from her speedy eviction from the Big 
Brother house and eager to "share" news of her ordeal.
 