
If you were concerned that forced funerals for fetuses and zygotes 
<http://www.vox.com/identities/2016/11/30/13793198/texas-abortion-fetus-funeral-buried-cremated>
 wasn’t quite horrific enough, rejoice! In the last week, Ohio haspassed a law 
banning abortions after 20 weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/ohio-vetoes-heartbeat-bill-abortion-ban-john-kasich>
 and Oklahoma wants to mandate that businessespost anti-abortion signs in 
women’s public restrooms. 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/oklahoma-facing-abortion-related-restroom-signs-controversy/>

In the wake of Trump’s win, reproductive rights opponents have not wasted a 
moment in their plan to roll back access to abortion and birth control. And, as 
has been the case for some time, these harmful policies are being presented as 
wins for women.


When Governor John Kasich of Ohio passed the 20-week ban, for example, he also 
vetoed a six-week ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/ohio-vetoes-heartbeat-bill-abortion-ban-john-kasich>
 – the hope being that the move would be seen as moderate in comparison. But 20 
weeks is around the time that women find out about fetal abnormalities – a 
leading reason for later abortions. And while the Oklahoma plan is beingtouted 
by pro-life groups 
<http://www.lifenews.com/2016/12/13/oklahoma-becomes-first-state-to-require-pro-life-restroom-signs-helping-women-find-abortion-alternatives/>
 as a way to offer women “alternatives”, what it’s really doing is shaming 
women and requiring that businesses spend money on ideological propaganda. 
(Also, so much for the Republicans caring aboutwomen’s privacy in bathrooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/10/north-carolina-bathroom-law-republicans-hypocrisy>
!)


The research is clear: women suffer when you deny them access to birth control 
and abortion. In fact, despite anti-choice rhetoric to the contrary, the only 
kind of negative mental health impact that abortion has on women occurswhen 
someone seeks out the procedure and is denied. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/14/health/abortion-mental-health.html?smid=tw-share>


Who will take on Donald Trump? Teen Vogue | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/who-take-on-donald-trump-teen-vogue>
The challenge we have in front of us, though, is not just the danger of 
Trump’s administration or the emboldening of Republicans. In a time when bad 
news for progress is around every corner – as Slate writer Jamelle Bouieput it 
<https://twitter.com/jbouie/status/808357517625618436>, “what disaster to write 
about today?” – we have to make that sure that women’s rights don’t get lost in 
the shuffle.


It wasn’t so long ago that gender and race were considered ancillary or 
distracting topics in progressive politics – a notion still being bandied about 
as people blame “identity politics” and “political correctness”for Trump’s win 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/bernie-sanders-trump-won-because-people-are-tired-of-politically-correct-rhetoric/>
. If history is any indication, it won’t be long before we start hearing 
murmurings from so-called progressives that women should sacrifice working on 
issues that affect them in service of “the greater good”.


It’s vital that we not forget or lose the momentum feminism has had over the 
last decade, especially on reproductive rights. The stakes are just too high. 
Hundreds of thousands of American women have alreadysought out illegal abortions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
, in part because of state-level restrictions. And as the Affordable Care Act 
comes under fire, it could leave millions without coverage for contraception.


These are not small things, these are not side issues or special interests. 
Women’s ability to control their bodies and plan their family size is a human 
rights issue. And while we have a tremendous amount of work to do on so many 
fronts, Americans cannot afford to treat feminism and women’s progress as 
something that can be pushed aside for a time and picked up later. Let’s not 
allow our the fact that we’re overwhelmed to get the better of us – not now, 
and not for the next four years.

 