
The Williams sisters have never been particularly gracious losers, often 
preferring to make excuses rather than acknowledge that an opponent has played 
better. So it was hardly surprising that when Serena was asked whether she 
needed to win the Australian Open to counter talk of a decline, she replied 
sternly: "I don't appreciate that language."

She had just defeated France's Am√©lie Mauresmo 6-2, 6-2 with considerable ease 
to reach tomorrow's semi-finals where she will play the new Russian No1 Maria 
Sharapova, who beat her in last year's Wimbledon final and the final of the 
season-ending championships in Los Angeles. It will be a crucial match for 
Williams.

"I don't have to win this tournament to prove anything," she insisted. But of 
course she does, because it is the nature of sport to compare like with like. 
For various reasons, some of them to do with injury, others concerned with 
striking a balance between on- and off-court activities, Serena and Venus have 
slid down the tennis scale. A few years ago their rivals were few, and largely 
intimidated by the Americans' immense power and athleticism. Today's youngsters 
have no such inhibitions; they hit the ball every bit as hard and many are 
technically superior, including Sharapova.

However, the 17-year-old Wimbledon champion had to put up an immense fight 
before defeating her fellow Russian and reigning US Open champion Svetlana 
Kuznetsova, and it is possible that the combination of physical exertion and 
the acute heat will exact a payback when she meets Williams.

Kuznetsova, stocky and muscular, dominated the opening set, with her forehand 
frequently accelerating beyond Sharapova's extensive reach. Yet despite her 
early dominance in the rallies, her first serve was malfunctioning.

Sensing the weakness, Sharapova set about exploiting it with savage intent. 
She broke back immediately, and thereafter Kuznetsova was unable to hold her 
serve again, losing 4-6, 6-2, 6-2. From having all the enthusiastic bounce of a 
young puppy, the 19-year-old Kuznetsova sunk into ever increasing despond. 
"It's all in my mind. I have the game; I have everything. But if you don't do 
the right things, you don't win."

Provided she recovers, Sharapova, whose will to win borders on frightening, 
seems certain to push Williams to her limits. The six-times grand slam winner 
still believes she is the best in the world, but the proof has been missing for 
nearly a year and a half at grand slam level. Tomorrow will be an acid test for 
Williams. Failure may mean an accelerated slide.
 