
William Buick will spend one of the busiest months of the Flat campaign on the 
sidelines after a30-day suspension imposed by the stewards at Chantilly on 
19 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/william-buick-banned-month-chantilly-godolphin-horse-racing>
 was confirmed by an appeal panel in Paris on Wednesday. The ban comprises 15 
days for causing interference which led to Pierre-Charles Boudot being unseated 
in the Prix de Diane (French Oaks), and a further 15 days for offensive 
comments to the panel at Chantilly.

Eclipse day at Sandown Park on Saturday, when he is expected to ride the Royal 
Ascot winner Hawkbill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/16/royal-ascot-gold-cup-day-live?page=with:block-5762cfcfe4b088b489cb2123>
 in the feature race, will be Buick’s final day in the saddle until early 
August.

Clive Cox hopes he can keep punching above his weight in Sandown’s Eclipse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/26/clive-cox-sandown-eclipse-stakes-royal-ascot>
He will be forced to miss the July meeting at Newmarket next week, the Irish 
Oaks, the King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot and all five days of
Glorious Goodwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/glorious-goodwood>, one of 
the most valuable meetings of the season.

Buick’s extended absence will mean that James McDonald, Godolphin’s principal 
jockey in Australia, will extend a stay in Britain that has already seen him 
claim the Northumberland Plate at Newcastle last weekend.

Buick was riding Highlands Queen, an outsider, for Yohann Gourraud in the Prix 
de Diane when he was judged to have caused interference to several runners, 
including Armande, ridden by Bourdot, who stumbled and unseated her jockey 
about a furlong-and-a-half from the finish. Both Armande and her jockey emerged 
from the incident unscathed, while Highlands Queen was subsequently demoted 
from ninth place to last.

“It’s not for us to comment on the ban other than to say that we are very 
sorry that we will not have William for the next 30 days,” John Ferguson, 
Godolphin’s chief executive, said on Wednesday.

“But the fact is that we do have James McDonald, who rode Antiquarium to win 
the Northumberland Plate last Saturday, and he is available for the next 30 
days. He’s a world-class rider and it will obviously be the case that one man’s 
misfortune is another man’s opportunity.”

Buick will hope to sign off before his enforced break with a Group One winner 
via Hawkbill, the Tercentenary Stakes winner atRoyal Ascot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/royal-ascot>, who is top-priced at 7-1 for 
the Eclipse after being given a supplementary entry on Monday.

William Buick banned for one month by ‘offended’ Chantilly stewards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/william-buick-banned-month-chantilly-godolphin-horse-racing>
The Gurkha, though, seems certain to start favourite when he steps up to 10 
furlongs for the first time, two‑and‑a‑half weeks afterfinishing second behind 
Galileo Gold in the St James’s Palace Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/14/royal-ascot-2016-day-one-live>
. Aidan O’Brien’s colt is top-priced at 11-10, but was backed to odds-on in 
places on day afternoon.

Time Test, who missed an intended engagement at the Royal meeting due to 
unsuitably soft ground, also seems increasingly likely to line up on Saturday 
after Andrew Cooper, Sandown’s clerk of the course, reported improving 
conditions at the track on Wednesday.

Roger Charlton’s colt is a 9-2 chance while My Dream Boat, the 16-1 winner of 
Ascot’s Prince of Wales’s Stakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/15/my-dream-boat-shock-winner-prince-of-wales-stakes-royal-ascot>
, is second-favourite on 7-2.

“It doesn’t look like it is going to be as soft as we thought earlier in the 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/sandown-waterlogging-time-test-eclipse-stakes-doubt>
 based on where we were and the forecast we have been given,” Cooper said.

“In the short term, we will be on the soft side of good and we will probably 
be in that sort of territory come Friday. It is certainly not looking like it 
is going to be soft ground. I suspect it might be on the slow side of good.”

Duramente, seen as Japan’s best chance to record a first victory in the Prix 
de l’Arc de Triomphe later in the year, has been retired after injuring his 
near-foreleg in a race on Sunday. The four-year-old won five of his nine starts 
including two Grade One events, and finished second in the Dubai Sheema Classic 
at Meydan in March.

“I felt he still had a way to go before becoming the perfect racehorse, so it 
really is a great shame that his career has been cut short by an accident like 
this,” Noriyuki Hori, Duramente’s trainer, said a statement on Wednesday 
afternoon.
 