
Who would think of buying The Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent>? Come on, hands up. There 
must be someone out there with a big enough bank balance, and a big enough ego, 
who thinks national newspaper ownership is worth losing Â£9m a year. For years 
on end.

Surely, there must be another Russian oligarch, or an Arabian sheikh perhaps, 
or even a newly rich Chinese tycoon who fancies being a British media magnate. 
No?

Then what about the current owners of our national press? I doubt that because 
they know all too well the commercial pitfalls involved plus, of course, 
competition objections. Why imperil their already precarious finances by taking 
on the loss-making Indy?

Then again, the i <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> has found a loyal 
audience of roughly 300,000 a day. And the large majority of those readers are 
in that advertising-friendly demographic - young, educated and affluent.

There have been suggestions that buyers might prefer to buy i, rather than the 
Indy and the Sindy, along with the Independent.co.uk website.

But i is a format rather than a stand-alone paper. It relies on publishing 
copy repurposed from The Independent. So a buyer would be acquiring a concept, 
not a proper title.

After all, The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> could 
always launch g. Similarly, The Times could have gone with t at any time (which 
some of its executives, having noted i's success, once thought was a rather 
good wheeze).

Why didn't they do it? Because they feared cannibalising their main 
newspapers. Because the necessary investment seemed disproportionate for the 
potential rewards. Because i's upward sales surge has halted well short of 
making it genuinely profitable.

Even so, for a new entrant to newspaper ownership, i might well seem like a 
good prospect. With skilled use of wire copy and contributions from high 
profile commentators, it might just work.

Well, up to a point. It would still require a huge punt, given that most 
investment analysts regard newsprint newspapers as a smokestack industry. It 
would be a brave entrepreneur who disregarded such advice.

Andreas Whittam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andreas-whittam-smith>
 has clearly found it difficult to attract anyone in his discreet inquiries 
over the past weeks and months. Perhaps the emergence of the story in public - 
something of a free public prospectus - will attract a buyer and save Alexander 
Lebedev losing more money. Sadly, I doubt it.
 