
Q My boyfriend purchased a motorbike a few months ago, which came with a year 
warranty. After a month an oil warning light came on the bike, but since 
filling it up the light was still on. Careful reading of the manual then 
revealed the light had a joint purpose - low oil and to indicate a service was 
due. While driving the bike to the specialist service centre in London, the 
bike broke down. This was due to low oil - we assumed the light was lit because 
the service was due, and not because of low oil. The repairs are quite steep 
and we're being told they are not covered under warranty because of the low oil 
incident. Do we have a right to argue this based on the fact there wasn't a 
separate indication for the low oil and service check?
IB

A You don't say whether the warranty is a manufacturer's 12-month guarantee, a 
separate agreement sold with the motorbike by the dealer, or an extended 
warranty company. Either way, however, the position is the same - your rights 
depend entirely on the wording of the warranty.

The reason you've been told the repairs are not covered is because the 
warranty company is arguing that the faults are due to customer misuse - you 
continued to ride the bike with a warning light displayed. But since you had 
already filled the tank with oil and discovered the warning light was dual 
purpose, you did nothing wrong. The important point is that you did not 
contribute to the problem by behaving recklessly at any point. You are 
therefore within your rights to pursue your claim under warranty.

In any event, in addition to your rights under warranty you have a separate 
right to claim redress from the seller in accordance with your rights under the 
Sale of Goods Act. Since your motorbike broke down after only a few months, you 
are entitled to either a replacement motorbike or repairs at the seller's 
option. But if the seller chooses to repair the motorbike these must be carried 
out within a reasonable time.
 