
This week the same MPs who voted Andrew Lansley’s unpopular Health and Social 
Care Act through parliament, despite thewarnings that it would distract, weaken 
and potentially even wreck the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/18/doctors-warning-nhs>, have a 
chance to undo at least some of the damage that both Westminster and the NHS’s 
equivalents of the dogs in the street know it has done. On Friday they will 
debate and vote on Labour MPClive Efford’s National Health Service (amended 
duties and powers) bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2014-15/nationalhealthserviceamendeddutiesandpowers.html>
, a private member’s bill which will receive its second reading.

Among what Efford regards as the many ill-advised, reckless or self-evidently 
negative changes the 2012 Act involved, he has one key target – the huge 
expansion in competition it brought to the NHS, with a concomitant expansion in 
the privatisation of clinical services previously provided by theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

“The bill wouldn’t repeal the entire Health and Social Care Act. But it cuts 
the heart out of it. It would repeal some of the worst elements of it that 
impose market forces on the NHS,” explains the MP for Eltham in south-east 
London, who is better known as theshadow sports minister 
<http://www.cliveefford.org.uk/about_clive>. For example, it would replace the 
health sector regulator Monitor’s duty to promote tendering with an obligation 
to promote integration of services.

Its 14 clauses would also repeal “section 75 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/22/section-75-health-act-destruction-engine>
”, the clause in Lansley’s legacy that enforces the compulsory tendering of all 
NHS contracts, which came into force last year. It removes the ability of 
hospitals to earn 49% of their income from private patients.New figures last 
weekend showed that such income has risen 10% overall since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/16/nhs-trusts-chasing-private-patients>
with, for example, the specialist Royal Brompton and Harefield trust growing 
its revenue from that source from £24.3m in 2010-11 to £33.6m in 2013-14.

It would also exempt the NHS from the EU-US trade treaty, currently being 
negotiated in secret, known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership(TTIP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
, which could open up NHS services to competition permanently, including from 
US healthcare firms. The coalition’s refusal to seek such an opt-out would be 
trumped by the new law specifying that TTIP does not affect the NHS. And it 
would restore the health secretary’s responsibility for the NHS, something 
Lansley watered down. Crucially, says Efford, his bill would reassert 
parliament’s sovereignty over the NHS.

The Royal College of Nursing, a persistent critic of Lansley’s “unnecessary 
and chaotic reorganisation”, haswelcomed the bill as an opportunity to undo the 
damage 
<http://www.rcn.org.uk/newsevents/news/article/uk/not_too_late_to_remove_unnecessary_focus_on_competition_from_nhs_rcn_responds_to_efford_bill>
. Lord Owen, the ex-Labour health secretary who tried to pilot two similar 
bills through last year, praises its “imaginative and constructive proposals”. 
TheBritish Medical Association is broadly supportive,  
<http://bma.org.uk/news-views-analysis/news/2014/november/bill-aims-to-remove-worst-elements-of-nhs-reform>
though worried that an over-powerful health secretary could introduce even more 
political interference in the NHS.

If it became law – few private member’s bills ever do – Efford’s bill would 
amount to a parliamentary mea culpa of historic proportions. If the coalition 
had made meaningful rather than cosmetic changes to Lansley’s law at the time, 
Efford’s effort would not be needed. But the admission by an unnamed cabinet 
minister last month that the act was this government’s greatest folly (quoted 
on the front page of the Times) and the fact that 44% of the public think the 
NHS is under threat from private health companies suggests Efford’s bill has 
caught a mood.

Efford says: “There will be plenty of Labour MPs in the Commons on Friday [a 
day MPs are usually in their constituences rather than Westminster] and I’ve 
got no indication that there’s a whipping operation to stop it, so the 
government has accepted that it can’t win the vote”.

Are any coalition MPs who backed Lansley’s bill likely to now back Efford’s? 
“Not so far. I suspect that they are all too embarrassed that they supported 
this incredibly unpopular piece of legislation that people want repealed,” he 
says.
 