
Paul Mason’s interesting analysis of Westeros economics (A Marxist Game of 
Thrones, G2, 7 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/06/marxist-theory-game-of-thrones-lannisters-bankers-sex-power-feudal-westeros-revolution>
) had a couple of important lacunae. The first came with his throwaway appeal 
to social psychologists to explain fantasy’s continuing appeal. I don’t doubt 
that my colleagues in that field have much to contribute, but a lot of this 
work has already been done – in the much maligned field of media studies. In 
2004 an international team of researchers gathered 25,000 responses to the 
films of The Lord of the Rings and learned (among many other things) that for 
those who most valued them, these films did the exact opposite of what Mason 
supposes. Their appeal lay precisely in the courage that people saw in the 
small characters who made a difference despite their size.

The second lacuna is in missing all the ways in which, recently, works of 
fantasy have provided motifs for emergent political movements: for Thai 
democracy demonstrators (The Hunger Games); for environmental protesters, and 
for occupied Palestinians (Avatar); and for the Occupy movement in the US (V 
For Vendetta). These are signs of a different kind of importance. We are 
currently researching reactions to The Hobbit (33,000 responses to date) – not 
so successful perhaps, but maybe for that very reason a researcher’s dream, 
since we may be able to see people’s disappointed ideals through their 
responses.Fantasy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fantasy-tv> is, 
indeed, very important.
Emeritus professor Martin Barker
Aberystwyth University

• John Mullan (Review, 4 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/03/george-rr-martin-game-of-thrones-and-the-triumph-of-fantasy-fiction>
) lives in a fantasy world in which “the Harry Potter novels”, alone of all the 
books he lists, magically wrote themselves. The omission – twice – of JK 
Rowling’s name is all the more glaring because she is the only female fantasy 
writer (not) cited in the main article. Yes, Trudy Canavan makes the small 
print (in answers to Mullan’s maps quiz), but, at the very least, I’d have 
expected Mullan to creditDiana Gabaldon <http://www.dianagabaldon.com>, the TV 
adaptation of whose Outlander books has won considerable audiences; and above 
all, the outstanding work ofUrsula K Le Guin <http://www.ursulakleguin.com> as 
writer and champion of the genre. Moreover, emerging female writers of colour 
such asNK Jemisin <http://nkjemisin.com> are challenging the northern European 
feudal nostalgia that groups (and possibly explains the popularity of) many of 
the series Mullan cites.
Dr Sophie Mayer
Lecturer in film studies, Queen Mary, University of London
 