
Had the Nato summit been held a few weeks earlier, William Hague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague> would have found himself 
120 miles down the M4, schmoozing with foreign ministers from Mongolia and 
Uzbekistan – Nato takes its outreach programme very seriously – visiting the 
only primary school in Newport that hadn't been closed for the day. He'd have 
been posing for awkward photo opportunities – "I'm sorry, Barack, I thought 
we'd booked Newport, Rhode Island" – next to the military hardware parked up on 
the Celtic Manor golf course.

If the leader of the Commons was piqued that the demands of his new job would 
limit his presence in south Wales to a small role later in the day to talk 
about the campaign against female genital mutilation (and doubtless share 
selfies of him atBrangelina's wedding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/sep/02/wedding-dress-classic-angelina-jolie-gown>
) with other world leaders, he didn't show it. Far from it. At Westminster, 
Hague looked like a man who genuinely couldn't believe his good fortune in 
having to read out next week's business timetable in front of a handful of MPs. 
Wild horses…

There were some notable absences, though, and Hague's opposite number, Angela 
Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, was most interested 
in the whereabouts of Michael Gove. It's traditional for the chief whip to make 
an appearance for this session, but Gove has failed to turn up to either of the 
two that have been held since his appointment. The cry went round the house: 
W...h...e...r...e...'s Mikey?

"Before the summer recess he lost his first vote, only three days into his new 
job," Eagle said. "Yesterday, only three days into the new session, he has 
already had to retreat before he lost another one. He was stuck in the toilet 
last time – I am not sure that I really want to know what his excuse is this 
time."

Hague wasn't prepared to divulge any intimacies. "I was a bit disappointed 
that it was the same joke about his being in the toilet as seven weeks ago," he 
said. "Recycling has its limits and we would like slightly more up to date. I 
am all in favour of recycling jokes, but I expect more from the honourable 
lady. I am sure that she will be able to deliver that next week."

This was a call for Eagle to up her game. She had had it far too easy against 
the previous leader,Andrew Lansley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, and had become lazy with 
her gags. If she was going to continue to use the session to take the piss – 
and he sincerely hoped she would – she could at least make an effort. Eagle 
smiled, taking the rebuke in the spirit in which it was offered. Next week's 
session should be a cracker.

Hague then responded to the inevitable jibes about the Tories' Ukip problems. 
"Our former honourable friendDouglas Carswell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/douglas-carswell> explained in May that 
the Conservative party's policy on Europe was 100% right," he said. "He may be 
the only person in British history to leave a political party because he was 
100% in agreement with it. That is particularly striking as there are many 
people who sit in this house in their political parties perfectly happily who 
certainly do not agree 100% with their party's policies."

As a put down to Carswell it was first rate. As an insight into Hague's own 
state of mind it was more intriguing. Just how much in agreement is he with his 
own party – 70%? 60%? Some might put it even lower. We're unlikely to find out 
for sure, as Hague is in the swan song of his parliamentary career. But what a 
swan song it is shaping up to be.
 