
As Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> prepares to 
defend his Wimbledon title, here is how the past 10 men’s champions have 
performed 12 months on from their crowning glory in SW19.

Stefan Edberg 

First Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> title 1988 

Following year Final. The Swede dropped only two sets en route to the 1989 
final where, once again, he faced Boris Becker. This time, however, Edberg lost 
in straight sets to the German 6-0, 7-6, 6-4.

Michael Stich 

First Wimbledon title 1991

Following year Quarter-finals. In a golden era for German tennis Stich looked 
on course to retain his crown. However, he faced a young American called Pete 
Sampras in the last eight and lost in straight sets 6-3, 6-2, 6-4.

Andre Agassi

First Wimbledon title 1992

Following year Semi-finals. The American faced his compatriot Sampras in what 
was the pair’s eighth meeting. Sampras won a close, epic battle, 6-2, 6-2, 3-6, 
3-6, 6-4.

Pete Sampras 

First Wimbledon title 1993

Following year Winner. A truly dominant display by 1994’s first seed. Sampras 
dropped only one set during the tournament, to Todd Martin, before beating 
Goran Ivanisevic in the final 7-6, 7-6, 6-0.

Richard Krajicek 

First Wimbledon title 1996

Following year Fourth round. The Dutchman returned to SW19 in 1997 keen to 
prove he was not a one-hit wonder but ultimately surrendered his title in the 
fourth round, losing a tight contest with Tim Henman, 7-6, 6-7, 7-6, 6-4.

Goran Ivanisevic

First Wimbledon title 2001

Following year Did not participate. After becoming the only wild-card entry to 
win Wimbledon Ivanisevic did not return to London to defend his title after 
temporarily retiring in 2002 after having shoulder surgery.

Lleyton Hewitt 

First Wimbledon title 2002

Following year First round. The Australian suffered one of the great Wimbledon 
upsets after heading into the tournament as the first seed. He lost to the 
big-serving Croat Ivo Karlovic 1-6, 7-6, 6-3, 6-4.

Roger Federer

First Wimbledon title 2003

Following year Winner. After adding the US and Australian Open titles to his 
inaugural Wimbledon triumph, the Swiss excelled again at SW19, breezing through 
the competition before defeating Andy Roddick in the final 4-6, 7-5, 7-6 , 6-4.

Rafael Nadal 

First Wimbledon title 2008

Following year Did not participate. Having beaten Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> in arguably the greatest 
Wimbledon final of all time, Nadal did not return to defend his title in 2009. 
At the time he said it was because of a knee injury before revealing in his 
autobiography that his parents’ divorce on the eve of the Championship had left 
him too devastated to take part.

Novak Djokovic

First Wimbledon title 2011

Following year Semi-finals. The Serb entered the defence of his title as world 
No1 and looked the part as he dropped only one set en route to the last four. 
However, once there Djokovic lost in four sets to the eventual 2012 champion – 
Roger Federer.
 