
Seeing the northern lights is on many a bucket list – but seeing them in a 
setting just as inspiring as the aurora borealis itself defies all expectations.

In the north of Sweden, the Abisko national park boasts boreal forests and 
fjords and is home to the indigenous Sami people. It also has one of the 
planet’s best and most consistent locations for sightings of the northern 
lights.


A winter holiday in Abisko is once-in-a-lifetime stuff – and one lucky reader 
could win a spectacular four-night break there.


On the Northern Lights and Sami Legends holiday 
<http://www.aurora-nights.co.uk/aurora-sky-station-abisko-break.php>, guests 
first fly to Kiruna, the most northerly town in Sweden. After being furnished 
with Arctic clothing to wear for the duration of their stay, you’ll head to the 
Máttaráhkká Northern Lights Lodge, a comfortable and friendly home-from-home in 
stunning surroundings.

On your first night, you’ll spend the evening with a Sami guide, meeting his 
reindeer before going out into the wilderness on a snowmobile sledge. Hot 
drinks and supper are served in a Sami tepee – with a side helping of 
intriguing tales about Sami life.

On the second day, guests travel 25 miles by snowmobile across the untouched 
wilderness of Swedish Lapland before exploring the original Ice Hotel, visiting 
the Ice Bar, chapel and individual art suites.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fwin-a-four-night-break-to-see-the-northern-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce222d7515d87520c7df3a559c6cc7ff712fefc9%2F0_154_2463_1478%2F2463.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Win%20a%20four-night%20break%20to%20see%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fwin-a-four-night-break-to-see-the-northern-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Win%20a%20four-night%20break%20to%20see%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvisit-swedish-lapland%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fwin-a-four-night-break-to-see-the-northern-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce222d7515d87520c7df3a559c6cc7ff712fefc9%2F0_154_2463_1478%2F2463.jpg>
 The holiday includes a husky sledge experience. Photograph: Graeme Richardson 
After a second night at Máttaráhkká, the adventure continues with a husky 
sledge experience, including the chance to drive a team of dogs on a sledge for 
two. In the evening, guests take the one-hour trip to the Abisko Mountain 
Lodge, where they will stay for two nights.

Abisko is known for its cloud-free sky and minimal artificial light, making it 
one ofthe best places in the world to see the northern lights 
<http://luxeadventuretraveler.com/best-place-in-europe-to-see-northern-lights/>.

On the final day, a trip to Norwegian fjords awaits: Abisko is less than 20 
miles from the Norwegian border and the scenery is breathtaking. Then, after 
dinner back at Abisko, you’ll join theLights Over Lapland 
<http://lightsoverlapland.com/> team to photograph the northern lights and 
hopefully capture an amazing picture to take home as a souvenir.

The lucky winner of this unforgettable holiday for two, worth £3500, must take 
their trip between 11 December 2016 and 20 March 2017. For a chance to win, 
simply enter your details below.

Terms and conditions

 * The Weekend à la Carte Swedish Lapland prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is 
open to residents of the UK aged 18 and over.

 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM”), their group companies or family members or anyone else 
connected to the Prize Draw.

 * Entry into the Prize Draw is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions. 
 *  To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. If you have 
any questions about how to enter or in connection with the Prize Draw, please 
emailcompetitions.glabs@theguardian.com 
<mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> with “Weekend à la Carte Swedish 
Lapland prize draw” in the subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. 
 * No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 6 January 2016. Entries received after 
that date and time will not be considered. 
 * The winner will be chosen from a random draw of entries. 
 * The prize is for two adults and includes flights, all accommodation, meals, 
activities, arctic clothing loan and transfers in Sweden. No monetary value is 
available in exchange for the holiday 
 * All spending money and other expenses (including all personal expenses, 
upgrades, meals outside of the package and in-room charges such as mini bar 
consumption, telephone calls, laundry services etc) as the case may be, unless 
specifically stated, are the sole responsibility of the prize winner. Prize 
winners are responsible for their own transport to and from the UK airports. 
The prize is valid for two adults travelling between 11 December 2016 and 20 
March 2017 (excluding 19 Dec 2016–3 Jan 2017 and 14-28 Feb 2017). GNM accepts 
no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize and not specifically 
included in the prize.

 * The winner/winners will be notified by phone or email after 13 January 2016 
and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to 
GNM within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that winner 
will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days or else 
they will also forfeit their prize).

 * Details of the winner/winners can be obtained by sending a stamped 
addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Creative, Guardian News & 
Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes. 
 * GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of similar 
value in the event the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winner may be required for promotional activity. 
 * Weekend à la Carte has the right to use the winner’s details for marketing 
purposes. 
 * No purchase necessary. 
 * Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw.
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw will be governed by English law. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.  