
Girls' Night Out celebrates women in the restaurant industry. Over three 
nights in March, six leading chefs from London and abroad will be cooking 
specially devised menus at1 Lombard Street <http://www.1lombardstreet.com/>, 
London EC3. You can win a five-course dinner for two worth £200 per head, 
including champagne and wine, on one of these nights.

On March 11, Gabrielle Hamilton, chef-owner of Prune 
<http://www.prunerestaurant.com/> in New York, will cook with Angela Hartnett 
of London'sMurano <http://www.muranolondon.com/>.

On March 12, Helena Rizzo of Mani 
<http://www.nowness.com/day/2010/11/15/1129/helena-rizzo-brazils-queen-chef> in 
Sao Paolo, Brazil, and Clare Smyth, triple-Michelin-starred head chef of 
London'sRestaurant Gordon Ramsay 
<http://www.gordonramsay.com/royalhospitalroad/Royal Hospital Road>, will take 
over the kitchen.

On March 13, it's the turn of Margot Janse 
<http://www.lqf.co.za/cuisine/margot-janse-bio.htm>, executive chef of Le 
Quartier Français <http://www.lqf.co.za/> in South Africa's Western Cape, and 
Anna Hansen, chef-owner ofThe Modern Pantry <http://www.themodernpantry.co.uk/> 
in London.

The evenings will begin with champagne and canapes, followed by a meal with 
wines chosen by Selfridges buyer Dawn Davies, who has sourced wine from female 
producers. The chefs will talk about their menus and answer your questions.

To win a place at this exclusive event – organised by Guardian chef Angela 
Hartnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/21/angela-hartnett-women-michelin-stars>
 and writerFiona Sims <http://www.the2fionas.com/fiona-sims.html>, and 
sponsored by American Express – email g2.competition@theguardian.com with your 
name and phone number, and preferred date. The competition closes at 11.59pm on 
Sunday 19 February 2012. Full terms and conditions below. Good luck!

Full terms and conditions


1. To enter, email g2.competition@theguardian.com with your contact details 
(name, email address and phone number) and preferred date to attend the event. 
2. Competition open to UK residents aged 18 and over. 3. Employees and agencies 
of Guardian News & Media Limited ("GNM"), its group companies, family members 
and anyone connected to the competition may not enter. 4. Competition closes 
11.59pm on 19 February 2012. 5. One entry per person. 6. Three winners will be 
selected at random and will be notified by email or phone on or before 27 
February 2012. Winners must reply within 6 days or will forfeit the prize. 7. 
Each prize is pair of tickets for one Girls Night Out dinner on 11, 12 or 13 
March 2012. Winners' preferred choice of date is not guaranteed. 8. No cash 
alternative. Prize is non-transferable and non-exchangeable. 9. By entering you 
accept GNM's full terms and conditions. 10. Name of winners available on 
written request to G2. 11. Winners may be required for promotional activity.
 