
Disney is to make yet another raid into its archive with a live action remake 
of much-loved children’s animation Winnie the Pooh.
According to reports 
<http://deadline.com/2015/04/winnie-the-pooh-disney-live-action-feature-alex-ross-perry-1201392427/>
, the new version will take a revisionist approach to AA Milne’s classic 
stories of the bear of little brain and his companions Tigger, Eeyore, Piglet, 
Owl and Rabbit. Screenwriter Alex Ross Perry, best known for writing and 
directing the 2014 Sundance hit Listen Up Phillip, will present a version in 
which Christopher Robin (Pooh’s owner) finds himself back in the Hundred Acre 
Wood as an adult.

That scenario has echoes of Disney’s hugely successful fantasy remake Alice in 
Wonderland, which took $1bn in 2010 with the story of Alice’s return to the 
Carrollian underworld. It is not clear whether Pooh will be further revised to 
restore the bear’s innate Britishness: Milne aficionados have long complained 
that a series of stories set in Ashdown Forest in Sussex wasgiven a North 
American flavour by Disney 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2014/12/26/251263/for-some-in-britain-reclaiming.html>
, with the studio even adding a character named Gopher that was not in the 
books.

Disney’s animated Pooh films include 1977’s The Many Adventures of Winnie the 
Pooh, 2000’s Tigger Movie, 2003’s Piglet’s Big Movie, 2005’s Pooh’s Heffalump 
Movie, and 2011’s Winnie the Pooh. The studio has embarked on a programme of 
reworking its back catalogue, following Alice in Wonderland with Wizard of Oz 
and Sleeping Beauty prequels Oz the Great and Powerful andMaleficent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, as well as the current live 
action take on Cinderella and upcoming films based on Beauty and the Beast and 
Mulan.
 