
Reading Winnie-the-Pooh, it may be tempting to think that AA Milne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aa-milne>’s charming and insouciant tales 
about the Bear of Little Brain and his companions in the Hundred Acre Wood 
tripped easily on to the page with scarcely any authorial involvement. That is 
not quite the case, as I discovered in contributing to the official sequel,The 
Best Bear in All the World, which was published on Thursday for Pooh’s 90th 
anniversary.

The wit and wisdom of Winnie-the-Pooh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/14/the-wit-and-wisdom-of-winnie-the-pooh>
Today, Milne’s reputation is as a writer for children, but before Christopher 
Robin and Pooh he was an acclaimed playwright and an accomplished essayist, 
novelist and writer of light verse. A 1920s polymath, his lighter-than-air wit 
caught and reflected the gaiety of the decade.

This was the skill set that Milne brought to his books for young readers: a 
consummate knack for creating pin-sharp characterisations that makes Pooh, 
Piglet et al so memorable, and droll, occasionally sardonic, dialogue that 
appeals to readers of all ages. This is the work of a playwright at play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-winnie-the-pooh-is-still-the-best-bear-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30baf019b0cc2bad8f98166861b3898a1f64d7ac%2F201_0_5717_3430%2F5717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winnie-the-Pooh%20at%2090%3A%20still%20the%20best%20bear%20in%20all%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-winnie-the-pooh-is-still-the-best-bear-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winnie-the-Pooh%20at%2090%3A%20still%20the%20best%20bear%20in%20all%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-winnie-the-pooh-is-still-the-best-bear-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30baf019b0cc2bad8f98166861b3898a1f64d7ac%2F201_0_5717_3430%2F5717.jpg>
 Illustration by Mark Burgess. Courtesy of Mark Burgess/Trustees of the Pooh 
Properties/Egmont Publishing 
Attempting to capture some of those qualities was a challenge, as was trying 
to replicate Milne’s verbal and stylistic tricks, such as Occasional Flurries 
of Capital Letters. And as if that wasn’t enough, I took the risky liberty, in 
my story, “Winter”, of inviting a newcomer to Pooh Corner. Penguin was inspired 
by a long-overlooked photograph of Milne playing with his son, Christopher 
Robin, with the teddy bear who would become Pooh, and a toy penguin.

While my colleagues – Paul Bright, Kate Saunders, Jeanne Willis – and I have 
been engaged on our Milne “impoohsonations”, illustrator Mark Burgess has been 
busily capturing the illustrative style of the original decorations by EH 
Shepard.

At 90 years young, Winnie-the-Pooh is still – in the words of Christopher 
Robin – the Best Bear in All the World.
 