
Ben Damh means “hill of the stag” in Gaelic. You can see why. In the season of 
the rut the hill is alive with the sight, sound and smell ofred deer 
<http://www.bds.org.uk/index.php/advice-education/species/red-deer>. Even 
before we reach the ridge we can hear roaring, like the sound of a distant 
lawnmower. As we stalk down onto the western slopes above Loch Damh, past musky 
puddles of peat where the stags will wallow, we are entering the centre of an 
unfolding drama with enough sex and violence to rival Game of Thrones.

 Each stag is ready to fight to the death for his chance to mate – and he only 
has only a short window to take his opportunity. On such poor ground as this, 
the hinds are in oestrus for just four short weeks around the beginning of 
October. They gather on the high greens to graze while the feeding is good, and 
the males soon follow.

Country diary: Dalmigavie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/nov/18/country-diary-dalmigavie> 
The first stag we come across is a “traveller” moving over the hill looking 
for a group of hinds to take over. He has been rolling in peat to blacken his 
fur and accentuate his barrel chest and shaggy mane. He has a fine set of wide 
antlers with 11 points and, standing on a ledge against the blue hills beyond, 
he looks a little like Landseer’s portrait ofThe Monarch of the Glen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Monarch_of_the_Glen_(painting)>.

Further down, another young stag is grunting and bawling, having lost any 
pretence of the rather Victorian notion of “nobility”. He roots in the heather 
with his antlers and paws the ground. I inch forward until I can see the source 
of his frustration. Below, there is a group of hinds, but a royal stag (with 12 
points) is keeping a close eye on them. The eight-pointer pretender may pant 
and gurn but for now, he doesn’t dare go on the offensive.

The bigger stag is fed up of this uninvited guest, as, I suspect, are the 
hinds, who move around the corner taking their protector with them, the young 
male following, his tongue lolling out. Out of sight, the drama continues.
 