
The Hundred Acre Wood is already home to a diverse animal population, from a 
kangaroo to the world’s most famous bear. Now a penguin is due to join the cast 
dreamed up byAA Milne <https://www.theguardian.com/books/aa-milne> in 1926, to 
mark the 90th anniversary of Winnie-the-Pooh.

Author Brian Sibley was inspired to create the character of Penguin by a 
little-known photograph of Milne with his son Christopher Robin Milne, in which 
Christopher is playing with a penguin toy alongside a teddy bear. The latter, 
which was renamed Winnie-the-Pooh after London Zoo’s Canadian black bear 
Winnie, was bought by Christopher’s mother Daphne Milne from the Harrods toy 
department, and was the inspiration for Milne’s best-loved stories set in the 
Hundred Acre Wood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14934f439d3871ea5f90f43e0ab9d1f52c1e4023%2F0_0_1437_1211%2F1437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14934f439d3871ea5f90f43e0ab9d1f52c1e4023%2F0_0_1437_1211%2F1437.jpg>
 AA Milne and Christopher Robin Milne, pictured playing with the penguin and 
Winnie-the-Pooh. Photograph: Culture Club/Getty Images 
The penguin toy is also believed to have been bought from Harrods, as were the 
toys that inspired Eeyore, Kanga, Roo and Tigger. Sibley, who was asked to 
write a new Pooh story to mark this year’s anniversary, said that the photo of 
the author and his son with the penguin toy came to mind while he was 
“pondering what other toys Christopher Robin might have owned but which were 
never written about”.

The real Winnie-the-Pooh and friends back on show after makeover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/03/the-real-winnie-the-pooh-and-friends-back-on-show-after-makeover>
“The thought of Pooh encountering a penguin seemed no more outlandish than his 
meeting a kangaroo and a tiger in a Sussex wood, so I started thinking about 
what might have happened if, on a rather snowy day, Penguin had found his way 
to Pooh Corner,” said Sibley, one of four authors to have contributed a 
seasonal story to the official sequel, The Best Bear in All the World, which 
will come out on 6 October from Egmont.

The writer said that he had loved Winnie-the-Pooh since childhood, and that 
writing his own story was “wildly exciting”, but “also daunting”.

“Milne’s effortless writing, especially in the Pooh books, at first seems 
highly imitable – until, that is, you attempt the imitation,” he said. “The 
stories may be light on plot: small, child-sized incidents involving mishaps 
and misunderstandings and experiences with that constant feature of country 
life – the weather.

“But what makes … these tales so memorable is their ability to work on two 
different levels: the child listener to the story always understands what is 
happening just before Pooh and the others do; while the adult reading to the 
child engages by recognising that, under their fur and feathers, the characters 
are just like people we know among our family, friends and colleagues.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21f9fb6b0c0ed51afa58cb2d87e5fbc191aa564f%2F896_254_4727_2504%2F4727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21f9fb6b0c0ed51afa58cb2d87e5fbc191aa564f%2F896_254_4727_2504%2F4727.jpg>
 Winnie-the-Pooh and friends, in an illustration from The Best Bear in All the 
World. Illustration: Mark Burgess/Egmont Publishing 
Sibley’s story Winter: In Which Penguin Arrives in the Forest, illustrated by 
Mark Burgess, will be joined by stories from Paul Bright, Kate Saunders and 
Jeanne Willis when the sequel is published in October. Burgess said that he was 
aiming for the spirit of Milne’s illustrator EH Shepard, “rather than slavishly 
copying”, when illustrating the sequel, and that he especially enjoyed drawing 
Penguin. “With a new character I feel I’m not quite so much in Shepard’s 
shadow. I hope Penguin has some more adventures,” said the illustrator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff75f2514c6689549cee9ab90c9d30cf8da6e99%2F50_24_1320_1648%2F1320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winnie-the-Pooh%20makes%20friends%20with%20a%20penguin%20to%20mark%20anniversary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fwinnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff75f2514c6689549cee9ab90c9d30cf8da6e99%2F50_24_1320_1648%2F1320.jpg>
 Squeak the penguin, from the Christmas edition of Harrods News, 1922. 
Photograph: Harrods Archive 
The character of Pooh made his first appearance in a 1923 poem in Punch. He 
went on to play a role in Milne’s poem collection When We Were Very Young, 
published in 1924, before starring in 1926’s Winnie-the-Pooh, which was an 
immediate hit. Milne followed this up with 1927’s Now We Are Six, and 1928’s 
The House at Pooh Corner. The Best Bear in All the World follows David 
Benedictus’s previous authorised sequel, Return to the Hundred Acre Wood, which 
was published in 2009.

Harrods archivist Sebastian Wormell said he believed the penguin toy in the 
picture could be “Squeak” from the cartoon strip Pip, Squeak and Wilfred, as 
shown in its 1922 catalogue. “In the early years of the 20th century, toy 
penguins soared in popularity as the exploits of Antarctic explorers such as 
Shackleton and Scott fascinated the public,” said Wormell. “It’s exciting to 
think a new Harrods toy could be joining Winnie-the-Pooh’s gang after all this 
time.”
 