
The gentle blundering of Winnie-the-Pooh has seen off the magical powers of 
Harry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> to be voted the 
UK’s favourite childhood book character.

A poll of 1,200 people who read at least once a week saw AA Milne’s creation 
top the list of favourite characters from childhood books, ahead of JK 
Rowling’s boy wizard. George, Enid Blyton’s tomboy adventurer from the Famous 
Five, came in third place, with The Hobbit’s Bilbo Baggins and Roald Dahl’s 
Matilda in fourth and fifth places.

Asked why they liked particular characters, 45% of respondents cited an 
adventurous nature – a characteristic that is certainly not true for Pooh, and 
only reluctantly so for Bilbo. Just over a third (37%) said their favourite 
character taught them to be different, while 33% said their choice of literary 
hero “felt like a good friend”.

The survey was commissioned by the Reading Agency, which launches its Summer 
Reading Challenge <http://summerreadingchallenge.org.uk/> for children in 
libraries across the country on Saturday. “We know the power of picking up a 
book you love and discovering a favourite character … The Summer Reading 
Challenge gives children the chance to be transported and inspired by the 
adventures of their favourite characters, and read books that can go on to play 
a fundamental role in their lives,” said chief executive Sue Wilkinson.

The top 10 was completed by a handful of classic characters, with Lucy from 
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe followed by The Cat in the Hat, Spot the 
Dog and Charlotte from Charlotte’s Web. Jacqueline Wilson’s creation Tracey 
Beaker took 10th place.

Stop pushing the same 'classic' books on children and trust modern writing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/13/stop-pushing-the-same-classic-books-on-children-and-trust-modern-writing>
The Reading Agency’s list includes characters from some of the same authors 
who featured onthe BBC’s new lineup of the top 10 titles every child should read
 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/57pvFwzbJHfmp3Gpjt44vQc/lovetoread-celebrating-the-pleasure-of-reading>
. This was criticised earlier this week by reading charity Booktrust’s chief 
executive Diana Gerald, who said that “too often, children are given ‘timeless 
classics’ to read, when there are so many other, newer books that are just as 
brilliant but can also talk to them about the world they know, in language that 
resonates with them.”

“We keep covering old ground when it comes to the notion of a ‘must-read’ 
book. There’s nothing new, no sense of exploration or departure from what’s 
come before – and in the case of lists for children, they don’t always reflect 
what young people are actually reading for pleasure,” agreed the novelist 
Samantha Shannon,in a piece for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/13/stop-pushing-the-same-classic-books-on-children-and-trust-modern-writing>
.

Wilkinson said that the Reading Agency undertook its new survey because it was 
“curious about which characters would stand the test of time and stay with us 
into adulthood, and the ones that would remain firm favourites across the 
generations”. Harry Potter, it discovered, was a favourite for 48% of 16-24 
year olds but only 3% of respondents over 55, while Pooh was a favourite for 
all ages. The survey’s older respondents preferred The Famous Five’s George and 
Bilbo Baggins to Harry Potter.

More than 750,000 children aged between four and 11 will take part in the 
Summer Reading Challenge, which encourages them to visit libraries and read six 
books over the holidays. The initiative’s 18th year will see it namedthe Big 
Friendly Read <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SxwPtzl34I>, to mark the 
centenary of Roald Dahl.

“We hope that the children walking through the doors of libraries enjoy taking 
part and finish the summer with a newfound love of reading,” said Wilkinson.

The full list of characters voted on, in order of popularity:

 * Winnie-the-Pooh

 * Harry Potter

 * George, The Famous Five

 * Bilbo Baggins, The Hobbit

 * Matilda

 * Lucy, The Lion the Witch and the Wardrobe

 * The Cat in the Hat

 * Spot the Dog

 * Charlotte, Charlotte’s Web

 * Tracey Beaker

 * Mog, Meg and Mog

 * Babar the Elephant

 * The Little Prince

 * Arrietty, The Borrowers

 * Willie, Goodnight Mister Tom

 * Stanley, Flat Stanley

 * Babe, The Sheep Pig

 * Lyra, Northern Lights

 * Grace, Amazing Grace

 * Hannah, Gorilla
 