
When Tim Henman and Greg Rusedski entered the Rod Laver arena this morning the 
only certainty in their minds, if either was in the least inclined to think 
about it, was that they could not meet the most experienced player left in the 
draw, Pete Sampras, until the final. It was a small comfort.

Sampras, winner of 13 grand slam titles, has emerged as the tentative 
favourite to win the Australian Open here for the simple reason that virtually 
all the other top names have disappeared.

The most notable absentee is Andre Agassi, the reigning champion, who pulled 
out of the tournament before it began with a wrist injury, one that might end 
the Las Vegas legend's career. Also gone is Australia's Lleyton Hewitt, the 
world No1, who lost out in the first round after chickenpox.

The top half of the draw was by far the more difficult, and Henman and 
Rusedski were fortunate to find themselves in the bottom half which has already 
been just about reduced to a lottery. Out have gone the No2 seed Gustavo 
Kuerten of Brazil - beaten in the first round by the Frenchman Julien Boutter - 
and the No5 SÃ©bastien Grosjean of France, together with Croatia's Goran 
Ivanisevic, the Wimbledon champion, and the No4 seed Yevgeny Kafelnikov of 
Russia, title winner here in 1999 and runner-up in 2000.

It meant that last night only two of the top 16 seeds were left to block the 
winning Briton's path to the final. One is the No12, Argentina's Guillermo 
Canas, who met the seasoned Swede Jonas Bjorkman on the same court before 
Henman and Rusedski went into action with the BBC cameras poised from 9am GMT 
to send the action live to viewers back home.

The successful Briton meets the winner of that match in the last 16 and the 
only other major obstacle remaining in the draw was Sweden's Thomas Johansson, 
the 16th seed and projected quarter-final opponent for Henman or Rusedski.

Yet both Britons must have wished, given the opening up of their half, that 
they had not been drawn together as soon as the third round, for only one of 
them can take advantage of what, superficially at least, appears an easy 
passage to the semi-finals.

The emphasis put on their match caused great amusement among those countries 
with players still involved in the bottom half. They smirked at the assumption 
that whoever won the all-British encounter might reach the last four simply 
because so many seeds had fallen, and pointed to the fact that neither of the 
British players had ever progressed beyond the last 16 here.

Henman entered his first Australian Open in 1996 and had five further attempts 
to get beyond the last 16, and Rusedski had met with a similar lack of success 
over seven outings in total.
 