
Yesterday was a massive day for US children’s and YA literature prizes - so 
let’s all celebrate this year’s winners of the 2016 Newbery medal, Caldecott 
illustration medal (awarded by the theAssociation for Library Service to 
Children (ALSC) 
<http://www.ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants/bookmedia/newberymedal/newberymedal>) and 
the Printz award for YA lit (awarded by the Young Adult Library Service (YALSA 
<http://www.ala.org/yalsa/>). Both award giving groups are part of the American 
Library Association and it’s a VERY big deal to win.

First up we have Matt de la Peña who has won the Newbery for his book Last 
Stop on Market Street 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/310757/last-stop-on-market-street-by-matt-de-la-pena-illustrated-by-christian-robinson/9780399257742/>
, illustrated by Christian Robinson and published by GP Putnam’s Sons, an 
imprint of Penguin Group in the US. We hope it’s going to be available to buy 
in UK bookshops soon too.

Last Stop on Market Street tells the story of CJ’s journey with his Nana. It’s 
not just a simple bus ride; but a multi-sensory experience through which he 
discovers that beautiful music, nature and people surround him.

“Read it aloud to someone. The use of language to elicit questions, to spark 
imagination and to make us laugh is at its best when spoken,” said Newbery 
medal committee chair Ernie J Cox.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwinners-of-newbery-caldecott-and-printz-awards-announced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11afcd764e1c03b590122c91854f527ebbcba1f2%2F0_0_3068_3071%2F3068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winners%20of%20Newbery%2C%20Caldecott%20and%20Printz%20awards%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwinners-of-newbery-caldecott-and-printz-awards-announced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winners%20of%20Newbery%2C%20Caldecott%20and%20Printz%20awards%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwinners-of-newbery-caldecott-and-printz-awards-announced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11afcd764e1c03b590122c91854f527ebbcba1f2%2F0_0_3068_3071%2F3068.jpg>
Sophie Blackall won the Caldecott Medal for the most distinguished picture 
book in 2016, with her beautiful pictures inFinding Winnie: The True Story of 
the World’s Most Famous Bear 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/348633/> written by 
Lindsay Mattick and published by Little, Brown and Company, part of Hachette in 
the UK.

It’s the gorgeous story of the friendship between a soldier (Harry Colebourn, 
who is the great grandfather of the author Lindsay Mattick) and the real bear 
who inspired Winnie the Pooh. If you want to know more about the story and see 
more pictures check out our galleryThe story of how Winnie the Pooh was 
inspired by a real bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/nov/24/winnie-the-pooh-inspired-by-a-real-bear>
.

Sophie Blackall is an Australian-born illustrator based in New York. She first 
learned to draw in the sand with a stick at the beach and has illustrated over 
30 books.

The story of how Winnie the Pooh was inspired by a real bear – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/nov/24/winnie-the-pooh-inspired-by-a-real-bear>
The biggest prize in America for YA literature, The Printz award went to Laura 
Ruby <http://www.lauraruby.com/bone-gap.php>for her book Bone Gap (published by 
Balzer + Bray, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers). The book follows the 
stories of Finn, Roza, and the people of Bone Gap in a heartbreaking tale of 
love and loss, magic and mystery, regret and forgiveness. Sounds great!

There were also three Newbery Honor books: The War that Saved my Life by 
Kimberly Brubaker Bradley 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/247693/the-war-that-saved-my-life-by-kimberly-brubaker-bradley/9780553556513/>
 andRoller Girl <http://www.victoriajamieson.com/books/> a graphic novel 
written and illustrated by Victoria Jamieson (both published by Dial Books for 
Young Readers, an imprint of Penguin Group in the US), andEcho 
<http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/book/echo#cart/cleanup> by Pam Muñoz Ryan. 

Four Caldecott Honor Books were named: Trombone Shorty with pictures by Bryan 
Collier and words by Troy Andrews (published by Abrams Books), Waiting which 
was illustrated and written byKevin Henkes 
<http://www.kevinhenkes.com/book/waiting/> (published by Greenwillow Books, an 
imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.) andVoice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer, 
Spirit of the Civil Rights Movement 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/249446/voice-of-freedom-fannie-lou-hamer-by-carole-boston-weatherford/9780763665319/>
, illustrated by Ekua Holmes and written by Carole Boston Weatherford 
(Candlewick Press).

Congratulations to all the winners! 
 