
In October 2013, we asked whether you loved or loathed iOS 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/08/apple-ios-7-update-iphone-problems-headaches>
, which was then the brand-new look for Apple's mobile software.

Its introduction had caused a huge stir: it was the first time Jonathan Ive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jonathan-ive>, formerly in charge of 
hardware design at Apple, had given his imprimatur to software. Primary 
colours, "flat" design, thinner text, gesture-based operation: it was a radical 
shakeup of the previous seven years' design.

Yet uptake was quick: even by last October, two-thirds of compatible devices - 
iPhones, iPads and iPod Touches - were already running it. Now the figure is 
88%,according to Apple's figures <https://developer.apple.com/support/appstore/>
, with 10% on iOS 6, and 2% on older versions. (In the US the figure is 91.75%,
according to Mixpanel <https://mixpanel.com/trends/#report/ios_7>, with 7.10% 
running iOS 6, and 1% running older versions.)

In a few days, Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> will 
preview some of the new features of iOS 8 at its Worldwide Developer Conference 
(WWDC) in San Francisco. That's ahead of the software release, expected in 
autumn.

Happy, sad, indifferent?

But are people happier now about what they weren't happy about then? On the 
other hand, have niggles surfaced from continued use that weren't obvious 
before? Have the bright primary colours and lack of skeuomorphism grown on you? 
Or do they grate even more?

It's time for some stocktaking: what's the verdict on iOS 7, as it hits its 
prime?
 Airdrop in iOS 7: doyou use it? Photograph: Apple 
What about the features added in iOS 7 - such as "Airdrop", which lets you 
pass files (such as photos) between devices - do you use it? Or the unlimited 
number of pages in Safari (andReading List, which lets you view offline)?

Or how about swiping - between pages in Safari (to go back and forward through 
pages you've visited), messages in Mail (swipe right to get a menu including 
delete; swipe left in a message to go back to the mailbox), or pages in apps 
such as Echofon or Train Times (where if you're reading an individual page, 
swiping left takes you back to the previous one - no more reaching to the top 
left for "Back")?To me, it signals a larger phone screen in the works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/18/ios-7-review-apple> (so iOS 
7 is getting you used to how to use it) - but do you use that action?
 The 'frosted glass' effect from the Control Center overlay in iOS 7. Like it? 
Photograph: Apple 
Is the "frosted glass" in the transparency layers useful or annoying? Do you 
wish you could change the elements in theControl Center (which you reach by 
swiping up from the bottom) - so for example it would contain your favourite 
apps, not just the clock, torch, calculator and camera?

Do you use "Frequent places" (which can give you travel time estimates between 
"Home" and "Work" and other subsidiary locations you frequently visit? IsSiri 
any better? Or (dare one ask)Maps? 

Down deeper

What about the deeper technologies that were introduced, such as the Multipeer 
Connecitivity Framework, which enables "off grid" chatting through apps such as 
Firechat <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/firechat/id719829352?mt=8>? Do you 
use it? There's also better multitasking, with the option to let some apps run 
all the time in the background. Helpful? Or battery vampire?

With security on many peoples' minds, have you used the iCloud Keychain, which 
looks after your website logins, credit card info, Wi-Fi network logins, and 
account information - essentially, a password manager?

Then there's the "iCloud activation" locking (whereby if the phone is stolen, 
and someone tries to wipe it and resell it, they won't be able to activate it 
without the Apple ID and password originally used to set it up). Has it helped? 
The "Trusted Devices" setting (which wasn't much mooted) asks whether to trust 
a computer if you connect it while the phone is unlocked. (If the phone is 
locked, then it won't trust a device by default.)

Pass, friend?

Passbook (Apple's method for storing electronic airline tickets and so on) 
also added a QR scanner. Ever used it? How aboutFacebook Audio, effectively 
Apple's VOIP offering?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fmay%2F29%2Fapple-ios8-ios7-iphone-ipad-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F29%2F1401363571856%2F42a63ad4-8d30-45d8-912e-f9916f73ad69-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=With%20Apple's%20iOS%208%20in%20the%20wings%2C%20what's%20your%20verdict%20on%20iOS%207%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fmay%2F29%2Fapple-ios8-ios7-iphone-ipad-wwdc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=With%20Apple%27s%20iOS%208%20in%20the%20wings%2C%20what%27s%20your%20verdict%20on%20iOS%207%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fmay%2F29%2Fapple-ios8-ios7-iphone-ipad-wwdc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F29%2F1401363571856%2F42a63ad4-8d30-45d8-912e-f9916f73ad69-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The iPhone 5S includes Touch ID for fingerprint unlocking. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
Finally, there's Touch ID - not a feature of iOS 7 itself, but of the iPhone 
5S. Do you use it to unlock your phone and make iTunes Store purchases? Or is 
it just an annoyance?

Let us know your considered thoughts on your use of iOS 7 in the comments.

And one more thing: what's the single new feature you'd most like to see in 
iOS 8? Only one - so make it a good one.

 