
Whenever I think of Lifetime I can’t help but think of Mother May I Sleep with 
Danger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0MhCZA_PUo> the quintessential 
Lifetime movie that starts with a fresh-faced Tori Spelling falling for a sexy 
guy in high school and ends with her running for her life through a corn field 
while he tries to kill her. Though it originally aired on NBC, it became a 
staple inLifetime’s constant rotation 
<http://www.mylifetime.com/movies/mother-may-i-sleep-with-danger> of movies 
about women in peril. Affairs, kidnappings, husbands that can’t be trusted, 
lies that must be uncovered and a search for perfection, often inspired by true 
events – this is what this genre occupied itself with.

The thing about Lifetime movies (and their hilarious titles 
<http://www.vulture.com/2014/02/10-types-of-lifetime-movie-titles.html>) is 
that they were always dreadfully sincere, which is what made it so easy to 
watch them with a sense of campy enjoyment. They didn’t know quite how 
ridiculous they were because they took themselves very seriously.A Deadly 
Adoption 
<http://www.mylifetime.com/movies/a-deadly-adoption/video/a-deadly-adoption-starring-will-ferrell-and-kristen-wiig-preview-clip?mkwid=sKf0ud2DB%7Cdc_pcrid_64777463912_pkw_a%20deadly%20adoption_pmt_e&utm_source=ltd_tune_google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_term=a%20deadly%20adoption&utm_campaign=G_A+Deadly+Adoption_Tune_Movie_Terms&paidlink=1&cmpid=PaidSearch_ltd_tune_google_G_A+Deadly+Adoption_Tune_Movie_Terms_a%20deadly%20adoption&gclid=Cj0KEQjwkv-rBRDwoMLav-2l9KIBEiQAUTkDUz7K8Mt1odZr7vW9l3BgNrs6UBxFi3CeuftVXzC2wGYaAvYp8P8HAQ>
 sounds much like all their other movies, featuring a wife who is terrorized by 
the woman who is going to give up her baby for adoption but tries to steal her 
life. It’s like The Hand that Rocks the Cradle, but if Rebecca De Morney 
actually gave birth and was played by an actress from the 90210 reboot.

But one look at the trailer for A Deadly Adoption 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F7cyCuMcU8k>, which premieres this Saturday, 
20 June, at 9pm EST, and it’s clear that this is no ordinary Saturday evening 
schlockfest. Starring Kristen Wiig and Will Ferrell it is, in fact, a parody of 
the very movies that Lifetime has made its name producing. Much in the vein of 
The Spoils of Babylon, a spoof of the overblown network miniseries that aired 
last year on IFC and scored Wiig an Emmy nomination, A Deadly Adoption is 
poking fun at all the tropes and devices of this very familiar type of movie. 
However, it’s not doing it from the comfort of a comedy channel where it can 
snipe at other networks, it is doing it from the belly of the 
inspired-by-true-events beast.

It seems like after all these years Lifetime has finally become self-aware. 
One of the rare networks that has always (and admirably) invested heavily in 
creating its own scripted programming, over the last few years Lifetime has 
mostly been creating what I called “clickbait TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/02/lifetime-clickbait-cable-tv-programming>
”, movies that offered a lot (an all-black version of Steel Magnolias, biopics 
about Whitney Houston and Aaliyah, behind-the-scenes tales from Saved by the 
Bell) and then delivered very little other than Twitter and meme fodder. A 
Deadly Adoption is a departure from all that. It’s willing to take Lifetime’s 
image into its own hands and show that the network is in on its own joke. It 
knows its movies are crazy and instead of trying to convince you otherwise, 
would rather make it a point of winking pride. Hey,it worked for SyFy with 
Sharknado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/31/lets-face-it-sharknado-2-is-the-future-of-television>
, why can’t it work here?

This foray into meta humor is hot on the heels of UnREAL, the best Lifetime 
series in recent memory, which is been garneringcritical raves 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/unreal-tv-review-798509>. Created by 
Marti Noxon and Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, a long-time veteran of The Bachelor 
franchise, UnREAL looks at the devastating behind-the-scenes duplicity of what 
it takes to manufacture a modern romantic reality show. The Bachelor is one of 
the most popular franchises among Lifetime’s core demographic – young women – 
and to take on the dark side of their favorite fairytale is a bold decision. 
Lifetime knows who is watching and what they care about, and these two 
programming decisions show that it is willing to challenge those viewers’ 
expectations of what the network is and the kind of programming they typically 
offer. Sadly, viewers have not found UnREAL yet (or are rejecting the very 
premise), and it has been drawingfewer than a million viewers 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/ratings/lifetime-drama-unreal-premieres-quietly-monday-1201510852/>
 a week.

Lifetime recently had a shakeup at the top, with Robert Sharenow stepping in 
as general manager of the channel in February and former MTV content chief Liz 
Gately stepping in as head of programming in April. Lifetime is not making 
review copies of A Deadly Adoption available to journalists before it premieres 
and declined to comment for this story. (That might be a vestige of the film’s 
original intention to be a secret broadcast, a secret thatwas ruined 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/04/02/will-ferrell-kristen-wiig-scrap-lifetime-movie>
 when Ferrell left one talent agency for a rival.)

A Deadly Adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-deadly-adoption> and 
UnREAL (unfortunate caps lock title aside) were well into development before 
the changing of the guard at Lifetime, but they hopefully denote a new 
dedication to quality. More than most of the diluted cable brands that will air 
anything that gets ratings, Lifetime has a real sense of who it is and what 
their audience will like. However, it has always suffered in terms of providing 
real quality for those viewers. Now it’s putting its reputation at stake by 
making light of just what distinguishes itself from the pack, and doing it with 
some real ingenuity.

Lifetime is ready to laugh at itself while we’ve been laughing all along. (Is 
it still camp if it knows exactly what it’s doing?) This might be a signal that 
it’s ready to move on from Mother May I Sleep with Danger and find some new 
genres to exploit, rather than the female exploitation flick. But then there is 
thehorrific cast photo 
<http://www.thewrap.com/full-house-lifetime-movie-cast-revealed-photo/> from 
their upcoming Full House movie. While Lifetime is making progress, it might 
not quite be out of the woods yet.
 