
An Australian woman who was reportedly attacked by a wombat while walking her 
dogs says she thought she was going to die at the paws of the aggressive 
marsupial.

Kerry Evans, from Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>, told Fairfax Media she 
was walking her springer spaniels Murphy and Pirate down a suburban street last 
week when she encountered the wombat, which was grazing in a front garden.

Evans said the wombat charged her dogs who panicked and knocked her to the 
ground, within reach of the wombat’s claws.

“I was laying screaming for help, I couldn’t get away from it, every time I 
managed to get up it attacked me and bit me and knocked me to the ground,” she
told the Canberra Times. 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/i-really-thought-i-was-going-to-lay-there-and-die-wombat-mauls-woman-walking-dogs-in-canberra-20160818-gqvyt8.html>

“I really thought I was going to lay there and die that night because I just 
couldn’t see how I was going to get away from it, it just wasn’t stopping its 
attack.”

She was rescued by a neighbour and a nearby driver, who took control of her 
dogs and allowed her to scramble away.

Evans received more than 20 bites and lacerations from the wombat’s attack, 
three of which required stitches.

Tasmanian wildlife take to water, with echidna and wombat found swimming far 
from shore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/02/tasmanian-wildlife-take-to-water-with-echidna-and-wombat-found-swimming-far-from-shore>
A spokeswoman from the Australian Capital Territory’s parks and conservation 
service said it was the first reported wombat attack in the Australian capital.

“The ACT government does not regularly warn the community about wombats as 
this was a rare occurrence,” she said.

Wombat attacks on humans are rare but not unheard of. In 2010 a 60-year-old 
man spent the night in hospital after being “mauled” by a wombat he encountered 
while attending to a call of nature outside his caravan.

According to a report from the time 
<http://www.smh.com.au/victoria/wombat-mauls-bushfire-survivor-20100406-rpeu.html?autostart=1>
, the man, Bruce Kringle, said he was unable to escape the animal and 
eventually lay on it until his neighbour came to his aid. The neighbour then 
killed the wombat with a blow to the back of the head with an axe.

Authorities suggested the wombat may have mange, a skin condition that causes 
blindness and can make wombats more scared and defensive, but one of Kringle’s 
other neighbours dismissed that claim, saying: “It looked quite healthy apart 
from the fact it was dead.”

James Woodford, a contributing writer to Guardian Australia who wrote a book 
titled The Secret Life of Wombats, said the animals “knock you over like a 
skittle.”

“They’re really only good around people while they’re babies,” Woodford said 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/wombat-combat-danger-is-their-middle-name-20100407-rr4d.html>
. “The image of the cute and cuddly wombat is a load of hogwash.”

Adult wombats are known to be aggressive, particularly if they feel 
threatened. A favourite technique,according to the Australian Museum 
<http://australianmuseum.net.au/common-wombat>, is to flee to a nearby burrow 
and then use their sizeable rump to crush the pursuing predator’s head against 
the dirt roof.

Their bites are usually not severe but can cause a serious infection if 
untreated.

Martin Lind, from the ACT’s wildlife service, said the animals were 
deceptively fast “little bulldozers” and not as cute and cuddly as commonly 
portrayed.

“As babies, they’re clingy, they’re adorable, they’re with mum 24 hours a day, 
they’re in a soft, snuggly sleeping bag all the time listening to a heart 
beat,” Lindtold The Canberra Times. 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/are-wombats-really-that-dangerous-yes-says-an-expert-20160819-gqwm0h.html>

“When they start to mature and hit puberty, they just hate everybody and 
everything. They go from running between your legs and cute as a button to 
being absolute little – can I swear? – little shits. They nip you, they wreck, 
they bite. I won’t look after wombats because you kiss goodbye to your flooring 
and everything. They just destroy everything.”

Lind suggested wild wombats be given a wide berth.
 