
It should set alarm bells ringing throughout the sport, particularly in the 
women's game, that Justine Henin-Hardenne had to quit midway through her 
Australian Open final against Am√©lie Mauresmo because the drugs she had been 
taking for an injury so upset her system that she was unable to compete. "For 
two weeks I have had to take anti-inflammatories for my shoulder, and that 
killed me," she said after quitting at 6-1, 2-0 down. "I had to double the dose 
the last few days because it was so painful."

Henin, four times a slam champion, has pushed herself so hard that injuries 
and viral problems have become commonplace for her. She is not alone. Kim 
Clijsters was hurt before the tournament began, Lindsay Davenport injured an 
ankle in the first week, Maria Sharapova had either a shoulder or rib problem 
depending on which source you believe, and the Williams sisters, who between 
them have won 12 of the slams in the past seven years, arrived woefully 
underprepared and proved they can no longer get away with it.

The level of hitting in women's tennis has become so fierce that their bodies 
are simply breaking down under the strain. The fact that Clijsters has risen to 
No1 in the world this morning, but will be missing from the circuit for several 
weeks because of injury, underlines the problems inherent in the sport. It will 
not matter to Mauresmo that she won this title by default, nor should it, but 
in the broader picture the women's game is either ignoring or failing to 
address a continuing stream of disruptive injuries.

It had been expected that this tournament might answer questions with regard 
to the shape of the coming year but no clear pattern has emerged. Sharapova, 
who will be 19 in April, was again a disappointment and close perusal of the 
video footage from her semi-final against Henin suggests that her father and 
coach, Yuri, shouted out during one of the Belgian's service games in an 
attempt to put her off. Henin ignored it.

He has been known to do this before and a couple of Russian players evidently 
witnessed a row between Sharapova and her father after the match when it was 
believed she told him he had embarrassed her and she did not want him to travel 
to Tokyo for the next tournament. Since winning Wimbledon in 2004 she has 
failed to reach a grand slam final.

At a time when women's tennis is struggling to make an impact outside the 
slams, and when it lacks the equivalent of a Roger Federer, the WTA is 
desperate that Sharapova succeeds in order to maintain interest in the US, 
where she is based. With Davenport close to retirement, the Williams sisters no 
longer dominant and little sign of any up-and-coming American youngsters on the 
women's side, Sharapova is regarded as the saviour, something which is causing 
much resentment among the other top-10 players.

Mauresmo's win in her first slam final since she lost here to Martina Hingis 
as a 19-year-old in 1999 was immensely heart-warming for a player who has 
suffered so badly from nerves in the past, although whether she can go on to 
win other major titles is still open to doubt. If, finally, she has genuinely 
conquered her nerves the Frenchwoman certainly has the talent and may take 
advantage of the current vacuum. At Roland Garros she has never gone beyond the 
last eight, so her best chance of adding a second slam seems more likely to be 
Wimbledon, where she has been a semi-finalist in three of the past four years.
 