
It’s Free Comic Book Day today – the North American comic book industry’s 
annual push to bring in more readers by distributing popular all-ages comics 
for free through thousands of retailers. Unfortunately, while comics may be for 
everyone, the culture around them has a lot of growing up left to do.


Last month, journalist Janelle Asselin penned a scathing and thorough critique 
<http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&id=52103> of a Teen Titans 
cover for the widely-read industry website, Comic Book Resources. The resulting 
backlash escalated quickly from ordinary disagreement toad feminam attacks on 
her professional experience, various sexual epithets and, ultimately, rape 
threats embedded anonymously into the fields of asurvey 
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1ZWhGZbqufwmZi8ujLUunA4J-R_8wmTeny2RPjTkDBrk/viewform>
 she's conducting on sexual harassment in the comics industry.

Sadly, none of this surprised me. I can't say for sure that every woman 
working in comics has faced some form of sexism or sexual harassment. But I've 
certainly had my share, despite being openly gay and therefore not suspected of 
sleeping my way up the ladder – a common assumption and laughably uncommon 
occurrence. That included textbook incidents like the drunk superior at an 
offsite office party who locked his arm around my shoulders, trying to pull me 
towards him for a kiss ("If you don't take that off me right now," I said, 
"I'll break it."), and subtler slights, like "girl ghetto" assignments and all 
sorts of presumptions that I lacked comics knowledge, although I've read, 
edited, written and drawn them for years.

It isn't hard to make the connection between Wonder Girl's head-sized breasts 
on that cover and a publishing sector that's still got a chronic problem with 
women. Entirewebsites <http://lby3.com/wir/> have been devoted to comics' 
lopsided use of sex and ultraviolence against female characters; marketing 
ideas are still more often aimed athumiliating them than, say, marrying them to 
each other. 
<http://jezebel.com/dc-comics-contest-draw-a-naked-woman-committing-suicid-1265537616>
 Two weeks after the Wonder Girl cover release, Dynamite Entertainment 
distributed warning-free preview pages of a Game of Thrones comic adaptation 
featuring a graphic rape scene, and all-access comics websites everywhere, 
including Comic Book Resources, ran them.
Earth Prime Weekly (@EarthPrimeWkly) 
First cover for DC's new Teen Titans #1! The new team includes Red Robin, 
Wonder Girl, Raven, Bunker and Beast Boy.pic.twitter.com/c2baqGexfd 
<http://t.co/c2baqGexfd>
 <https://twitter.com/EarthPrimeWkly/statuses/453655805334536193> April 8, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/EarthPrimeWkly/statuses/453655805334536193> 
Asselin, a friend and former DC Comics editorial colleague of mine, has 
handled the Teen Titans fuss just fine, showing up her critics both one-on-one 
and en masse via Twitter and Tumblr. Unfortunately, her original point – that 
the industry is squandering its vast potential with these choices – got almost 
entirely lost in the uproar. Too bad, because it's not enough to speak out 
against bionic boobs and office harassment. Comics is at risk of becoming 
irrelevant in today's diverse and fast-changing publishing landscape.


Asselin's conclusion was that publishers need to sell comics by and to new 
demographics, especially girls and women. Like many of the industry's best 
advocates, she backs up her beliefs proactively, by writing a monthly column 
calledHire This Woman. <http://comicsalliance.com/tags/hire-this-woman/> The 
title is self-explanatory. But why is the onus on individual commentators like 
us to keep pointing this out?

For a very long time I've said that if you want to broaden the horizons of 
comics, there is no substitute for getting more women (and a broader range of 
ethnic, racial and cultural experience) into the business of making and 
publishing them. It's time I got more specific.

Women do now fill far more of the editorial and creative ranks in the comics 
industry, but there are still very few women in senior editorial management. 
Women are getting the bestselling books into stores and greenlighting the
million-dollar movie franchises 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/movies/2014/04/13/marvel-studios-comic-book-movies/7512685/>
, but they're barely represented among the creative executives who map out the 
universes and storytelling strategies. That's where you cement broad-based, 
long-term loyalty to authors and characters, tap new audiences and trends, and 
grow readership, without which none of those books or movies would exist.

Take, for example, how Time Warner scaled back 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/30/books/comics-mother-of-the-weird-stuff-is-moving-on.html?_r=0&adxnnl=1&pagewanted=2&adxnnlx=1398380627-aJQBYI8bwyOhA97MoYI9Dw>
 DC's influential Vertigo imprint, which broadened comics immeasurably with 
Neil Gaiman's Sandman and many more groundbreaking creations of non-superhero 
genre fiction. Smaller, nimbler publishers arejumping into the vacuum 
<http://comicsbeat.com/stop-wondering-where-all-the-female-creators-are-and-go-find-them/>
, snapping up female talent and building new franchises, most famously with a 
little something calledThe Walking Dead. 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Walking_Dead_(comic_book)> But they are, by 
definition, smaller.

It's great to see smaller publishers filling the void – but it means that the 
industry leaders aren't actually leading. They definitely aren't plowing even a 
fraction of their movie millions into original content. They should be 
laboratories for great comics, but they're becoming cages.

Some new, female-friendly takes on superheroes are getting through the big 
publishers, from Young Avengers to Detective Comics. But the commercial and 
literary power of comics as a whole is so much greater than superhero comics. 
There are fiction (like The Walking Dead and Saga) and nonfiction (like Art 
Spiegelman's Maus, Marjane Satrapi's Persepolis, Alison Bechdel's Fun Home and 
Rep. John Lewis's March) comics that illustrate the medium's potential to 
reflect a truly diverse world and become a real marketplace of ideas.


In the era of transmedia, comics in the US is still an absurdly cultish 
medium, and most of its resources are directed at a male audience and a single 
genre. The day when comics' potential to show the greatest range of people, 
worlds and ideas to the most people is achieved – that is the day that comics 
will truly be free.

• This article was amended on 6 May 2014 to correct the phrase ad feminam, from
ad feminemas the original said.
 