
A scandalous picture of suffering, trauma and destitution is painted by a 
former Work Programme adviser who was tasked with getting claimants off the 
employment and support allowance (ESA) sickness benefit.

Speaking to the press for the first time since she quit the job last year, 
Anna Shaw (not her real name) says: “Some of my clients were homeless, and very 
many of them had had their money stopped and were literally starving and 
extremely stressed. Many had extreme mental health conditions, including 
paranoid schizophrenia, psychosis, bipolar disorder and autism. One guy 
[diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic and homeless] came to see me for the first 
appointment and mentioned that he had not eaten for five days. I offered him my 
lunch, thinking he would refuse it out of pride, and he fell upon it like a 
wild animal. I’ve not seen a human being eat like that before.”

Shaw can only speak out anonymously, because when she resigned, after just a 
few months in the job, her employer made her sign a confidentiality clause. She 
believed that the majority of her ESA caseload of about 100 clients were not 
well enough to have been on the government’s welfare-to-work Work Programme, 
but should instead have been signposted to charities that could support them 
with their multiple problems. “Almost every day one of my clients mentioned 
feelings of suicide to me,” she says. Shaw says she received no training in 
working with people with mental health issues or physical disabilities.

Under the government’s welfare reforms, Shaw’s clients would have completed a 
controversial test, called the work capability assessment (WCA), currently 
conducted by contractor Atos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/11/work-capability-assessment-collapse-benefits>
, and been placed in the work-related activity group (WRAG) of ESA because they 
were judged capable of working, albeit with appropriate support. Shaw’s 
employer was subcontracted by one of the 18 “prime providers” the government 
pays to implement its Work Programme to get jobless people into employment. 
However, Shaw says she was never given a copy of her clients’ WCA, which 
details their health conditions, so it was difficult to provide the support 
they needed.

Shaw thinks many of her ESA claimants wanted to work, but the “fundamental 
issues” – their physical and mental disabilities, often coupled with situations 
such as homelessness or domestic abuse – were not dealt with. “Every person who 
came in needed specialist help on a whole range of things, and to be supported, 
not under imminent threat of losing their benefit the whole time.”

She believes many of her clients had been wrongly assessed as fit to work. “I 
had a woman with multiple sclerosis who had been domestically abused and was 
suffering from very severe depression and anxiety, and she had a degenerative 
condition and she was deemed fit for work,” she says. “I gave people advice 
under the radar about how to appeal ... but it was absolutely not in our remit 
to encourage people to appeal.”

The most recent government figures 
<http://tabulation-tool.dwp.gov.uk/WorkProg/wp_cuml_jo/tabtool_wp_cuml_jo.html> 
(to June 2014) show that only 2% of longer-term ESA claimants find sustained 
employment.Independent research by the Centre for Economic and Social Inclusion 
 
<http://www.cesi.org.uk/publications/fit-purpose-transforming-employment-support-disabled-people-and-those-health-conditions>
has found that disabled people are about half as likely to find employment as 
non-disabled people. Last week, areport suggested that officials were 
considering cutting ESA, which is paid to around 2 million people, by as much 
as £30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/30/cuts-employment-support-allowance-papers-jobseekers-allowance>
a week as the chancellor, George Osborne, seeks a £12bn cut in the welfare bill.

Shaw says she was expected to enrol claimants on back-to-work courses. “It was 
very much ticking boxes. My managers were just obsessed with compliance with 
the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP). We would be penalised as an 
organisation if we didn’t sanction people who failed to show up… but with ESA 
they realised there was very little chance of getting these people into work. 
They were kind of parked.”

In the past year, sanctions for ESA claimants who fail to turn up for 
interviews with their job adviser haveincreased more than sevenfold 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/jobseekers-allowance-and-employment-and-support-allowance-sanctions-decisions-made-to-march-2014>
. In each case, claimants lost at least one week of their benefit money, even 
if they said they were too ill to get to an appointment. “One minute we had to 
sanction and the next minute we were told absolutely not to sanction,” says 
Shaw. “I think this was in response to [hostile coverage to sanctions in] the 
press… so the advice was given that we weren’t sanctioning them but we weren’t 
to let them know we weren’t sanctioning them… so they would come for 
appointments.”

According to one of Shaw’s former colleagues who is still working for the 
organisation, sanctioning has intensified. “She said: ‘It’s got a lot worse 
since you left and now we’re having to sanction all the ESA claimants if they 
don’t turn up for appointments,’” says Shaw.

Two months ago, the work and pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, stated 
that the WP 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/work-programme-boosts-prospects-of-long-term-unemployed-in-wales>
 “revolutionises the way we provide support to those who are the hardest to 
help, supporting a move from dependency to independence and getting people into 
work so that they have financial security for the future”. But Shaw’s 
revelations contradict the ministerial architect of welfare reform.

She says: “I felt that my job was really a non-job and as long as I ticked the 
boxes, they didn’t really care what I did with them… but they missed the point 
that these were actually human beings that I was coming into contact with, and 
going home every night wondering if these people were still alive.”

Shaw’s claims are backed up by a recent report, Fulfilling Potential 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/media/933438/2014-support-not-sanctions-report.pdf>, 
compiled by a WP client, Catherine Hale (pictured, right), with support from 
Mind and the Centre for Welfare Reform. Of the 500 people on ESA who responded 
to an online survey, 82% said their WP provider made no effort to adapt jobs on 
offer or make it easier for them to work. Only 7% said their adviser had a copy 
of their WCA.

A spokesman for the DWP says Work Programme providers “have the freedom to 
design any work-related activity so it is appropriate to the person’s 
condition”, and the DWP “offers more money to providers for helping the 
hardest-to-help groups into work, such as people on ESA”.

But there is no breakdown of how much of the £1.37bn WP expenditure from June 
2011 to 31 March 2014 was spent on helping ESA claimants. He insists that 
sanctions are “used only as a last resort” and “about 99% of ESA claimants 
don’t get a sanction”. He adds that the DWP is looking at how to share 
information about clients’ medical conditions with WP advisers.

Framed as a worthless, feckless good-for-nothing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwork-programme-adviser-box-ticking-sanctioning-sick-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415026811638%2Fd0c797ba-112e-497d-8fd0-242950987314-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Work%20Programme%20adviser%3A%20%E2%80%98Almost%20every%20day%20one%20of%20my%20clients%20mentioned%20feeling%20suicidal%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Melissa%20Viney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwork-programme-adviser-box-ticking-sanctioning-sick-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Work%20Programme%20adviser%3A%20%E2%80%98Almost%20every%20day%20one%20of%20my%20clients%20mentioned%20feeling%20suicidal%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Melissa%20Viney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fwork-programme-adviser-box-ticking-sanctioning-sick-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415026811638%2Fd0c797ba-112e-497d-8fd0-242950987314-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Catherine Hale, who suffers from ME, fought against her fit for work 
classification. Photograph: David Levene/Guardian 
In December 2012, Catherine Hale, 44, who has suffered for many years from 
severe ME was placed in the work-related activity group of ESA and referred to 
a jobcentre. “I brought a copy of the report from my work capability assessment 
(WCA)… it explains what my problems are and she [the jobcentre adviser] said 
‘Oh, I can’t look at that dear, I’m not even qualified to put on a sticky 
plaster’. She just didn’t want to know.”

Six months later the referral letters started to arrive inviting Hale to 
attend an interview at a Work Programme (WP) provider to discuss what 
employment may be suitable for her.

“Each letter came with a threat attached that if you do not turn up your 
benefit will be affected”, says Hale. “The first time I was supposed to go I 
was really poorly and could barely get out of bed. I was aware I had to phone 
them up. They were all really rude and didn’t pass on your messages. There was 
no compassionate human being in the system at all. I had a kind of breakdown 
from the anxiety. There was something about being framed as a worthless, 
feckless, good-for-nothing that left me feeling persecuted and empty of 
self-belief.”

Hale says she got a letter from Seetec, the WP provider, saying that the 
centre she had to attend for her interviews had moved to Woolwich [south 
London]. “I looked it up and it involved taking two trains and walking almost a 
mile. I advised them my WCA said I can’t walk more than 200 metres and 
requested adjustments. I never got any reply to that letter or any other letter 
I’ve ever written to Seetec,” she says. “Then I started getting letters 
mandating me to four-hour workshops three days a week for four weeks in a row. 
My WCA report says I can’t sit for more than an hour without pain or discomfort 
so I wrote and pointed this out.”

According to Hale, Seetec reported her to the DWP for failure to attend on 
five occasions. “Each time they report you the DWP writes to you and gives you 
seven days to give a good reason for not attending which effectively is three 
days by the time the letter gets to you and you post it back. I’d point out 
that my disability is not in dispute because they’ve got my WCA report. I’d 
written requesting adjustments and hadn’t had any reply.”

In March, Hale says she was sanctioned but didn’t receive a letter to tell 
her. Her benefit was cut by £71.70 per week. Hale had telephone interviews with 
Seetec so she “recomplied’’ with the programme. The adviser should have alerted 
the DWP that she had re-engaged. Hale’s solicitor advised her she had a very 
strong case of discrimination under the Equality Act 2010 and would have a high 
chance of success in a county court, but this would probably come with a 
confidentiality clause. She chose instead to talk. In August, Hale was 
reassessed and put in the support group of ESA where she is not expected to 
work.

Seetec said: “We are aware of the issues raised and are working with the DWP 
to gain a clear understanding of Ms Mollona’s [Hale’s married name] experience.”
 