
The outgoing head of the tribunal which hears appeals relating to social 
security benefits has said that the work capability assessment (WCA) has 
undergone "virtual collapse" and accused the Department for Work and Pensions 
of being overly optimistic about the pace at which fit-for-work tests were 
being carried out.

Writing in the Judicial Information Bulletin, a confidential journal 
distributed to tribunal members, Judge Robert Martin, who retired as president 
of the social entitlement chamber at the end of last month, says that the 
tribunal was advised by the DWP to expect a surge in its workload.

But he says problems with delivery of the government's welfare shakeup and the 
removal of legal aid funding for challenging benefits decisions meant there was 
actually a drop in cases, from more than 50,000 in July 2013 to 8,775 in March 
this year.

"The virtual collapse of the WCA process is the biggest single factor in the 
decline of the appeals intake," he writes.

He says the DWP had advised the tribunal that there would be a "bow wave" of 
appeals afterAtos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> Healthcare, which 
administered fit-for-work tests for sick and disabled people, had recovered 
from its initial problems which led to questions about the quality of its work. 
"The advice from DWP was unduly sanguine," he observes.

In March, the government announced that the Â£500m contract with Atos, blighted 
by accusations that the tests were crude and inhumane, was going to end early. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/atos-quite-work-capability-assessment-contract-early>

Referring to the removal of funding under the legal aid scheme for advice and 
assistance on welfare rights matters, Martin writes: "This loss of funding, 
compounded by continuing cutbacks in local authority spending on advice 
services, has severely reduced the help and support available to claimants to 
pursue their legal rights in challenging benefit decisions."

In the article, which appeared in the April edition of the Judicial 
Information Bulletin but was only published online last week, on a forum for 
welfare rights workers <http://www.rightsnet.org.uk/forums/viewthread/6471/P15/>
, Martin also has less than flattering words about other parts of the 
government's welfare changes.

He identifies the personal independence payment (Pip), introduced to replace 
disability living allowance (DLA) over a three-year period beginning last 
October, as the second biggest factor in the decline in the number of appeals.

Again there were problems with Atos and another company carrying out 
assessments,Capita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, which 
meant they were taking twice as long carrying them out as they had anticipated, 
he says. "The delays by DWP both in rolling out the programme of natural 
reassessment and in reaching decisions on the fresh claims it had actually 
received fed through to the appeals stage."

Martin says the tribunal currently has a "minimal level of sessions", a 
situation he expects to persist for most of the year. "I cannot see a 
significant increase in WCA appeals before the end of 2014," he writes.

"If a new supplier is found, presumably at a premium, the company will have to 
address the chronic shortages of healthcare professionals which has dogged Atos 
and which is now exacerbated by the need for additional resources to deal 
concurrently with Pip."

A DWP spokesman said fewer appeals going to tribunal was "welcome news" and 
the department had streamlined the appeal process, including introduction of 
the "mandatory reconsideration process", where the DWP reviews its own 
decisions before they go to appeal at tribunal.

"The aim is to enable incorrect decisions to be changed at the earliest 
possible opportunity and removes the need for often costly and protracted 
appeals, which lead to delays in people getting the benefits they have applied 
for," he said.

Appearing before the work and pensions parliamentary select committee last 
month,Martin questioned the mandatory reconsideration process 
<http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Main/Player.aspx?meetingId=15390>.

"The claimant now has to make two applications," he said. "Personally, I'm 
quite concerned that a number of claimants who may have winnable cases drop out 
between the mandatory consideration case and deciding to make a further appeal. 
So it seems to me to be regressive."
 