
“Can we chat?”

“Yeah, sure. Any time.” 

That’s what the casual academic is supposed to say when faced with this 
question from a permanent academic, particularly one who has employed them in 
the past.

Want to improve teaching in universities? Value those who teach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/11/want-to-improve-teaching-in-universities-value-those-who-teach>
In fact, “yeah, sure” is probably the safest answer for a casual member of 
staff to give to almost any request from the faculty. And therein lies a 
quandary: how can a casual who must only say yes ever enter into a real and 
honest dialogue with the permanent staff who employ them?

Let’s consider the discursive positioning 
<http://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/discursive-positioning/7905> here. I am a 
casual tutor, you are permanent (an academic, subject coordinator, faculty 
bigwig). As a permanent member of staff, you are secure, confident and busy. 
You’re an expert on your tiny slice of the pie. You know you’ll be able to pay 
your mortgage next semester, you have your own office space, an email address, 
a phone number.

You handle the big stuff after it’s filtered through to you by those at the 
coalface. You get un-doable things done. You’re allowed to get angry, screw up, 
and have opinions. But when you ask me for anything, I accede. That’s just how 
it is.

To complicate the conversation, I play two roles in this dialogue: teacher and 
casual. As teacher, I am confident, assured and authoritative. I am expert in 
my tiny slice of the pie. I demonstrate sound academic, interpersonal and 
communication skills for my students. I think on my feet, handle complaints, 
answer unexpected questions – I even keep the back row quiet and off Facebook. 
As teacher, I have power. It’s fun, I love it and I want to keep doing it. 
That’s just how it is.

Academics! You've got to fight for your right to job security
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/01/academics-fight-for-right-to-job-security>
I am also a casual member of staff. As casual, I am disempowered, silenced and 
compliant. I am expert in navigating the systems, on clawing my way to some 
work and juggling the admin to stay in that work. I cannot apply for internal 
positions, I don’t get to participate in the “culture of lifelong learning”. I 
have no job security, no fixed office space, no permanent email address, no 
phone number. I am invisible, with no name on a door or profile on the web.

I beg for work from semester to semester, and constantly have to watch my 
words, actions and body language to avoid a career-ending slip-up. I’m not 
allowed to get angry, question decisions, or argue back. If I want to keep 
being teacher, I have to keep saying yes. That’s just how it is.

Two problems 

This is clearly not a sound base from which to begin communication. There are 
two immediate problems in any conversation between a permanent and a casual 
academic.

The first, of course, is encapsulated in the phrase “that’s just how it is”. 
The university system of power is built up layer by layer, with the casuals – 
those doing the majority of the work – right at the bottom. They are the 
foundation that keeps the rest of the structure operating, but receive the 
least job security, support and acknowledgment.

As in all systems of power, most of those at the top – the permanents – 
reinforce the status quo by justifying and excusing the functioning of the 
system. Every time a permanent says “that’s just the way it is”, it reminds the 
casuals exactly how precarious, tenuous and transitory our position is.

'Universities need to value their staff' – five tips for management
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/apr/14/five-ways-university-leaders-inspire-motivate>
The second problem is the lack of space for casuals to express grievances, 
complaints or concerns. What complicates this further for me is that my area of 
expertise is actually in systems of power (SOP), their dysfunctions, 
narratives, and structural flaws.

The icing on the cake is that I am also a primary source, with experience 
inside some severely dysfunctional SOP. The faculty loves this expertise when I 
turn it outwards and call it research. But, it turns out, it’s not so lovable 
when I turn it inwards. When I complain or question or point at broken bits of 
the SOP, I’m told that’s just how it is.

I know that every conversation between a permanent staff member and me is 
going to hit the wall of “that’s just how it is”.

The researcher in me screams no, the teacher in me asks why, but the casual in 
me speaks loudest of all.

So yeah, sure. Let’s chat.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 