
Ciro Immobile scored twice in the last 15 minutes to earn Italy a 3-2 win in 
Macedonia after the four-times champions were on the brink of a humiliating 
defeat.

Andrea Belotti gave Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> a 
24th-minute lead after the visitors, who have not lost in a qualifying 
competition for 10 years, had made a shaky start.

Ilija Nestorovski equalised in the 57th minute after Italy lost the ball in 
midfield and Feran Hasani struck again for the hosts two minutes later after 
another Italy mistake in midfield.Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/macedonia> were threatening to claim a 
third when Immobile scored out of the blue in the 76th minute and he then 
headed the winner from close range in the second minute of stoppage time.

The win left Italy with seven points from three games in Group G, behind Spain 
on goal difference after Diego Costa and Nolito scored second-half goals to 
seal a battling 2-0 win for Julen Lopetegui’s side inAlbania.

Costa took advantage of a horrendous error by the Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> goalkeeper, Etrit Berisha, in 
the 56th minute to break the deadlock in a tight game before the substitute 
Nolito finished off a slick team move in the 63rd.

Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> dominated possession but 
struggled to find a way through until the Atalanta goalkeeper Berisha’s 
misplaced pass landed at the feet of Vitolo, who quickly found David Silva to 
tee up Costa for a tap into an unguarded net.

The Spain captain, Real Madrid’s Sergio Ramos, limped off with 10 minutes left 
with a knee injury. His centre-back partner Gerard Piqué later confirmed that 
he will retire from international football after the nextWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. “I’ve always given 
my best on the pitch and there are those who appreciate what I’ve done there 
are also some who clearly don’t want me there,” said the Barcelona player.

Dusan Tadic maintained his impressive international form with a goal and two 
assists to giveSerbia a 3-2 home win over Austria in Group D.

The Southampton winger volleyed a 74th-minute winner after the Austrians twice 
came from behind to cancel out an Aleksandar Mitrovic double in Red Star’s 
stadium.Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> are top of Group D 
on goal difference from Republic of Ireland with seven points from three 
matches.

Mitrovic fired Serbia ahead in the sixth minute and gave them a 2-1 lead after 
Marcel Sabitzer had equalised. Marc Janko levelled again after sloppy defending 
by the hosts.

Tadic, who also scored one goal and set up the other two in Serbia’s 3-0 win 
in Moldova, delighted the home fans when he popped up in the heart of the 
penalty box and drilled a shot past the goalkeeper, Ramazan Ozcan.

A sizzling volley by Alfred Finnbogason helped the Euro 2016 quarter-finalists 
Iceland to a 2-0 win over Turkey in Reykjavik. They are second in Group I, 
level on seven points with the leaders,Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>.

In their previous qualifier against Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/finland>, Iceland had scored twice late 
on to win 3-2 but this time they grabbed two goals before the interval. The 
central defender Omer Toprak deflected a shot by Elmar Bjarnason into his own 
net in the 42nd minute and two minutes later Finnbogason scored following a 
long headed clearance by Kari Arnason down the middle.

Mario Mandzukic continued his fine scoring form with an opportunist header as 
Croatia beat Finland 1-0 in Tampere.

The towering target man, who scored ed a hat-trick in Thursday’s 6-0 defeat of 
Kosovo, pounced in the 18th minute after Andrej Kramaric turned an inviting 
Sime Vrsaljko cross into his path.Ukraine beat Kosovo 3-0.
 