In Lauren Child's Charlie and Lola books, what is the name of Charlie's best 
friend?  Marvin  Morten  Marty  Mort What is the name of Roo's mother in AA 
Milne's Winnie the Pooh books?  Mama  Mother Roo  Kanga  Kessie In which book 
would you find Aunt Spiker and Aunt Sponge?  Awful Auntie by David Walliams  
James and the Giant Peach by Roald Dahl  Horrid Henry by Francesca Simon  Diary 
of a Wimpy Kid by Jeff Kinney What sweet treat does the White Witch use to lure 
Edmund to her side in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe?  Chocolate  Biscuits
 Honeycomb  Turkish delight In JM Barrie's Peter Pan, what is John and Michael 
Darling's sister called?  Margaret  Wendy  Mary  Jane In which book would you 
find Little Nutbrown Hare and Big Nutbrown Hare?  Guess How Much I Love You by 
Sam McBratney  The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies by Beatrix Potter What kind of 
creature is Eragon, in the Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini?  A dragon  
A human In Charlotte's Web, what kind of creature is Charlotte's friend Wilbur? 
 A sheep  A rat  A pig  A goose Who briefly became head of Hogwarts in Harry 
Potter and the Order of the Phoenix by JK Rowling?  Minerva McGonagall  Dolores 
Umbridge  Severus Snape  Horace Slughorn What do the pictured people having 
common?  They've all been the bestselling children's author in the UK for at 
least one year  They have all been the Children's Laureate  They all write 
books about magic  They all write books about Which fictional school does 
Darrell Rivers attend?  The Unseen University  Malory Towers  Hogwarts School 
of Witchcraft and Wizardry  Brakebills In which classic book by Dodie Smith 
would you meet sisters Rose and Cassandra Mortmain?  The Hundred and One 
Dalmatians  I Capture the Castle  A Tale of Two Families  The Midnight Kittens 
Sally Lockhart is the star of four Victorian mysteries by which British author? 
 Agatha Christie  Enid Blyton  Robin Stevens  Philip Pullman What do Dinah, 
Orlando and Mog have in common?  They're all cats  They're all dogs In the 
Hunger Games, what is the name of Katniss Everdeen's younger sister?  Penelope  
Primrose  Prudence  Padma In which fictional series would you find Crossland 
High School?  Alex Rider by Anthony Horowitz  Captain Underpants by Dav Pilkey  
The Brilliant World of Tom Gates by Liz Pinchon  Diary of a Wimpy Kid by Jeff 
Kinney In Philip Pullman's Northern Lights, what does Lyra believe became of 
her parents at the beginning of the book?  She thinks they died in a airship 
crash  She thinks they died in battle  She thinks they abandoned her to be an 
orphan, but are alive  She thinks they poisoned each other, after discovering 
they were both having affairs In John Green's An Abundance of Katherines, how 
many girls called Katherine has Colin dated?  6  10  19  21 Who is the central 
female character in Cassandra Clare's The Mortal Instruments series?  Clary Fray
 Izzy Lightwood  Aline Penhallow  Maia Roberts In which American city is 
Veronica Roth's Divergent set?  New York  Austin  San Francisco  Chicago  You 
gotâ€¦  You know kids books, possibly even better than they do. Or are you a 
child? Either way, well done!  So close, yet so far. You know your stuff, but 
there are still a few series for you to discover. Go do some reading and come 
back to blitz this.  Just missed a pass mark! You've got a world of Harry 
Potters and Sally Lockharts to discover. Try again.  Oof. Maybe you're due a 
re-read and a first read of some kids books? Dig out that box of books in the 
attic and get reading.  Oof. Maybe you're due a re-read and a first read of 
some kids books? Dig out that box of books in the attic and get reading.  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  