
A huge Yazidi temple is under construction in a small Armenian village, 
intended as a symbol of resilience for a persecuted religious tradition.

The temple is being built in Aknalich, about 35km from Yerevan, the Armenian 
capital. Seven domes will surround a central arched roof, crowned with a 
gold-plated sun. At 25m high, it will be built from Armenian granite and 
Iranian marble and house a 200-square-metre prayer hall.

Yazidi refugees return to Sinjar in Iraq – a photo essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/mar/03/yazidi-refugees-isis-return-sinjar-iraq-photo-essay>
The complex will also include a conference hall, seminary and museum.


Named Quba Mere Diwane, this will be the largest Yazidi temple in the world, 
although there are relatively few contenders. The project is being funded by 
Mirza Sloian, a Yazidi businessman based in Moscow,according to EurasiaNet 
<http://www.eurasianet.org/node/79546>, and is scheduled to be completed next 
year.


“This temple is important for us because our community is facing extinction. 
Our community is displaced around the world, and we need temples in each place 
for our children to keep their culture and identity,” said Ahmed Burjus of the 
UK branch ofYazda, a global Yazidi organisation <http://www.yazda.org/>.


The complex in Aknalich is not intended to overshadow Lalish, the most holy 
Yazidi temple 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/photo-gallery-iraqs-yazidi-kurds-their-holiest-site-lalesh-temple-1460354>
, about 36 miles north of Mosul in northern Iraq. Followers of the Yazidi faith 
are expected to make a pilgrimage to Lalesh once in their lifetime.


“There will only ever be one Lalish,” Khdr Hajoian, vice-president of the 
Yazidi National Union, told EurasiaNet.

Yazidis are the largest minority group in Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, with a population of about 35,000, 
although many have left or are leaving to find work elsewhere, particularly in 
Russia.


They originated in eastern Turkey and northern Iraq, but many were killed or 
driven out of Turkey during the bloody rule of the Ottoman Empire. Yazidis 
describe themselves as “a people of 72 genocides”.


The most recent onslaught was in northern Iraq – until recently, home to 90% 
of Yazidis – in 2014.Islamic State killed thousands of Yazidis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/isis-genocide-britain-yazidis>
 in and around Sinjar, abducted young girls and women to be used as sex slaves, 
forced people to convert to Islam, and drove an estimated 50,000 into the 
mountains where they were besieged.


In June, the UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry on Syria said 
Islamic State was committing genocide 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20113&LangID=E>
 against the Yazidis of northern Iraq.


Thousands of Yazidis now live in squalid refugee camps in northern Iraq and 
Turkey, or have scattered acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.


“People are suffering from psychological and medical problems in the camps, 
with no work and no future,” said Burjus. “Even in Europe, no country has 
recognised Yazidis as a distinctive group. Our fate is not in our hands.”


Germany is home to western Europe’s largest diaspora community. According to 
Burjus, there are fewer than 700 Yazidis in the UK. European governments 
classify Yazidis as Kurds, he said.


Who are the Yazidis and why is Isis hunting them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/07/who-yazidi-isis-iraq-religion-ethnicity-mountains>
The Yazidi faith is derived from Zoroastrianism, Christianity and Islam. They 
have been denounced as infidels by Islamic extremists, and unfairly accused of 
being devil-worshippers.


They do not accept converts, and Yazidis are not permitted to marry 
non-Yazidis or even Yazidis from a different caste.


As well as being persecuted for their religious beliefs, Yazidi communities 
are dispersing because of economic pressures.


“Yazidis are not well placed to handle the challenges they face,” said 
Christine Allison, professor of Kurdish studies at Exeter university. “They are 
fragmented, vulnerable and face big socio-economic difficulties.


“There is a risk of Yazidis not surviving – or at least being a much smaller 
community within a generation.”

 