
Sir Martin Sorrell <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell> has 
said Richard Desmond has "got it wrong" in accusing WPP's media buying arm of 
bullying broadcasters, arguing that Group M is not "in any sense exploiting its 
position".

Sorrell, the chief executive of marketing services company WPP, was responding 
to Channel 5 owner Desmond'srecent comment that he did not have the "testicles" 
to resist Group M's demands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/12/richard-desmond-martin-sorrel-wpp>
.

"I doubt that, I'm very surprised by his assertion that he doesn't have that 
part of his anatomy," said Sorrell, speaking to MediaGuardian at theAdvertising 
Week conference <http://www.advertisingweek.com/> in New York on Tuesday. "He 
is a very tough guy."

Speaking at the Royal Television Society conference in Cambridge earlier in 
September, Desmond said that Group M has so much UK market power that 
broadcasters can feel forced to work with other parts of theWPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wpp> empire.

He was responding to a question about broadcasters being pressured into making 
production companies they use to develop TV shows in partnership with Group M 
Entertainment, which invests in programming.

"I think he has got it wrong, probably for the first time in his life he has 
got it wrong," said Sorrell. "[Desmond] said it in response to a question, it 
wasn't [an agenda] in his speech. I think he was doing it for effect."

Desmond's claims were backed up by John McVay, chief executive of Pact, the 
trade body for independent producers.

McVay, speaking on BBC Radio 4's The Media Show last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/20/independent-tv-producers-unfair-deals-wpp>
, accused Group M Entertainment of striking unfair deals to retain significant 
global rights to TV formats it funds.

"That's not true at all," said Sorrell, of the assertion that Group M 
Entertainment deals were unfair to production companies. "That's incorrect. No 
one is forcing them to do anything."

Sorrell added that what Group M is doing in the UK has been commonplace in 
many countries, including the US, for many years, and that rivals have an 
agenda in raising supposed issues.

"We are working with clients on entertainment packages just like we've done 
anywhere in the world – coming up with programmes that make sense," he said. 
"It is just another form of competition. I don't think there is any reason to 
complain about more competition. I don't think in any sense that Group M is 
exploiting its position. People use situations to try and substantiate their 
positions."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 