
Author: Susan Orlean (b1955) grew up in Cleveland, Ohio, before becoming a 
journalist in first Portland, Oregon, and then Boston. A collection of columns 
from the Boston Globe became her first book, Red Sox and Bluefish (1987). She 
moved to New York in 1986 and was taken on by the New Yorker magazine. A New 
Yorker article, Orchid Fever, became the basis for her book The Orchid Thief 
(1998), the basis for Adaptation. The same year saw another article, Life's 
Swell, about Hawaiian surfer girls, published in Outside magazine - this became 
the film Blue Crush (2002). In 2003, her dog Cooper "authored" a food book, 
Throw Me a Bone.

Story: Orlean travels to Florida to meet John Laroche, the eponymous "thief", 
after reading a news report of his trial for stealing orchids from the 
Fakahatchee state reserve. Laroche is setting up an orchid-cloning business for 
the Seminole people tribe, who claim immunity from laws protecting endangered 
wildlife and plants. Orlean soon finds herself immersed in the world of orchid 
collecting, tracing its history and chronicling Laroche's semi-legal activities 
at its fringe. She embarks on a quest to see a rare ghost orchid growing in the 
Fakahatchee, but her foray with Laroche into the swamp ends in failure when he 
gets lost.

Film-makers: The scion of a multi-millionaire retailing family, Spike Jonze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spike-jonze> (b1969), made his name as the 
director of a string of high-profile music videos, notably the Beastie Boys' 
Sabotage, Bj√∂rk's It's Oh So Quiet, and Fatboy Slim's Praise You - all marked 
by knowing humour and pranksterdom. He also helped develop the MTV stunt series 
Jackass, which started in 2000. His feature film debut, Being John Malkovich 
(1999), was the work of scriptwriter Charlie Kaufman, who had written it as a 
sample to send to agents. Jonathan Demme's production company optioned The 
Orchid Thief, and hired Kaufman to adapt it. By the time Adaptation went into 
production, the Jonze-Kaufman connection was high-profile enough to attract 
Meryl Streep (playing Orlean) and Nicolas Cage (Jonze's cousin by marriage) in 
a dual role as Kaufman and his fictional twin brother Donald, who is credited 
on the film's opening titles.

How book and film compare: Only small sections of Orlean's original end up in 
the film. The screen version is, instead, a Pirandello-esque comedy on the 
difficulties of adapting books into films, with Kaufman himself the central 
character. Kaufman's difficulties with the creative process become the 
narrative's driving force, from his insecurity around film sets (incorporating 
footage from Being John Malkovich), to his battles with the "rules" of film as 
espoused by screenwriting guru Robert McKee. The fictional Donald (and his 
serial-killer script The 3) is the antithesis of all Kaufman's artistic 
ambitions, but the idea of adaptation is made to work as a metaphor for the 
creative process itself, as the film tacks on a conventional drugs-sex-chase 
ending.

Inspirations and influences: Adaptation is not the first self-aware, 
metatextual film - as a device, it goes back at least as far as Buster Keaton's 
Sherlock Jr (1924) - but it concentrates on the practice of intertextual 
adaptation like no other. In films like Scream (1996) and The Faculty (1998), 
Kevin Williamson developed a form of self-aware film character that was 
palatable to mainstream audiences, but Kaufman took the idea to its logical 
conclusion here.
 