
ITV1 placed its bets for a super Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/aug/17/x-factor-returns-itv1-ratings>
 on the return of Simon Cowell's The X Factor and Red or Black? – but neither 
hit the ratings jackpot.

The X Factor's total audience of 8.7 million viewers, a 42.4% share, was the 
worst for a launch show since 2006, while Ant and Dec game showRed or Black? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/red-or-black> lost out to another 
showing of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull on BBC1.

With the hot weather presumably partly to blame, The X Factor – which aired on 
ITV1 between 8pm and 9.30pm on Saturday – wasdown from just over 11 million 
viewers last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/22/x-factor-launch> and was the 
lowest launch audience since 7 million viewers (37%) watched the third series 
begin in 2006.

The ITV1 talent show is now into its second year without Cowell on the judging 
panel but has stuck broadly to the recipe of last year's show, with Nicole 
Scherzinger replacing Kelly Rowland among the judges.

Stripping out timeshifted channel ITV1+1, Saturday's The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> had 8.1 million viewers 
on ITV1, a 39.4% share, compared with last year's 10.5 million, 44.5% of the 
audience, on the main network.

The second series of controversial game show Red or Black?, which was wrapped 
around the return of the X Factor to give it as much of a ratings lift as 
possible, had 3.4 million viewers (20.5%) for its first instalment between 
7.15pm and 8pm, and 4 million (19%) between 9.15pm and 10pm.

This was down on last year's first series which began with 6.6 million (30.8%) 
and 7.2 million (31%) for its results show.

The earlier edition of Red or Black? lost out to the BBC1 Harrison Ford movie 
repeat, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, which had 4 million 
viewers, a 24.6% share, between 6.25pm and 8.20pm.

Red or Black?'s results show was beaten by BBC1's Casualty, which averaged 4.2 
million viewers (20.1%) between 9.10pm and 10pm.

Although Cowell is no longer on The X Factor judging panel, busy across the 
Atlantic making the US version for Fox, his company Syco TV co-produces both 
The X Factor, with Thames, and Red or Black?, which he makes with ITV Studios.

Saturday also saw the return of Jonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross> to ITV1's Saturday night 
schedule.

The Jonathan Ross Show had 3.6 million viewers, a 20.3% share, between 10pm 
and 11.10pm.

It was up against BBC1's Match of the Day, which returned on the first day of 
the new Premier League season and was also watched by 3.6 million viewers, a 
23.9% share, between 10.20pm and 11.40pm.

Earlier, BBC1's Total Wipeout returned for its fifth and final series with 2.4 
million viewers (19.4%) between 5.25pm and 6.25pm.

The X Factor: launch show ratings

2012: 8.1 million (39.4%), 8.7 million including ITV1+1

2011: 10.5 million (44.5%), 11 million including ITV1+1

2010: 11.1 million (47.8%)

2009: 9.9 million (48%)

2008: 10.2 million (48%)

2007: 9.5 million (45%)

2006: 7 million (37%)

2005: 6.7 million (41%)

2004: 4.9 million (26%)

(overnight audience, including ITV1+1 where stated)

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC and some other channels including Sky1) and same day 
timeshifted (recorded) viewing, but excluding on demand, or other – unless 
otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, ITV1, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally 
include ratings for their HD simulcast services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 