
Is the XXL Freshman Class list 
<http://www.xxlmag.com/news/2015/06/2015-xxl-freshman-class-cover/> still 
relevant? In a hyper-active media world in which new music from across the 
globe (let alone across the country) is easier to find than ever, we are less 
reliant on singular outlets to drive the information about the newest and 
hottest artists. As the XXL Freshman Class list enters its eighth year, looking 
toward the hip-hop magazine for an introduction to new artists seems like a 
tradition of the past, one that no longer reflects both the quick rise of 
musical trends, acts and interest in global audiences.

That said, each year the XXL Freshman Class list comes out it produces a 
series of groans and frustrations from readers across the country. No one 
publication is perfect and we can’t expect to be satisfied year after year. But 
within the last five years, the list has missed the mark in a way that shows 
something is sour in its execution.

In 2009, Nicki Minaj  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj>and Drake 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake>were left off the list and when they 
were asked to participate the next year, they were well beyond rookie status. 
In 2012, the publication welcomed its first female on the cover,Iggy Azalea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/iggy-azalea>. The choice was lambasted by 
a number of hip-hop fans and Azalea’s peers, includingAzealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks>. Listening to the early 
efforts of Azalea and Banks prove that the latter would have made for a 
stronger choice in the end.

The latest list, released earlier this week, includes Kidd Kidd 
<https://twitter.com/itskiddkidd>. Although his first official EP came out in 
2014, Kidd Kidd (born Curtis Stewart) released his first mixtape in 2002. In 
fact, he’s released seven mixtapes in total, and this doesn’t include his work 
withSquad Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5GXxaqPzcZM>, a Dirty South group 
that made appearances on Lil Wayne records throughout the 00s.

This is not an ageist complaint but one of confusion. What is the purpose of 
including an artist so well established? Like past XXL lists, no real 
explanation is given. Readers are meant to accept these choices despite their 
illogical inclusion.

Beside Kidd Kidd, the list thankfully includes a few highlights like the 
continuously risingTink <https://twitter.com/official_tink> (a contemporary 
Timbaland protege) and Fetty Wap, who has created the unequivocal song of the 
summer inTrap Queen <https://twitter.com/fettywap>. These choices – albeit 
obvious for even the casual music fan – are smart and reflective of current 
music trends. But why do we continue to read and anticipate a list that 
ultimately disappoints and doesn’t reflect the hyper pace in which we listen to 
music in 2015?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio&media=>
In 2015, regional hip hop scenes and acts can grow beyond their city limits 
with the efforts of the internet and an increasingly voracious audience eager 
for the next single or video. Small artists, many of whom would have only 
broken out within the confines of their streets or neighbourhoods, can find 
audiences in small towns as equally as large cities.

Consider the Chicago drill scene 
<http://hiphopdx.com/interviews/id.2491/title.young-chop-says-i-don-t-even-know-what-drill-music-is->
, which gained international recognition with artists such asChief Keef  
<http://www.chiefkeef.com/>and Sasha Go Hard 
<https://twitter.com/sasha_darapper>. Born on the often neglected South Side of 
Chicago, the proliferation of the heavy and stark subgenre fuelled numerous 
record label offers for its emerging stars due to a greater push from champion 
supporters in and outside of the media world.

Artists who’ve declined to be included in the list include the enigmatic Jay 
Electronica <http://rocnation.com/artists/jay-electronica/>, A$AP Rocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/asap-rocky> (who just released his latest 
successful record),Earl Sweatshirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/earl-sweatshirt-i-dont-like-shit-i-dont-go-outside-review>
 and ILoveMakkonen <https://soundcloud.com/ilovemakonnen>, among others. All of 
the above artists have found success on their own, suggesting the obvious: when 
the problems of the list (its execution, its timeliness) are discussed more 
thoroughly than the list itself, there is a serious flaw in its relevancy and 
its purpose.
 