



Yahoo on Monday joined the elephant’s graveyard of fallen internet giants. 
While the company is officially still alive, nowmerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/yahoo-to-sell-core-web-business-to-verizon>
 with fellow faller AOL and owned by Verizon, it lives on as a shadow of its 
former self with an uncertain future. The internet has proven a ferocious 
testing ground for tech companies. Here are some of the other once white-hot 
companies that have failed to adapt and survive.

Yahoo to sell core web business to Verizon for nearly $5bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/yahoo-to-sell-core-web-business-to-verizon>
 AOL

How the mighty have fallen: the company that taught millions about dial-up 
internet and introduced them to email was the hottest name in tech when it 
merged with the media powerhouse Time Warner in January 2000. That deal proved 
one of the worst in history. AOL, once worth $226bn, wasacquired by Verizon 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/may/14/verizon-aol-deal-future-advertising>
, for $4.4bn.

AltaVista

The reigning internet search company before Google, AltaVista ping-ponged 
around the tech sector over five years and had as many owners. It attempted a 
share sale in 2002, after the dotcom bubble had burst, but was forced to cancel 
due to lack of interest. Its final buyer? Yahoo.Yahoo closed Altavista in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2013/jul/03/apple-cheap-iphone-colours-ugly>
.

Netscape

Once upon a time, there were two browsers locked in an eternal battle for 
market share: Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator. Both are gone now, 
Microsoft having announced a new browser – Edge – that will supersede Explorer. 
For its part, Netscape was the scrappier, savvier, open-source browser, the 
brainchild of Marc Andreessen, now a billionaire investor, who had also 
co-authored the very first wide-use web browser, Mosaic. AOL bought Netscape in 
1998 and eventually shut down the company butits spirit survives 
<https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/history/details/> in Mozilla, which 
develops the current leader in open-source browser software, Firefox.

Myspace

The billionaire Viacom chairman, Sumner Redstone, fired the company’s CEO, Tom 
Freston, for failing to acquire Facebook’s major competitor ahead of Redstone’s 
nemesis, Rupert Murdoch. He should have given Freston a bonus. News Corp paid 
$580m for the less adroit social network, then approaching 100m users, in 2005. 
In 2011, News Corp sold Myspace for $35m and it is nowlargely a music site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/myspace-time-inc-facebook-acquisition-ownership>
.

Napster

In an era when CD sales ruled the music world, Napster offered a preview of 
the future: digital music for free. The record industry decided to sue just 
about everyone involved in the online music sharing site and eventually “won” 
with a court injunction in theA&M Records v Napster 
<https://www.law.cornell.edu/copyright/cases/239_F3d_1004.htm> case in 2001. 
But the damage was already done. The music industry’s golden days of 
high-profit music sales have given way to a leaner, meaner digital future.

Pets.com

Plenty of companies on this list are victims of failing to adapt quickly 
enough to technology or the law, but Pets.com may be the only one that was 
almost purely a creation of the stock market. Given the outsize valuations of 
tech startups at the moment, Pets.com’s $300m infusion of cash before its 
disastrous IPO seems almost quaint by comparison (Snapchat is supposedly worth 
$20bn), but at the time it was unprecedented. The company went public in 
February 2000 at$11 per share 
<http://www.cnet.com/news/pets-com-raises-82-5-million-in-ipo/>; by the time it 
announced its liquidation in November of the same year, the price had fallen to
19 cents <http://money.cnn.com/2000/11/07/technology/pets/>.
 