
I talk a lot about reduction. Reducing the number of toys  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/sep/01/depriving-your-kids-of-toys-great-idea>
you have, the quantity ofcleaning supplies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/06/how-to-make-your-own-laundry-detergent-and-help-save-the-planet>
 you buy, even the amount ofmeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/15/new-year-resolution-stop-eating-meat-vegetarian>
 you eat. My constant focus on reduction over recycling, upcycling or disposing 
of waste responsibly is a deliberate one. Put simply, recycling isn’t enough.

Recycling is good, and I’m not here to contradict that. When the options are 
to either toss a plastic bottle into the recycling bin or into the trash can, 
you’ll see me shaking my pom-poms for the blue bin. But I’m afraid the 
black-and-white thinking ends there.Recycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/recycling> is a complicated business, 
and not always a pleasant one to boot.

First of all, recycling doesn’t wipe the slate clean. It requires an enormous 
expenditure of energy and resources, including the monitoring of collection 
sites, the transportation of recyclables, and the recycling manufacturing 
process itself.

Why is recycling important? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Adam Vaughan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/11/why-is-recycling-important-google-answer>
Plastic, my nemesis, is especially problematic in that it can rarely be used 
for primary reprocessing – the process of breaking down a product and 
manufacturing it back into that same product. Plastic’s sensitivity to heat and 
light mean that its long, flexible molecules (the same ones that give it its 
unique malleability) degrade and break down when exposed to repeated thermal 
and mechanical processing. In plain terms, plastic has a sort of “heat 
history”, degrading more and more each time it’s processed. This process is 
irreversible.
For this reason, plastic is typically used for secondary reprocessing, which 
takes recovered plastic and uses it to create items which are not typically 
recyclable themselves: bumper stickers, textiles, and plastic lumber.

These uses are certainly preferable to its not being reused at all, but it’s 
important to understand that recycling a plastic bottle doesn’t mean closing 
the loop. That bottle will not embark on some celestial journey, reincarnated a 
thousand times. Recycling absolutely has a waste footprint, and it’s not an 
insignificant one.

Furthermore, recycling only works when there’s someone on the other side of 
the equation, someone who wants to buy the recycled material. And although some 
organizations operate with earth-friendly practices, many do not.

With falling commodity prices, recycled glass, aluminum, plastic and cardboard 
are being sold for less and less while the cost to the processor to process 
these materials stays the same. It’s come to the point where many cities are 
operating recycling programs at asignificant and consistent cash loss  <http:>– 
admirable, perhaps, but not sustainable.

So why is there always that undercurrent of resistance when we talk about 
consuming less? Certainly some of it is simple habit: it’s not yet common 
practice for many of us to carry a reusable water bottle instead of buying one. 
We’re more used to buying new rather than sourcing secondhand. We lack the time 
to take a few extra minutes to placate a crying toddler instead of simply 
handing them the toy they’re screaming for.

But I have a hunch that, as with recycling, the story is a bit more 
complicated. Viktor Frankl, in his book Man’s Search for Meaning, wrote the 
following about what a person goes through when possessed by a feeling he 
refers to as an existential vacuum: “No instinct tells him what he has to do 
and no tradition tells him what he ought to do; sometimes he does not even know 
what he wishes to do. There are various guises under which the existential 
vacuum appears. Sometimes the frustrated will to meaning is vicariously 
compensated for by a will to power … the will to money … [or] the will to 
pleasure.”

With apologies to Frankl, I’d like to add another to the list. I think, faced 
by this sort of nameless listlessness, many of us fill the void by shopping.

Treat yo self. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZsABTmT1_M0> 
Have it your way.
You’re worth it. 

Unless we address the underlying reasons we buy so much, we will never truly 
feel that we have enough. Unless we understandwhy stuff keeps coming through 
the door, it matters less and less how we organize it, curate it, or dispose of 
it when we’re done.
We’re not buying things because we have money to burn – this generation is 
crushed under its debt 
<http://business.time.com/2013/01/17/todays-young-adults-will-never-pay-off-their-credit-card-debts/>
. We aren’t doing it because we’ve got space to fill – our houses are packed to 
overflowing. And finally, we’re certainly not doing it because it makes us 
happy. Studies repeatedly hammer home one simple truth: it’s the experiences 
and the people 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2014/10/buy-experiences/381132/> 
in our lives that bring the most happiness.

Not the stuff. Never the stuff. That’s the real secret.

 