
The bells of York <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york> Minster fell silent on 
Christmas Day for the first time in more than 600 years following the 
controversial breakup of their bellringing team.

Worshippers had been warned to expect a silent Christmas after the cathedral 
disbanded its 30-strong ringing group in October due to safeguarding concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/how-york-minster-campanologists-sacking-blew-the-lid-off-bitter-dispute>
.

One group of campanologists from Leeds was asked to help ring the bells before 
a new team could be appointed, but they refused in solidarity with their sacked 
York colleagues.

How York Minster bellringers' sacking blew the lid off bitter dispute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/19/how-york-minster-campanologists-sacking-blew-the-lid-off-bitter-dispute>
The dean of York Minster, Vivienne Faull, and the archbishop of York, Dr John 
Sentamu, who supported the decision, were both in attendance at the minster’s 
Christmas Day service.

The decision came after the ringers refused to accept the decision not to 
reinstate one of its members, who had been suspended following a police 
investigation into allegations of child sexual abuse that did not lead to a 
prosecution.

This member has not been named by the chapter but is understood to be David 
Potter, a senior campanologist who was given an MBE for his services to 
bellringing and has never been convicted of any offences.

Potter was the subject of a police investigation in 1999 that was reviewed 
again in 2014, but he was never charged.

The chapter at York Minster commissioned its own risk assessment, and 
eventually decided that Potter should be permanently excluded from the 
bellringing team. It said the bellringers refused to accept this decision and 
so had to be disbanded.

In October, Potter’s solicitor, Colin Byrne, said: “Mr Potter has no cautions 
or convictions or any civil findings ever made against him. Issues surrounding 
the bellringers and the minster is a private and confidential matter between 
those two parties but the process that he has been subject to has shown a 
disregard for due process and equally the treatment of his fellow bellringers.”
 