
In the fourth episode of Seinfeld’s ninth season, Kramer and George try to 
resell a pair of opera tickets and end up thwarted by their own greed.

It’s a small moment of schadenfreude for anyone who has lost tickets or money 
to a scalper – but since that episode aired in 1992, the problem has got much, 
much worse. Last week in AustraliaJerry Seinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jerry-seinfeld> has unwittingly exposed 
how vulnerable fans are in a lightly regulated ticketing system that rips them 
off.

After a two-day presale for Telstra customers, ticket sales to Seinfeld’s 
first Australian standup tour in close to 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/03/jerry-seinfeld-to-tour-australia-for-first-time-since-1998>
 opened to the public through Ticketek, with the cheapest tickets in Sydney 
priced at $81.40 and premium seats costing $203.60.

Within minutes they were sold out. And within hours they were reselling on 
Australian resale sites including ViaGogo, Ticketblaster and Ticketmaster 
Resale, with some sellers on Ticketmaster Resale asking $2,298.85 for a ticket. 
The same is true for Adelaide and Melbourne. For the first show, in Perth, 
there was a pair on for $2,300 each, just to keep it simple; for Brisbane you 
could find them for $1,998.96.
Danny Allen (@dpallen) 
#Seinfeld <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Seinfeld?src=hash> tickets already on 
eBay and Ticketmaster Marketplace for 400% markup!@Ticketek_AU 
<https://twitter.com/Ticketek_AU> + scalpers = average punters missing out 😔
 <https://twitter.com/dpallen/status/797969739704246273> November 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/dpallen/status/797969739704246273> Chris Phillips (@cr1spe)
Seinfeld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> ticket scalpers, 
you just made my list.
 <https://twitter.com/cr1spe/status/798092859173765120> November 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/cr1spe/status/798092859173765120> 
“[Scalping] is generally seen as a really dishonest thing to do,” wrote one 
angry Facebook commenter. “It seems your Ticketmaster Resale website is a 
platform for this.”

A self-described “huge Seinfeld fan”, the television critic and podcaster Dan 
Barrett, missed out on Sydney tickets to Seinfeld and will have to fly to 
Brisbane to see the show.

“It’s offensive to see large ticketing websites facilitating the scalping of 
tickets,” he said of the inflated costs available through resale sites. “It 
only encourages profiteering, leaving fans like myself unable to go.”

A Ticketek spokesman echoed the criticism in a statement to Guardian 
Australia, urging fans to “avoid resale scalper websites”, calling them 
“predatory and misleading”.

“There is no guarantee those tickets are genuine and you risk being ripped 
off. We see countless examples of people who buy from resale and never receive 
tickets or find that they are the third or fourth buyer of the same ticket. 
Fans should only purchase tickets from the official ticketing agent.”

Ticketek v Ticketmaster

Some fans believe Ticketek exacerbated the Seinfeld frenzy by releasing some 
tickets to Telstra customers early under its commercial partnership – standard 
practice for many events, but one that reduced an already small pool of tickets 
available to the wider public on Monday.

Customers and ticket sellers are also vulnerable to “bots” that buy tickets in 
high volume at high speed then flip them on to reselling sites – often before a 
concert, musical or sporting event has even sold out.

A Ticketek spokesman said bot activity “wasn’t a significant factor” in the 
Seinfeld tour, which was more about “a huge demand and a limited number of tour 
dates and available tickets”. But, he said, Ticketek was “always vigilant” 
about bots and had invested “considerable technical effort and funds” to defend 
against them.

But others are pointing the finger at Ticketmaster, Ticketek’s rival ticketing 
agent, which appears to be selling Seinfeld tickets for the greatest markups 
through its reselling arm, Ticketmaster Resale, and making a small fortune from 
the scalped tickets.

In one receipt sourced by Guardian Australia, the seller was charged more than 
21% by Ticketmaster Resale

Live Nation Entertainment group is the global parent company of Ticketmaster, 
Ticketmaster Resale and the promotions and touring company Live Nation. Inits 
annual report 
<http://s1.q4cdn.com/788591527/files/doc_financials/2015/Annual-Report.pdf>, 
its chief executive, Michael Rapino, trumpeted the company’s reselling 
platforms as a “major focus” now in operation in 13 countries. Reselling for 
Live Nation Entertainment enjoyed 34% growth in gross transaction value last 
year, amounting to US$1.2bn – and continuing to “grow the volume of secondary 
tickets sold” forms part of the company’s strategy.

While Ticketmaster Resale has not released the amount of revenue it is taking 
from the $1.2bn in transactions, it’s likely to be a lot. Speaking to Guardian 
Australia, a Ticketmaster spokeswoman said every transaction incurred a 15% fee 
from the buyer and a 10% fee from the seller – meaning Ticketmaster Resale 
makes 25% on each transaction.

With Ticketmaster Resale taking at least 25% on each transaction, the higher 
the inflation charged by the seller, the higher its profit. In the extreme 
example of a $2,300 Seinfeld ticket, it means the company would accrue at least 
$575 for merely handling the deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26027ccab63d40061c04cca93999c0318e9cedcb%2F0_0_3983_2859%2F3983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26027ccab63d40061c04cca93999c0318e9cedcb%2F0_0_3983_2859%2F3983.jpg>
 This week tickets for Adele’s first Australian tour go on sale. The singer has 
been waging war against scalpers. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
In the case of the Live Nation tours that are sold through Ticketmaster and 
resold through Ticketmaster Resale, Live Nation Entertainment is not only 
profiting from scalpers’ inflated prices but effectively double dipping, making 
money on the primary sale and all secondary sale fees and charges. Responding 
to this claim, Live Nation sent a statement: “Live Nation Australia [the 
Australian branch of the global company] does not participate in any revenues 
or fees that may be generated through the Ticketmaster Resale program.” 
Ticketmaster refused to comment on this.

This week will represent another highlight in the scalpers’ calendar, when 
tickets for Adele’s first Australian shows go on sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/adele-to-tour-australia-for-the-first-time-in-2017-gday-its-me>
. Promoters believe this sale will outstrip the nearest comparison: AC/DC’s 
tour last year. ButAdele 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/inside-adeles-all-out-fight-against-scalpers-20151222>
 – along with acts such asIron Maiden 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jesselawrence/2015/10/01/iron-maiden-aim-to-squeeze-out-secondary-ticket-market-on-upcoming-book-of-souls-world-tour/#8b70a8f85b7e>
,Mumford and Sons 
<http://www.mumfordandsons.com/news/to-all-our-fans-around-the-world-help-us-to-stop-the-ticket-touts/>
 andViolent Soho 
<http://fasterlouder.junkee.com/scalpers-taking-advantage-ticketmasters-resale-facility-theres-not-much-can/858788>
 – has been one of those waging a war against scalping, which puts money in the 
pocket of scalpers – not artists – at the expense of an artist’s fans.

We verify and reissue every ticket sold by fans … The seat you buy is always 
the seat you get
Ticketmaster Resale 
Who is the touring company for Adele? Live Nation. And the official ticket 
agent for Adele’s shows in Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth? Ticketmaster. Perhaps 
that’s why Ticketmaster has confirmed to Guardian Australia thatAdele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> tickets will not be listed on 
Ticketmaster Resale. Live Nation works for its artists, after all. 

Ticketek is handling the sales for the Sydney and Adelaide shows. 

Like other ticket resale companies around the country, Ticketmaster Resale 
stresses that its platform is “secure”: “We verify and reissue every ticket 
sold by fans … The seat you buy is always the seat you get,” it says on its 
website.

“Ticketmaster Resale provides a safe and secure platform for fans to sell 
unwanted tickets and to purchase tickets for events that might otherwise be 
sold out,” Ticketmaster said in a statement to Guardian Australia. “Our 
Ticketmaster Resale marketplace offers the best solution for fans, as it 
provides a customer guarantee which protects fans when making a purchase.”

Appetite for destruction

Ticketmaster Resale is a major player in the Australian secondary ticket 
industry, with ViaGogo, Queen of Tickets and Ticketblaster among a bunch of 
other resale platforms dealing in tickets to sporting and cultural events. Some 
resales, of course, are genuine: sellers may no longer be able to go to an 
event, and it’s not illegal for them to sell tickets on to buyers who can. But 
in reality these resale marketplaces are facilitating, and often profiting 
from, ticket scalping – and the fans are losing out.


Buying tickets for big New York events is a 'fixed game', attorney general says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/28/hamilton-adele-tickets-new-york-fixed-game>
Tickets for Guns N’ Roses’ 2017 tour are now going for $2,300 on Ticketmaster 
Resale; Justin Bieber is listed on ViaGogo for $1474. One Nick Cave fan 
searched for tickets to the artist’supcoming Australian tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/26/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-announce-january-tour-dates-for-skeleton-tree>
 and landed on ViaGogo’s site before the primary ticketseller’s homepage – 
thanks to some well-placed Google AdWords. In a rush, he spent $350 on two 
tickets, well above the general seating cost of $103 each, before receiving an 
itemised bill: he would pay a service charge of $54 per ticket, amounting to 
$458 in total. He received no confirmation of where he would be seated.

Not only are users paying a premium price and a substantial fee for their 
ticket, but they are not even guaranteed entry. Many venues refuse resold 
tickets; many of the tickets sold aren’t legitimate; some ticket numbers are 
sold more than once; and some tickets – listed at a premium price in the vague 
“section A” – end up not only being the worst seats in section A, but among the 
worst in the house.

Like other resellers, Ticketmaster Resale guarantees a 100% refund of the 
ticket price if the ticket is not accepted by the venue or promoter – but, also 
like other resellers, the company pockets the fees regardless.

The law 

What can be done? Australia’s federal consumer laws protect customers against 
misleading or deceptive conduct – but the Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission says selling tickets at inflated pricing is in itself not in breach 
of federal laws.

We are also watching … the situation in the US and the UK, where there are 
advanced plans to criminalise the use of bots
Ticketek 
Some forms of scalping are illegal in some states and at particular venues – 
but according toa report on scalping 
<http://file///Users/steph_harmon/Downloads/report%20(3).pdf> introduced to 
parliament by Senator Nick Xenophon in 2014, the state-based legislation is 
complicated, inconsistent and ineffective.

“We hate it … we’re against it,” the music industry heavyweight Michael 
Gudinskitold the Herald Sun 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/resale-scalp-alert-call-for-ticketing-probe-as-resellers-get-greedy/news-story/17a382ef879b4c4d1498a5264f32818b>
. “Some of the prices I’ve seen are extreme, and it doesn’t go to the artists 
or the promoters. It’s a great frustration and I think the ACCC should look at 
it.”

Live Performance Australia is the peak body for the nation’s live performance 
industry, and its chief executive, Evelyn Richardson, said the secondary ticket 
market was a key issue right now. “We’re looking at it as we speak,” she told 
Guardian Australia.

In Australia, solutions are likely to include a mix of self-regulation within 
the industry, and better government regulation of technological developments 
such as automated software and bots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b690be4a8c1961741d0eff73a6c16a1412b2f8b%2F0_0_3365_2237%2F3365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b690be4a8c1961741d0eff73a6c16a1412b2f8b%2F0_0_3365_2237%2F3365.jpg>
 Guns N’ Roses at Coachella in April. Within 48 hours of their 2017 Australian 
tour going on sale there were 9,000 tickets available on the resale market, 
worth almost $4m. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images for Coachella 
In September Xenophon revived his fight to get the federal government to 
legislate against these bots 
<http://www.news.com.au/opinion/senator-nick-xenophon-wants-ticket-scalping-issue-revisited/news-story/31418f62c933dfa7492310a43fb4be20>
 – a fight Ticketek endorses.

“We are also watching closely the situation in the US and the UK, where there 
are advanced plans to criminalise the use of bots to acquire and sell tickets,” 
the Ticketek spokesman said.

Live Performance Australia endorses laws against bots too, which might be 
difficult to enforce but will at least send a message. “There has always been 
ticket scalping and people profiteering from buying tickets on the primary 
market, but now there are more ways for scalpers to quickly flip them and get 
them on to the secondary market … and a greater variety of platforms for people 
to resell,” Richardson said.

“Ticketing companies themselves invest a lot of technical resources and money 
into defending against bots, and they will continue to do that as the 
technology gets more sophisticated.”


In the US, Congress is considering legislation to curb bot activity 
<https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/114/hr708> (“I did not want to pay $800 
[for a Hamilton] ticket,” a Florida Democratic senator, Bill Nelson,said in a 
hearing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/theater/congress-considers-plan-to-curb-ticket-bots.html?_r=0>
); and the UK is awaiting a government response toa secondary ticketing review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/independent-secondary-ticketing-review-published-today>
 which was published in May – as the#toutsout campaign 
<http://fanfairalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/FanFair_Toutsout_A-Guide-to-fighting-ticket-touting-MMF.pdf>
 gains steam.

I say this to people I know: find out the venue or the promoter … and check 
out their site
Evelyn Richardson, Live Performance Australia 
Richardson stressed that while Australia was watching for potential solutions, 
its industry functioned differently. The commonality was that “the resale 
market is a growing market” – but Australia’s solution, she said, was “clunky 
at the moment”.

“With respect to large-scale profiteering, that is a challenge and I think 
we’ll see technological solutions to it,” she said. “We’re seeing 
internationally – and even in Australia – a move to paperless tickets and other 
ways of controlling the inventory so that scalpers can’t get access to it … 
Increasingly, venues and promoters are looking at how they can respond, how 
they can control it, and manage it in a more effective way.”

Buyer beware

Bots are just one of the technological factors at play; another is Google 
AdWords, which are paid for by resale sites to prioritise their listings over 
the primary sellers.


According to the Ticketek spokesman, within 48 hours of the Guns N’ Roses tour 
going on sale in August there were 9,000 tickets available on the resale 
market, worth almost $4m.

The concert itself had not yet sold out through Ticketek – meaning people were 
finding the reseller links first, thanks to ads on Google, and buying tickets 
at inflated prices well before they needed to.

In the case of the Seinfeld shows, those Google ads looked like this:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82f73102dc8808719dd8f8fbd722c2fad92706f%2F0_0_970_907%2F970.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20must%20be%20joking%3A%20Seinfeld%20ticket%20frenzy%20highlights%20resale%20rip-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyou-must-be-joking-seinfeld-ticket-frenzy-highlights-resale-rip-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82f73102dc8808719dd8f8fbd722c2fad92706f%2F0_0_970_907%2F970.png>
With the branding of sites such as Ticketmaster Resale not dissimilar to that 
of Ticketmaster itself – and with many resale listings not showing a ticket’s 
original price – many customers don’t realise they are purchasing a ticket 
through a secondary source for more money than it is worth.

Defenders of sites such as Ticketmaster Resale say they themselves offer a 
protection against a growth in ticket fraud, facilitated by digital technology. 
Their big markups merely cover fraud protection and customer care, and the 
guarantee that fake tickets will be refunded. But until there is a better 
regulatory system, Richardson said the onus was on the buyer.

“It is very much a case of buyer beware,” she said. “Know where you’re buying 
your ticket from. If you’re buying on a secondary site, you can’t be sure that 
the ticket you’re buying is a valid ticket.

“If it’s for a show where the promoter or the venue say you can’t resell, then 
they reserve the right to cancel the ticket – and they may do that. And if you 
bought it on a secondary site, then getting a refund is going to be difficult.”

How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
The issue was one of education, Richardson said. “Does the customer understand 
that they’re paying a premium price, and they’re paying a commission fee? If 
they understand that and they still make that choice, then that’s an informed 
choice. But I think the issue that we’re focused on is insuring that the 
consumer is properly informed.”


Richardson recommended that customers add an extra step to their ticket 
purchasing. “I say this to people I know: find out the venue or the promoter 
who is the primary authorised seller and check out their site,” she said. 
That’s where you’ll find the promoter’s official ticketing partner and bypass 
the misleading Google result.

“From an industry perspective, we’re very mindful of some of the challenges 
that [digital scalping] raises and we’re looking at how we can respond to those 
as quickly as we can. But, in the meantime, the consumer needs to be diligent 
about checking where they are buying their ticket from.”

Do you have an experience of ticket resales to share? Email 
steph.harmon@theguardian.com

 * This article was amended on 21 November to insert that Ticketek is the 
official agent for Adele’s shows in Adelaide and Sydney.  