
In Aristophanes's play The Birds, first performed in Athens in 414BC, two 
friends, Peisthetaerus and Euelpides, weary of taxes, lawsuits and civic 
obligations, leave the city and go in search of the fabled kingdom of the 
birds. This paradise of liberty and pleasure, is, as I put it in my new version 
for the National Theatre, "somewhere with no/ Damned bureaucrats and lawyers up 
your arse,/ Where you can simply sit and watch time pass" - preferably drinking 
and shagging your brains out as well.

Hopelessly lost in the sky, the travellers meet Tereus the Hoopoe, a 
king-turned-bird, who introduces them to this adopted world. At this point the 
colonising business instincts of Peisthetaerus (aka Pezza) instantly reawake. 
What's needed here, he tells Tereus, is a city. The birds can rise to 
greatness. How? "By economic means, of course./ You call this air? I call it 
market force./ Considered as a medium of exchange,/ It has a most unearthly 
fiscal range."

Pezza stakes his life, and that of the terrified Euelpides (or Eck), on his 
ability to win the distrustful birds over before being pecked to death. Birds, 
he says, were here before the gods, before the earth itself. Let them be 
restored to their original status. The flattery works. A name is chosen for the 
city and building begins. Nothing will ever be the same again. Which brings us 
to the halfway point of the play.

When The Birds was first performed, Athens was in the midst of the 
Peloponnesian War, staking its might against numerous rival Greek city-states. 
A naval expedition had recently sailed against Syracuse. The ultimate outcome 
would be the defeat of Athens, the loss of its independence and its democracy. 
The play doesn't labour the contemporary situation, but the audience at the 
Athenian festival where it was staged in competition would have known the 
background and enjoyed Aristophanes's mixture of sophistication and gleeful 
vulgarity. In the event, Aristophanes's play only came second (the winning play 
has been lost). But where mere political entertainment is consumed and 
forgotten, The Birds has survived. Its concerns are permanent.

Last autumn I was asked to write a version of The Birds, to be directed by 
Kathryn Hunter and staged at the National during the Transformation season in 
the reconfigured Lyttelton. A former member of Complicite and a leading 
exponent of physical theatre, Hunter has worked on a wide range of material, 
from Shakespeare to Brecht. But why The Birds?

Although Aristophanes's name is well-known, in Britain his comedies are 
perhaps more honoured in print than on the stage. The traditional student 
production in Cambridge, dating back to 1882, suggests that his work occupies 
the same neglected-classic status as the lesser-known Elizabethan and Jacobean 
dramas, also much loved by student societies. Elsewhere, matters are different. 
His place in Greek theatre is prominent, a matter of national pride, and 
productions are regularly the subject of controversy. The renowned 1974 
Epidaurus production by Karolos Koun read The Birds as a warning against 
dictatorships, such as the then recently fallen Colonels' junta.

There are strong antecedents for the reapplication of the play. Goethe, 
directing it in Weimar in 1780, read it as a satire on his literary 
contemporaries and the fickleness of public taste. Planche's London version of 
1846 poked fun at the idea of the Channel Tunnel. And not content with 
monopolising the press and broadcasting, the Italian Prime Minister Silvio 
Berlusconi was recently involved in a censorship row over a production of 
Aristophanes's The Frogs that dared to satirise him. ClearlyAristophanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aristophanes> is durable and adaptable.

But what is The Birds about? Critics and scholars differ as widely in their 
interpretations as directors. Is it satire, celebration, a warning or a work 
whose success lies in gleeful invention rather than meaning? Does it take 
sides? Is it worldly or idealistic? Like Shakespeare's plays, The Birds 
survives interpretation, shadowing the complexity of life itself. The only 
thing to do was see where the story led us and try to find speakable verse in 
which to present it.

Then there is the Chorus: the birds themselves. For the past couple of years 
Kathryn Hunter has been involved in a number of workshops with circus 
performers, and The Birds, which is a collaboration between the National and 
Mamaloucos Circus, provides the opportunity to marry circus skills with the 
original drama. The world of the birds is made present, filled with their song, 
their beauty and their aerial power.

Staging a play that is also a circus is a fairly hairy business. Watching 
rehearsals involves moments of disbelief and terror. Can they really be doing 
that? The large cast, most of whom are acrobats of various kinds, appear as 
fabulous creatures, perpetually in motion, on stage and in the air. Their 
equipment includes trapezes, silk ropes, Chinese poles, bungee-harnesses, 
trampolines, the terrifying cloud-swing (it looks like an elaborate way of 
killing yourself), hand-balancing poles and something called the strop, which 
sounds like a recreation for High Court judges. When the army of birds dives to 
attack, Pezza and Eck have to defend themselves with saucepan lids and kebab 
skewers before Pezza persuades the birds to talk their freedoms away. It is a 
spectacle, but it is also properly dramatic: air and space are the elements 
from which the play shows a prison in the process of construction.

Freedom, the play seems almost to suggest, is a condition best enjoyed in 
ignorance. To draw a line in the sand, to call this place Here and that one 
There, to call these people Us and those others Them, is to invoke not only the 
apparatus of the state but servitude as well, a condition that may be improved 
but not escaped. None of this should surprise us, Aristophanes indicates. 
Comedy may be against the government but it also needs a kind of complicity 
with human nature, with the earthy self-interest in small things that would 
corrupt the conduct of greater matters. Comedy is also realistic: in 
Shakespeare we warm to Falstaff, and to Stephano in The Tempest, but we know 
their local anarchy can never be allowed to shape the state. As the poet James 
Simmons wrote in Stephano Remembers: "We were no good as murderers. We were 
clowns."

In the later stages of the present version of The Birds, comedy is mingled 
with alarm, as Pezza successfully exceeds the political scope of the Athenian 
Del Boy he seems at first to be. He casts Eck aside (which sows the seeds of 
revolt). He barbecues the opposition. The air itself will be divided and owned. 
As the geometer Meton remarks, with a nod to WH Auden, "It's time the air was 
properly surveyed,/ Split into lots, its firm frontiers displayed./ Until 
that's done, the air is only... air./ My plan will mean it's seriously there."

When the gods trespass in the birds' airspace they risk a war of religion, 
race and ideology - a threesome reproduced today in the conflict between the 
west and Islam. Even Hercules, the mighty demigod, finds himself a stateless 
refugee of mixed race. It is no coincidence that the cast of this version of 
The Birds is multi-ethnic and multi-lingual, nor that the play's language moves 
between traditional forms (rhyming couplets and the Hoopoe's impassioned 
lyricism) and the intoxicated visiting Poet's spontaneous rap ("for those who 
think tradition's crap"), as well as the Chorus's hip-hop celebration of bird 
life, complete with breakdancing.

In Thucydides's History of the Peloponnesian War, an envoy from the city of 
Corinth remarks that the Athenians "are incapable of leading a quiet life 
themselves or of allowing anyone else to do so". It is at the point where 
reforming energy crosses over into political intolerance that The Birds closes, 
with the opposition crushed and the hero deified, free to make off with the 
girl, the fame and the money.

As the birds depart the stage, Tereus the Hoopoe repeats part of the birds' 
Creation myth as a warning to anyone who might care to listen. Dress the world 
in whatever colours you like, the Hoopoe says, but man has only one 
destination: "Are you listening, you shadows/ On loan from the night?/ You who 
amount to less than a dream,/ You flightless, earthbound, clayfooted/ Momentary 
things who only seem/ To live:/ You must endure your little lives of pain/ And 
then wither like leaves/ Come to dust, come to death, once again./ Are you 
listening, men?" Tereus's view is cold, but at least it is clear. The 
unexamined life is not worth living, said Socrates, but that is so terribly 
last century compared with the excited rush to join Pezza's globalising army. 
Or is it? I'm sure we can find seats among the other citizens for Messrs Blair, 
Bush, Berlusconi and their world-bestriding pals.

Â· The Birds is in previews at the Lyttelton, London SE1 (020-7452 3000), from 
July 23 and tours from August 22. Tour details:www.mamaloucos.com 
<http://www.mamaloucos.com>. Sean O'Brien's version of The Birds will be 
published by Methuen to coincide with the production. His most recent book of 
poems is Downriver (Picador).
 