
You’ve got donations! Having an AOL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aol> email address might make you look 
about as cool as leg warmers but as far as the political class is concerned, 
you’re the hippest kid on the block.

Data from email marketing firm Fluent has revealed the average contribution to 
a political campaign by email domain name, and while a donation-friendly user 
with aGmail <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gmail> address will net a 
candidate an average of $31, the average donation from an AOL address is a full 
$159.

 “When we encounter an AOL address, it’s gold,” Jordan Cohen, Fluent’s CMO, 
toldCNBC <http://www.cnbc.com/2016/01/19/aolcoms-trump-card.html>.


Will Conway, director of politics and advocacy at NationBuilder, a company 
that makes political campaign-management software, said that email was a still 
more personal way to attract donors than straightforward advertising. “I would 
argue that you can see a lot about the people you’re emailing, and what they 
care about, and it’s free,” Conway said. “The key is that people can take 
action in a moment of persuasion.”


Email <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/email> marketing was a major 
contributor to Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential campaign and has supplanted the 
ubiquitous fundraising letter as the method of choice for attracting individual 
donors to a cause. And while AOL users tend to get made fun of as old and out 
of touch, users over the age of 50 make the vast majority of individual 
campaign donations.

“AOL still represents the old school and you have a lot of parents and 
grandparents on there,” said marketing consultant Peter Shankman. “While [the 
dollar amount] isn’t indicative of the quality of Gmail, that’s really 
something kids started to use entering college. I wouldn’t say they don’t have 
money, but they don’t understand the power of political donations yet.”

Interestingly, the desktop-to-mobile transition that has affected the rest of 
the advertising world also comes to bear on electioneering: 47% of the 
donations to campaigns on the web came from mobile, rather than desktop 
browsers.

“At the end of the day, money wins elections, and unless we take all the 
television and computers away, money will continue to win elections,” said 
Shankman. “With the younger demographic, there’s that kind of clicktivism that 
doesn’t necessarily bear out. Look at Kony.”
 