
Nine Inch Nails’ Trent Reznor <https://www.theguardian.com/music/trent-reznor> 
is the latest artist to join the music industry’s war of words with YouTube, 
attacking Google’s video service over the role it plays for musicians.

“I find YouTube’s business to be very disingenuous. It is built on the backs 
of free, stolen content and that’s how they got that big,”said Reznor in an 
interview with Billboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/digital-and-mobile/7407889/apples-brain-trust-iovine-reznor-cue-and-kondrk-on>
.

Reznor was not speaking purely as an artist, however. He is also chief 
creative officer atApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music>, the streaming service 
launched by Apple in 2015, which is one of the key rivals to YouTube in the 
digital music world.

“I think any free-tiered service is not fair. It’s making their numbers and 
getting them a big IPO and it is built on the back of my work and that of my 
peers. That’s how I feel about it. Strongly,” said Reznor, widening his 
criticism to other rivals like Spotify in the process.

Why is the music industry battling YouTube and what happens next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/20/music-industry-battling-google-youtube-what-happens-next>
YouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> has faced a barrage 
of criticism from musicians and music-industry bodies in 2016, as part of a 
campaign in the US and Europe to rework copyright legislation that grants the 
service “safe harbour” status when users upload copyrighted material without 
the permission of the rights owners.

Rightsholders have also argued that YouTube’s vast catalogue of free music 
could impede the growth of paid music-streaming subscription services likeApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> Music and Spotify’s premium tier 
– important context to Reznor’s comments, given his role.

In its most recent public statement, following an open letter to Alphabet boss 
Larry Page from rock band Sixx:AM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/nikki-sixx-ramps-up-protest-against-youtube-video-royalties>
, YouTube indicated that the criticism is having an impact on the company’s 
plans.

“The voices of the artists are being heard, and we’re working through details 
with the labels and independent music organisations who directly manage the 
deals with us,” a spokesperson said.

“Having said that, YouTube has paid out over $3bn (£2.1bn) to the music 
industry, despite being a platform that caters to largely light music listeners 
who spend an average of one hour per month consuming music – far less than an 
average Spotify or Apple Music user. Any comparisons of revenue from these 
platforms are apples and oranges.”


Following Reznor’s criticism, YouTube issued a new statement addressing his 
comments.

“The overwhelming majority of labels and publishers have licensing agreements 
in place with YouTube to leave fan videos up on the platform and earn revenue 
from them. Today the revenue from fan uploaded content accounts for roughly 50 
percent of the music industry’s YouTube revenue,” said a spokesperson.

“Any assertion that this content is largely unlicensed is false. To date, we 
have paid out over $3 billion to the music industry – and that number is 
growing year on year.”
 