
Zadie Smith will be giving the first glimpse of her long-awaited new novel NW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241144145/nw>, poet 
Alice Oswald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-oswald> will put on a 
rare performance ofMemorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780571274161/memorial>, 
her reimagining of the Iliad, and authors fromIrvine Welsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/irvinewelsh> to Joyce Carol Oates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joyce-carol-oates> will debate the key 
issues facing modern literature at this summer'sEdinburgh international book 
festival <http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/>.

From talks by former prime minister Gordon Brown and former hostage John 
McCarthy to the reminiscences of Seamus Heaney and Andrew O'Hagan about their 
journeys together throughScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, 
Wales and Ireland, 800 authors from 44 countries will appear in 750 events at 
this year's festival. A lineup featuring eight Booker winners, including Hilary 
Mantel, John Banville and Anne Enright, will also incorporate Nobel laureates, 
politicians and poets.

Will Self <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/11/willself>, Pat Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pat-barker> and James Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-kelman> are all launching their new 
books in Charlotte Square Gardens this August, as isIan McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianmcewan>, whose latest novel, Sweet Tooth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780224097376/sweet-tooth>
, is the story of the daughter of an Anglican bishop who enters the 
intelligence service.

Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/11/zadiesmith>, who has not 
published a novel since 2005'sOn Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141019451/on-beauty>, 
will give a sneak preview of NW, about four people who grew up on a council 
estate in north-west London. "It's a fantastic year for British fiction," said 
festival director Nick Barley.

Smith will also be discussing the state of Britain today on a panel with 
Alistair Darling and Paddy Ashdown, while McEwan will be interviewing 
Scotland's first minister Alex Salmond about his life beyond politics. Debate 
will likewise rage at theEdinburgh World Writers' Conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/09/edinburgh-festival-books-world-changing-1962>
, a major programming partnership between the Edinburgh International Book 
Festival and the British Council. The event will mirror the notorious 1962 
Edinburgh writers' conference, where authors including Norman Mailer andWilliam 
S Burroughs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamburroughs> thrashed out 
the relevance of literature.

Fifty writers – US author Nathan Englander, China's Xiaolu Guo and Norway's 
Dag Solstad among them – will spend five days discussing the theme of writing 
as an essential component of society. Carnegie medal winnerPatrick Ness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrick-ness> will explore censorship today, 
Egypt's Ahdaf Soueif will ask if literature should be political, and Welsh will 
debate the concept of a national literature.

"It might well be as feisty as the first conference," said Barley, referring 
to the infamous showdown in which Hugh MacDiarmid denounced Alexander Trocchi 
as "cosmopolitan scum". "The questions asked are just as relevant today. We 
chose the authors attending because they are brilliant writers with strong 
opinions about the world and the novel, so we've got Ahdaf Soueif, who has been 
so heavily involved in the Arab spring, talking about politics and literature. 
I know it will be a passionate and immediate response, from someone who is 
living through revolution as we speak. And there's [Israeli novelist] Aharon 
Appelfeld, a man who survived the Holocaust and whose life experience has 
informed his writing."

Broadcasters James Naughtie and Sue MacGregor will be curating their own 
series of events at the festival. Naughtie will look at modern Britain along 
with Smith and others, while MacGregor will consider the information age on a 
panel including Prue Leith, Sarah Hall andAL Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alkennedy>. "I'm delighted by a new bookish 
challenge – exploring how we deal with the information age, when ideas good and 
bad, current events, and whole books can be flashed across the universe in a 
nano-second," said MacGregor.

A host of other leading authors will join the lineup, including Howard Jacobson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/howard-jacobson>, poet Ruth Padel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ruth-padel>, Louise Welsh and AN Wilson, as 
well as Youssef Ziedan, winner of the international prize for Arabic fiction, 
and Dutch author Herman Koch with the first English translation of his 
bestselling novel The Dinner. Debut writers are also in strong supply, 
including the actor John Gordon Sinclair, and audiences are being invited to 
vote for their favourite first novel. Children are well catered for, with the 
festival hosting the launch of the final Artemis Fowl novel byEoin Colfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eoin-colfer> and a peek at Jacqueline Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jacquelinewilson>'s retelling of E Nesbit's 
classic Five Children and It. New children's books from David Walliams, crime 
writer Val McDermid, Mackenzie Crook and DJ Simon Mayo will also be presented 
at the event, and children's laureate Julia Donaldson and War Horse author 
Michael Morpurgo are both set to appear.

"Last year, our theme was revolution," said Barley. "Now the question everyone 
is asking is: 'Where did revolution take us?' My feeling is that, following a 
time of revolution, we need to take stock. So the theme of the debates is 
'rethinking' – looking again at ideas we thought were clear in our minds, like 
democracy.

"This is a year for taking stock about what matters to us in a time of 
uncertainty, doubt and data overload. It is also, of course, a time when 
Scotland is preparing to make a big decision about its own future. All this and 
more will be discussed, deliberated, considered, broadcast live online via the 
Edinburgh World Writers' Conference, and disseminated around the world. We look 
forward to a lively, informed and informative debate."
 