
“How are we getting away with playing something like this?” hollers Zane Lowe 
from inside the small studio – rented from will.i.am – that houses his Beats 1 
show. It’s 9.30am in Los Angeles and blaring out to more than 100 countries is 
Que Buena Es La Rumba by Happy Colors. It sounds, to me at least, like a Diplo 
remix of 15 songs playing at once and it’s hard to think of something less 
radio-friendly for a morning’s drive to work. But this isn’t typical radio; 
it’s Beats 1, where, apparently, there are no rules.

Apple Music's Beats 1: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/30/apple-musics-beats-1-zane-lowe>
“We tried so many times to come up with a new term for it,” says Lowe, 
sprawled on a sofa after the show. As well as a DJ, he has also become the 
spokesperson for Beats 1, Apple Music’s global, 24-hour radio station, which 
launched in June to much fanfare as part of its new streaming service. Only 
it’s that term – radio – that’s causing Lowe problems. “Not because we want to 
separate ourselves from radio – I love radio and I’m really proud we can bring 
what we all love about radio into a music service – but this is different.” 
While his former employers at Radio 1 – which Lowe left in March after 12 years 
– have a remit to adhere to, listening figures to scrutinise and a young 
audience to placate, Apple has given Lowe and Beats 1 a surprising amount of 
creative freedom. It’s a freedom that has caused teething problems.

“We obviously have this huge support and the resources to make it work, but 
the spirit is that of a pirate station,” Lowe says, sliding further down the 
sofa. “There’s a scrappiness to Beats 1 at the moment – sometimes things don’t 
work and sometimes they do, but there’s no consistency.” It’s surprising to 
hear him talk about inconsistency and scrappiness, considering the streamlined 
perfectionism that seems to be Apple’s hallmark. “You go in that studio and you 
sort of feel like, if you tripped over the wrong wire, you could bring the 
whole thing down.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443105388994%2F251d0f98-1995-4151-b7ca-b6ccd2ef0932-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443105388994%2F251d0f98-1995-4151-b7ca-b6ccd2ef0932-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beat 1’s trio of established DJs, Ebro Darden (left), Julie Adenunga and Zane 
Lowe. 
Acting as the glitzy facade while the maintenance work continues behind the 
scenes is the station’s roll call of presenters. Using Apple’s clout and the 
lure of Beats 1’s global reach, the station’s trio of established DJs – Lowe in 
LA, Ebro Darden in New York andJulie Adenuga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/01/apple-beats-1-dj-julie-adenuga-interview>
 in London, each broadcasting live – have been joined by a cast that reads like 
the world’s most intriguing festival. So there are prerecorded shows from 
Drake, Dr Dre, Elton John, Pharrell Williams, Jaden Smith, Q-Tip, Josh Homme, 
Vampire Weekend’s Ezra Koenig and St Vincent, all hand-picked by Lowe and Beats 
1 co-founder Jimmy Iovine and chief creative officer Trent Reznor. “We asked: 
‘What’s the one thing that can truly be improved on radio at the moment?’ and 
that was the relationship the artist has with the promotional experience,” Lowe 
says of his colleagues. “So we handed the reins over to the artists and told 
them they can build it however they want, play whatever they want, talk to 
whoever they want. If you don’t want to play your own music, then don’t, we 
don’t mind. Make it an extension of who you are as a creative person.”

Pharrell Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pharrellwilliams>, who 
co-hosts OTHERtone with Scott Vener, explains – in a very Pharrell way – why he 
signed up: “My mind has exploded into rainbow colours multiple times from the 
music I’ve heard that’s out there. It’s humbling when you think about how there 
are seven billion people on this planet and we’re lucky enough to come across 
some of that music. The odds, if you think about it, are stacked against us. It 
really is mind-blowing.”

As Jay Z-owned Tidal – one of Apple Music’s streaming platform rivals – has 
discovered, however, having famous friends doesn’t guarantee success, and all 
the Beats 1 shows have to uphold Iovine’s station mantra: “Don’t be boring.”

“That means don’t be blinded by how good this might look on paper. Will it 
work on air? Will they have interesting things to say?” Lowe says. “Otherwise, 
it just turns into a mess and looks like a fancy list and not much else.” Shows 
and artists will come and go, with Ellie Goulding and Disclosure recently 
finishing stints and Haim, Eric Prydz, Major Lazer and Chance the Rapper 
stepping in. Perhaps to better reflect the global reach of the service, a 
different blog or collective from around the world will also be given a show 
for a month, starting with Mexico’sNAAFI 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BI6Vky6mwvs>. “It’s not about worrying about 
image or what their social stats might be,” Lowe insists. “It’s about whether 
it’s good for music. Jaden Smith is good for music. He cares, he’s hungry.” 
When I suggest that perhaps a big fat cheque from Apple helps with all the 
caring, Lowe sits up. “Does it sound like they’re doing it for the money? Look, 
I’m sure some of them are doing it for financial reasons as well as love,” he 
concedes, “but it’s not something I get embroiled in. Let’s be honest, 
Pharrell’s made some money in his life so I’m not sure a cheque from Beats 1 is 
going to make a difference.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443106594665%2F48192c1f-6c19-473c-8ad3-951854d2273d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443106594665%2F48192c1f-6c19-473c-8ad3-951854d2273d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jaden Smith: ‘Kids who are being born right now will start using Beats 1 at 
the age of like three or four.’ 
Smith, son of Will and brother to Willow, is Beats 1’s secret weapon. A 
precocious professional eccentric (he’s previously said he wanted to be “the 
most durable person on the planet”), he’s enthusiastic to the point of 
caricature (good songs are punctuated with “get into it, flames”) and plugged 
into new music. His MSFTS Frequency show encapsulates Beats 1’s focus on 
sharing music in a passionate and personality-led way. “Age is irrelevant if 
you know what you’re talking about and know music,” he says. “People don’t have 
a lot of references to see what young people think and the type of music they 
like to listen to. It’s important to hear those things and to know that 
anything is possible – like if Jaden has a Beats show,” he coos, “then I can do 
anything with my life.”

Because the majority of the shows don’t air live, the lack of audience 
connection and conversation can sometimes make them feel inward-looking. At 
their worst, they come across like a bunch of famous people chatting to other 
famous people. While it can be interesting to hear musicians in conversation 
(Dr Dre’s interview with Quincy Jones, for example), shows that lack format 
(and perhaps give too much control to the artist) can descend into so much 
back-slapping that you worry about lumbar injuries.

You get the sense, however, that a DJ such as Smith understands his audience 
and how they consume music. He has also thought about the future. “I think the 
new kids who are being born right now, who are just coming into this world, 
will start using Beats 1 at the age of like three or four,” he says. “That 
group will just grow and grow until it’s every single kid. Genres will no 
longer exist for those kids. Everything will be mixed and merged together and I 
feel like that’s what Beats 1 is doing.”

“The younger generation listens to music much differently,” agrees Pharrell’s 
sidekick Vener. “They’ll listen to a hip-hop song next to a trippy rock song 
next to an old-school 80s song. It’s more mood-based now.” It’s why Koenig’s 
Time Crisis show can open with Abba’s One of Us and move on to Skepta’s 
Shutdown without unsettling anyone. “If there had been any restrictions on the 
music I could play that might have been a bit uncomfortable,” Koenig tells me 
in an endearingly deadpan manner. The show is his excuse to “play music and 
talk shit” and move beyond the genres he uses with his band. “There’s the music 
you make, there’s the music that influences you and then, in 2015, when we’re 
all constantly bombarded on all sides by media, there’s also the music you want 
to talk about.”

“I like the fact it’s one station and not segregated into one country or pop 
or rap or electronic,” muses Q-Tip, whose Friday night show of almost non-stop 
music, Abstract Radio, is, he muses, “a bit non-sequitur, a bit Monty Python”. 
“It could be segregated and something like, ‘OK, all you guys who like curry, 
go to this curry place in Currytown,’ and, ‘All you guys who like French 
cuisine, you guys go here to Frenchtown’,” he says, the analogy tickling him. 
In fact, it’s a shame he doesn’t talk more on his show; he is brilliantly 
bonkers. “I don’t necessarily want to play the things you guys want to hear, 
but I want to play the things you didn’t know you wanted to hear,” he 
continues. “If I play the stuff that you want to hear, I want to play it in a 
way you didn’t know you wanted to hear it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443106794641%2F665c0f8a-9366-47d1-8d08-d743ced40b3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zane%20Lowe%3A%20%E2%80%98Beats%201%20is%20the%20common%20room%20for%20the%20future%20pop%20rebels%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fzane-lowe-beats-1-apple-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443106794641%2F665c0f8a-9366-47d1-8d08-d743ced40b3c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pharrell Williams (left), Haim and Scott Vener. 
Both Q-Tip and Smith seem intent on confounding expectations and, to some 
extent, the definition of sense itself. “I feel like everyone thought I’d talk 
more,” Smith says of his show. “I choose not to speak because everyone wants to 
hear me speak. Everyone wants to hear me rant, everyone wants to hear what I 
have to say so they can go: ‘Oh that’s so ridiculous.’ But that’s why I don’t 
talk. It shows me how obsessed they are with me in general and how much they 
want to know what I think about certain things.”

If all this talk of a radio station that plays a broad spectrum of music 
throughout the day is bringing to mind, well, Radio 1, then you’d be right. 
Lowe is open about how influential his time with the station has been. He’s 
also quick to point out that BBC 6 Music also uses musicians as hosts, albeit 
slightly less flashy ones, and he agrees with critics who say Beats 1’s core 
playlist (and there is one, though it’s not published yet) is more specialised 
and niche than Radio 1’s. In fact, on Lowe’s show, as with his Radio 1 show 
before it, pop is allowed only if it can be prefixed with the word “authentic” 
(“Of course we’re going to play [Taylor Swift’s] Bad Blood, the Kendrick 
remix,” he says at one point). When I ask where the listener goes if they want 
to hear Pitbull, for example, he says, “You go to the pop station onApple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> radio,” meaning away from 
Beats 1.

But for American artists and audiences brought up on strictly formatted radio, 
Beats 1 is something new. “Going to the UK and doing stuff for Radio 1 was 
eye-opening because we don’t have anything like that in America,” Koenig says. 
“Maybe Beats 1 will become a version of that for some kids in America.” It’s 
also why Haim were keen to sign up. “When we were on Zane’s Radio 1 show we had 
the best time,” says Alana Haim. “It was just us playing songs and dancing 
around the studio and there was such a vibe that everyone was like: ‘What is 
going on in the studio?’ That’s what we want [for our show]. I want people to 
be like: ‘Where is this party?’”

The Beats 1 shows are like social media, in that they accentuate specific 
personality traits and enhance the dialogue between artist and audience. “This 
allows us the window to offer people the chance to see what we like that 
doesn’t necessarily have anything to do with us at all,” explains Pharrell. 
“Artists make social media work for them because they can use it to control 
their own platform and what they want to say, so I guess what we’re doing is 
learning from social media,” Lowe adds.

Lowe sees Beats 1’s role as a facilitator, not just between artist and 
listener but between artist and artist. “For me, Beats 1 is the common room for 
the future pop rebels. When we play Troye Sivan on the radio, I’m deliberately 
going to play [unsigned newcomer] Kiiara next to him because I think he’ll 
approve. When he quotes the chorus of her song and tweets it to three million 
of his fans, tagging in Kiiara, then I know that conversation is working.”

In a music world where streaming services often require the user to instigate 
the conversation, Beats 1’s aim is to bring the unknown of radio into people’s 
phones. “On demand is à la carte,” Lowe adds. “But, as long as I’m involved in 
Beats 1 in some form or another, I will push as hard as I can for that sense of 
random discovery.” So, is Beats 1 radio? He takes a moment, which for Lowe is 
an age. “You can listen to radio in your local area and get the information, 
the heartbeat of your town, and then go to Beats 1 when you want to be tapped 
into something music-driven and something that’s exciting. It wasn’t like radio 
was broken, it was more: ‘Will this work?’ And it’s working.”

• Apple Music Festival 2015 runs at the Roundhouse in London until 28 
September. Details:applemusicfestival.com <https://www.applemusicfestival.com/>
 