
Zenit St Petersburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg> 
approach their winter break in strange circumstances. If ever there was a club 
in a Jekyll and Hyde situation it is the Russian champions.

Despite their recent poor Champions League record, they are the only team in 
this year’s competition to havewon their first five group games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/zenit-st-petersburg-valencia-champions-league-match-report>
. They go into Wednesday’s final Group H tie, at Gent, having guaranteed top 
spot in a section that also includes Valencia and Lyon.

Their domestic campaign has been a disaster, however. Zenit won the league 
with ease last year but Russia’s richest club find themselves in sixth place, 
seven points behind the leaders, CSKA Moscow, with no sign of improvement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fchampions-league-all-the-permutations-explained-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F7%2F1449483281594%2FKP_687641_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20all%20the%20permutations%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fchampions-league-all-the-permutations-explained-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20all%20the%20permutations%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fchampions-league-all-the-permutations-explained-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F7%2F1449483281594%2FKP_687641_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Champions League: the permutations explained 
The head coach, André Villas-Boas, has rejected a contract extension and will 
leave at the end of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/10/andre-villas-boas-announces-quit-zenit-st-petersburg-manager>
 to be with family in Portugal. Despite a very impressive start to the former 
Tottenham manager’s tenure, andthe title secured last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/18/andre-villas-boas-zenit-st-petersburg-russian-premier-league-criticism-boris-chukhlov>
 at the end of his first full campaign, his behaviour at Zenit has made him 
unpopular in the country.

At the beginning of this season the Russian Football Union, headed by Vitaly 
Mutko, introduced the 6+5 rule which dictates that there must be at least five 
players eligible for the Russian team on the pitch at all times. Whereas 
Villas-Boas’s managerial counterparts have carried on, the Zenit coach has been 
in continuous uproar about this, insisting that the rule will kill the future 
of Russian football. He believes the development of young Russian players will 
be restricted if they are not able to learn unfettered from foreign 
counterparts.

These outbursts are becoming embarrassingly repetitive and fans feel that 
Villas-Boas has used the rule as an excuse for poor league form. Some even 
claim that the Portuguese’s negative attitude towards the league has caused 
their downfall. The overseas player rule cannot realistically explain Zenit’s 
poor league form. Although Villas-Boas has been forced to drop some overseas 
names to accommodate the 6+5 rule, almost all of Zenit’s Russian players would 
walk into most of the country’s Premier League sides. Moreover, their 
significant defensive problems come despite an all-foreign backline.

Villas-Boas also damaged his reputation when he was accused of disrespecting 
St Petersberg’s locally born Andrey Arshavin and Aleksandr Kerzhakov.Arshavin 
was unsympathetically offloaded to Kuban Krasnodar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/13/andrei-arshavin-leaves-zenit-st-petersburg-kuban-krasnodar>
 and Kerzhakov demoted to the B team. During Zenit’s Super Cup victory over 
Lokomotiv Moscow in July, the fans displayed an image of both players with the 
phrase “Guys from our backyard” as a statement of objection.

On the credit side, Villas-Boas brought the in-form Artem Dzyuba from Spartak 
Moscow before the start of this season. There was uproar when the free transfer 
was confirmed, such is the rivalry between Spartak and Zenit, and stickers were 
plastered around the city reading “No room for pigs in St Petersburg”. However, 
Dzyuba has proved to be a valuable asset. He was the joint-second-top 
goalscorer in the Champions League after five group matches, with five goals, 
and has the same standing in the Russian Premier League with eight. He is 
arguably the best value for money signing in Europe.

The record signing, Hulk, has dramatically improved as Villas-Boas has 
transformed the Brazil striker into a team player. The former Porto player’s 
key passing stats have increased and he is providing assists on a more regular 
basis. Hulk, Axel Witsel and Igor Smolnikov are not part of the squad for the 
game at Gent.

When Villas-Boas arrived he said he wanted to build a dynasty at Zenit and be 
like Peter the Great, the founder of the city of St Petersburg. However, his 
time is in danger of being classed as a failure masked by this season’s 
European success. Despite their form in the Champions League, the lack of 
consistency during Villas-Boas’s tenure means he has not really improved on the 
work of the previous coach, Luciano Spalletti, and the title won last season is 
not as highly regarded as it might have been because various teams were in 
turmoil, with CSKA Moscow the only serious challengers.

Whereas the Champions League is clearly the priority for the board, the fans 
feel the league carries more importance. When Zenit win the league it stretches 
beyond football and is a case of St Petersburg getting one over Moscow, 
something that Villas-Boas has failed to understand.

The club have apparently spoken to Carlo Ancelotti and Antonio Conte about 
taking over but been rebuffed by the Italians. The new manager is likely to be 
from overseas as the board believes that a Russian coach would not be able to 
control the international nature of the squad. This rules out AVB’s assistant 
Sergei Semak and arguably Rostov’s Turkmenistani manager Kurban Berdyev.

Zenit are unlikely to get beyond the second knockout round of the Champions 
League and when their elimination happens, with the league title surely already 
gone, the search for a new manager will intensify. Whoever takes over next 
season must quickly adapt to life in Russia and perfect a balancing act between 
a board which wants European glory and fans who prefer domestic success, all 
while keeping the RFU onside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-andre-villas-boas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef311b454981d45a550e02030076619942a443b%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zenit%20St%20Petersburg%E2%80%99s%20Champions%20League%20form%20masks%20problems%20at%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-andre-villas-boas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zenit%20St%20Petersburg%E2%80%99s%20Champions%20League%20form%20masks%20problems%20at%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fzenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-andre-villas-boas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef311b454981d45a550e02030076619942a443b%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Zenit, here on their way to the second of their wins over Valencia in the 
Champions League, are seven points off the top in Russia at the winter break. 
Photograph: Dmitry Lovetsky/AP  