
People on their first pregnancies always think they are going to give birth 
early, and when you ask them why (actually, you never ask them why, they just 
tell you), the answer is always something totally nonsensical, the subtext of 
which is, "I can't believe this takes nine whole months. I mean, I know it 
takes normal people nine months, but I'm sure I can do it faster than that."

People on their second pregnancies always hope they are going to be early, 
right up until it's actually time to do it, and then they start flailing around 
for ways to delay it until someone has invented an alternative to childbirth. 
Here is what has occurred to me: maybe if I got swine flu, I could slip into a 
coma, they would have to take the baby out for its own safety and then I would 
just wake up and meet it . . . Or maybe if someone happened to stab me while I 
was walking along . . . Sorry, I shouldn't be saying all this.

I was talking to my friend L the other day. She always gives birth at home (by 
"always" I mean "twice"), and she said, "Yes, the second time is far easier. 
The first time was unbearable for 18 hours." Because she's been eight months 
ahead of me both times, I have a really clear memory of the last time we had 
this conversation, and "unbearable for 18 hours" is not the phrase she used. I 
remember her saying "fine" and "manageable". So I said this to her, and she 
snorted, "Well, of course I wasn't going to tell you the truth till you'd done 
it."

It's considered really bad form, almost sadistic, to be accurate in your 
labour conversations, in the presence of anyone who hasn't done it. But having 
everybody openly lie to your face doesn't actually make it any better. Unless 
they are incredibly good at lying (you'd be surprised how few of you are, you 
ladies), you can see right through it. So you are left with a terrible feeling 
of foreboding, trying to piece together a real experience from the bits they 
left out (like, why didn't you notice you were naked in the middle of the 
street? How can you have smashed out your own teeth just to distract yourself?)

This is terrible, I am self- righteously breaking the silence, trying to tell 
the world what a nightmare it all is, and in half an hour I'll have changed my 
mind and decided that the rest of the world was right all along, and it's a 
fine experience that is easily worth it and soon forgotten. But then it will be 
too late. There will be, I don't know, four women having a really bad day. It's 
as if I'm some kind of sadist.

Talking of which, I have some fresh complaints about midwives. There is this 
business that starts in the second trimester that I believe to be purpose built 
to destroy one's peace of mind. It's not very high-tech; they take a tape 
measure and measure your bump, which is meant to correspond in centimetres to 
the number of weeks pregnant you are. Since this has clearly been going on 
since the middle ages, I don't know what they did to freak you out before 
centimetres were invented, but perhaps that's one to refer to Notes & Queries.

Sometimes they say it's too big and you've got gestational diabetes, and you 
have to get a load of blood taken and spend a morning in hospital, so that a 
consultant can finally say, "Why do you think you've got gestational diabetes 
anyway?" and you can say, "I DON'T". Then other times (still in the same 
pregnancy, mind â€“ sometimes only a fortnight later), they say it's too small 
(they all measure it in a different way, from different points: it really is a 
lot like witchcraft) and you say, "What does that mean?" and they say, "Well, 
it could mean it's not growing properly", but there isn't a blood test for 
that, so they just smile breezily and say, "It's probably OK", and that's that. 
They can get back to their egg roll, and you can get back to picturing this 
baby that only two weeks ago was fiendishly large, and has now stopped growing.

"Sadist" is too strong a word for these community midwives. If they were real 
sadists, they'd moved up the ranks and be working in a proper birthing unit by 
now.
 