
I am very lucky. I came out when I was 13 and have never faced any problems 
about being gay. Now I am 72 and living in West Yorkshire. As a theatre nurse, 
I worked in different hospitals across the country.

A lot of older gays are still living in the past, when they had a 
cloak-and-dagger lifestyle. Now, we live in a more enlightened society. But my 
age group remembers a time, before decriminalisation of homosexual behaviour, 
when you would be wary of talking to a copper.

Recently, I became a peer educator on end-of-life issues and have spoken at a 
conference organised by Age Concern and Help the Aged. All our lives, 
especially as professional people, we think ahead â€“ but nobody talks about what 
they would like when the end comes. Everybody wants to go to heaven but nobody 
wants to die. It is not as morbid as it sounds. People live longer but not 
necessarily happily.

Death is a particular issue for the gay community. An awful lot of gay people 
have been living together for decades. It can happen that when one of the 
partners dies, the other is left out on the streets. Whether young or old, gay 
or not, when someone dies, it is a very traumatic period, especially if it is 
unexpected.

Staff in nursing care homes have got to be taught to accept people of 
different persuasions, even if they may not agree with it. I was working in a 
nursing home just before I retired, and people used to make snide comments 
about being gay. It can cause people to go back into the closet. They don't 
want to let it be known that they are gay because they don't want to face any 
aggro.

I would like my epitaph to read: "If I can't do a good turn for anybody, I 
would not do them a bad turn." Most importantly, I would like my partner to be 
included and remembered. When his previous partner died, he was left out in the 
cold and was very upset. I would not want that to happen again.
 