
The prime minister has concluded his negotiations and the starting gun has 
been fired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/cameron-set-to-name-eu-referendum-date-after-cabinet-meeting>
. It is now for each of us to make up our minds as to what is best for Britain. 
For the Conservative party this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to reach a 
momentous conclusion to a fratricidal debate. For while Britain has never had 
an easy relationship with the European Union, it is the Conservative party that 
has an uncanny ability to form a circular firing squad whenever the word 
“Europe” is mentioned. For Britain it has been43 years of edgy unease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/jun/02/guardian190-britain-enters-eec-1973>
. For the Tories it has been an excuse to take to the hills. No other political 
issue has had the ability to animate people beyond reason.

Duncan Smith boasts of disloyal voting tactics over Maastricht
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/aug/23/uk.euro1> 
I remember the Maastricht treaty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/1991/dec/12/emu.theeuro> debates in 
parliament <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/aug/23/uk.euro1>. I was a 
government whip from 1992-1995; photographs show that this experience turned my 
hair white. Night after night I watched the destruction of the Conservative 
parliamentary party as we paralysed ourselves arguing about how many European 
angels could balance on the head of a pin.

Voting at 3am and securing a majority of four was regarded as a landslide. In 
those days the whips had real power, and they used it. UnderRichard Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/jan/30/bbc.huttoninquiry4>’s leadership 
the whipskept John Major’s ship of state afloat 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/print/148432/the-maastricht-treaty.thtml>, until 
in the end it sank, not to be refloated for 18 years. In the small hours of one 
night a senior Conservative whip was hailed by a leading Eurosceptic from the 
end of a long Commons corridor. Unable to face him he turned through an 
adjacent door to discover himself in a broom cupboard. It took 20 minutes to 
find the strength to come out.

Yet I remember when John Major privately set out his Maastricht vision with 
the two critical opt-outs at a meeting of theOne Nation Conservative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/14/thatcher-legacy-one-nation-conservatism>
 group of MPs. We thought it so masterful we nearly gave him a standing ovation.

Now David Cameron has an agreement with Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/20/how-to-argue-against-brexit-eu-fate-europe-uk-at-stake>
. I watched from a front seat Britain’s negotiations with the EU undertaken by 
Margaret Thatcher, Major and Cameron – and to a lesser extent Tony Blair. 
Cameron’s talents of forceful charm and forensic affability have made him the 
most successful of these four British negotiators with our EU partners. He has 
delivered fully on our manifesto promise of an in/out referendum by the end of 
2017. But no-one could accuse him of bringing home the crown jewels.

If we want to remain a member of the EU club then we cannot have our cake and 
eat it. The decision to go or stay is inevitably finely balanced. Since the 
1800s one of the guiding principles of British foreign policy has been to 
prevent a coalition against us from continental Europe. If we leave we will 
have turned our backs on this strategic foundation stone – to the dismay of our 
American allies and continental friends, and much to the delight of Putin’s 
Russia. And the EU would have to show its existing members that there is a 
price to pay for leaving.

Yet Britain would survive outside. We would govern ourselves without constant 
petty interference from a European political elite that, like all political 
elites, is forever seeking greater power and authority. The world is moving to 
a freer trading regime, and protectionism is declining and discredited. Our 
security comes from Nato and our borders, not the EU. If we had known how it 
would all develop we would probably not have signed up in 1973. Furthermore, 
the EU has never looked less attractive: facing inwards, and unable to address 
searing issues outside – not to mention the failures over Greece, the euro and 
migration.

Boris Johnson to campaign for Brexit in EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/boris-johnson-eu-referendum-campaign-for-brexit-david-cameron>
But we need this referendum to be transparently free and fair so that it 
reaches its climax with no-one crying foul. That would be a shame for our 
country, but an ocean-going disaster for the Conservative party.

If on 24 June there are senior Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> saying that the contest 
was rigged with the cards stacked against an out vote, and that the government 
had abused the strength of its position, then disaster will have been wrested 
from the jaws of victory. It would open the door to years more infighting and 
splits over the EU. The great gain for both the country and the Conservative 
party from this referendum will be that it ends the European debate for a 
generation.

So within the party, let us see an end to inflammatory emails – and indeed any 
emails by Conservative MPs seeking to suggest how colleagues should behave. Let 
every Conservative MP, every minister, decide for themselves their view on 
Europe unfettered and unthreatened, and let us all express our views with 
courtesy and integrity.

Those who are passionate about leaving – the likes of Gove, Duncan Smith, 
Davis, Jenkins, Fox and Cash, andnow Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/boris-johnson-eu-referendum-campaign-for-brexit-david-cameron>
 – let them have their say loud and clear. Let us hear equally from the 
Osbornes, Greens, Grieves, Soames, Herberts, Clarkes and Heseltines, with 
respect and integrity.

As for my election pledge on Europe to my electorate, it will be delivered: I 
have promised to organise a debate with leading protagonists on both sides for 
a thousand of my constituents to come to, to listen and to decide.

And when the debate is over, the votes are cast and counted, and the result 
has been announced, let us all shake hands, accept the result and get on with 
delivering the modern, socially mobile and outward-looking Britain for which 
the Conservatives were elected.
 