
Mysterious scratch marks on two 16th-century Italian masterpieces at the 
National Gallery <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-gallery> 
have rekindled a bitter dispute about a cost-cutting drive that has seen 
security at the world-famous collection handed over to the private security 
firm Securitas.

The damage, apparently caused by fingernails or rings, is the latest 
development in the long-running battle over arrangements to oversee more than 
six million visitors a year.

Curatorial staff were shocked to find “clearly visible” scratches at the 
bottom ofSaints Sebastian, Roch and Demetrius, painted in the 1520s by 
Ortolano. Further scratches were found at the bottom ofCanon Ludovico di Terzi, 
an early 1560s portrait by Giovanni Battista Moroni. The National Gallery 
confirmed the scratches, but dismissed them as “minor” and said there was no 
evidence of how they had happened.

Warnings of an increased risk of vandalism and theft were first sounded in 
2011 after the gallery – under its previous director, Sir Nicholas Penny – cut 
back on its warders or “gallery assistants”.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> and security experts feared that 
a decision to make each of them guard two rooms rather than one would make the 
collection more vulnerable. They were particularly surprised as the move came 
after an attack on two Poussin masterpieces. The gallery argued that the 
changes had been designed to improve efficiency rather than cut costs, bringing 
it into line with other similarly prestigious institutions worldwide.

Last July it appointed Securitas, one of Britain’s largest security firms, to 
oversee some visitor and security services, stating that no staff members would 
be made redundant. It meant that about 300 gallery assistants, who guard 
paintings and answer visitors’ questions, would be employed by Securitas rather 
than the gallery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnational-gallery-renaissance-art-vandalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb1bd8eca29ee1273238b5b7226ed7344f835b7%2F0_0_3801_5517%2F3801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Renaissance%20mystery%20adds%20to%20National%20Gallery%20vandalism%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnational-gallery-renaissance-art-vandalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Renaissance%20mystery%20adds%20to%20National%20Gallery%20vandalism%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fnational-gallery-renaissance-art-vandalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb1bd8eca29ee1273238b5b7226ed7344f835b7%2F0_0_3801_5517%2F3801.jpg>
 Curators at the National Gallery were shocked to find scratch marks on 
Ortolano’sSaints Sebastian, Roch and Demetrius, painted around 1520. 
Photograph: Alamy 
In October members of the Public and Commercial Services union (PCS), which 
represents gallery staff, voted to return to work after more than 100 days on 
strike over the outsourcing. The PCS reiterated its opposition to the 
privatisation, but an agreement was reached on terms and conditions and the 
reinstatement of a union representative who had been sacked during the dispute.

In an interview with the Guardian earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/27/national-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview>
, the gallery’s new director, Gabriele Finaldi, said: “It was a bumpy period, 
but we have moved on. The outsourcing began in early November and is working 
rather well.”

However, the dispute is far from over. A PCS spokeswoman told the Observer: “A 
recent article quotes Dr Finaldi saying that the privatisation is ‘working 
rather well’. That’s not been the experience of staff at the gallery. 
Commitments to pay staff a living wage and broadly comparable terms and 
conditions for new starters remain unresolved, despite a commitment agreed. 
This commitment settled our dispute last year. Patience is running out.”

One staff member said: “The security has been cut back by Securitas. This can 
only be so Securitas can earn a profit on its contract with the gallery.”

Referring to Leonardo’s masterpiece in the Louvre in Paris, another said: “It 
is not uncommon for privatised Securitas staff at the National Gallery to tell 
visitors that they can find theMona Lisa in the Sainsbury wing of the gallery! 
It’s no surprise that paintings are now getting damaged.”

Michael Daley, director of ArtWatch UK, an outspoken critic of the National 
Gallery’s conservation policy, was alarmed by news of the scratched paintings, 
saying that it reflected the importance of having guards in every room. “When 
you’ve got a painting that’s 400 or 500 years old, it’s very fragile. With 
ever-increasing crowds, the current presentation is an invitation to mishap and 
injury,” he said.

A National Gallery spokeswoman said: “As part of routine daily checks to all 
our works, some minor scratches were observed in the varnish on two paintings. 
Both works were checked by curatorial staff before the gallery opened the 
following morning and the scratches to the varnish quickly reduced without the 
works even needing to be removed from the walls. There is no evidence to show 
how these occurred.”
 