
How to Think about Sex, How Proust can Change your Life, Status Anxiety and 
Religion for Atheists are just a few of the subjectsAlain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> has addressed in his books 
(his first work, Essays in love, written at 23, sold two million copies). His 
prolific writing, TV programmes and media presence have made him an 
internationally popular philosopher, a label with which he has no problem. “The 
elites have a ridiculous suspicion of popularity”, he told a packed audience at 
the Edinburgh international books festival.

Dismissed as a self-help evangelist, shallow and obvious, with smarmy and 
banal ideasby critics in this newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/25/art-is-therapy-alain-de-botton-rijksmuseum-amsterdam-review>
, he divides opinions and is certainly intriguing. His latest work,The News: a 
User’s Manual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/29/news-users-manual-alain-de-botton-review>
, is an exploration of contemporary media and the impact of the 24-hour news 
bombardment. Whether he offers much newis up for discussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/09/the-news-alain-de-botton-digested-read>
, but he is nothing if not quotable. Here are 10 of his provocations:


Most problems in our society come down to the media


We mostly know how to live, what we want for our kids and even how to run an 
economy. So why doesn’t it happen? The media is what colours and textures our 
belief systems. It has, in a way, replaced religion.

The media is the new church

The old way in which we used to know what was important was, argued De Botton, 
“by opening a book that hadn’t changed in hundreds of years”. Religions used to 
dominate western imaginations, and the media has replaced them.

Writers aren’t important

If you are trying to start a revolution, you drive a tank to the TV station, 
not to the houses of novelists … Writers mean nothing!

Bellini would be painting Taylor Swift today


The Catholic Church employed Bellini, who painted the Taylor Swifts of the 
day. Things need to be popular to be listened to. There is a ridiculous 
suspicion of popularity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407690153960%2F9c418200-aa94-464d-8275-35e6e1c2c4f3-1346x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407690153960%2F9c418200-aa94-464d-8275-35e6e1c2c4f3-1346x2040.jpeg>
 Taylor Swift. Photograph: Attila Szilvasi/Newspix/REX 
There isn’t that much news after all

18 million people a day check the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
News website. What do they expect to find? We think there’s where we’ll find 
what’s important … But there isn’t as much news as we think there is.

According to De Botton, most of the news stories are archetypes that , “under 
all the flutter and noise,” keep coming around: See the photo below? To him, 
it’s the exact same story asTaylor Swift going to the supermarket 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2541647/Multimillionaire-Taylor-Swift-dons-tiny-shorts-shop-veggies-Whole-Foods.html>
 orNatalie Portman going to the park with her son 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2464453/Natalie-Portman-takes-son-Aleph-walk-Tuileries-Garden-Paris.html>
: “We expect princes to live in the clouds.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407690594791%2F1b5b5ff0-319c-4ef8-ae3a-0ec6a0daaeed-1413x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407690594791%2F1b5b5ff0-319c-4ef8-ae3a-0ec6a0daaeed-1413x2040.jpeg>
 In the clouds … Prince William and Prince George. Photograph: Pool/Reuters 
People have no interest in those they haven’t met

The dream of the news is that it makes us care about other people and 
situations. But we cannot identify with people to whom we haven’t been 
introduced. Humans will only respond to art, to people who are skilled in 
making you care.


The media should bring us wisdom

Wisdom is that part of knowledge that is not just true but also helpful in 
leading a flourishing life. The mission of the media should be to help the 
individual and the nation to flourish.


The news is always trying to scare you

Always remember that the news is always trying to make you scared. It’s bad 
for us, but very good for news organisations: the easiest way to get an 
audience is through frightening people. And sometimes they give massive hope 
about there being a cure for cancer! We need to return to that sober mentality 
of the guys the news replaced: life is a cycle – there’s no need to go from 
extreme hope to fear.

Sunday papers foster envy

News organisations excel at making us jealous, De Botton said. He used the 
example ofElon Musk <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>, the 
wealthy businessman behind Tesla cars among other ventures, whose lifestyle we 
hear about in the media:

The news is the foremost promoter of a toxic society of envy. People like Musk 
are one in 10 million, but we’re told they’re guys just like us. Sunday 
newspapers in particular: please never read the Sunday papers. You’ll never 
find anything new about the world and they will make you a miserable creature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407691630511%2Fb3362362-5aae-4e78-aa9f-154cb241b835-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alain%20de%20Botton%20in%20quotes%3A%20%22The%20news%20promotes%20a%20toxic%20society%20of%20envy%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F10%2Falain-de-botton-in-quotes-the-news-promotes-a-toxic-society-of-envy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F10%2F1407691630511%2Fb3362362-5aae-4e78-aa9f-154cb241b835-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Elon Musk in one of the cars he invented. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Celebrities are our role models

I strongly believe every society needs heroes and heroines. We cannot have a 
society where there are no role models. The elite, the serious media, have 
abandoned the task of creating role models. They seat back and criticise the 
Miley Cyrus thing … But who do they propose?

Forget BBC values - bias is good

I am pro-bias. The BBC is idiotically pretending it has no bias [...] but 
balance drives us crazy. We don’t need unbiased news, we need news with good 
bias.

The smartphone changed everything

The summer of 2000 can be seen as the last time we were ever truly alone, he 
said: “The invention of the smartphone fundamentally changed the dynamics of 
Western society”.

The news wants to weaken our attachment and curiosity: we need desperately to 
be individual thinkers.
 