
This week's comedy news

That's the Edinburgh fringe done and dusted, then – and we crash back to 
reality with a news story featuring a lefty comedian praising Margaret 
Thatcher. As a rookie standup in the 1980s,Alan Davies tells the Daily Telegraph
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/20/alan-davies-comedian-interview-jonathan-creek>
, "what really saved me – even though I was a lefty and a Labour voter and a 
CND person – was Thatcher's Enterprise Allowance Scheme." The scheme, launched 
in 1982, gave a guaranteed income of £40 per week to unemployed people who set 
up their own business. "That kept my head above water," Davies told the 
(delighted) Telegraph. "If you were on the dole, you got £26 a week and you 
weren't allowed to work. If you were on the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, you 
got £40 and you could work. So I was on that for a year and I felt like I had 
to make it." So, on top of all her other crimes, we have Thatcher to thank for 
Jonathan Creek, lots of Abbey National ads and one half of QI.

Back to Edinburgh, the fringe has reported record ticket sales this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/26/edinburgh-fringe-record-ticket-sales>
, with the figure of 1.94m tickets an increase of 5% on 2012. Last year, sales 
were detrimentally affected (it is thought) by the London Olympics, which ran 
simultaneously. And this year's total sales figures does not include events on 
the free fringe, widely thought to have had a good year. Some venues reported 
higher sales spikes still, with the Stand Comedy Club posting a 30% 
year-on-year increase. In total, the fringe featured 45,464 performances of 
2,871 shows at a total of 273 venues.

Over in the US, the standup and star of the sitcom Parks and Recreation 
<http://www.nbc.com/parks-and-recreation/>, Aziz Ansari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/17/aziz-ansari-review>, has signed 
a book deal worth a reported – take a deep breath – $3.5m (£2.25m). Penguin is 
the publisher who's stumped up that whopping advance. The tome is said to 
"investigate the new world of being single in a tech-obsessed age,according to 
USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/books/2013/08/23/aziz-ansari-book-deal/2692455/>
. "You know when you text someone you're romantically interested in," Ansari 
said, announcing the deal, "and you don't hear anything back, and then you see 
them post a photo of a pizza on Instagram? That's exactly what I want this book 
to deal with." That news isn't this week's biggest sitcom tie-in story, of 
course. On this site,we've already reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/22/ricky-gervais-david-brent-movie> 
that Ricky Gervais is planning a big-screen outing for his most famous 
creation, David (The Office) Brent.

There's lots of TV comedy news this week – much of it announced at last 
weekend's Edinburgh international television festival. Most amusing is standup
Terry Alderton's casting as a "cockney cabbie love interest" on EastEnders 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/showbiz/424190/Comedian-Terry-Alderton-joins-EastEnders-as-Bianca-Jackson-s-cockney-cabbie-love-interest>
. Elsewhere, national institution and movie directorDanny Boyle makes a rare 
foray into TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/22/danny-boyle-channel-4-pilot-series>
, making a C4 pilot of a police comedy-drama scripted by Peep Show duo Sam Bain 
and Jesse Armstrong.Russell Kane has secured a BBC3 chat show 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/news/story/000001229/russell_kane_greg_james_bbc3_chat_show/>
, alongside his occasional sidekick the Radio 1 DJ Greg James, and Roisin 
Conaty – best newcomer in the same year, 2010, that Kane won the Edinburgh 
comedy award –is to pilot her own sitcom on Channel 4 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/08/22/18524/c4_pilots_roisin_conaty_sitcom>
. The sketch troupe Pappy's sitcomBadults has had a second series commissioned 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/news/story/000001230/badults_series_2/>, and the 
Hollywood remake of the feature film of UK comedy The Inbetweeners is to be 
directed by British former sketch comic (with Perrier-nominated Dutch Elm 
Conservatoire)Jim Field Smith 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/08/23/18533/us_inbetweeners_remake_gets_its_director>
. No writer and actors have yet been announced.

 Best of the Guardian's comedy coverage

• Are these the least funny funniest jokes of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shortcuts/2013/aug/20/female-free-best-joke-list-edinburgh>
? I'm not hugely impressed by Dave's top-10 Edinburgh gags list – not least for 
its gender bias

• "Snark, self-deprecation and pop-culture smarts" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/aug/23/best-tina-fey-gags-jokes>
 – as two new Tina Fey projects are announced, the Guardian arranges six of the 
US comic's sharpest quips

• "It's really a case study for what is the future of the sitcom" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/aug/20/mymusic-fine-brothers-youtube-sitcom>
 – Stuart Dredge on the hit YouTube sitcom (30m views and counting) MyMusic

• "The aim is the cheap thrill – and more than that, the reassurance that 
cheap thrills are something almost everyone is looking for" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/26/gilbert-gottfried-dirty-jokes-comedy-gold>
 – Leo Benedictus's Comedy Gold column considers US comic Gilbert Gottfried.

• "You be the comic" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/26/mike-winters>: one of the 
last survivors of end-of-the-pier comedy, Mike (brother of Bernie) Winters has 
died. Dennis Barker writes his obituary.

Show me the money
 Bridget Christie was announced as this year's winner of the Edinburgh comedy 
award. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Two stories from the no-man's-land between comedy and filthy lucre this week. 
Here'sVeronica Lee in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/comedy/features/corporate-gigs-which-comedians-take-the-funny-money-8783540.html>
 on corporate comedy gigs. "People like Jimmy Carr and Dara Ó Briain really 
like doing corporates," we hear, and they fetch around £20,000 per gig. Lee 
interviews comics including Jo Brand and Ed Byrne, to explain the attraction of 
the corporate gig (cash notwithstanding), before her namesake Stewart Lee – 
quelle surprise – represents the refuseniks. It's an interesting look at the 
side of comedy that, unless we work for big business, we seldom see.

In the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2401209/John-Cleese-Humiliating-foreign-adverts-comic-genius-making-12-million-divorce.html>
, meanwhile, we encounter "The humiliating foreign adverts comic genius John 
Cleese is making to pay for his £12 million divorce." "Humiliating" is the 
Mail's judgment – the rest of us might settle for "a bit depressing", as the 
erstwhile star and co-creator of Fawlty Towers and Monty Python flogs shopping 
websites and face creams across the world. Together, the two articles present a 
facet of the comedy world far, far removed from the cheerful carnival of 
creativity we've all just attended on the Edinburgh fringe.

Best of our readers' comments

The winner of the Edinburgh comedy award, Bridget Christie, was announced on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/24/bridget-christie-wins-edinburgh-comedy-award>
 – but below the line, predictably enough, there were as many uninformed 
brickbats as congratulations. The best comments spoke up for Christie and her 
deserving win, includingthis one from CardinalPirelli 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26335746>:
 Roughly about 3,000 [people] will have seen the show (The Stand is really 
small, and I had to stand at the bar), [which] probably means that only a few 
on this thread actually saw it and have any place commenting on what it was 
like. So, from someone who was there, unlike 99% of people on this thread -
1) It was funny, very funny. 
2) It wasn't very political, quite surreal in fact, but with an emotional 
punch at the end.
3) Most people on this thread's comments are hilarious because they clearly 
didn't see it… 
And this one from officetramp 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26335092>:
 The very best comics are the ones who make you think. The best, most 
interesting kind of entertainment is mind expanding. If you're having to 
"shoehorn" the politics into your show you're doing it wrong. There are plenty 
of awful male comedians filling stadiums right now with the comedic equivalent 
of mashed-up baby food, but as usual we reserve our collective ire for a woman 
with something to say. 
Earlier in the week, I wrote about the hard-to-defend omission of female 
comics from the TV channel Dave's top ten "funniest" jokes on the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shortcuts/2013/aug/20/female-free-best-joke-list-edinburgh>
. As ever when "women" and "comedy" are mentioned in the same sentence, lots of 
people wanted to have a say.MissSarahLady's comments were most interesting 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26217775>, I thought:
 Funnily enough, the comic who won [Dave's award] has one of the funniest 
productions on the Fringe. It's called The Sky Show and is made up of poetry, 
pathos, surrealism and pure beauty. The comic doesn't, in fact, call himself a 
comic. So much so that half way through his show, he throws away an awkward one 
liner about Wispa to demonstrate how out of place actual 'jokes' are in his 
piece. Imagine his surprise when this joke won an award.

Milton Jones, Tim Vine or Gary Delaney are one-liner comedians, and should win 
these kind of competitions. Women (and most men) tend to stay clear of one 
liners (although there are some women on the open mic circuit on their way up 
who are concentrating on this form.)

As a female comedian, I in no way resent the fact that blokey channel Dave has 
come up with a list of one-liners that haven't been written by a woman. This 
list in no way reflects the standup comedy that I understand and love: the 
comedy that is created by hundreds of men and women, including, oddly enough, 
the male winner of this list.  