
The former Bank of Scotland boss Sir Peter Burt has bought the pawnbroker 
Albemarle & Bond out of administration, saving the majority of shops and 628 
jobs.

Administrators PricewaterhouseCoopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pricewaterhousecoopers> said the City 
grandee's investment vehicle Promethean had acquired the troubled pawnbroking 
business, including 128 of Albemarle's 187 pawnshops. The remaining 59 
branches, which employ 181 staff, are not part of the deal and are likely to 
close.

Stephen Plowman, who has spent the last eight years restructuring firms such 
as Direct Auto Finance and Yes Car Credit, has been appointed as chief 
executive. He is tasked with returning Albemarle, which also offers payday 
loans, to its roots, focusing on pawnbroking and jewellery and returning it to 
profitability. Albemarle called in administrators at the end of March after its 
lenders pulled the plug. After two profit warnings, it was so desperate for 
cash that it started melting down its gold jewellery stocks.

Burt told the Guardian last week: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/07/h-and-t-group-albemarle-and-bond-assets-pawnbroker-uk>
 "We are certainly not going to be in the payday loan business. We are just 
going to go back to the old core business, the pawnbroking business, which has 
a bit of gold trading obviously."

He noted that pawnbroking "has been around a very long time" with the Medici 
family crest (three golden balls) becoming the sign of a pawnbroker. "Lending 
against security has been there for a very long time and Albemarle & Bond was a 
very profitable business. It had a market cap of £220m not very long ago [in 
2011]." He added that three-quarters of people bought back what they had pawned.

Burt beat off competition from H&T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/07/h-and-t-group-albemarle-and-bond-assets-pawnbroker-uk>
, Britain's largest pawnbroker.

One of the directors of Promethean Investments, former HSBC chief executive 
Sandy Flockhart, reiterated that Albemarle would "stick to the basic bones of 
the business – asset-backed lending". He acknowledged some shops could close in 
coming months, but added: "We are hopeful of retaining a large part of the 
workforce."

Mike Jervis, lead administrator at PwC, said: "The deal announced today was 
the best offer received, preserving the most jobs and keeping the most stores 
open. All 120,000 pledged items remain safe and available for the customers to 
redeem."

In 2011 Albemarle declared it was "the age of the pawnbroker" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/27/pawnbroker-albermarle-bond-buyer-share-plunge>
. It sought to capitalise on the financial crisis and recession and opened new 
pawn shops and 40 pop-up gold-buying stores. But it overexpanded and was soon 
caught out by the falling price of gold.
 