
On 22 November 1963 the world was too preoccupied with the Kennedy 
assassination to pay much attention to the passing of two writers from the 
other side of the Atlantic:CS Lewis and Aldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/nov/14/cs-lewis-aldous-huxley>
. Fifty years on, Lewis is being honoured with a plaque in Poets' Corner at 
Westminster Abbey, to be unveiled in a ceremony on Friday. The fanfare for 
Huxley has been more muted.

There are various reasons for this: The Chronicles of Narnia 
<https://www.narnia.com/uk> propelled their author into the Tolkien league; 
Shadowlands, the film about his life starring Anthony Hopkins, moved millions; 
and his writings on religious topics made him a global figure in more spiritual 
circles. There is aCS Lewis Society of California <http://www.lewissociety.org/>
, for example; plus aCS Lewis Review <http://www.cslewisreview.org/> and a 
Centre for the Study of CS Lewis & Friends 
<http://library.taylor.edu/cslewis/index.shtml> at a university in Indiana.

Aldous Huxley never attracted that kind of attention. And yet there are good 
reasons for regarding him as the more visionary of the two. For one of the 
ironies of history is that visions of our networked future can be bracketed by 
the imaginative nightmares of Huxley and his fellow EtonianGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>. Orwell feared that we would 
be destroyed by the things we fear – the state surveillance apparatus so 
vividly evoked in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Huxley's nightmare, set out in Brave 
New World, his great dystopian novel, was that we would be undone by the things 
that delight us.

Huxley was a child of England's intellectual aristocracy. His grandfather was 
Thomas Henry Huxley, the Victorian biologist who was the most effective 
evangelist for Darwin's theory of evolution. (He was colloquially known as 
"Darwin's Bulldog".) His mother wasMatthew Arnold 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matthew_Arnold>'s niece. His brother, Julian and 
half-brother Andrew both became distinguished biologists. In the circumstances 
it's not surprising that Aldous turned out to be a writer who ranged far beyond 
the usual preoccupations of literary folk – into history, philosophy, science, 
politics, mysticism and psychic exploration. His biographer wrote: "He offered 
as his personal motto the legend hung around the neck of a ragged scarecrow of 
a man in apainting by Goya 
<http://www.museodelprado.es/coleccion/galeria-on-line/galeria-on-line/obra/aun-aprendo-album-g-54/>
:Aún aprendo. I am still learning." He was, in that sense, a modern Voltaire.

Brave New World was published in 1932. The title comes from Miranda's speech 
in Shakespeare's The Tempest:"Oh, wonder! / How many goodly creatures are there 
here! / How beauteous mankind is! Oh brave new world, / That has such people 
in't."

It is set in the London of the distant future – AD 2540 – and describes a 
fictional society inspired by two things: Huxley's imaginative extrapolation of 
scientific and social trends; and his first visit to the US, in which he was 
struck by how a population could apparently be rendered docile by advertising 
and retail therapy. As an intellectual who was fascinated by science, he 
guessed (correctly, as it turned out) that scientific advances would eventually 
give humans powers that had hitherto been regarded as the exclusive preserve of 
the gods. And his encounters with industrialists likeAlfred Mond 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/wales/posts/Alfred-Mond-industrialist-and-benefactor>
 led him to think that societies would eventually be run on lines inspired by 
the managerial rationalism of mass production ("Fordism") – which is why the 
year 2540 AD in the novel is "the Year of Our Ford 632".

In the novel Huxley describes the mass production of children by what we would 
now call in vitro fertilisation; interference in the development process of 
infants to produce a number of "castes" with carefully modulated levels of 
capacities to enable them to fit without complaining into the various societal 
and industrial roles assigned to them; and Pavlovian conditioning of children 
from birth.

In this world nobody falls ill, everyone has the same lifespan, there is no 
warfare, and institutions and marriage and sexual fidelity are dispensed with. 
Huxley's dystopia is a totalitarian society, ruled by a supposedly benevolent 
dictatorship whose subjects have been programmed to enjoy their subjugation 
through conditioning and the use of a narcotic drug – soma – that is less 
damaging and more pleasurable than any narcotic known to us. The rulers of 
Brave New World have solved the problem of making people love their servitude.

Which brings us back to the two Etonian bookends of our future. On the 
Orwellian front, we are doing rather well – as the revelations of Edward 
Snowden have recently underlined. We have constructed an architecture of state 
surveillance that would make Orwell gasp. And indeed for a long time, for those 
of us who worry about such things, it was the internet's capability to 
facilitate such comprehensive surveillance that attracted most attention.

In the process, however, we forgot about Huxley's intuition. We failed to 
notice that our runaway infatuation with the sleek toys produced by the likes 
of Apple and Samsung – allied to our apparently insatiable appetite for 
Facebook, Google and other companies that provide us with "free" services in 
exchange for the intimate details of our daily lives – might well turn out to 
be as powerful a narcotic as soma was for the inhabitants of Brave New World. 
So even as we rememberCS Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/cslewis>, let 
us spare a thought for the writer who perceived the future in which we would 
come to love our digital servitude.
 