
November can be a bit depressing. With the clocks having gone back, dusk 
starts descending in the afternoon, the mornings get steadily darker too and 
Christmas dominates the retail agenda to a surely unhealthy extent. If you are
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> it is also a 
worrying time. During a tenure spanning two decades as Arsenal manager, 
November has consistently proved the cruellest month for the Frenchman.

Statistics crunched from Wenger’s reign show his team average 2.18 points per 
game in March, 2.14 in September and October and 2.09 in April, but they manage 
only 1.59 during the 11th month. It is as if they are suddenly afflicted by 
seasonal affective disorder at the awkward junction between autumn and winter.

That explains why there was a certain nervousness on Saturday among those 
visiting supporters celebratingthe 4-1 win at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report-olivier-giroud-alexis-sanchez>
, where Alexis Sánchez and Olivier Giroud scored twice, the latter with his 
first two touches after stepping off the bench to game-changing effect.

Olivier Giroud and Alexis Sánchez at the double as Arsenal ease past Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report-olivier-giroud-alexis-sanchez>
Instead of revelling in Sánchez’s gloriously subtle, frequently deep-sitting 
interpretation of the lone-striker role and Giroud’s imperious, home 
defence-dissecting contribution as a second-half substitute, there was a 
slightly cautious mood among theArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> squad flying home from Newcastle 
airport.

Wenger and company will be back in the air on Monday, heading for Bulgaria and 
the Champions League group game against Ludogrets which promises to get this 
November off to a fairly gentle start.

Tougher Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> 
assignments at home against Tottenham Hotspur and away against Manchester 
United and José Mourinho await but, to the neutral eye at least, there is 
abundant cause for optimism for the team level on points with Manchester City 
and Liverpool at the top of the table.

Even if Wenger is neglecting to dose his players up with maximum-strength 
vitamin D tablets or scatter sun lamps around the training ground, there is 
every reason to believe a month also featuring a Champions League date with 
Paris Saint-Germain, a league game at home to Bournemouth and a League Cup tie 
against Southampton will prove the exception to the general rule about the 
perils of darkening days.

It should be stressed that, in collecting only two points from 10 games, David 
Moyes’s wretchedSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> 
have registered a record-equalling worst start to a Premier League season and 
were always there for the taking.

Accordingly, an Arsenal ensemble lacking, among others, the injured Santi 
Cazorla – whose absence has so often proved seriously undermining to regularly 
dashed title hopes – Lucas Pérez and Nacho Monreal sparkled in the balmy 
Wearside sunshine. Significantly Kieran Gibbs shone so brightly at left-back 
that it will be difficult for Monreal to oust him.

Wenger’s side have now gone 14 games unbeaten and appear to have acquired some 
of the resolve and resilience they sometimes lacked in the past.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-sunderland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20emphasises%20importance%20of%204%E2%80%931%20win%20over%20Sunderland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-sunderland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20emphasises%20importance%20of%204%E2%80%931%20win%20over%20Sunderland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-sunderland-video&media=>
Arsène Wenger emphasises importance of 4–1 win over Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/29/arsene-wenger-arsenal-sunderland-video>
As awful as Sunderland were at times, they did not fold until the final 20 
minutes and briefly hauled the score back to 1-1 courtesy of Jermain Defoe’s 
penalty. Arsenal had missed several inviting chances by then and, for a little 
while, a question hung in the air. Would Wenger’s players lose heart or could 
they raise their game?

Tellingly, they took the latter option with three goals in seven utterly 
ruthless minutes, not only ruining Moyes’s weekend but suggesting this latest 
title challenge is underpinned by hitherto elusive mental strength.

After praising his side’s resolve and “great response” to the equaliser, 
Wenger agreed that in previous seasons this was a game Arsenal could easily 
have ended up drawing, or even losing.

“Yes, but not only us,” the Arsenal manager said. “The statistics of home 
teams who equalise show they will probably go on and win, but Sunderland were 
surprised by the strength of our push after they got back to 1-1.”

A follow-up inquiry suggesting his players had acquired a previously elusive 
“maturity” seemed to please Wenger. “I believe so, yes,” he said. “That’s what 
we want to show over a longer distance.

“We now have some difficult games coming up, we have a difficult November, so 
by the end of November we’ll know more about ourselves – but the desire and 
mentality is great in this side. We have a great togetherness and we have 
quality as well. They are good ingredients.”

For the moment at least the body language of Mesut Özil, Mohamed Elneny – 
impressive in a holding midfield role – and especially Sánchez offers immense 
encouragement.

Variously kneed, niggled and shirt-pulled as Sunderland persistently fouled 
him, the Chilean appeared impervious to such disincentives, typically affecting 
an air of utter disdain before delighting in wrong-footing Lamine Koné, Papy 
Djilobodji and company once more.

“Beating Sunderland like this strengthens our belief that we can bounce back 
from disappointing results [notably last week’s home draw with Middlesbrough] 
and that we can also bounce back within a game when it suddenly doesn’t go our 
way,” Wenger said. “Now we have to show we can do it week in, week out.” And 
throughout November, too.
 