
The vignette of Alexis Sánchez tearing off some strapping to toss to the turf 
as he skulks off, head down, visibly disgruntled to see his number up on the 
substitutes’ board, is not unfamiliar. Three times in recent weeks Arsène 
Wenger has withdrawn his attacking focal point, at the tail end of the 
victories overChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
,Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/arsenal-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
 andLudogorets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
, in the interests of rotation and preserving energy. Three times Sánchez has 
not appeared best pleased.

Sunderland v Arsenal: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/sunderland-arsenal-match-preview>
“When I decide to take him off, I take him off,” Wenger says pointedly. “There 
is no special case. He has his own character but he is not treated differently 
from everybody else.”

Sánchez may take the shots but Wenger calls them. A meddler might wonder if 
the Chilean is treading a fine line in terms of respect for his manager’s 
decisions with these little huffs but Wenger tries to regard it as the emotion 
of a player who cannot stand not playing. “They all recognise [rotation] after 
the game but during the game they want to stay on the pitch,” he says. “I have 
played football - you want to play even when you are tired.”

Wenger is keen to avoid the kind of problem that was so costly last season. In 
November 2015, Wenger noted a hamstring alarm when Sánchezwas instrumental in a 
game against Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/arsenal-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
 and considered leaving him out for the next match at Norwich City. Sánchez, 
however, insisted he wanted to play. In the game at Carrow Road hepicked up an 
injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/norwich-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 that would rule him out for almost two months. At the time, Wenger described 
it as a “nightmare”.

Arguably Sánchez has become an even more pivotal presence this season as he 
has evolved in the central striker role. His dynamism and movement encourage 
Arsenal to play a pacier attacking game on their day. It was a role Wenger 
always had in his mind when hesigned Sánchez in the summer of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/10/alexis-sanchez-signs-arsenal> 
but it has taken more than two years to give the player a prolonged run in the 
middle. Wenger now sees that as Sánchez’s primary role.

“I see him there because of the kind of gut he has – provocative,” Wenger 
explains. “He has a short technique and can always create something. He has a 
good mixture between scoring and giving the final ball. In my taste, he still 
comes too much to the ball becauseAlexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> likes to have the 
ball. And we have enough playmakers in our team. We do not want to forbid him 
to come to the ball but to get in a bit more off-the-ball runs. That’s why when 
we have Walcott it balances well because when Sánchez comes, Walcott goes. This 
is a good mixture, a good working unit.”

It has been a work in progress. Wenger remembers starting Sánchez at 
centre-forward for his first away game in the Premier League, which wasat 
Goodison Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/23/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. It was not a particularly successful experiment.

“I took him off at half-time,” the manager recalls. “Maybe I made up my mind 
that he is more of a winger – but I didn’t give up. I think he is happy there.

“You have a similar type now in England who looks happy to have moved from 
wide to centre. Redmond is doing well at Southampton as an inside striker. Most 
of the time you develop a good technique on the flanks as a winger because you 
are against the line and you have to dribble, and when you are inside you have 
a bit more room.”

For Saturday’s trip to Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, Wenger has the option of 
continuing with Sánchez in his new position or shifting him wide to accommodate 
the return of Olivier Giroud. A tough decision? “Of course,” says Wenger. “They 
are completely different but they can as well play together. It is a good 
option to have. To leave quality players out is tough – but the toughest thing 
is not to have quality players.”
 