
Arsène Wenger has warned the Football Federation of Chile that Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> could spend up to 
three months on the sidelines if he is risked in Tuesday’s World Cup qualifier 
against Uruguay.

English club football has never quite been the same since a momentous 1996 | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/10/england-club-football-1996-arsene-wenger-manchester-united-newcastle>
The forward is out of Thursday night’s meeting with Colombia in Barranquilla 
afterlimping out of training 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-chile-calf-tear-injury-world-cup-qualifier>
 earlier this week with a suspected calf tear. Sánchez has stayed with the 
squad in the hope that he may recover in time to face Uruguay but Wenger – who 
has been told the injury is actually to the 27-year-old’s hamstring – has said 
that would be “a suicidal decision”.

The Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> manager told beIN 
Sports: “I got a text last night [to say] that he has a hamstring injury. The 
team from Chile has travelled without him and they kept him to try and get him 
fit to play Uruguay for the second game on Tuesday night.

“I believe that with a hamstring injury we have to get access for our medical 
staff to the MRI scan to see what grade it is, how bad it is and make 
absolutely sure they don’t make any suicidal decision that could harm his 
future for two or three months.

“That is absolutely important. It’s a grey area between the national team and 
the club team and of course they look at their own results which I can 
understand but we have to preserve the health of Alexis Sánchez.

“He always wants to play and that’s where it is a more sensitive case because 
he’s always ready to play even when injured.”

Sánchez was absent for six weeks last season with a hamstring injury sustained 
in a 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-norwich-fall-arsene-wenger>
 against Norwich City. He has scored six Premier League goals so far this 
season from a central role.
 