
Nice work, Sunday Politics. You stuck a grizzly bear in your interview chair 
and jabbed him with a poker.The bear roared and thrashed about, and your host 
called him an idiot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/jun/09/andrew-neil-alex-jones-sunday-politics>
. Congratulations, have a Pulitzer.

On Sunday, the Sunday Politics became Beadle's About, when they invited fiery 
Texan shock-jock, Alex Jones, and sat him next to David Aaronovitch, to discuss 
the Bilderberg conference. Jones is a known quantity to the mainstream,after 
his famous tirade at Piers Morgan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/video/2013/jan/08/alex-jones-pro-gun-tirade-piers-morgan-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Everyone on the production knew precisely what was going to happen, the 
bellowing shambles was always the goal. It was the TV equivalent of shaking 
Diet Coke and Mentos.

Before the production got through to Jones, I'd been booked to take part in 
the discussion with Aaronovitch. I was looking forward to it, as the argument 
for takingBilderberg <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> seriously 
as an international policy summit is easy to make. I knew Aaronovitch would try 
and drag the event into the world of conspiracy, and I was ready to defend the 
journalists and politicians who this year were paying proper attention to an 
influential and unaccountable lobbying forum.

But the Sunday Politics didn't want a discussion. They wanted chaos, so they 
booked a volcano. Barely for a second did the programme stray into a critique 
of the event itself. The whole sequence, from start to finish, was deliberately 
shaped to discredit any serious discussion of a conference which takes itself 
seriously enough to spend millions of pounds on security. Which is serious 
enough to hold the attention, for three days, of George Osborne, Kenneth 
Clarke, the Dutch prime minister, the head of the IMF, the heads of Google, 
Shell, BP and HSBC. And dozens of other senior policymakers and corporate CEOs. 
But for Andrew Neil's crazy gang, it was all a giant hoot.

"It's like Christmas for conspiracy theorists," grinned Neil, introducing a 
short video package about this year's conference. No mention made of all the 
mainstream press that turned up (Reuters, AP, the Times,Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10102168/Bilderberg-Group-No-conspiracy-just-the-most-influential-group-in-the-world.html>
, Channel 4 News, BBC London News,Sky News 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1100183/bilderberg-conference-watford-too-secret>, 
Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2336847/Bilderberg-2013-Who-billionaires-politicians-arriving-secretive-conference-Watford-hotel.html>
, many others) â€“ or the fact that the report itself was shot in a press area, a 
first for the conference. It was just a chance to giggle at the crazies.

"This protest seems more like a slightly weird party," said reporter Adam 
Fleming, as his camera picked out a ventriloquist doll and a protester dressed 
as a clown. Kenneth Clarke turned up, plump with chuckles, to reassure a giddy 
Fleming that there's nothing to worry about, and not to listen to the all the 
"nutty theories" about Bilderberg.

Fleming didn't ask Clarke about allegedly breaching the ministerial code by 
attending last year's conference 
<http://technocracywatch.org/bilderberg/clarke/>, or about his involvement with 
the Bilderberg Association charity (brought up by Michael Meacher on Sky News 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jAm-l4kE1Zw>). He just stood there simpering 
while Clarke told him how "dull" the whole thing is. "I'm actually slightly 
disappointed," Fleming giggled. Yeah, you and me both.

From giggly start to screaming finish, it was a cheap, circus hatchet job on 
the story. Never, not for an instant, was there going to be a debate. They 
could have had one, but they wanted a hand grenade. Aaronovitch didn't even 
need to pull the pin. It pulled itself. Jones barely needed a nudge to explode.

Before the show I told the producers what would happen. "This isn't 
journalism," I said, "this is sport." If anything, it was an attack on 
journalism. Certainly an attack on measured thinking. I texted the producer 
after the show. "Job done."

Charlie Skelton <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/charlie-skelton>, a comedy 
writer and journalist, reported on the 2013 Bilderberg conference for the 
Guardian
 