
Over the years I’ve kept many diaries: seed sowing, daily temperatures (max 
and min), night temperatures (max and min), propagation, first flowering, 
trials, tribulations and some heartache. They are all interesting in one way or 
another. Gardening is an art, but there’s a great deal of science to make it 
work; understanding the many variables is part of mastering it. Or, if 
mastering’s too much to hope for, a diary at least allows you to recognise your 
own messy, variable ways.

If nothing else, learn to love plant labels. Yes, they are unsightly, and 
there’s nothing sadder than a graveyard of them littering a bed, but there is 
no better way to record plant information.

The plant’s name is a must, because however much you believe you will remember 
it, you won’t. Include the date, too – if in three weeks nothing has appeared, 
you can start to think of resowing. (Unless you’re sowing perennials, shrubs or 
trees, which in some cases can take more than a year to germinate.) Seed 
doesn’t germinate for all sorts of reasons: you sowed poorly, or it succumbed 
to disease early on and got damped off, or the seed was too old to be viable. 
You only see a pattern if you record it. If you’re sowing in a community 
setup, particularly with beginner gardeners, knowing who has sown what is an 
essential teaching tool.

Finally, if you are using more than one brand of compost, it’s well worth 
noting this too, because good compost can make a huge difference to germination.

I always write on labels in pencil because it doesn’t fade in the sun and is 
easily removed with wire wool when you want to recycle. After years of 
experimenting with every type going, the bog-standard white label wins. It’s 
easily cleaned up and will last for years if you buy a good version (try
harrodhorticultural.com 
<http://www.harrodhorticultural.com/plastic-plant-labels-pid8026.html>, pack of 
100 for £4.95). Thrifty types will find that plastic ice-cream or margarine 
tubs, and some milk cartons, make equally useful homemade labels with a little 
scissor action. I find the biggest issue with wooden labels is that they either 
rot or the writing fades. Bury the label in the ground at 12 o’clock to the 
back of the plant; that way, even if you have to dig a bit, you’ll always know 
where to look.

In my good years, I back up all that I write on the labels in a seed-sowing 
book or in notes on my phone; it’s one of the most useful things I do. As for 
the labels that come with shop-bought plants, I stick them on a pin board in 
the shed, or paste them into my notebook with a location in the garden. (The 
plastic nearly always shatters or fades if you leave them on the plant.)

I am a huge fan of Rite In The Rain 
<https://www.anyweatherpaper.co.uk/waterproof-notebooks> waterproof notebooks. 
There arereporter-style ones 
<https://www.anyweatherpaper.co.uk/waterproof-notebooks/pocket-notebook-4-x-6> 
if you want something small (£6.99), or splash out on theGeological version 
<https://www.anyweatherpaper.co.uk/waterproof-notebooks/geological-bound-book-4-3-4-x-7-1-2>
 (£27.99) for something to keep in your damp shed. My other notebook obsession 
is theOgami <https://www.cassart.co.uk/brand/ogami> brand (from £6, available 
from origin68.com), an Italian notebook made from stone rather than trees. Yup, 
ground-up bits of limestone, mashed up with resin, make wonderfully smooth 
paper that is waterproof and tearproof: the stuff of outdoor-writing dreams.
 