
Learning to garden in the early noughties meant that I slightly overdosed on 
grasses. Yes, the right grass can effortlessly hold together a scheme, yes they 
dance in the wind, produce lovely seed heads in autumn and make a striking 
bleached presence in winter, yada, yada, yada. But there were too many other 
things I wanted to grow, so they fell down the list.

It’s not that I’ve got to the bottom of my list, far from it. But I’ve been 
hanging around with a garden designer and I guess it is rubbing off on me, 
because grasses can hold a garden together. Many are easy to sow, make great 
cut flowers, and for the price of a packet of seed allow you to experiment.

All the big seed companies offer ornamental mixes with six or so different 
grasses, chosen for their attractive seed heads: these are a perfect starting 
point. If you fall in love with a particular variety or species, buy 
individually next year or save your own seed. If using a mix, sow in a line or 
in seed trays, prick out the individual species and plant them into appropriate 
spots.

Foxtail barley (Hordeum jubatum 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/8793/Hordeum-jubatum/Details>) is a short-lived 
perennial. It will naturalise and self-seed if it likes you, and for that you 
need to grow it in a sunny open spot in well-drained soil. It has lovely silver 
pink barley-like seed heads that wave in the wind and look particularly good 
with vertical forms rising between them, such as veronicastrums. Foxtail barley 
grows to about 70cm tall; cut back old stems hard in early spring.

Greater quaking grass (Briza maxima 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/76294/Briza-maxima/Details>) has fine hanging 
droplets of pale green flowers that look like pearls as the light catches them. 
They readily self-seed and take about 12 weeks from a late-spring sowing. Again 
they do best in full sun and grow to about 50cm tall; they dry to a buff colour 
and it’s worth leaving some over winter. If you love this, try common quaking 
grass (Briza media <http://www.knollgardens.co.uk/product/briza-media/>), the 
perennial evergreen species that looks wonderful with achilleas, Mexican 
fleabane (Erigeron karvanskianus 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/32487/i-Erigeron-karvinskianus-i/Details>) and 
other grasses such asmelica 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/64376/Melica-altissima-Atropurpurea/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fs%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26form-mode%3Dfalse%26plant_plant_type%3Df%252fplant_plant_type%252fgrass-like%26context%3Db%25253D0%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%252526r%25253Df%2525252Fplant_plant_type%2525252Fgrass-like%26page%3D2%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
.

I have a soft spot for hare’s tail grass (Lagurus ovatus 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1108>). The name is apt; the 
flower head is just that – a hare’s tail from tufts of narrow, arching leaves 
and slender stems. The flower heads start off pale green and fade to cream. 
They look good among salvias and low-growingVerbena hastata 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/46339/Verbena-hastata/Details>.

Switch grass (Panicum elegans, often sold as ‘Frosted Explosion’ 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/panicum-elegans-frosted-explosion>) is 
a half-hardy annual, but it should be warm enough to sow outside now. It has 
long panicles of airy stems that puff into an explosion of delicate seed heads. 
It doesn’t mind a little shade and grows well in pots. It grows to 80cm tall 
and looks lovely with salvias.

How to grow perfect courgettes and squash | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/30/how-to-grow-perfect-courgettes-squash>
Finally, cloud grass (Agrostis nebulosa 
<http://www.plant-world-seeds.com/store/view_seed_item/2507>) takes airy to a 
new level; wispy puffs of seed heads perfect for flower arranging and 
spectacular in the garden, too. It comes from Spain and Portugal so does best 
in hot, sunny spots.

PS Chop, chop, it’s Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chelseaflowershow> time. That’s all 
I am going to say about doing the Chelsea chop. Go to the columnsarchived online
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/17/alys-fowler-chelsea-chop>
 to learn more, but get to it or regret it – particularly with those floppy 
sedums.
 