
In my local park there is a tree crowned with amber-red haws, big enough to 
pluck and suck off the flesh. They taste sweet, with a hint of apple – a little 
mealy but delicious enough. This is the eastern haw,Crataegus orientalis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crataegus_orientalis>. It has everything a small 
tree should: flowers in spring, colour in autumn, and fruit that attracts a 
host of small birds to flit around its branches.

It doesn’t mind if the conditions are windswept, where it becomes sculptured 
and craggy. It has a spreading habit with slightly pendulous thorny branches, 
but you can slowly prune it into a shape that fits your space. The leaves are 
deeply lobed dark green with a woolly bloom that makes them appear silvery in 
spring, turning buttery yellow and bronze in autumn. The flowers are chalk 
white with pink anthers, followed by large reddish fruit in autumn. The haws 
often persist well into winter, hanging like Christmas ornaments.

I’m a big fan of hawthorns, though I like the large-haw types for small 
gardens rather than our native common hawthorn (C. monogyna 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=573>). Hybrid cockspur thorn (C. 
×lavalleei <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crataegus_%C3%97_lavalleei>) has 
large orange-red haws; it has a spreading habit, reaching 5m tall and 4m wide. 
The glossy, dark green foliage turns coppery bronze in autumn, and the white 
flowers appear in May, followed by fruit in autumn. Like all hawthorns, it has 
thorns, so it’s not one for climbing, but it makes a dense head and grows 
anywhere, even on polluted sites. It’s perfect for the front garden: in summer 
it screens out the road, and in winter it lets light back in while offering 
a lovely silhouette.

Alys Fowler: learn to love plant labels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/alys-fowler-plant-labels> 
If you want an evergreen tree that won’t take over your garden, the Japanese 
loquat (Eriobotrya japonica <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=2902>
) is perfect. It’s evergreen, has off-white flowers that smell of hawthorn and 
if you’re somewhere sheltered and warm, apricot-yellow fruit in summer that 
taste sharp, succulent and sweet. The leathery leaves suffer frost damage below 
5C, so it is best suited to urban gardens, but it springs back from frost and 
doesn’t mind being pruned to suit its space. A slightly hardier choice would be 
the strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=158>). It’s another evergreen, 
this time with small green leaves, clusters of white flowers in autumn and red 
fruit that are much loved by birds. (They’re edible, just: best in a jam if you 
have loads.)Malus ‘Evereste’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1248> is a small crab apple that 
is covered in large scarlet buds that open and fade to pink. In autumn the 
foliage turns yellow and bronze among hundreds of yellow, orange and red crab 
apples. These often persist on the tree till after Christmas, when the 
blackbirds descend or you make crab apple butter. It’s quite a 
pollution-tolerant tree.

For pots, try a Japanese maple (an Acer palmatum or one of the many 
cultivars), with attractive new growth in spring and fiery foliage that 
burnishes into autumn.
 