
Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> has become a cultural 
juggernaut with more than $5bn in revenue in 2014 and more than 63 million 
subscribers around the world (and about 40 million in the US alone). It’s 
adding them at a record pace too, signing up 4.9 million streaming subscribers 
anxious for House of Cards in the first quarter of 2015. The future of TV is 
clearly not on your TV set – and if it is, it’s probably coming through the 
internet, not the cable box. With so much money at stake, everyone is trying to 
get into the game.

The most recent announcement is AMC’s Shudder, a subscription service that 
allows horror fans to get their frights with hundreds of scary movies in its 
archive. Shudder costs $4.99 a month or $49.99 a year andis currently testing 
in beta 
<http://variety.com/2015/digital/news/amc-beta-tests-streaming-service-for-horror-fans-exclusive-1201515550/>
 with an undefined roll-out to mass market sometime in the near future. This is 
a partnership between AMC and Dramafever, a streaming service you have never 
heard of unless you’re a huge fan of Korean television. AMC andDramafever 
<http://www.dramafever.com/> also collaborated on SundanceNOW 
<http://www.sundancenow.com/>, where subscribers can watch several festivals 
worth of indie movies and documentaries whenever their hearts desire.

These new services, where networks bring their wares directly to customers 
online rather than through cable television, are called “over the top” or OTT 
and not because their offerings are that outrageous.

These days, everyone is down with OTT. There’s Netflix, of course, and Hulu, 
which is owned by NBC, ABC, and Fox. CBS has CBS All Access for its current and 
past shows. Since both CBS and Showtime are owned by Viacom, I figured the two 
channels would pair up, but Showtime just announced the clunkily namedShowtime 
Anytime <http://www.sho.com/sho/showtime-anytime>, its answer to the 
groundbreaking HBO Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/08/hbo-now-launch-apple-netflix-amazon-hulu>
. Both services offer the original programming and stores of movies from the 
subscription cable channels to those who have broadband internet but not a full 
cable package. Along with all of these, let’s not forget Amazon Prime, a 
growing hub for repeats and original programming; Apple TV, where viewers pay 
to download individual shows; and Dish’s Sling TV, where viewers can watch live 
television channels (including ESPN, which is key) and other on-demand content 
over the internet for only $20 a month.

Cutting the cord: a look at the pros and cons of quitting cable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/us-money-blog/2015/mar/29/cutting-the-cord-a-look-at-the-pros-and-cons-of-quitting-cable>
The field is getting crowded which means the inevitable is coming: one of 
these is going to fail. I know, that’s sort of like thinking about getting 
divorced while still sunning yourself on a Hawaiian honeymoon, but there is 
just too much competition for a limited number of households.

Nielsen’s Total Audience Report 
<http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports/2015/the-total-audience-report-q4-2014.html>
, which was issued in March, found that two out of five American households 
subscribe to a streaming service. Netflix is in 36% of homes, Amazon Prime in 
13% (and some of those people might just want the free shipping for dog food 
and books), and Hulu Plus in 6.5%. Compare that to cable television, which is 
dwindling but was in84% of homes 
<http://www.fiercecable.com/story/us-pay-tv-penetration-flat-84-homes-and-netflix-has-little-do-it-study-says/2014-09-02>
 at the end of 2014. That’s more than 100 million cable subscriptions.

What should be most frightening for these over the top providers is that 
people don’t seem to be doubling up yet. While one third of Americans have one 
subscription, only 10% have two, and a paltry 2.6% subscribe to three or more. 
This report was issued before the invention of half of these streaming 
services, but while the cord-cutting revolution is happening, a broadcaster’s 
worst nightmare of people cobbling together all of their shows with a suite of 
subscriptions just isn’t happening. Cord cutting is accelerating, but only 
31,000 peoplegot rid of their cable service 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2015/05/11/cord-cutting-accelerates-first-quarter-2015/27133979/>
 in the first three months of the year. That’s still only a fraction. In fact, 
Nielsen found that those who have streaming services also watch more regular 
television as well.
 Netflix paid a reported $100m to license all 236 episodes of Friends for four 
years. Photograph: NBC via Getty Images 
There are so many streaming content providers that bidding wars are already 
starting for premium shows. Netflix paid a reported $100m to license all 236 
episodes of Friends for four years, but passed on a similar offer for 160 
episodes of Seinfeld. Instead Hulu snatched up the show about nothing for a 
record-setting$160m 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/hulu-seinfeld-licensing-160-million-1201483537/>
. That’s a whole lot of nothing.

This will only continue as competition gets more stiff and more services enter 
the fray. Eventually trying to acquire the streaming rights to Big Bang Theory 
or Law & Order will be like entering the Hunger Games. Most of these services 
are backed by huge corporations (AMC is by far the smallest) so it seems like 
losing a bit of money now for market share in the cord-cutting future would be 
a good bet. If failure is not an option, how do all of these content providers 
get their shows before eyeballs?

When show resources get scarce and the economics no longer make sense for 
smaller brands to strike out on their own, mergers and alliances should start 
to form. While someone like News Corp could bundle all of the Fox channels 
together (Fox, FX, Fox News, Nat Geo, etc.) and keep the rights to 20th Century 
Fox movies all to themselves, that would be a formidable package. And what if 
they make a deal with Viacom that owns CBS, Showtime, MTV, Comedy Central, and 
a score of other stations? That’s essentially your whole dial available on one 
service.

'Seismic' Apple TV service to stream 25 channels across all devices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/17/apple-tv-service-25-channels-iphone-ipad-abc-cbs>
Or what if Turner (TBS, TNT, Cartoon Network, CNN) got into bed with 
NBCUniversal (NBC, USA, Bravo, SyFy, and the Universal movie catalog)? That’s a 
whole lot of bang for your buck too. What if someone like Apple or Google can 
forge an alliance between all of these disparate partners and take on Netflix 
and HBO for domination. We can call the platform One Ring, because it would 
rule them all.

Niche streaming services for underserved markets (Korean Americans, horror 
fans) make sense now, in the near future they probably won’t have the capital 
for the content arms race and will have to fold themselves in with a larger 
partner. All of this just sounds like the cable system we have now, but cutting 
out the middleman of Comcast, Time Warner, or Verizon (even though you’ll still 
be paying for them to provide broadband). The future is hectic and uncertain 
and will probably be moving quickly. Everyone is trying to grab their slice of 
the pie before it’s been eaten altogether. But now that everyone is rushing to 
stream rather than broadcast on linear cable, it seems like the system is too 
big to fail.

 * This article was amended on 12 June. Shudder’s monthly price is $4.99 not 
$5.99 as we initially reported  