
American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> was found 
to be “deeply and extremely disgusting” by Andrew Motion and “the most 
loathsome offering of the season,” by the New York Times when it was first 
published. Almost quarter of a century later – in a move which would no doubt 
delight its controversial author – Bret Easton Ellis’s divisive novel has 
become the subject of a police raid, after a bookshop in Adelaide was asked to 
remove copies of the book from shelves when it was discovered to be on sale 
without the required plastic wrapping.

Irvine Welsh – American Psycho is a modern classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
Telling of Wall Street worker (and psychopath) Patrick Bateman’s adventures 
through rape, torture, cannibalism, murder and necrophilia, ever since American 
Psycho was first published in 1991, Australia’s classification laws have given 
it a “restricted classification” and insisted that it only be sold“in a sealed 
wrapper and to adults” 
<http://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/8-markings-advertising-display-and-restricting-access/restricting-access-content-likely#_ftn2>
. This is a decisionthat Ellis has said 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/shrink-rapping-with-genx-20100813-1235u.html>
 he “love[s] ... I told my publisher I want all my books restricted and put in 
little bags. It’s like a little sandwich!’’

But, according to Jason Lake, co-owner of Adelaide bookseller Imprints 
Booksellers, the latest edition, featuring an introduction from Irvine Welsh, 
arrived from the publisher without the necessary wrapper.

“I had a phone call from a lady on Tuesday who was quite aggressive and 
questioned why we were selling this classified product out of its wrapper. My 
defence was it came to us like this. There’s no way I would have removed the 
wrapping,” hetold ABC News in Australia 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-07-17/american-psycho-removed-from-adelaide-bookshelves/6628846>
.

Following the phone call, on Friday, Lake said he was asked to remove the book 
from the shelves by the police. “It was very gentle and polite ... I just think 
it’s ludicrous that this person complained about the book,” hetold the Sydney 
Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/bookstore-raided-by-police-for-selling-novel-american-psycho-20150717-gif4pg.html>
.

With American Psycho dividing opinions ever since it was first published in 
1991 – Joan Smith in the Guardian called it “nasty, brutish and long”, and “an 
entirely negligible piece of work, badly written and wholly lacking in insight 
or illumination”, while Fay Weldon called it “seminal” – the Australian 
bookseller sided with those underwhelmed by the novel, joking that it should be 
banned not for its content, but its “quality of writing”.

“It’s not a great book at all, but it’s a work of satire, for goodness sake,” 
Lake told ABC. “It was a comment on that period in America, the whole ‘greed is 
good’ era ... In a liberal society people should be free to read what they want 
to read.”

Police confirmed that they had taken action over to ABC. “Police spoke with 
bookstore staff, who were very co-operative, and the matter was resolved to the 
satisfaction of police,” said a spokesperson.

The book’s publisher, Pan Macmillan, said that a “small number of copies” of 
the Picador classic edition of American Psycho – Welsh calls the book “one of 
the greatest novels of our time” in his introduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
 – had been released without shrink-wrapping “due to an unforeseen production 
error”. “When the publisher was made aware of the error, the problem was 
immediately rectified and copies of the title already purchased without 
shrink-wrapping are returnable,” a spokespersontold Books+Publishing. 
<http://booksellerandpublisher.com.au/item/33573>
 