
Duncan Shiekh's music for American Psycho - the new musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review>, 
in which Matt Smith plays, brilliantly, the lethally charismatic Patrick 
Bateman - is a straight-up triumph. He's nailed an idiom that takes in The 
Human League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/27/human-league-credo-new-album> and
Phil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/02/phil-collins-godfather-popular-culture>
, but comes up with his own razor-sharp satires of 80s yuppyism, label-worship, 
and holidays in the Hamptons.

I saw it last night at London's Almeida theatre 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/event/americanpsycho>, and the only problem I found 
with the score was that it was actually too enjoyable. Shiekh's score is too 
sympathetic, and at the end of the show, almost too moving in Bateman's 
admittedly anti-redemptive closing hymn to the schisms of late capitalism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1mSJpOBXFU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1mSJpOBXFU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1mSJpOBXFU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Reading on mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1mSJpOBXFU>

In the film, Bateman's paeans to Whitney Houston and especially Phil Collins 
reveal a precise if ironic correlative between the murderous vacuity of the 
music and the breathtaking cynicism of Bateman's killings to which they are the 
soundtrack. But in the show, Shiekh's music makes us care about Bateman and his 
business-card-cut-out characters - even if Rupert Goold's production keeps the
Huey Lewis Hip to be Square <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LB5YkmjalDg> 
slaying pretty well as it is in the film.

Watching the show also made me realise what's so un-stomachable about Phil 
Collins, and why The Pet Shops Boys of the same era were such geniuses by 
comparison.Sussudio <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1mSJpOBXFU> brings me out 
in a cold sweat; the production, the drum machine, the inane sincerity of the 
lyrics; there's no colder or more superficial sound in popular music, precisely 
because it takes itself so seriously. Whereas the PSB - or even the Human 
League, whose music is also used here - turn that celebration of technology on 
its head, reflecting and distorting that superficiality back to us, and showing 
up the hollowness of the age for what it is - which is whyActually 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actually> endures where No Jacket Required 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Jacket_Required> is unlistenable to today.
 