
Ever wondered what your favourite novels would look set to a dance routines? 
Or what they would sound like if given the camp cabaret treatment? No, me 
neither. Or at least I hadn't – until it was recently revealed thatBret Easton 
Ellis's American Psycho is currently in development to be turned into a musical 
<http://marquee.blogs.cnn.com/2010/12/07/american-psycho-the-musical-promises-a-bloody-good-time/>
.

It's enough to make you shudder – not the prospect of revisiting American 
Psycho's axe attacks and torture scenes (or banal attention to pointless 
detail) but the very thought of "musical theatre", two words that fill any 
discerning musical, theatrical or bookish snob with disdain. I'm totally 
prejudiced, of course - the last musical I saw was We Will Rock You, whose plot 
was so incomprehensible that I walked out halfway through.

Literature and theatre have long enjoyed a far from symbiotic relationship. 
Literature has given theatre some of its most successful musicals ever – Les 
Misérables (based on the writing of Victor Hugo), Cats (TS Eliot), Phantom of 
the Opera (Gaston Leroux) and Oliver! (Dickens) to name but four – while 
musicals have given us jazz hands, Bonnie Langford, the Time Warp and Andrew 
Lloyd Webber. It hardly seems a fair trade-off.

American Psycho is, of course, a satire on those materialistic wealthy men and 
women who defined Wall Street – and by extension, America – in the 1980s; and 
in the case of its most unreliable narrator Patrick Bateman, an individual for 
whom the American Dream was not quite enough. Maybe such a narrative arc – 
riches to, er, riches – wouldn't be so strange set to music. After all, 
American Psycho tackles Big Themes like life, death, capitalism and morality. 
And it is full of musical references toHuey Lewis & The News, Phil Collins and 
Whitney Houston <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1mSJpOBXFU>. And it is funny.

There's also the setting to consider: the barren sterility of Bateman's 
apartment with its view over the magical, twinkling skyline of Manhattan would 
transfer well, as would the formal look of tailored pin-striped suits and 
Brooks Brothers shirts. Yes, perhapsAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> could make for an unlikely 
hit musical after all.

If that's the case, it could pave the way for a new wave of contemporary 
novels receiving highly inappropriate musical adaptations. With its sinister 
"Singing In The Rain' sequence and heavy use of Beethoven, A Clockwork Orange 
has already been treated to a more or less musical version, withBono and the 
Edge supplying what Burgess himself described as a "neo-wallpaper" score 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/02/14/theater/poor-reviews-for-musical-of-a-clockwork-orange.html>
 that didn't get as far as the West End or Broadway after very tepid reviews.
The Buddha Of Suburbia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBFM9KiN3xE> and 1984 
received screen adaptations that were but a shuffle-hop-step away from musicals 
and could surely tempt an enterprising impresario. But perhaps these choices 
are way too obvious.

Personally I'd pay through the nose to see Ulysses given a full-on, improvised 
free jazz production – or maybe Solzhenitsyn's One Day in The Life Of Ivan 
Denisovich <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_Day_in_the_Life_of_Ivan_Denisovich>
 with music by ... I don't know,Jedward 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MnyAUXx40tU>. Imagine that, or can you 
razzle-dazzle me with some better ideas...?
 