
The daughter of the former cabinet minister Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, a junior NHS doctor, 
has called for Jeremy Hunt to be sacked, accusing the health secretary of 
misusing statistics and alienating “an entire generation of junior doctors”.

Dr Hannah Mitchell, who is currently working on a research fellowship in 
Botswana as part of her post-foundation programme, warns that the morale of 
junior doctors is at “breaking point” afterHunt imposed a new contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/11/jeremy-hunt-to-impose-contract-on-junior-doctors>
.

Jeremy Hunt is dishonest or stupid. Either way, he must be sacked | Letter 
from Dr Hannah Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/12/jeremy-hunt-is-dishonest-or-stupid-either-way-he-must-be-sacked>
In a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/12/jeremy-hunt-is-dishonest-or-stupid-either-way-he-must-be-sacked>
, Mitchell writes: “What Jeremy Hunt has managed to achieve is nothing short of 
spectacular. Health secretaries have come and gone, imposing new measures of 
varying unpopularity on the NHS, but not one has managed to so completely unite 
doctors in their dislike and alienate healthcare workers across the board in 
the way he has.

“He says we lack vocation, he paints us as the problem. The morale of the 
workforce is at breaking point; with imposition, the goodwill of doctors who 
work hours beyond those they are rota-ed and paid to do [so] will dry up.”

Mitchell, who says she is likely to seek permanent work in South Africa after 
her research fellowship and then a posting in Sierra Leone, said her colleagues 
have been incensed by Hunt’s claim that the new contract needs to be introduced 
to avoid preventable deaths at the weekend. Under the contract, doctors will be 
paid theirnormal rate for working on Saturdays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/12/junior-doctors-dispute-why-talks-with-government-failed>
 between 7am and 5pm as part of the government’splan to create a seven-day NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/18/seven-day-nhs-seven-questions-answered>
.

“I am one of the many junior doctors who have left the UK. If he goes ahead 
with imposition of [the] contract, I am certainly unlikely to return to the UK 
to continue clinical practice. The health secretary has alienated an entire 
generation of junior doctors, we have no confidence in him, he must be sacked,” 
she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjeremy-hunt-government-will-impose-junior-doctors-contract-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Hunt%3A%20government%20will%20impose%20junior%20doctors%20contract%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjeremy-hunt-government-will-impose-junior-doctors-contract-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Hunt%3A%20government%20will%20impose%20junior%20doctors%20contract%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjeremy-hunt-government-will-impose-junior-doctors-contract-video&media=>
Jeremy Hunt announces the Department of Health will impose a new contract on 
NHS junior doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/feb/11/jeremy-hunt-government-will-impose-junior-doctors-contract-video>
Hunt has been accused of distorting the findings of a report, published in the 
British Medical Journal 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/jeremy-hunt-criticised-for-misrepresenting-nhs-weekend-mortality-facts-a6703301.html>
 last year, which highlighted the fact that 11,000 more deaths occur within 30 
days of admission to hospitals between Fridays and Mondays.

What junior doctors should do next in their battle with government | John 
McTernan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/12/what-junior-doctors-should-do-next-battle-with-government>
Mitchell said Hunt has misused the report. “The health secretary is not even 
clear on what he means by a seven-day-weekNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. He continues to misuse research to 
support his arguments. He has been told the statistics he uses are not correct, 
meaning he is either dishonest or stupid, I don’t know which is worse. He 
demonises the BMA, and lies about their actions. They are not a militant union; 
they are the very moderate voice representing junior doctors in the UK,” she 
said.

Mitchell is also furious with Hunt’s suggestion that the new contract will 
introduce a sense of vocation for medical staff. “That is the most inflammatory 
and appalling thing to say as a health secretary about junior doctors,” she 
said.

Andrew Mitchell, the former international development secretary, told the 
Guardian: “There is no three-line whipping system in the Mitchell family. We 
are an open democracy and there is no dad in the country who is prouder of his 
daughters and the fantastic doctor that Hannah has become.

“Whatever the merits of this matter, the junior hospital doctors are a 
dedicated, hardworking and inspiring group of people, although inevitably the 
government is responsible for managing this resource.”
 