
The BBC's Sunday Politics show is generally a rather sedate affair, heavy on 
serious interviews and light on controversy. But viewers were treated to a 
highly charged confrontation between hostAndrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> and US conspiracy theorist Alex 
Jones, which saw the latter labelled the worst person to be interviewed on the 
show and an idiot.

The shock jock had been invited on the show alongside journalist David 
Aaronovitch to discuss the secretiveBilderberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> conference, which has been 
taking place near Watford over the past week.

But having been asked on several occasions to let his co-guest speak, Jones 
launched into a tirade about several conspiracy theories detailed on hiswebsite 
<http://www.infowars.com/>.

He was cut off by Neil, but when he continued to rant, the presenter said: 
"You are the worst person I've ever interviewed," before thanking Aaronovitch 
and continuing with the show.

With Jones's shouts still audible, the presenter looked into the camera and 
said: "We have an idiot on the programme today," before using hand gestures to 
indicate that Jones was insane.

After being told several times to try not to dominate the conversation, Jones 
appeared to lose his temper, shouting: "Hey listen, I'm here to warn people; 
you keep telling me to shut up. This isn't a game. Our government, the US, is 
buildingFema <http://www.fema.gov/> [Federal Emergency Management Agency] camps.
 Alex Jones, right, author and conspiracy theorist, outside the 2013 
Bilderberg Group meeting in Hertfordshire. Photograph: Guy 
Corbishley/Demotix/Corbis 
"We have an NDAA <http://www.ndaa.org/> [National Defence Authorisation Act] 
where they disappear people now. You have this arrest for public safety, life 
in prison. It's basically off with their heads, disappear them. Take them away. 
Infowars.com. Liberty is rising. Liberty is rising. Freedom will not stop. You 
will not stop freedom. You will not stop the republic. Humanity is awakening."

Noting Neil's gestures, he added: "No, you guys are crazy, thinking that the 
public's too stupid. You're crazy, thinking the public doesn't know. You're 
crazy, thinking the public isn't waking up."

Jones said earlier in the show that the creation of the euro was a Nazi German 
plan, and theBilderberg Group 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/05/bilderberg-2013-goldman-sachs-watford>
 – an annual conference of politicians, business leaders and academics who meet 
behind closed doors – was heavily involved in the EU plan. "We have forced them 
from cover to admit they're puppeteers above the major parties," he said.

Taking to Twitter after the show Neil said Jones had played up for the camera. 
"The moment Alex Jones knew he was no longer on air he stopped," he wrote. 
Jones is renowned for his "shock jock" tactics and came to the attention of the 
British public after calling for Piers Morgan to be deported from the US for 
his views on gun control.

He was invited on Morgan's show to discuss the issue 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWQPZ-taYBs>, after the 14 December massacre at 
Sandy Hook elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut, where he called the 
presenter a "redcoat foreigner" and threatened to start a revolution if anyone 
tried to "take our guns".

At the end of the Sunday Politics show Morgan said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/piersmorgan>: "Morning, @afneil 
<https://twitter.com/afneil> – didn't you get my memo on @RealAlexJones 
<https://twitter.com/RealAlexJones>?"
 