Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOyhHPIYLYJU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOyhHPIYLYJU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOyhHPIYLYJU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Hometown: Los Angeles.

The lineup: Angel Haze <https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze> (vocals, 
raps).

The background: Do you remember when people used to talk about the sheer 
ingenuity and invention displayed on TV adverts, adding that they preferred 
them to the actual programmes? Well have a look atthis 55-second trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyhHPIYLYJU> for today's new artist. The 
opening scene, coated in a tangerine murk, in which four individuals in white 
fog-masks and what appear to be black hoodies, anoraks or hooded sleeveless 
vests, stand stock still in what could be a torture chamber, or a cell, two of 
them wielding sticks on fire. The menacing drone of synthesisers as the camera 
zooms in on the character at the front, the only one of the four whose eyes you 
can't see. Slowly, one of the others removes the latter's mask and uncovers her 
head with a mixture of sensuality and implicit violence. Is she about to be 
ravished, or decapitated? Then the climax, in which the person, revealed to be 
a woman in a beanie, refocuses her bleary eyes as the music reaches a buzzing, 
droning peak. A name – Angel Haze – appears on the screen, as does the title of 
an EP – Revelation – and a release date: 17 July 2012. As you can imagine, it's 
astonishingly enticing. This Angel Haze, you will perhaps assume after that 
minute's worth of signifiers of mystery and intrigue, will be roughly like Wu 
Lyf and Odd Future crossing swords during the apocalypse, and that Revelation 
EP will, you estimate, take the hazy sonics ofcloud rap 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/mar/05/new-band-main-attrakionz> to new 
beguilingly blurry, frazzled and fuzzy extremes.

That's what you hope, anyway. And so it was with some disappointment that we 
downloaded – for free, so the cost was to our morale not bank balance – Angel 
Haze's two mixtapes, Voice and King. They reveal that the 20-year-old, based in 
LA and highly touted bya source we trust <>, sings and raps, which is 
interestingif not totally unusual 
<http://www.pammiepedia.com/2010/05/nicki-minaj-sings-and-raps-in-your-love.html>
. Her singing voice is pleasingly indistinct, a capable R&B coo. She raps quite 
fast (the speed of her flow has been praised – who cares?), but it's what she 
raps that concerns us, or rather it's her concern that concerns us – about 
being a victim, about being cursed, about struggle. The language of oppression 
and strife. Yawn. She talks about her "past pain" and it's all a bit Badu, a 
bit soul-lite and poetry night at a downtown jazz bar. It's articulate enough 
but we were expecting Angel Haze, a bisexual Native American, to be the new 
abased goddess, plunging deep into the bowels of the human condition like 
Tyler, the Creator or Earl Sweatshirt, not skimming the surface of ghetto 
sorrow like a latterday Biggie/Ghostface/Nas.

That EP trailer, and attendant hype, led us to anticipate more than these 
sub-Minaj putdowns ("Putting heat to those bitches like I'm ironing fabric"), 
old-school braggadociousness like she's the slender ghost ofRoxanne Shanté 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9IFs13w_JQ>, this pile-up of facile 
observations, pseudo-poesy and doggerel. If anyone can tell us what "I'm 
mentally reclined in my mind" means, we'd be very grateful. So much for the 
content. Hopefully the context for her rhymes will be more innovative on the 
Revelation EP than the mixtapes' Drake, Minaj and Ellie Goulding samples. She 
sings and raps – but who's going to be producing? Someone who will keep her 
away from this mushy, mellow soulfulness, please. "My goal in hip-hop," she has 
said, seemingly unaware that hip-hop has just enjoyed itsGreatest 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-Q36-6tPtU>! Year 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s4l7bmTJ7j8>! Ever 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XSbZidsgMfw>!, "is to in some way revive its 
originality." Be our guest.

The buzz: "She spits rhymes like bullets, sings like an innocent, and is wise 
beyond her years. Meet Angel Haze, quite possibly the greatest unsigned rapper 
ever." –MTV <http://www.mtviggy.com/interviews/the-many-faces-of-angel-haze/>.

The truth: Full marks for the trailer, fingers crossed for the new EP.

Most likely to: Work with Syd tha Kyd.

Least likely to: Work with Sid the Sexist 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YcnN8-sJ8Hk>.

What to buy: The Reservation EP is released on 17 July.

File next to: Erykah Badu, Roxanne Shante, MC Lyte, Lauryn Hill.

Links: iamangelhaze.bandcamp.com <http://iamangelhaze.bandcamp.com/>.

Friday's new band: Mikhael Paskalev.
 