
Oscar-winning actor Anjelica Huston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston> is to write a memoir that is 
expected to detail her often turbulent relationships with her father, film 
director John Huston, and former lover Jack Nicholson.

The Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/anjelica-huston-penning-memoir-162926> 
says Huston's book, which does not yet have a title, will be published in 2013. 
"My father once said that interest was the most important thing in the world, 
and he wasn't talking about money, but rather the infinite possibilities and 
choices and patterns we all have in life," said the star of The Royal 
Tenenbaums and The Grifters. "In this book, I want to look back at the 
landscapes that formed me â€“ the exceptional highs and lows I have experienced."

Huston was involved in a relationship with Nicholson between 1973 and 1990. 
She famously became caught up in the fall-out fromRoman Polanski's arrest 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2009/CRIME/09/27/zurich.roman.polanski.arrested/> on 
suspicion of having sex with a 13-year-old girl at Nicholson's LA home in 1977. 
Nicholson once said in an interview that he was"annihilated emotionally" 
<http://clooneysopenhouse.forum-motion.com/t306-is-this-george-s-future-apart-from-the-children-bit-jack-nicholson-interview>
 by one of his separations from Huston.

Huston's relationship with her father is said to have been a difficult and 
often distant one, especially during her youth growing up in Ireland. However, 
the Oscar-winning film-maker helped his daughter confirm her status as a 
serious actor in 1985 with the dark comedy Prizzi's Honor, which landed the 
younger Huston an Academy Award for best supporting actress. Prior to the film, 
Anjelica's efforts to break into Hollywood had at times been held back by 
suggestions of nepotism, and she had spent much of her teens working as a 
model. During that period she had relationships with photographer Bob 
Richardson, who was 23 years her senior, and actor Ryan O'Neal. Much later, she 
married the artist Robert Graham, who died three years ago.

Huston's memoir will also deal with her family's celluloid legacy 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/03/01/us-books-anjelicahouston-idUSTRE72065G20110301>
. As well as father John, her grandfather Walter was an Oscar-winning actor and 
her brother Danny is also a Hollywood star. The book will be released in the US 
by Scribner, with Simon & Schuster publishing in Britain.
 