
Anjelica Huston arrives at the Carlyle hotel in Manhattan after lunching with 
Sofia Coppola <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sofia-coppola>. It’s the first 
time she has seen her old friend in over 15 years, and the reunion has put her 
in a nostalgic mood. Huston and Coppola have a lot in common, not all of it 
good. “In both cases our fathers were larger than life and gregarious,” Huston 
says, “and they didn’t understand certain things about how a female emerges 
from her chrysalis.” It took the 63-year-old a long time to complete the 
transition from gawky daughter of the legendary director John Huston to 
Oscar-winner in her own right. “You do feel like you wished you’d had a bigger 
voice at the time.”

Huston has more than made up for those years of meekness, but there’s still an 
avidity to her that borders on nervousness, a touching and almost quaint bid to 
be liked that seems somehow rooted in her status as a second-generation 
Hollywood star. She orders avodka bullshot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jan/26/bullshot-cocktail-drink-recipe>
 (vodka, beef bouillon, lemon) – the very act of drinking mid-afternoon during 
an interview is pretty old school – and although a little pale and 
round-shouldered, she looks good, with sheets of dark hair that swing when she 
laughs. Huston’s appeal has always centred on her combination of ungainly, 
diffident beauty and self-assurance, the result of a background as insecure as 
it was privileged, and she speaks plainly in a way that newly minted 
celebrities do not.

After the disappointment of the recent NBC TV series Smash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/smash>, she is in demand again, about 
to go into the Broadway play Love Letters, with Martin Sheen, and the star of a 
new ad campaign for Gap, in which she appears opposite Michael K Williams (Omar 
from The Wire). She is also promoting Watch Me, the second volume of her 
memoirs, which recounts her years with Jack Nicholson, the start of her career, 
and her eventual long and happy marriage to thesculptor Robert Graham 
<http://www.robertgraham-artist.com/>, who died in 2008.

Publicity around the book has focused on three aspects, the first of which is 
a Pope-is-a-Catholic-grade scoop – thatJack Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacknicholson> was unfaithful to her. They 
were together, on and off, for almost 17 years, during which time he fathered a 
child with someone else and messed Huston around appallingly. At all these 
years’ distance, she says, she is able “to have perspective on it. I can laugh 
about it,” although she is still stung by the memory of some of his outrages – 
and still charmed, in spite of herself.

Nicholson’s behaviour is exemplary compared with that of two other men in the 
book, one of whom Huston sets out to expose, the other, paradoxically, to 
defend. Ryan O’Neal makes a brief appearance when she claims he head-butts her 
in a car park in the late 1970s, after the pair had a brief relationship. “He 
turned on me, grabbed me by the hair and hit me in the forehead with the top of 
his skull,” Huston writes. “I saw stars and reeled back. Half blind, I ran away 
from him.” Later, he slaps her about in the bathroom.

It’s not a surprising account of O’Neal, an individual who once accidentally 
made a pass at his own daughter, Tatum, when he failed to recognise her at her 
mother’s funeral. More surprising is that Huston put up with it. Although she 
ended the relationship shortly afterwards, she didn’t go to the police or make 
a fuss, something she now seeks to rectify. “If you’re in a situation where 
someone’s mistreating you, I think it’s your duty to speak out,” she says. “I 
think men really need to get a grip, with this. Beating up on women is not a 
viable solution. Men shouldn’t get away with it, or think that they can get 
away with it.”

A few pages further on in the book, Huston whacks Nicholson on the head after 
yet another of his girlfriends comes forward, this time to give an interview to 
Playboy, testifying to his fondness for light S&M. Huston flew at him in a 
violent rage. Some will see this as a double standard, although, she says, 
there’s generally only so much damage a woman can do to a man, “without going 
at him with a kitchen knife. Which I wouldn’t recommend. Not that I’ve ever 
done it.”

As for O’Neal: “I don’t even want to characterise Ryan as a beater-upper. I 
don’t want to say that’s who he is, for ever. But it’s bullyish behaviour and 
it’s something that happened. Something very unfortunate. Something I’m sure he 
regrets.”

Along with everything else.

“I would hope.”

If such a thing happened today, of course, there would be CCTV footage of the 
assault in the car park and O’Neal would be held to account. Huston is 
ambivalent about the way privacy filters have changed, making a point we’ll 
return to – about the naivety of celebrities who expect their naked photos to 
stay private. But there are advantages to the new order, too. “The world has 
changed and now they do catch [domestic violence] on closed-circuit camera. I 
think it’s good that they don’t have that privacy any more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanjelica-huston-i-wanted-perfect-romance-and-lovely-husband%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416321891087%2F239eaf27-483b-497e-9e4d-c67445451b0e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjelica%20Huston%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20a%20perfect%20romance%20and%20a%20lovely%20husband%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanjelica-huston-i-wanted-perfect-romance-and-lovely-husband%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjelica%20Huston%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20a%20perfect%20romance%20and%20a%20lovely%20husband%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanjelica-huston-i-wanted-perfect-romance-and-lovely-husband%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F18%2F1416321891087%2F239eaf27-483b-497e-9e4d-c67445451b0e-1020x612.jpeg>
 With Jack Nicholson, her partner for 17 years. Photograph: Bob Colacello 
Her staunchness on the subject of abusive men has its limits. Elsewhere in the 
book, Huston is keen to set the record straight concerning her involvement – or 
lack thereof – in the events leading up to Roman Polanski’s flight from the US 
in 1978. Hissexual assault of 13-year-old Samantha Geimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/18/samantha-geimer-roman-polanski-unlawful-sex-email>
 took place in Jack Nicholson’s house, when Huston was in another room. She 
says she saw and heard nothing, although had the director not fled the country, 
it was reported that she was due to be called as a witness for the prosecution. 
In the book, she seems not to put Polanski into the same abusive category as 
O’Neal.

“Not at all,” she says.

Did he remain a friend?

“Oh yeah. I mean, I don’t see him, we don’t live in the same country. I really 
like Roman. He was a thoughtful… I never saw him be abusive in any way. Just 
the opposite. I saw him call the paramedics at a party when he noticed a girl 
who was acting oddly, and was concerned about her. My memories of Roman were 
always that he was a gentleman.”

Did you raise what happened to Samantha Geimer with Polanski at the time?

“No. I never had a chance to. And it was a difficult time, in that our lawyers 
didn’t want us to speak. It was an ongoing case.”

Given everything that has come out since – that he had anal sex with the girl, 
not something a 13-year-old can give her consent to under any circumstances – 
hasn’t that given Huston pause, over the years? She blinks rather vigorously.

“Quite honestly, it’s something that I didn’t have anything to do with. It was 
completely outside my jurisdiction, outside my knowledge. I saw the girl once, 
fleetingly, as she left the house. It’s not something that I want, really, to 
have to take sides on, or have that involvement with. I like Roman. I trust him 
as a friend. And that’s whoever’s story it is. But it’s not my story.”

***

Anjelica Huston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston> didn’t 
particularly want to be an actor. It was one of those things that, as with 
Sofia Coppola, she was shoved into by her director father. “Our fathers put us 
into movies before we were ready for it, without really our consent,” she says. 
As a result, it took her many years to feel that she had earned her right to be 
there, and even longer to move beyond other behavioural patterns set by her 
father.

She grew up mostly on the Huston estate in Ireland; her mother was Enrica 
Soma, Huston’s fourth wife. In the early days of her relationship with 
Nicholson, she realised with dismay that she was in a similar relationship to 
the one that her parents had had. “In that my father was... I wouldn’t call him 
a roué, but he liked the ladies. And wasn’t a particularly faithful man.”

The sad thing is, Huston says, she wasn’t drawn to Nicholson because of his 
wildness. Or rather, she may well have been drawn to him for the qualities that 
drew everyone to Nicholson – his extraordinary charisma and unreliable charm. 
But she was in search of a conventional relationship. There was a lot of 
drinking and drug-taking in those years, but she wasn’t particularly happy. “I 
think it was my original wish, before everything happened, that I would have a 
perfect romance and a lovely husband. I wanted to be like Jo March in Little 
Women. I wanted to be married to a man who would give me lots of sons.”

Huston would, eventually, have a long and stable marriage to an artist, who 
represented “a new kind of stability for me”. And yet, looking back, she can 
still feel herself being sucked into the Nicholson vortex. “You still want to 
tame the beast. And the fact that you haven’t tamed him yet – I’m talking about 
the metaphorical beast… I think women like to conquer hearts. Men like to 
conquer countries.” (This is what I mean by the quaintness of Huston: she 
occasionally talks like an unreconstructed movie star from the 1940s.)

Part of the difficulty in her relationship with Nicholson, apart from his 
raging infidelity, was that at the peak of their romance, Huston’s acting 
career had yet to take off. Before they were through, she would win an Oscar 
for her role inPrizzi’s Honor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1A4Q92grgSY>, 
and from there would go on to star inThe Witches 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=naHTCY8vKbA>, The Addams Family 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zIC2aMlqEZk> and The Royal Tenenbaums 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aPO12GYknq4>. But at the time, she was 
floating around Hollywood, doing not very much.

“When you don’t have a nine-to-five job, and you’re with somebody who gets a 
tremendous amount of attention, it’s not that you resent it, it’s that you have 
all that extra time to think about it. To think about who he’s with, or why 
aren’t I getting a certain amount of attention? Or what about me: why doesn’t 
the phone ring for me? What about my opinion?”

Nicholson was controlling, too. At one point, when the two were living 
together, Huston was told via third parties not to draw on the telephone pads; 
it annoyed the master of the house. “Why can’t I draw on the telephone pads in 
my own house! Those are the things that crop up when you move in with a man of 
a certain notoriety or fame. They’ve got people around to do stuff for them, so 
it’s not even as though I could fit into the role of housewife, or even flower 
arranger. There was no role, except to be on his arm.”

I ask Huston if, when she was married to Bob, she ever behaved towards him the 
way Nicholson behaved towards her, given that she was the celebrity half of the 
couple.

“No, he was too big in his own right. Visually, he was an incredibly 
commanding and beautiful-looking man. So not the kind of person you’d say 
‘Don’t draw on the phone pads’ to. I would have framed what he drew on the 
phone pads.”
 Taking delivery of a gift from Jack Nicholson in the 70s. 
Their relationship was one of “mutual respect”, she says, something that it 
took her years to identify as the crucial element in a relationship. “There are 
certain places you don’t go, if you really want to stay with someone. And to 
deny them that respect is to court disaster.”

And yet. There’s an extraordinary scene in the book, in which, some time after 
Huston and Nicholson have split up and he is living with the woman with whom he 
had a child, he sends Huston a priceless piece of jewellery, a pearl and 
diamond bracelet that Frank Sinatra had once given to Ava Gardner. With it was 
a note: “These pearls from your swine. With happiest wishes for the 
holidays–Enjoy–Yr Jack.”

She was, she writes, “devastated”. Was she also furious? What on earth was he 
doing, toying with her like that after so comprehensively betraying her? She 
looks guilty. Oh, God – she was charmed.

“I was totally charmed.” Huston laughs. “Totally charmed and furious, all of 
it. His signing, ‘Your Jack’, was the one thing he never was. But that’s the 
nature of a charmer - to make you think you’ve made tracks. Charm is the worst. 
And you can’t deny it, and you can’t pretend that it’s not there and it’s not 
happening. It’s a dangerous element, charm.”

She and Nicholson had wanted to have a child. I wonder what their kid would 
have been like.

“Charming, probably.”

****

In the event, Huston didn’t have a child, with either Nicholson or anyone 
else. She thinks now that this was probably for the best.

“I would probably have been miserable,” she says. “When I talk about my mother 
and not wanting to echo that relationship, I think it would’ve probably been 
very much the same way. I would have been a stay-at-home mum, and he’d have 
been off, doing what he did. And that’s never really been me, either. I’m too 
noisy. I suck up too much air, myself.”

For a while, she and Nicholson did try to conceive, and later on, in her 
mid-40s, Huston and her husband underwent several unsuccessful rounds of IVF. 
Their closeness was in some ways cemented by the fact that it was only ever the 
two of them. Bob died in 2008, from kidney failure. Huston says she can’t even 
remember what she did in the days and months following. She had spent so much 
time at the hospital, she was lost. “There’s a good deal of effort goes into 
helping to get somebody well, and after you don’t have that any more, it’s like 
the barometer drops. There’s nothing to do. And nothing you can do. No way to 
look good, feel good, act good.”

Bob had, to some extent, regulated her behaviour. He was the steady one. 
Whereas, “I felt like flotsam and jetsam for a long time. Very emotional. Going 
between polar opposites.” Without him, she says, “I fret and worry and get lazy 
and eat too much. I’ve done something all my life – like smoked – to keep my 
energy down. I’ve got a big engine. He used to say to me, ‘Don’t worry your 
pretty little head.’ That was my favourite sentence in the world.” She smiles. 
“Just when he convinced me that was a good idea, he had to go and leave. Now I 
have to worry my pretty little head.”

She is not an astute businesswoman. “I’m not good with sums.” Earlier this 
year, she sold their heavily mortgaged apartment in Venice Beach, LA, at a 
loss. But she isn’t wildly extravagant, either, at least by the standards of 
her industry. Her guilty pleasures are expensive sheets and too much 
dry-cleaning: “You pay for dry-cleaning a couple of times, you might as well 
buy new clothes.”

For the past six months, she has been tentatively dating, which she initially 
found “inhibiting. Embarrassing. I felt like 16 again. So maybe it’s not a bad 
thing. Makes you feel like a young whippersnapper.” She talks about her 60s 
being a time of greater emotional security, although “beauty is dropping off 
and certain things are irritating – like, you can go to the gym every day of 
the week and it’s never going to look like it did, even in your 40s. Inside, 
much better.” It’s the outside that generates the most attention, however, and 
Huston says that while she is not averse to the smaller cosmetic gestures, she 
has a horror of hardcore plastic surgery.

“I’m scared of the knife. I’ve been under for a few operations, not of the 
vanity form. It really takes away your taste for voluntary surgery. And I don’t 
want to happen to me what happened to Joan Rivers. Also, she didn’t look young 
to me; she looked like she’d had a hell of a lot of surgery. I don’t know 
exactly what it does for you. Here’s the other thing: how far does it go? Do 
you stop at the neck? Because nothing about one’s body is the way it used to 
be. So between the varicose veins and the spider veins, and this and that, you 
could spend your entire life doing these tweaks. And still not be satisfied. 
You see these terrible plastic surgery victims who are addicted to it.”

Apart from anything else, Huston says, she doesn’t believe having surgery 
delivers the things it promises. “I don’t think they’re getting more sex,” she 
says, of the women who favour it. And there is always the risk of inviting 
ridicule. “There’s thisbig thing about Renée Zellweger’s new face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/23/where-has-real-renee-zellweger-gone>
. I think she hasn’t had a full facelift – I think it’s just the eyes. If you 
look at her from the eyes down, it all looks pretty much like her. I think 
she’s had this lifted.” She puts a hand to her forehead and lifts. “Eyes are 
really, really dicey, because that’s what people look at immediately. If your 
eyes don’t look like you, people get spooked.” She laughs. “And now here we 
are, talking about her stitchery. This wasn’t her intention, I’m sure. She just 
wanted to look refreshed.”

When Huston was in her 20s, Eileen Ford, the modelling executive, suggested 
she get a nose job; but Huston resisted, not least because, she says, her 
father would have gone mad. Because it was his nose? “No, well, it wasn’t 
really his nose. Because his nose was a big boxer’s nose. And my mother had a 
beautiful nose. It would just have been declassé. He would have thought it was 
vulgar, to go and get a little nose. Also, I would’ve looked weird. It wouldn’t 
have suited my face.”
 Anjelica Huston with her father, John, the legendary film director. 
Photograph: Vinnie Zuffante/Getty Images 
For a long time, she felt unattractive. Nicholson’s cheating didn’t help. But 
eventually she got over it, and over him, too, and the pair are still friends. 
He didn’t object to the book, and what could he say? It was all true. But I 
wonder if Huston thought she was letting the side down by spilling the beans? 
No, she says. “I was pleased for the opportunities to set the record straight.” 
And anyway, in this age of diminished privacy, it is pointless trying to hang 
on to your secrets.

“I think so much of what celebrity does is to give the impression that you 
have to hide things, keep them secret. Look at this odd culture, where people 
are sending naked photos of themselves on Instagram, yet they don’t want to 
talk about their private life, oh no. It’s an odd dichotomy, isn’t it? And one 
that doesn’t make a lot of sense, as far as I’m concerned.”

She seems to be roping Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> into this, which seems a 
bit unfair, given that Lawrence didn’t send those photos via Instagram. As far 
as anyone knows, they were hacked.

Huston won’t have it. “Maybe she didn’t know – but the fact is, there is no 
privacy. Get over it. It’s gone. There might’ve been a bit of a choice, 
somewhere in there between the 70s and 80s. We’re all on the record. They’ve 
got our iridology, and fingerprints, and emails. They know exactly who we are. 
It’s the way it is.” Celebrities have to bear some of the responsibility for 
their own exposure, she says. “You don’t want to see naked pictures of yourself 
on the internet? Don’t put them there. Don’t take them.”

Isn’t that a monstrous intrusion into one’s private decision-making? Huston 
shrugs. “There is no more privacy.”

In the scheme of things, she feels much more sorry for Jennifer Aniston. 
“Every bloody tabloid in the world asks, does she have a baby bump? Well, that 
happened to me, too. And it’s extremely difficult to deal with, particularly if 
you’re trying to get pregnant. Particularly if you’re having IVF and it’s 
failing. And then you have to read, ‘Does she have a baby bump?’ Leave her 
alone.” She warms to the theme. “You’re taking hormones and your emotions are 
up and down, and you get to be made to feel like a failure? Because it’s not 
happening? That’s hard on a body. I think there’s not very much sensitivity 
about it.”

Huston has a solution. “Jennifer Aniston could make a public statement, like: 
‘You know what? Everybody, let’s call it a day on this.’ I think she has the 
gumption to do that. And she should, because what they do to her, or to anyone 
in that position…” Huston finishes her drink and issues a glittering look… 
“that’s bullying.”

• Watch Me: A Memoir by Anjelica Huston is published by Simon & Schuster at 
£20. To order a copy for £16, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/watch-me.html> or call 0330 333 6846.
 