
Hilary Rosen's attack on Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/12/hillary-rosen-ann-romney-live> 
handed husband Mitt a rare PR opportunity with women. But the debate over the 
value of stay-at-home motherhood obscures the real picture of women in the 
workforce, and without.

• The number of stay-at-home mothers dropped from 9.8 million in 1969 to 5.7 
million in 2009, according to a paper byRose Kreider and Diana Elliott, 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:xUYUuZjEgSUJ:www.census.gov/population/www/socdemo/ASA2010_Kreider_Elliott.ppt+Rose+Kreider+and+Diana+Elliott+historical+changes&cd=4&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us>
 of the US census bureau.

• From 1969 to 2009, the number of women with a bachelor's degree rose from 9% 
to 42%, according to Kreider and Elliott. They concluded that women who stay 
home are increasingly those who are less educated and can't earn enough money 
to make working outside the home worthwhile.

• Low-wage mothers are particularly hard hit by the difficulty in finding 
child care. Funding for pre-school programs recently hit a decade low, 
according to theNational Institute for Early Education Research. 
<http://nieer.org/news-events/news-releases/pre-k-spending-child-drops-levels-nearly-decade-ago>

• The number of unemployed women grew by 858,000 since January 2009, Obama's 
inauguration month. But the recession started before he took office and hit men 
first and hardest. Some 3.4 million men and 1.8 million women have lost jobs 
since the recession started,according to the government. 
<http://www.bls.gov/cps/>

• As the job losses moved from male-dominated industries like construction to 
government positions (which the Republicans have been keenest to cut),women 
started to suffer more. 

• When Obama took office, unemployment for men was 8.6% and for women 7%. The 
rate peaked for men at 11.2% in October 2009 and for women at 9% a month later.
The gender gap has nearly closed. Last month, the rate was 8.3% for men and 
8.1% for women. <http://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.t01.htm>

• The wage gap, too, is narrowing. In 1979, women between the ages of 25 and 
34 earned 68% what their male counterparts did. By 2010, they earned 91%, 
according to thebureau of labor statistics 
<http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2012/ted_20120110.htm>. 

• In 2010, women who worked full time had median earnings of $669 – 81% of 
men's median weekly earnings ($824).

• From 1979 to 2010, on an inflation-adjusted basis, earnings for women with a 
college degree increased by 33%, while those for male college graduates have 
risen by 20%.

But while the gap is narrowing, big challenges remain.

• African American women make only 62¢, and Hispanic women only 54¢, for every 
dollar earned by white, non-Hispanic men, according to the National Women's Law 
Center. 
<http://www.nwlc.org/resource/closing-wage-gap-especially-important-women-color-difficult-times>

• About 46.2 million people, or 15.1% of the US population, are living in 
poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/interactive/2011/sep/15/us-poverty-mapped>
, according to census bureau data, the highest figure in 52 years. Women were 
hardest hit, with 17 million living in poverty last year, compared with 12.6 
million men.Twice as many women over 65 were living in poverty, compared with 
men.

• More than 40% of women who head families are now living in poverty 
<http://www.nwlc.org/analysis-new-2010-census-poverty-data-%E2%80%93-september-2011>
. Withmore than half of poor children living in female-headed families in 2010, 
the child poverty rate jumped to 22%.

• Even in among the 1%, inequality remains rife. The number of women on 
corporate boards <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/08/equality-usa> 
worldwide has nudged above a measly 10% for the first time, according to a 
recent survey of 4,300 companies in 45 countries by corporate governance expert 
GMI.There are just 11 women at the head of Fortune 500 companies. 

• Women hold just 90, or 16.8%, of the 535 seats in the 112th US Congress 
<http://www.cawp.rutgers.edu/fast_facts/levels_of_office/Congress-CurrentFacts.php>
. They have 17 of the 100 seats in the Senate, and 73 (16.8%) of the 435 seats 
in the House of Representatives.
 