Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXK_V-T-OsCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXK_V-T-OsCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXK_V-T-OsCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Back in the day – 1997 to be precise – when Barbara Walters created the View, 
you used to hear her voice over the opening credits, explaining what the show 
was meant to be.

"I've always wanted to do a show with women of different generations, 
backgrounds and views: a working mother; a professional in her 30s; a young 
woman just starting out; and then somebody who's done almost everything and 
will say almost anything. And in a perfect world, I'd get to join the group 
whenever I wanted."

Fifteen years later, the show has spawned dozens of imitations around the 
world – Loose Women is its British incarnation. For presidential candidates 
(and their wives) who want to appeal to undecided women in swing states, it has 
become as essential a stop on the campaign trail as small-town diners in Iowa 
or Ohio. Last month's joint visit by Barack and Michelle Obama garnered a 
whopping 4.3 million viewers.

This election year, the political segment is called Red, White and View. On 
Thursday it was Ann Romney's turn to take her place on the blue couch. She was 
supposed to be accompanied by her husband, Republican presidential candidate 
Mitt,but he cancelled his appearance earlier this week 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intel/2012/10/mitt-romney-cancels-on-the-view.html>. (A 
decision that presumably looked pretty smart after his"binders full of women" 
remark during Tuesday's second presidential debate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/oct/17/binders-full-women-reconsider-voting-mitt-romney>
 spawned such derision).

Romney came out wearing her signature scarlet dress, to standing applause, and 
sat on the center of the couch, to be confronted immediately by Walters. [Mitt] 
said he didn't want to come on with us "because we are high risk and we are 
sharp tongued," she said.

"He said sharp and young," countered Mrs Romney, smiling brightly. Score one 
to her.

Without missing a beat, Walters moved on to Romney's shifting position on 
abortion. "I wonder what your views are," she asked.

"The good news is I'm not running for office and I don't have to say what I 
feel," said Mrs Romney, sunnily. Score two.

"Mitt has always been a pro-life person," she added, explaining that her 
husband was against embryo research. "This is an issue that is so tender. The 
most important thing we can do is have respect for each other."

Then she went in for the kill. The difference between what women were talking 
about when Romney campaigned four years ago and now was "heart-breaking, 
Barbara. This year what I hear... 90, I would say 95% of what I hear is, 'Help, 
please help'."

"Economic help, you mean," offered Walters.

"Absolutely," said Mrs Romney, with all the conviction provided by her 
uncheckable number. Score three.

Whoopi Goldberg <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whoopi-goldberg> tried to 
have a go at the fact that Mitt Romney did not serve in Vietnam because he was 
on a Mormon mission, but she got her facts mixed up and the fumble gave Mrs 
Romney the opportunity to point out that although neither her sons nor her 
husband had served in the military, they had all served on church missions; she 
added that one of her sons is a doctor who treats military veterans. Cue loving 
applause from the audience.

Score four.

After another commercial, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, whose professional credentials 
consist of being a 2001 contestant on Survivor and marrying the American 
footballer Tim Hasselbeck, turned to Mrs Romney and asked if there had been a 
moment when she and Mitt had almost broken up.

"Well, not according to him," was the smiling reply.

However, she said, early on in the relationship, when he was on his mission 
and they were apart for three and a half years, she dated a lot and came close 
to breaking his heart.

The questions were getting softer and softer.

In the early days of The View, the show was the perfect forum for political 
debate. But the host lineup has changed dramatically – gone are the empathetic 
Meredith Vieira and the colorful Star Jones. In are Goldberg and the token 
conservative, Hasselbeck. Walters, older and less with it, drifts in and out. 
The intelligence has been diluted and the shoutiness amplified. More often than 
not, the hour of The View resembles a Real Housewives reunion without the 
moderator.

Mrs Romney's appearance finished against a vast photo of Ann and Mitt, all the 
kids and the 18 grandkids. The picture was of an all-American family who make 
dinner, clean up and share the household chores when together. Yes, all of that 
takes place at the family's "Lake House", but no-one bothered to comment on 
that. There was no mention of binders of women, either.

The Romney segment closed with the ladies of The View slumped against the 
couch while their guest remained perky and upright.

'You are a wonderful advocate for your husband," Walters had said.

She got that right.
 