
Call it a retraction of a denial.

On Tuesday, the Mitt Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> 
campaign hastily took offline a video of Ann Romney in which she rejected the 
notion that her husband was unsympathetic to low-income voters.

In the interview, with the Denver Fox affiliate, Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> was asked if her husband's 
secretly recorded comments at a Florida fundraiser didn't express "any disdain 
for people who are poor, or who are on entitlement programs".

"Absolutely not, absolutely not, totally not so," Ann Romney replied.

The video was temporarily posted to the campaign's YouTube account with the 
headline "Ann Romney to FOX31: Mitt Doesn't Disdain the Poor."

Moments later the video disappeared, but not before BuzzFeed snagged it 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/zekejmiller/ann-romney-mitt-doesnt-disdain-the-poor>.

Ann Romney's answer wasn't a bad one (the headline is another story). But her 
having to face such a question is bad news for the campaign. The interview 
capped a day in which Mitt Romney's comments that 47% of Americans refuse to 
"take personal responsibility and care for their lives" were played and 
replayed.

Ann Romney herself comes in for brief mention in the fundraiser video – and 
her husband isn't much nicer to her than he is to supporters of the president. 
Asked why he doesn't deploy her more,Romney replies with a joke that might come 
off as an insult <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>: "We use Ann sparingly right 
now, so that people don't get tired of her."

In fact the campaign frequently deploys Ann Romney, who has a strong track 
record at fixing what's broken and tenderizing what's tough. Onthe campaign bus 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=> and the convention dais 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0NraMG2zImE&feature=related>, she regularly 
succeeds in translating Romney for Romney, in capturing his best side, his 
faithfulness and dependability. Unlike her husband, she can make a joke she's 
told a hundred times sound newly surprising and funny, ason Tuesday on Live! 
with Kelly and Michael 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kj8xjCf0TeU&feature=player_embedded#t=1m30s> 
when she repeated an anecdote about Romney's reaction to her vow that she was 
done with politics: "He kind of laughed and said, 'Do you know what? You say 
that after every pregnancy.'"

Ann Romney has headlined nearly 40 fundraisers this year 
<http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-09-18/michelle-obama-along-with-ann-romney-fuel-husbands-coffers>
, reportedly generating millions for the campaign. She is scheduled to speak at 
a fundraiser in Louisiana on Wednesday. She is billed as the solo host of a 
major campaign rally in Des Moines, Iowa, on Thursday.

Before her appearance at the Republican national convention, a USA 
Today/Gallup poll 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/156950/americans-christie-ann-romney-positive-light.aspx>
 found voters had a favorable opinion of her by a margin of 42-24, although 
many, 34%, either had not heard of her or had no opinion.

The former first lady of Massachusetts has had some slips on the campaign 
trail. Her explanation of the couples' refusal to release more than two years' 
worth of tax returns – actually so far only one year, 2010, plus estimates for 
2011 – was taken as borderline snide. Releasing more information would only 
provoke more attacks, she told Good Morning America's Robin Roberts.

"We've given all people need to know and understand about our financial 
situation and how we live our life," she said, allowing frustration to creep 
into her voice.Some heard her say "all you people" 
<http://2012.talkingpointsmemo.com/2012/07/ann-romney-tax-returns.php>, as if 
the public were a pestilence.

Her attempts to make her husband relatable can backfire. While the young Mitt 
and Ann Romney may have lived briefly in a basement apartment, her mention of 
"a lot of pasta and tuna fish" in her convention speech felt disingenuous, for 
the new daughter-in-law of a governor turned cabinet secretary. The scene also 
fell flat as an evocation of romantic squalor.

There are now 48 days until the election. If the Romney camp was ever really 
worried about "people getting tired" of Ann, they can no longer afford to be.

Up next, the campaign is reportedly considering a guest-hosting slot for her 
on Good Morning America 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/tv-column/post/ann-romney-michelle-obama-may-guest-host-on-good-morning-america/2012/09/18/1ea6bcfe-01bd-11e2-b260-32f4a8db9b7e_blog.html>
 in October.
 