
Democratic strategist Hilary Rosen criticised Ann Romney on CNN last night, 
saying she "hasn't worked a day in her life." Ann Romney responded by tweeting: 
"I made a choice to stay home and raise five boys. Believe me, it was hard 
work." Rosen's comment and Romney's response have fuelled an ongoing debate. 
We're collecting commentary from those weighing in, including politicos, 
reporters and readers. Tweet us@GuardianUS <https://twitter.com/#!/GuardianUS>, 
or toss in your thoughts in the comments below.

Irin Carmon on the real war on moms.

This is not about the so-called Mommy Wars, where mothers with a paycheck 
sneer at the ones without one – a binary simply not reflected in women's lived 
experience. It's about class and about how government policy compounds its 
impact on households with kids. ~Irin Carmon, Salon 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/04/12/the_real_war_on_moms/>

Dashiell Bennett on how the debate detracts from women's issues

In this case, it's possible that both Rosen and Ann Romney are right. (Being a 
stay-at-home is a real job and the fact that Romney could choose to stay home 
and raise kids is a fortunate one. But neither one qualifies or disqualifies 
someone from having an informed opinion about something.) Their debate about 
what work really means distracts from actual policy issues, like the Lilly 
Ledbetter Act or Wisconsin's equal pay law. –Dashiell Bennett, The Atlantic Wire
 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/politics/2012/04/moms-get-drafted-war-women/51043/>
Michael Cohen (@speechboy71) 
If Ann Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> thinks being a 
working mom is difficult why is she unbothered that her husband supports 
cutting child & health care for them?
 <https://twitter.com/speechboy71/status/190438809488465921> April 12, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/speechboy71/status/190438809488465921> 
Cassie Murdoch on Rosen's 'flawed approach'

It's not like Rosen is picking on one of Mitt's grandkids. After all, it was 
Mitt himself who chose to give Ann a central role in his campaign to win the 
delicate hearts of women. If he's going to rely on her for economic advice, 
then we should be allowed to examine her qualifications on that issue—which is 
what Rosen was trying to do, albeit in a bit of hackneyed way. Grrrr. –Cassie 
Murdoch, Jezebel 
<http://jezebel.com/5901295/twitstorm-erupts-after-cnn-pundit-says-ann-romney-has-never-worked-a-day-in-her-life>

Chris Cillizza on the effect on the presidential race

What Rosen's comments do is put Romney on the offensive on the issue. Ann 
Romney's appearance on Fox News Channel this morning and a conference call with 
several of Romney's female surrogates — New Hampshire senator Kelly Ayotte 
among them — is evidence of the Romney team taking the fight to Obama. –Chris 
Cillizza, The Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/post/hilary-rosen-throws-mitt-romney-a-lifeline-in-war-on-women/2012/04/12/gIQAJVTqCT_blog.html>

Jason Linkins on how Rosen v. Romney means nothing to election.

Let's recall, as well, that after many days were spent dinging Romney on Eric 
Fehrnstrom's Etch A Sketch line, it turned out that whole meme went largely 
unnoticed by the general populace. If "Etch A Sketch" didn't matter, then 
Hilary Rosen will matter even less, and a week from now the only people who 
will even remember it will all reside inside the Beltway. ~Jason Linkins, The 
Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/12/hilary-rosen-ann-romney-election-doodlysquat_n_1421050.html?1334251135>
Kate Harding (@KateHarding) 
Also, because I can't get over this, please imagine female candidate saying, 
"My husband talks to men and tells me about their concerns."
 <https://twitter.com/KateHarding/status/190447334591696896> April 12, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/KateHarding/status/190447334591696896> robinmarty 
(@robinmarty) 
I agree with @AnnDRomney <https://twitter.com/AnnDRomney>. Motherhood is 
work.Please let me know how much the GOP is willing to pay me per child to do 
it.
 <https://twitter.com/robinmarty/status/190458838489640962> April 12, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/robinmarty/status/190458838489640962> 
Steve Kornacki on how the Romney campaign is boosted

For Romney's campaign, the chance to play victim couldn't possibly come at a 
better time. There's now clear polling evidence that a large number of women 
have moved from their camp to Obama's since the GOP picked a fight over 
contraception a few months ago. –Steve Kornacki, Salon 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/04/12/the_martyrdom_of_ann_romney/>
Lizz Winstead (@lizzwinstead) 
Having a couple of Cadilliac's to maintain, while overseeing 3 houses AND 
raising 5 boysall on a monarch's budget is hard.
 <https://twitter.com/lizzwinstead/status/190453441443790848> April 12, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/lizzwinstead/status/190453441443790848> 
Ruth Marcus on Ann Romney not being a typical working woman.

You don't have to be a combatant on either side of the Mommy Wars to recognize 
that Ann Romney's privileged life experience is not typical. She's never had to 
worry about the price of a gallon of gas as she filled up the Cadillacs. ~Ruth 
Marcus, The Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/post/ann-romneys-not-your-typical-working-woman/2012/04/12/gIQAjMhbCT_blog.html>

Ali Harden and Kristen Hawn agree on Ann Romney.

We need to work together to find solutions to the big problems facing our 
country — and steer clear of the ridiculous sound-bite warfare. Rosen should 
know better. ~AliHarden, Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0412/75073.html>


While Republican pundits will take this perceived opportunity to attack the 
president and congressional Democrats on women's issues, the American people 
continue to face very real challenges. ~Kristen Hawn, Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0412/75073.html>
 