
Upstairs in the Crosby Street hotel in New York, 20-year-old Ansel Elgort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ansel-elgort> has been talking about himself 
all day. Down in the basement, film journalists pick at the buffet. One of 
them, speaking with an air of special knowledge, tells me Elgort is very tired. 
"You should take him some cookies, he'll need the sugar," he advises firmly. 
He's so unequivocal that when I'm ushered upstairs I find I'm holding three 
choc-chip cookies wrapped in a napkin.

Elgort and Shailene Woodley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/04/shailene-woodley-young-adult-badass-divergent>
 star inThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/05/the-fault-in-our-stars-first-look-review>
, based on John Green's cultish bestseller about two teen cancer patients who 
meet at a support group and fall in love.

When the trailer was first released on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ItBvH5J6ss&feature=kp>, it clocked up a 
record-breaking three million views in 24 hours; when the movie was released in 
the US last week, it sped past Tom Cruise to the top of the box office. It 
looks to do for Elgort whatTwilight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/film+culture/twilight> did for Robert 
Pattinson. But whilePattinson graduated to adult roles after Twilight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/15/robert-pattinson-lawrence-arabia>
, Elgort is there already, as the lead in Men, Women and Children,Jason Reitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jason-reitman>'s latest, opposite Adam 
Sandler and Emma Thompson.

As I enter the room, he's standing on the windowsill regarding Manhattan below 
him. So, is he exhausted after this day of press?

"I'm never exhausted; I'm a crazy m'fucker," he says, in a confident torrent, 
as he dismounts with a leap. "This is the beginning of this journey."

I offer him the cookies anyway. His comically movie-star-perfect features 
squish into a quick frown.

"Are these poisoned?"

I'm a bit taken aback. No, they're fine.
 With Woodley in The Fault in Our Stars 

Woodley and Elgort work sweetly together on screen. She's wry and shrewd – a 
counterbalance to his easy swagger. The audience at the press screening I 
attended turned swiftly into a noisy orchestra of weeping. My irritation over 
the heartstring pulling was only compounded by how impossible it was to resist.

So did he cry when he watched it? "Yeah, of course," he shoots. "Big time. The 
first time I cried was I think ..." He chews a cookie while he thinks. And 
then: "Well, I cry whenever I watch an emotional scene that I did, just because 
it brings me back to that moment. It's like I remember being there, I remember 
feeling what I felt. It's really weird, right?"

Mawkish though it is, I tell him I'd left the screening feeling lucky to be 
healthy. "There are so many things to be lucky for," he agrees. "Lucky to be 
healthy, lucky to be, like, beautiful. Lucky to be living in America. It's 
like: what the fuck. It's crazy. I feel like I have more luck than 99.999% of 
people in the whole world." A pause. "I'm a lucky fuck."

He is indeed. That he acknowledges his gilded upbringing is heartening, too. 
He is the youngest son of an opera director and a fashion photographer; his 
sister, Sophie, is a photographer, and his older brother, Warren, a film-maker. 
The whole family looks like a walking Ralph Lauren ad.
 With his father at the Fault in Our Stars after party. Photograph: Startraks 
Photo/REX 
When Elgort made his first chat show appearance on Jimmy Kimmel  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0CPqPvOvCSE>earlier this year, the host 
whipped out an image of the supermodel Karolína Kurková. Lying on the floor 
beside her is a profoundly unbothered little boy: the photographer's son. "My 
dad said to always do what I loved and not worry about the money or anything, 
because if I do what I love then the money will come."

Encouraged by both parents, he began ballet classes when he was nine, then 
went toLaGuardia High <http://laguardiahs.org/>, a performing arts school whose 
alumni include Jennifer Aniston and Adrien Brody.

His first movie role was in last year's Carrie remake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/01/carrie-review>, as the smooth 
jock who also happens to be sensitive enough to woo the school wallflower out 
of her shell. (Somewhat of a rehearsal, then, for The Fault in Our Stars.) 
Being on a film set for the first time seems not to have fazed him one bit.
 Elgort in Carrie 

"It wasn't scary, that was the thing. I was totally confident because I'd 
worked so long training and stuff. I knew how to act."

Then came Divergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/divergent-review-film-shailene-woodley>
, another Young Adult smash, in which he played Woodley's brother. "Shailene," 
he says, "is a very different person to most people. She's very unique. She 
has, some would say, odd ways of living."

Like what? "Like she eats only certain types of food, she cooks a certain way. 
But the nice thing was that she was able to speak about life spiritually and I 
think at that point in my life – I was 19 – I'd never thought about any of that 
kind of stuff. So I was like: wow that's interesting. I'd never talked to 
anybody like that but I guess Shailene talks to her friends like that all the 
time."
 With Woodley in Divergent 
"Shailene and I share a certain love," he says, "but it's a friendship love." 
This, he thinks, is also what their characters in this new film enjoy. "I think 
it's more than a love story, it's like the opposite of Romeo and Juliet – it's 
not lust; it's real love. And, y'know, they have sex just because they're in 
Amsterdam and are probably never going to have sex otherwise – so let's do it, 
I guess. But really, they're there just because they love each other. That's 
why it's refreshing because it's not, like, cheesyluurve."

It's curious Elgort's conception of "real love" seems to sideline sex. 
Particularly since hisInstagram account <http://instagram.com/anselelgort> 
(1.5m followers and counting) does little to discourage the female gaze.

"It's important power," he says of his online reach. "Because there are some 
celebrities who have millions and millions of people following them and they 
don't lead by example. I think one of the best people on Twitter isJohn Green 
<https://twitter.com/realjohngreen> [author of The Fault in Our Stars]. He 
leads by example and he encourages millions of people to do good things. And 
there are people who don't, and it's a waste, y'know? I look to John as a role 
model and whenever I'm unsure of something I'm like: 'Would John tweet this?'

"I'm happy to be a role model because I think I can do it over other people. I 
think my parents raised me well. And I'm pretty straight edge. All my friends 
make fun of me for being straight edge. Like we go out and I'm not really 
drinking. But they understand why – I'm doing really well, I'm really focused 
always on the prize. I want to keep creating and making important things and 
that's what I want Ansel Elgort to be about."
 On The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon. Photograph: Nbc/NBCU Photo Bank via 
Getty Images 
It's a bit of a shock, the third-person reference. But such brand-awareness is 
presumably part and parcel of being a pin-up in 2014. For Elgort, this savvy 
seems to come naturally; perhaps more so to him than his peers.

I ask how he feels about the Pattinson comparisons and whether he's ready for 
that level of attention. "I don't compare myself to anyone, but yeah, in 
certain ways it's really nice because a lot of people like Robert Pattinson. I 
think I'm a lot more ready than a lot of people. I'm willing to hopefully 
encourage people to do good things."

Fame at this pitch holds no fears for a man apparently allergic to anxious 
introspection. Or, perhaps, just a 20-year-old self-aware enough to know he's 
on top of the world. And making the movie did change his perspective, he says. 
Sometimes, luck runs out.

"I think one of the biggest things is that … it just happens."

"It", of course, being cancer. He quotes the film – "The world is not a 
wish-granting factory" – then sits back. "That's how it is. It could happen to 
anyone, y'know? As young people, we think we're invincible."

The Fault in Our Stars in released in the UK on 19 June
 