
It will be kitchen knives at dawn when celebrated chef and author Anthony 
Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> makes his 
first venture into graphic novels next year with the "gourmet slaughterfest" 
comic Get Gyro.

Bourdain, author of the explosive behind-the-scenes memoir Kitchen 
Confidential and follow-up Medium Raw: A Bloody Valentine to the World of Food 
and the People Who Cook, is currently hosting the foodie travel show No 
Reservations. But the chef is also planning a move into more graphic culinary 
territory in 2011 after signing a deal with DC Comics, he has revealed.

"It's about ultraviolent food nerds. It's a gourmet slaughterfest, sort of 
like Fistful of Dollars meets Eat Drink Man Woman," 
<http://www.omaha.com/article/20100904/ENTERTAINMENT01/709049912> he told the 
Omaha World Herald. In another interview, he described the comic as a 
combination of Kurosawa's 19th-century Japanese gangster film Yojimbo, Big 
Night, the story of two Italian brothers starting a restaurant in New Jersey in 
the 1950s, and Danish film Babette's Feast, in which a Parisian refugee plans a 
culinary banquet to thank the twin sisters who took her in."[Get Gyro is] an 
ultraviolent slaughterfest over culinary arcana," 
<http://www.nowtoronto.com/daily/story.cfm?content=176716> said Bourdain.

The move isn't Bourdain's first foray into fiction: he is also the author of a 
handful of crime novels, including Gone Bamboo, "a feast of murder, hitmen, and 
the hitwomen they love", Bone in the Throat, about a junior chef who 
"unwittingly finds himself a partner in big-time crime", and The Bobby Gold 
Stories, as well as his non-fiction books. "The next book will be a crime 
novel, just to take a break from writing and talking about myself. I think that 
will be a healthy departure," he told the Omaha World Herald. "It's displaced 
New Yorkers in the Caribbean doing bad things to each other. Food will be 
involved."

With a graphic novel now on the way as well, he's a long way from the "loud, 
egotistical, one-note asshole who's been cruising on the reputation of one 
obnoxious, over-testosteroned book for way too long and who should just shut 
the fuck up", as he suggests he might be described in his latest book Medium 
Raw.
 