
Close your eyes, Arsène. Now … Open them. Happy 20th anniversary! Yes, that’s 
right. It’s exactly what you’ve always wanted. For one perfect half at the 
EmiratesArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> produced 
something sublime, 45 minutes that contained pretty much the full set of 
Wenger-isms entwined in a relentless performance of sinuous passing football.

This was Wengerball in excelsis on a muggy, grey north London late afternoon, 
the footballing equivalent of one of those Evening-With-Ronnie-Corbett-style 
affairs, where some garlanded old ham gets to stand centre-stage and beam 
munificently while his favourite anecdotes, his most wonderful personal 
qualities are paraded beneath the studio lights.

The Premier League doesn’t do anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/arsene-wenger-20-years-arsenal-incredible-journey>
 gifts. But if it did, if everyone concerned could have got together and 
designed a perfect commemoration …

Well, this would have probably been it. There was a supremely assertive 
performance from Wenger’s own record signing Mesut Özil. A goal from Theo, the 
dear but slightly wayward nephew. Not to mention a performance of real craft 
and confidence from the academy kid Alex Iwobi, a Wenger youth since the age of 
eight. All this, just to be clear, againstChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, opponents who in Wenger’s 
previous big day, his 1,000th game as a manager, had pulverised his best XI at 
Stamford Bridge.

Mesut Özil strike seals Arsenal’s impressive demolition of Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Everywhere you looked Wenger’s small, prudently selected glass of red wine 
ranneth over. Diego Costa was shut down and dead-ended by the summer singing 
Shkodran Mustafi.Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> justified the shuffle 
to centre-forward. At half-time the crowd, tetchy at times, rose as one beneath 
the white lights of this Wenger-built steel and glass spaceship. Fittingly, 
victory even left Arsenal in third place. Really, really, really you shouldn’t 
have.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwenger-praises-arsenals-nearly-perfect-first-half-against-chelsea-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wenger%20praises%20Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98nearly%20perfect%E2%80%99%20first%20half%20against%20Chelsea%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwenger-praises-arsenals-nearly-perfect-first-half-against-chelsea-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wenger%20praises%20Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98nearly%20perfect%E2%80%99%20first%20half%20against%20Chelsea%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fwenger-praises-arsenals-nearly-perfect-first-half-against-chelsea-video&media=>
Wenger praises Arsenal’s ‘nearly perfect’ first half against Chelsea – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/25/wenger-praises-arsenals-nearly-perfect-first-half-against-chelsea-video>
The third goal in particular was an absolute sensation, the Full Wenger, a 
move that brought the manager up on to his feet with huge, sheepish, guilty 
smile on his face. As the crowd leapt and hugged you half-expected Wenger to 
start tapping the rim of his champagne flute and making a fond, grateful, 
dad-ish speech. This was supposed to be another taut London derby, a shaking of 
the lapels at the hands ofAntonio Conte’s high-tempo hustlers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/23/antonio-conte-chelsea-stamford-bridge-arsenal>
 With 40 minutes gone it had turned into a procession.

A quick word here on Chelsea. Ugh. A last word on Chelsea. Meh. Conte will 
work on his defence. They will be better than this. Otherwise this was simply a 
Wenger day right from the start. Diego Costa has been at his most incorrigible 
in games between these two, a jousting, hustling, kidney-jabbing force of 
destruction. Mustafi handled him well here. He is an aggressive, forceful 
defender who likes to attack and intercept, intruding into space in front of 
Costa as he looked to take the ball with his back to goal.

Arsenal’s first goal came from a wretched Gary Cahill back pass, leaving 
Sánchez to streak away and produce a sublime dinked finish. The second was a 
peach, a moment of pure, fast-twitch Arsenalism. Özil and Iwobi switched passes 
with a zippy swagger in front of the Chelsea defence. Iwobi fed the ball out to 
Héctor Bellerín – another Wenger page boy – who crossed into the space teased 
out of a ball-watching defence. Theo Walcott prodded it home.

That crowning third was a Mesut Özil Joint from the start. With five minutes 
until half-time the world’s most ethereal high-spec playmaker outmuscled N’Golo 
Kanté (yes, really) in his own half, scooted away at real pace, exchanged 
passes with Sánchez and then bounced a slightly scuffed volley down into the 
ground and over Thibaut Courtois. It was a brilliant Özil moment, and a pointed 
one too as he did what some have been demanding, driving right through the 
heart of an opponent in the most cinematic style and then finishing his own 
move.

It was Iwobi who stood out as Arsenal began to pass and move Chelsea out of 
this game. Upright and sure in possession with a lovely weight of pass, he 
grows in confidence as his best qualities seem more pronounced. Clearly Iwobi 
adores Özil, with whom, like an eager, hulking kid brother, he always looks to 
switch passes, staying close to him whenever Arsenal break. There are worse 
places for an apprentice 20-year-old attacking midfielder to be.

As the second half unspooled there were further anniversary gifts. Cesc 
Fàbregas, who many insisted Wenger should have brought back, left the field to 
jeering applause. Arsenal made some celebratory efforts to quite literally pass 
the ball into the net. “We’ve got to not make too much of it,” Wenger said at 
the end, still grinning, a little puppyish, japing with the dictaphones. The 
season rumbles on from here, although Arsenal do have eight winnable games 
before the north London derby in November. The real world will surely intrude 
along the way. For now this was a simply a wonderful homage.
 