
It was a wild, oscillating contest, in keeping with the story of an eccentric 
title race, and when the players left the pitch at the end to try to make sense 
of everything there must have been regret for both teams.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> will wonder whether it might 
have been a lot more straightforward had it not been for Francis Coquelin’s 
sending-off, when they were 1-0 ahead, and Tottenham cannot be fully satisfied 
after that electric spell when they scored twice in two minutes and put 
themselves in a position to kill off their opponent’s fading title hopes.

Trouble mars north London derby before Tottenham v Arsenal draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/05/tottenham-arsenal-fans-north-london-derby>
Those were moments to convert the blood of any Tottenham supporter into red 
wine, featuring a peach of a goal from Harry Kane and one of the more raucous 
goal celebrations this stadium has witnessed for a long time, but it was an 
afternoon, ultimately, when Arsenal finally started to answer some of the 
criticism that has threatened to engulf them recently. Derided for lacking 
competitive courage, facing allegations of collective cowardice and the 
possibility of losing four successive games for the first time since October 
2002, Arsène Wenger’s players did at least show it was not completely true they 
have less heart than the Tinman in Wizard of Oz.

Their resilience to come back with ten men, salvaging a point courtesy of 
Alexis Sánchez’s first league goal since October, does not make it feel any 
less preposterous that they lost so meekly against Swansea City and Manchester 
United in their previous two league fixtures. Yet Arsenal did at least show 
they understood the importance of this fixture and refused to wilt when they 
were losing with a man down. They might still have imperfections, with only two 
wins from their last nine away league games, but it was an improvement.

Wenger’s men had taken the lead after 38 minutes courtesy of Aaron Ramsey’s 
clever improvisational flick to divert Héctor Bellerín’s cross-shot past Hugo 
Lloris in goal. At that stage Coquelin’s new midfield partnership with Mohamed 
Elneny looked compact. Danny Welbeck was making the most of some sparse service 
and, though Spurs had most of the early play, Mauricio Pochettino’s team were 
clearly rocked to be behind.

Unfortunately for Arsenal, the complexion of the game completely changed nine 
minutes into the second half when Coquelin dived into a challenge on Kane by 
the left touchline, missed the ball and eventually got back to his feet to the 
inevitable yellow card. Coquelin had already been booked in the first half for 
handling the ball, though there was an argument he had been fouled in the 
build-up to the earlier incident and Wenger was incensed later in the match 
when Eric Dier pulled back the substitute Olivier Giroud, having been shown a 
yellow card a few minutes earlier. The referee, Michael Oliver, decided against 
brandishing another red card and Wenger was entitled to complain about it 
afterwards.

Only winners of the much-anticipated north London derby were Leicester | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/05/north-london-derby-tottenham-arsenal-leicester-barney-ronay>
Wenger did not dispute, however, that it was silly from Coquelin, especially 
having warned the midfielder to be careful at half-time, and that mistake had 
costly repercussions. With an extra man, Spurs suddenly had new belief and were 
level on the hour, Christian Eriksen swinging over a corner and Toby 
Alderweireld sweeping in the loose ball after it had popped out between Erik 
Lamela and Gabriel.

Spurs were invigorated and when Kane curled in a beauty two minutes later, 
taking aim from a position where most players would not even have thought a 
shot was on, the ground was in a state of near-euphoria. Dele Alli had beaten 
Per Mertesacker for pace to reach the ball close to the corner flag and his 
back-heeled pass left Kane with the chance to turn inside. Running in from the 
left, Kane took his shot early, starting it outside the post but with the right 
amount of bend and pace to curl over David Ospina into the top corner.

Pochettino made the point afterwards that Ospina, deputising for the injured 
Petr Cech, was one of the game’s outstanding performers, especially with his 
first-half save to keep out Lamela’s effort and later in the match when Eriksen 
took aim from outside the penalty area.

Kane’s goal means he has now scored 14 times in 18 top-division London derbies 
but the England striker will also think back to another chance, within a couple 
of minutes of Coquelin’s dismissal, when his shot initially appeared to have 
gone past Ospina only for the goalline technology to deny him by roughly the 
width of a cigarette paper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftottenham-hotspur-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F534d439d0c16acb349538fe72ec9712b9307e874%2F17_0_4136_2481%2F4136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%E2%80%99s%2010%20men%20escape%20Tottenham%20with%20point%20thanks%20to%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftottenham-hotspur-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%E2%80%99s%2010%20men%20escape%20Tottenham%20with%20point%20thanks%20to%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftottenham-hotspur-arsenal-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F534d439d0c16acb349538fe72ec9712b9307e874%2F17_0_4136_2481%2F4136.jpg>
 Harry Kane curls the ball past David Ospina and in off the post. Photograph: 
Dylan Martinez/Reuters 
Yet Arsenal also had their moments, even with the numerical disadvantage. 
Welbeck justified his selection, chosen in attack ahead of Giroud and Theo 
Walcott, and the most encouraging part for Wenger must have been Sánchez’s 
improved performance. His equaliser came from a scuffed shot and, like Ramsey’s 
goal, a vital contribution from Bellerín. Lloris might reflect he could have 
saved it but Sánchez had his best game for some time and if Arsenal have any 
chance of returning to the top they will cling to the hope that, to quote 
Wenger, they will now start to see more of “the real Alexis.”

Overall, however, it was not a result either team could find entirely 
satisfactory.

• This article was corrected on 5 March 2016 to reflect the fact that Dele 
Alli was not offside in the buildup to Harry Kane’s goal
 