
One minute sunny, the next spattered with rain, it was a deceptive summer’s 
day at Vicarage Road. Fans were dressed for the beach but watched much of the 
second half under floodlights. Only at full-time did the sun deign to show its 
face again.

As with the weather, so with Arsenal. An accomplished performance was 
pockmarked with moments of bad judgment. An imposing 3-0 half-time lead could 
have been nullified were it not for Petr Cech. And yet, for all thatWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> corralled possession in the 
second half, you could not say that the visitors were ever truly threatened.

Arsenal’s Mesut Özil and Alexis Sánchez turn on style against Watford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/watford-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
It was the sort of deceptive day that leads to familiar thoughts about the 
Gunners: could this be their season? Have they finally found the grit to 
compete in tough physical matches (of which this was one)? Might Mesut Özil and
Alexis Sánchez <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> be 
ready to grab the league by the scruff of the neck? Oh, and how long before one 
or the other, or Santi Cazorla, or Laurent Koscielny, gets injured again?

Such questions will be answered in the fullness of time and Gunners fans could 
be forgiven for thinking they know the answers already. But on Saturday Arsenal 
played well enough to encourage those same supporters to dream, with Özil and 
Sánchez in particular superlative. “I think what we have seen from him today is 
what we want from him,”Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> said after the match about 
Özil, who scored the game’s third goal and looks suspiciously like he has added 
some muscle to his skinny frame. Sánchez delivered similarly, turning his lack 
of height against a Watford back three to his advantage, constantly spinning 
and sprinting past defenders who didn’t know whether to step in or drop off.

The confidence that the German and Chilean had in each other was apparent from 
the off. As early as the fifth minute Özil asked Sánchez to thread a ball 
through three players and slide him in on goal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Farsene-wenger-victory-against-watford-encouraging-for-arsenal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%3A%20victory%20against%20Watford%20'encouraging'%20for%20Arsenal%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Farsene-wenger-victory-against-watford-encouraging-for-arsenal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%3A%20victory%20against%20Watford%20%27encouraging%27%20for%20Arsenal%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Farsene-wenger-victory-against-watford-encouraging-for-arsenal-video&media=>
Arsène Wenger: victory against Watford ‘encouraging’ for Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/28/arsene-wenger-victory-against-watford-encouraging-for-arsenal-video>
No problem. In the 36th minute Sánchez returned the request, burrowing his way 
through a crowd before playing a one-two which required Özil to return the ball 
square and over an opponent’s leg with his back to goal.

Sure thing, buddy. Both opportunities came to nothing in the final moment, but 
it was a sign of what was to come. Sánchez provided the sumptuous cross for 
Özil’s emphatic header, and the German was involved in the move that led to the 
Chilean’s loopy tap-in.

Arsène Wenger praises returning Mesut Özil in Arsenal victory over Watford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/arsene-wenger-mesut-ozil-arsenal-win-watford-return>
It wasn’t just confidence that was noticeable, but clarity. Özil and Sánchez 
knew what they wanted to do on the pitch and how and when to do it. The same 
terms applied to Petr Cech, Koscielny and Cazorla. Wenger has only been able to 
select this experienced spine once since November, and that was the final day 
of last season against Aston Villa (a 4-0 win that secured second place in the 
league). Last season all five were injured at some point, with Özil sustaining 
four distinct injuries and Koscielny six.

That Arsenal look a different team with experience in the side is not a new 
observation, but it was proven once again on Saturday. The ability to execute a 
match plan and individual moments in the game was accompanied by good decisions 
made under high pressure. But it did not apply across the whole team. Others 
like Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, Theo Walcott and Jack Wilshere, each of whom have 
yet to carve out a distinct position for themselves atArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, mixed good moments of play with 
bad decisions elsewhere.

Watford can take solace from their second-half showing even though at the back 
of their minds, they will know the contest had by then been decided. They will 
also know that in the battle forPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> survival ahead, one of 
their own greatest assets will be that same experience. Of the 21 players 
Walter Mazzarri has used in just three league games so far this season, only 
one is under the age of 23. Eight, meanwhile, are over 30.

Even when the game was running away from them, Watford looked well drilled. 
They switched comfortably from a back three to a back four during the game and 
from a front two to a front three. “There’s a very good quality in the dressing 
room,” said Younès Kaboul, who joined from Sunderland this month, after the 
match. “We’re a physical side with great experience but I think the strength is 
the mentality of the squad. All the boys are [of a] very good mentality, we put 
a shift on the pitch. Today the first half was bad for us but second half we 
had the reaction and maybe had we scored one more, anything could have 
happened.”

Watford face West Ham and Manchester United after the international break 
before a run of fixtures that includes all three promoted sides. This will give 
a better sense of where their expectations lie this season. As for Arsenal, we 
all know the drill by now.
 