
Arsenal’s title challenge is set to be bolstered by the return of Mesut Özil 
andAlexis Sánchez <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> 
from injury this weekend as Arsène Wenger’s side seek to break down a 
psychological barrier by securing a first league win over Chelsea in almost 
five years.

Sell-ons, bench-warmers and fill-ins: the life of Premier League academy 
graduates | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/21/academy-graduates-arsenal-illusion-flawed-system>
Özil missed Sunday’s draw at Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/stoke-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 with a bruised toe but will start against the champions, with Wenger also 
hoping Sánchez can feature at some stage for the first time sincea hamstring 
injury suffered at Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/norwich-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 at the end of November. The Chilean will be monitored over the next few days, 
with Wenger anxious to avoid risking a relapse, but should play some part at 
the Emirates Stadium.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have been further 
heartened by Francis Coquelin’s return to full training a month early after a 
knee problem. “The good news is that Özil certainly will be available and, for 
Sánchez, the next two days will be decisive though, this time, I think he will 
make it for selection,” said Wenger.

“Francis Coquelin is also back in full training today, ahead of schedule, and 
Danny Welbeck will be in full training next week [having been absent since last 
April]. So those are positive news. Tomas Rosicky I think will play for the 
under-21s tomorrow night [against Swansea City]. A few players are coming back. 
We’re going into a very important period now, so to have people available is 
important for us.

“We have done extremely well during all this period when we had big players 
out but this is a good opportunity to have everybody back. We are in front of 
an important schedule and we want to do well in the FA Cup and the Champions 
League. The forwards give you goalscoring [potential] and, as well, I think 
sometimes in games, when you have 70 minutes gone and you have a strong bench, 
it gives you a big chance to win the game. That variety of problems you can 
give to the opponent is very important.”

Wenger suggested Sánchez may start Sunday’s fixture on the bench. “The doubt 
is about him having been out for a long time and the risk of a setback,” he 
said. “To be clear on all the tests is one thing. To be clear after training is 
another. But the intensity of a big game you can never replicate in training 
and you can make the risk minimal. I’m cautious with him because we cannot 
afford a setback, which would mean a very long period out. We don’t want to 
take this risk. But the signs he’s shown in training this week are positive.”

Arsenal, who are top of the table on goal difference from Leicester City, hope 
to make amends for their 2-0 defeat at Stamford Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/19/chelsea-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 by José Mourinho’s Chelsea in September. Wenger’s side, who are the only team 
to have beaten Leicester at the King Power Stadium in the league this season, 
have made their mark against Manchester City and Manchester United this season 
and are keen to wound the champions.

“It is another opportunity where we can show we have moved forward,” said 
Wenger. “It’s another game where people look at us and see how we behave. Even 
ifChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are not in the best 
position, look at their squad. It’s a big game because of the quality of the 
players on the pitch. They are not in this title race, no, but they are direct 
rivals because of the quality of their team. I think this season is exceptional 
circumstances for them – they will be back – but I still consider them direct 
rivals.”
 