
Arsène Wenger will include Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> and Aaron Ramsey in 
his party for Arsenal’s friendlies in Scandinavia against Viking FK and 
Manchester City as he looks to get them into shape for the Premier League 
opener at home to Liverpool on Sunday week.

The manager is not expected to include Jack Wilshere, who has what has been 
described as a minor knee injury. The midfielder sustained the problem during 
the club’s trip to the US and he was unable to play in the victory against 
Chivas on Sunday.

Premier League 2016-17 preview No1: Arsenal | David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/01/premier-league-2016-17-preview-arsenal>
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> travel to Norway on 
Thursday, where they face Viking on Friday before they move to Sweden for the 
game against City on Sunday. Wenger will not take Laurent Koscielny, Olivier 
Giroud or Mesut Özil on the mini-tour, after he granted them extra time off 
after Euro 2016. Koscielny and Giroud played in the final for France, which 
they lost to Portugal, while Özil featured in Germany’s semi-final defeat 
against France.

Ramsey and Sánchez returned to training at the beginning of this week. Ramsey 
reached the semi-final of the European Championship with Wales, although he was 
suspended for that game – the defeat against Portugal – and so his last 
involvement was in the quarter-final win against Belgium on 1 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/01/aaron-ramsey-belgium-wales-euro-2016>
.

Sánchez won the Copa América with Chile  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
for the second summer in succession and he featured in the final against 
Argentina on 27 June – a game in which he damaged an ankle.

Wenger continues to track the Lyon striker Alexandre Lacazette and the 
Valencia centre-half Shkodran Mustafi, as he seeks to finalise his squad. He 
has already seen a £29.5m offer for Lacazette turned down but it is understood 
that the French club would consider a sale if Arsenal came back with a higher 
bid. Mustafi is valued by Valencia at £25m.
 