
Arsenal accept that Alexis Sánchez has to be considered as a doubt for their 
Premier League fixture at Manchester United on Saturday week but it is 
currently impossible for them to make an exact diagnosis on themuscular injury 
that the Chile forward has suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-chile-calf-tear-injury-world-cup-qualifier>
 on international duty.

The London club’s medical staff have been in contact with their Chilean 
counterparts since Sánchez pulled up with the problem in training before his 
country’s World Cup qualifier away to Colombia on Thursday.

Jack Wilshere raring to go for England after rediscovering love for game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/jack-wilshere-england-arsenal-bounrmith-eddie-howe>
Chile’s football association has described the injury as a “low-grade muscle 
tear” and has said that Sánchez will not travel to Colombia. He will remain in 
Santiago for treatment and assessment, in the hope that he can be fit for 
Tuesday’s qualifying tie at home to Uruguay.

Arsenal are hopeful that, as Sánchez has not yet been ruled out of the Uruguay 
game, the injury cannot be too serious. On the other hand, it remains unclear 
as to whether the problem relates to the player’s calf or hamstring and there 
is frustration atArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> over 
the lack of clarity and their relative lack of power in the situation. Arsène 
Wenger will also be acutely aware of how Sánchez always pushes himself to play 
for Chile.

The game against Uruguay is scheduled to start at 8.30pm local time next 
Tuesday –Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> is three hours 
behind the United Kingdom – and Arsenal’s visit to Old Trafford is the 12.30pm 
kick-off on the Saturday. A direct flight from Santiago to London takes roughly 
15 hours.

Sánchez, who has established himself as Wenger’s No9 this season, scoring 
eight goals in all competitions,suffered a hamstring injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/norwich-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 in November of last year that ruled him out for two months. Wenger always says 
that the minimum period of absence for a hamstring is three weeks.
 