
Less than a month after the election, collectors, gallerists, critics and art 
tourists assembled inMiami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/miami> for Art 
Basel’s circus-like rotation of champagne-fuelled parties, raucous DJ sets, 
exclusive dinners on chartered yachts, and, of course, a dizzying array of 
gallery booths. While artworks charged with political urgency permeate the 
fair, the general mood of hotel party-hoppers and well-heeled PR agents is 
disconnected from that of the current socio-political climate and is, instead, 
marked by complacency.

Stars and stripes? Whatever: six times artists subverted the American flag
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/02/artists-american-flag-jasper-johns-dread-scott>
Under the Trump administration, the rich will continue to get richer and 
deregulated markets like the global art market will likely blossom and balloon 
to unprecedented levels. It is precisely the blue-chip segment of the art world 
that will benefit from an increase in tax cuts, with bloated accounts and 
sky-high auction rates. As is the case with other industries, the already 
trenchant economic stratification between emerging artists and personnel (ie 
art handlers, custodians and studio assistants) and top-tier gallerists and 
collectors will widen. Asreported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/04/art-basel-miami-beach-has-inequality-invaded-the-art-world>
 last year, “even as art benefits from general income inequality, the art world 
itself is an unequal place. This is not a rising-tide-lifts-all-boats 
situation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23f8074810a689d486c3f1dc0c38ce3c97d5d36%2F0_240_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump's%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump%27s%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23f8074810a689d486c3f1dc0c38ce3c97d5d36%2F0_240_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 A view of Art Basel in Miami Beach 2016. Photograph: PR 
At the Miami Beach convention center, well-tanned Miamians in wacky prints, 
execs in crisp suits and leather loafers, and groomed Ivanka Trump-types become 
impatient as the VIP check-in line grows long. Inside, fair-goers contend with 
frigid, air conditioned winds and stall in front of bold works such as Sam 
Durant’s glowing orange End White Supremacy piece (2008), on view at Blum & 
Poe’s booth, and Rubin Ortiz Torres’ strikingBlack Star Spangled Banner 
<https://www.artbasel.com/catalog/artwork/45440?> (2013), on view at OMR. Amid 
a rising tide of neo-nazism and white nationalism (what many outlets have 
downplayed as the “alt-right”) in the US, these pieces feel especially salient. 
(Both works would have been similarly relevant in prior Basel years, as in 2014 
when a swell of Black Lives Matter protests erupted in Miami and across the 
country, after thepolice officer who killed Eric Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/03/eric-garner-grand-jury-declines-indict-nypd-chokehold-death>
 was not indicted.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af26a2f24309b02c30305c25ee82f7be1cd58d1%2F0_0_2362_2010%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump's%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump%27s%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af26a2f24309b02c30305c25ee82f7be1cd58d1%2F0_0_2362_2010%2F2362.jpg>
 Black Lives Matter Always by Barthélémy Toguo. Photograph: Courtesy of Galerie 
Lelong 
Ten red and orange watercolor portraits of young black men killed by police 
officers form a backdrop for two wooden gun toys that are suspended by metal 
chains in Barthélémy Toguo’sBlack Lives Matter Always 
<https://www.artbasel.com/catalog/artwork/45665?i=0> (2015), installed at 
Galerie Lelong. At the bottom of each lyrical, emotionally charged rendering, 
the subjects’ names are scrawled in cursive: Tamir Rice, Oscar Grant and 
Michael Brown. (At Miami Art Basel in 2014, the Cameroonian artist’s 
installation The New World Climax addressed the global refugee crisis by 
highlighting words like “migrant” and “illegal”.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdcc1064eb1f7cf44a6c0150dfc6276e895af6e7%2F0_0_4398_3456%2F4398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump's%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Basel%20Miami%3A%20how%20the%20art%20fair%20landscape%20reflects%20Trump%27s%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fart-basel-miami-donald-trump-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdcc1064eb1f7cf44a6c0150dfc6276e895af6e7%2F0_0_4398_3456%2F4398.jpg>
 Untitled 2016 by Rirkrit Tiravanija. Photograph: Rhona Wise/AFP/Getty Images 
At Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, Rirkrit Tiravanija’s The Tyranny of Common Sense 
Has Reached Its Final Stage speaks directly to this period of uncertainty and 
political turmoil. Tiravanija gathered pages from the New York Times the day 
after the election and added all-caps, brightly colored text to obfuscate the 
fatalistic headlines (for instance: “Trump Triumphs”). The work satisfyingly 
captures the frenzy of news consumption during this election cycle with 
apocalyptic, on-the-nose timeliness.

Sandwiched between the booths there are plenty of diversions – promotional 
cocktail carts and illy coffee stations primed for cross-continental friends to 
catch up on industry gossip. The hosts at a series of events are, as usual, 
befuddling in combination: celebrities paired with luxury watch brands paired 
with DJs and lesser-known celebrities. (While some performance artists are 
present, artists are notoriously absent from many of the fairs.)

On Friday night, Madonna hosted a benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/02/madonna-art-collection-benefit-raising-malawi>
 for her charityRaising Malawi <http://www.raisingmalawi.org/#home> at the 
newly opened Faena Forum in Miami Beach. Tickets sold for $5,000 at the lowest 
and $150,000 at the highest rung, the “philanthropist package”. Celebrity 
guests included Sean Penn, Chris Rock, and Ariana Grande; artworks by the 
big-name contemporary artists Ai Weiwei, Richard Prince, Cindy Sherman,Julian 
Schnabel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-schnabel>, Marilyn Minter 
and Damien Hirst were auctioned as part of the benefit.

Madonna raises $7.5m for Malawi and criticises Trump at Miami show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/03/madonna-malawi-miami-donald-trump-native-americans>
Meanwhile, across the country in Oakland, California, dozens of people were 
killed in a fire at the “Ghost Ship” warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/oakland-ghost-ship-warehouse-fire-deaths-24>
. Trump announced another troubling appointment –Ben Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nomination-trump-administration>
, the retired neurosurgeon with zero experience working in government – to 
oversee the Department of Housing and Urban Development. But as the fair 
closed, one glimmering bit of news shone through: the Army Corps of Engineers 
had moved to block construction of theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
, which would destroy the Standing Rock Sioux tribe’s sacred burial grounds and 
threaten its only water supply. While this was a major win for the water 
protectors, a legal representative for the tribe pointed out that the decision 
could be appealed under the new administration.

As the art world landscape trembles and even quakes with political art, one 
looks to activist groups such asOccupy Museums <http://www.occupymuseums.org/> 
for direction. The social justice group that grew out of Occupy Wall Street 
aims to hold large arts institutions responsible for their investments, and 
announced that the Miami Art Fairs were “Trump’s inaugural pre-party”. The 
group targeted the fair’s lead sponsor, UBS, with a spoof of its promotional 
materials with the title UBS Debt Collection: To the 1% Its Freedom. As the 
fair closes and pop-up tents for the satellite fairs are taken down, we must 
remain vigilant as to how political art is understood and consumed.
 