 August Wilson, who has died of inoperable liver cancer in Seattle at the age 
of 60, was a playwright, poet and essayist, and one of only seven American 
dramatists ever to win two Pulitzer prizes. In 1988, he had two plays, Fences 
(with James Earl Jones) and Joe Turner's Come and Gone, running simultaneously 
on Broadway. This was an achievement not matched by any other African-American.
Wilson leaves behind an oeuvre that is epic in scope and achievement, 
emotionally complex and full of lyricism and humour. He made good his early 
ambition to "tell a history that has never been told" and to reclaim some of 
the many untold black narratives that have universal resonance. That his name 
is mentioned in the company of theatrical giants such as Eugene O'Neill and 
Arthur Miller is no overblown tribute.

As the actor and director Burt Caesar says: "There are two astonishing lacunae 
in mainstream Americam drama: the story of race and the presence of black 
people. Wilson's poetic plays are a late 20th-century corrective to all that. 
His success is evident by the visceral impact they have on audiences. His work 
a true benchmark."

For his lauded, 10-play Pittsburgh Cycle, Wilson won a Tony award and seven 
New York Drama Critics Circle awards, as well as an Emmy nomination. His play 
Jitney won an Olivier award in London in 2001. His many accolades included 
Rockefeller and Guggenheim fellowships, honorary doctorates, a Nat- ional 
Humanities Medal and the 2003 Heinz Award in Arts and Humanities. He was a 
member of both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American 
Academy of Arts and Letters.

Yet his poor beginnings hardly presaged this brilliant career. He was the 
fourth of six children - and the eldest son - born in the Hill district, a 
racially mixed area of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to Frederick August Kittel, a 
German-American baker, and an African-American cleaning woman, Daisy Wilson, 
whose mother had walked from North Carolina in search of greater opportunities. 
His biological, white father was a shadowy, little-present figure in his 
childhood, and, following his parents' divorce, his mother remarried David 
Bedford. It was this man, Wilson's African-American stepfather, who effectively 
raised him and moved the family to a predominantly white suburb.

Growing up in comparative poverty, Wilson was conscious of his elders having 
endured even greater hardships: "My generation of blacks knew very little about 
the past of their parents ... They shielded us from the indignities they 
suffered."

His experience of racism led him to drop out of high school - he had attended 
three - at the age of 16. He continued the process of self-education, his 
mother having taught him to read at the age of four; at the heart of that 
process was the local Hill district branch of the Carnegie public library. 
Unable to find satisfactory employment as a teenager, he joined the US army in 
1963; discharging himself after a year, he took the momentous decision to 
become a writer.

Something of a landmark year for Wilson came in 1965; he bought his first 
typewriter, co-founded the Center Avenue Poets Theatre Workshop, and listened 
for the first time to the music that was to inspire his creativity as a 
cultural nationalist. He recalled (in the preface to Three Plays, 1991) "a 
typewritten, yellow-labelled record titled Nobody in Town can Bake a Sweet 
Jellyroll like Mine by someone named Bessie Smith. It was the beginning of my 
consciousness that I was a representative of a culture and the carrier of some 
very valuable antecedents."

Wilson began writing poetry and short stories, some appearing in small black 
journals, and was active in the Black Power movement of the late 1960s. His 
first publication, For Malcolm X and Others, appeared in the Negro Digest in 
1969. That same year, Wilson married Brenda Burton, with whom he had a 
daughter, Sakina Ansari. The marriage ended in 1972.

His interest in theatre as a literary outlet - and a way of raising 
consciousness - was fuelled by seeing a production of Athol Fugard's Sizwe 
Bansi is Dead in 1976. In 1978, he moved to St Paul, Minnesota, where he wrote 
his play, Jitney (first produced in Pittsburgh in 1982). The year after his 
second marriage, in 1981 to Judy Oliver, he wrote Ma Rainey's Black Bottom.

This marked the first of Wilson's many collaborative productions with Lloyd 
Richards, dean of the Yale University drama school. Richards was himself part 
of black theatre history. When he directed Lorraine Hansberry's A Raisin in the 
Sun (1959), he was the first black director on Broadway, directing the first 
play by a black woman on Broadway. Located in Chicago, in 1927, Ma Rainey's 
Black Bottom was the only one of Wilson's plays not set in the Hill district of 
Pittsburgh. Drawing for its theme on the exploitation of black musicians by 
white record companies, the play launched his theatrical career, opening on 
Broadway in 1984 to critical acclaim.

During the following two decades - with success following success - Wilson 
claimed an unassailable position within the pantheon of American theatrical 
talent. His Pittsburgh Cycle explores and brilliantly illuminates different 
aspects of 20th-century black American life that might otherwise have received 
scant attention. Each, although not written chronologically, is set in a 
different decade - Gem of the Ocean (2003), set in 1904; Joe Turner's Come and 
Gone (1986), in 1911; Ma Rainey's Black Bottom (1984), in 1927; The Piano 
Lesson (1987), in 1936; Seven Guitars (1995), in 1948; Fences (1990), in 1957; 
Two Trains Running (1990), in 1969; Jitney (1982), set in 1977; King Hedley II 
(1999), in 1985; Radio Golf (2005), in 1997.

Though he moved in 1994 to Seattle, creatively Wilson never left his 
birthplace in Pittsburgh, where he indelibly witnessed the black oral tradition 
passed on from generation to generation. His voice was emotionally complex and 
unfailingly powerful, making use of telling humour and surprising lyricism, 
while steeped in the gritty specifics of ordinary black lives.

As he said in the New York Times in 2000: "I wanted to place this culture 
onstage in all its richness and fullness, and to demonstrate its ability to 
sustain us in all areas of human life and endeavour, and through profound 
moments of our history in which the larger society has thought less of us than 
we have thought of ourselves."

He is survived by his third wife, Constanza Romero, their eight-year-old 
daughter Azula Carmen Wilson and his daughter from his first marriage.

Â· August Wilson, playwright born April 27 1945; died October 2 2005
 