
A few years ago there was a woman in my life – let’s call her Tanya – and we 
had hooked up one night in LA. We’d both attended a birthday party, and when 
things were winding down, she offered to drop me off at home. We had been 
chatting and flirting a little the whole night, so I asked her to come in for a 
drink. Eventually we started making out, and it was pretty awesome. I remember 
drunkenly saying something really dumb when she was leaving, like, “Tanya, 
you’re a very charming lady ...” She said, “Aziz, you’re a pretty charming guy 
too.” The encounter seemed promising, as everyone in the room had agreed we 
were both charming people.

I wanted to see Tanya again and was faced with a conundrum: how and when do I 
communicate next? Do I call? Do I text? Do I send a Facebook message? Do I send 
up a smoke signal? How does one do that? Will I set my rented house on fire?

Eventually I decided to text her, because she seemed to be a heavy texter. I 
waited a few days, so as not to seem overeager. I found out that the band Beach 
House, which we listened to the night we made out, was playing that week in LA, 
so it seemed the perfect move.

Here was my text: “Hey – don’t know if you left for NYC, but Beach House 
playing tonight and tomorrow at Wiltern. You wanna go? Maybe they’ll let you 
cover The Motto if we ask nicely?”

A nice, firm ask with a little inside joke thrown in. (Tanya was singing the 
Drake song The Motto at the party and, impressively, knew almost all the 
lyrics.)

I was pretty confident. I wasn’t head-over-heels in love with Tanya, but she 
seemed really cool and it felt as if we had a good connection.

A few minutes went by and the status of the text message changed to “read”.

My heart stopped.

This was the moment of truth.

I braced myself and watched as those little iPhone dots popped up. The ones 
that tantalisingly tell you someone is typing a response, the phone equivalent 
of the slow trip up to the top of a roller coaster. But then, in a few seconds 
– they vanished.

And there was no response from Tanya. A few more minutes go by and … nothing.

Aziz Ansari: ‘I’ve always been a feminist. There wasn’t a period when I was 
against women and then started dating one’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/07/aziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women>
No problem, she’s probably just crafting her perfectly witty response. She 
started a draft, didn’t feel good about it, and wanted to get back to it later. 
I get it. She also probably didn’t want to seem overeager and be writing back 
so fast, right?

Fifteen minutes go by … nothing.

My confidence starts going down and shifting into doubt.

An hour goes by … nothing.

Two hours go by … nothing.

Three hours go by … nothing.

OK, maybe she’s busy with work. No big deal. I’m sure she’ll get back to me as 
soon as she can. We had a connection, right?

A fucking day goes by.

A full day!

Now my thoughts get crazier: what has happened?! Did Tanya’s phone fall into a 
river/trash compactor/volcano? DidTanya fall into a river/trash 
compactor/volcano?? Oh no, Tanya has died, and I’m selfishly worried about our 
date. I’m a bad person.

I shared my dilemma with a friend.

“Aww, come on, man, it’s fine. She’ll get back to you. She’s probably just 
busy,” he said optimistically.

Later I check Instagram, and this clown Tanya is posting a photo of some deer. 
Too busy to write me back, but she has time to post a photo of some deer she 
saw on a hike?

I’m distraught, but then I have a moment of clarity that every idiot has in 
this situation.

Maybe she didn’t get the text!

I kept debating whether I should send another message, but I felt it would 
just be too desperate and eventually accepted that she wasn’t interested.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433772553839%2Fe445e7ef-9b84-457c-997c-c3966cc0c7a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aziz%20Ansari%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20dating%20by%20text%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20shud%20hang%20out%20sumtimez%E2%80%99%20is%20a%20bad%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aziz%20Ansari%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20dating%20by%20text%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20shud%20hang%20out%20sumtimez%E2%80%99%20is%20a%20bad%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433772553839%2Fe445e7ef-9b84-457c-997c-c3966cc0c7a0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 I didn’t end up going to the concert. Instead I went to a comedy club and 
started talking about the awful frustration and self-doubt. Photograph: Mat 
Hayward/Getty Images 
I didn’t end up going to the concert. Instead I went to a comedy club and 
started talking about the awful frustration, self-doubt and rage that this 
whole “silence” nonsense had provoked in the depths of my being. I got laughs 
but also something bigger, as though the audience and I were connecting on a 
deeper level. I could tell that every guy and girl in the audience had had 
their own Tanya in their phone at one point or another.

Asking someone out on a date is a simple task that frequently becomes a 
terrifying conundrum of fear, self-doubt and anxiety. It means declaring your 
attraction to someone and putting yourself out there in a huge way, while 
risking the brutal possibility of rejection – or, in the modern era – an 
unexplained, icy-cold silence.

Just a generation ago, the landline or even a newspaper classified ad would 
have been a first stop to finding romance. Today, we look at our screens almost 
immediately. In a 2013Match.com <http://Match.com> survey researchers asked 
Americans: “If you were asking someone out on a first date, which method of 
communication would you be most likely to use to get in contact?” For 32% of 
people aged under 30, the answer was text message, and, over time, that will 
increasingly be true for all of us. The phone call is quickly being phased out. 
Men, it’s worth noting, are still overwhelmingly the ones expected to initiate 
the first ask. In 2012 only 12% of American women had asked anyone out in the 
previous year. So when discussing the pitfalls of relying on a text message to 
build romantic interest, I use the situation of a guy asking a girl out. The 
issues discussed generally translate both ways (minus the issue of girls hating 
dudes initiating with penis photos).

Modern Romance by Aziz Ansari review – for everyone whose date never texted 
back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/04/modern-romance-aziz-ansari-review>
The modern bozo

One firm takeaway from all our interviews with women is that most dudes out 
there are straight-up bozos. These were intelligent, attractive, amazing women 
and they all deserved better. Some people say that it doesn’t matter what you 
text someone. If they like you, they like you. After interviewing hundreds of 
singles, I can scientifically confirm that this is total bullshit.

A website called Straight White Boys Texting 
<http://straightwhiteboystexting.tumblr.com/> has become a hub for women to 
submit the horrifying (and often hilarious) texts that guys have sent them. As 
described on the site, the blog came about due to the phenomenon in which a guy 
texts an inept sexual advance like, “Hey what’s your bra size ;)” or “what 
would you do if you were here haha lol ;)” apropos of nothing, in order to try 
to hook up with someone.

This was known as a “straight white boy text,” hence the name of the blog, 
but, to be clear, the site is inclusive of douchey dudes of all races, 
ethnicities and sexual orientations.

Here are two favourites of mine:

– Afternoon sex?;)

This gentleman wastes no time. What’s interesting to me, though, is would this 
guy ever act this way in real life? Doubtful that he’d just go up to a woman 
and say, “Afternoon sex?” and wink at her – unless he was some kind of R&B 
superstar, in which case he’d be doing it all the time and it would possibly be 
quite successful.

Here’s another:

- I like your tits

- You literally can’t even see them in any of my pictures I don’t understand

- Im assuming that they are nice

Again, I have to assume if this guy met this woman at a bar, his introduction 
would be something better than “I like your tits.”

The bad texts

The mistakes people make are not always so egregious. Let’s look at the things 
that irritated people the most.

1 The generic ‘hey’ text Want to know what’s filling up the phones of nearly 
every single woman? It’s this: “Hey,” “Hey!” Heyyy!!” “Hey what’s going?” 
“Wsup,” “Wsup!” “What’s going on?” “Whatcha up to?” It seems like a harmless 
message to send, and I’ve sent a good number of them in my own dating life. 
However, seeing it from the other side is eye-opening. When your phone is 
filled with that stuff, generic messages come off as super dull and lazy. They 
make the recipient feel like she’s not very special or important to you.

2 Endless back and forth So many people trying to make a connection wind up 
spending so much time typing and typing and trying to schedule things that, 
eventually, whatever spark may have been there diminishes. They go from 
enjoying the banter to trying to schedule something concrete, and all of a 
sudden they’re acting like secretaries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433772456699%2Fa30185d7-bbeb-4ac0-866f-fe8473c1c230-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aziz%20Ansari%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20dating%20by%20text%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20shud%20hang%20out%20sumtimez%E2%80%99%20is%20a%20bad%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aziz%20Ansari%E2%80%99s%20guide%20to%20dating%20by%20text%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20shud%20hang%20out%20sumtimez%E2%80%99%20is%20a%20bad%20start&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Faziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F8%2F1433772456699%2Fa30185d7-bbeb-4ac0-866f-fe8473c1c230-1360x2040.jpeg>
 ‘There are some non-bozos out there’ Photograph: Reed Young for the Guardian 
Another form, which is especially common among the younger gentlemen out 
there, emerges when a dude is just too shy to actually ask the other person to 
do something. Instead of Even when not negotiating times and places, people can 
exchange meaningless texts ad nauseam. I can’t tell you how many girls I met 
who were clearly interested in a guy who, instead of asking them out, just kept 
sucking them into more mundane banter with gems like, “So where do you do your 
laundry?” What follows are 10 back-and-forths about laundry detergent. (“Yeah, 
I recently switched to fragrance-free detergent. It’s beenfantastic.”)

3 Grammar/spelling Let’s say you are a handsome, charming stud who really made 
a great first impression. If your first text is “Hey we shud hang out 
sumtimez”, you may just destroy any goodwill you have built up.

The good texts

Not all guys are bozos. We also found some really great texts that gave me 
hope for the modern man. While a phone call may be great, the advantage of 
texting is that it can allow a guy or girl to craft a great, thoughtful message 
that can build attraction. We were also able to spot three specific traits 
these successful texts shared:

1 A firm invitation to something specific at a specific time There is a 
monumental difference in the fortunes of the guy who texts a girl, “Hey wuts 
goin on?” versus “Hey Katie, it was great meeting you on Saturday. If you’re 
around next week, I would love to take you to dinner at that restaurant we were 
talking about. Let me know if you’re free.” These two guys could have the same 
intentions and feelings in their hearts, but the girl they’re texting will 
never know that.

2 Some callback to the last in-person interaction This proves you were truly 
engaged when you last hung out and seemed to go a long way with women. Take 
this story: “One time, I met a guy at a party. When I got home, he texted me, 
‘Good night little Audrey.’ That’s not my name. I figured he was just too drunk 
to remember. After I confronted him about this, he said that he called me 
Audrey because I told him that I looked up to Audrey Hepburn. It was actually 
pretty sweet.”

I hope you aren’t holding an ice cream cone against your chest, because your 
heart just warmed – and your ice cream just melted.

3 A humorous tone This is dangerous territory because some dudes go too far or 
make a crude joke that doesn’t sit well, but ideally you both share the same 
sense of humour and you can put some thought into it and pull it off. Here’s 
another story from our research: “I met her at a bar in town, 2–3am after 
getting her number I drunkenly text her, ‘I’m that tall guy you made out with.’ 
In the morning I woke up to a message that said, ‘Which tall guy?’ I was 
incredibly impressed with her sense of humour and we’re still together 
two-and-a-half years later.”


What happened with Tanya, though?

The thing to remember with this nonsense is, despite all your second-guessing 
about the content or timing of your message, sometimes it’s just not your fault 
and other factors are at play.

A few months after the Tanya situation, I ran into her again. We had a lot of 
fun together and she eventually told me that she was sorry she didn’t get back 
to me that time. Apparently at the time she was questioning her entire sexual 
identity and was trying to figure out if she was a lesbian.

Well, that was definitely not a theory that crossed my mind.

We ended up hooking up that night, and this time she said there would be no 
games. I texted her a few days later to follow up on this plan. Her response: 
silence. (To be clear, Tanya and I are still friends and she’s a very nice 
person.)

• Extracted from Modern Romance by Aziz Ansari with Eric Klinenberg. To order 
a copy for £13.59 (RRP £16.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com> or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, 
online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 