
Aziz Ansari constantly chased love as wannabe ladykiller Tom Haverford in 
Parks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation>, and 
contemplates the strangeness of online dating throughout his standup comedy. 
Now he’s using another medium to investigate our contemporary love lives in new 
book Modern Romance, to be published on 16 June.

He has partnered with sociologist Eric Klinenberg, a professor and author at 
New York University, to create a rigorous and data-led examination of how we 
date. The pair conducted hundreds of interviews with people from Japan to the 
American midwest to gauge how love, sex and relationships have changed with the 
advent of networked technology.

Aziz Ansari: 'It’s time to get serious'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/14/aziz-ansari-parks-and-recreation>
They even set up a research forum on Reddit, Modern Romantics 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/modernromantics/>, which asked questions like “Has 
anyone tried an ‘open relationship’? What were the rules? How did it go? Would 
you do it again?” and “Has anyone hired a consultant to help you put together 
an online dating profile or worked with a dating coach? How’d that go?”

Ansari has frequently mused on this material in successful tours filmed for 
Netflix specials like Dangerously Delicious and the forthcoming Aziz Ansari: 
Live at Madison Square Garden. In his Buried Alive set, he considered the 
difficulties of lasting romantic love, while his latest tour had a skit about 
the commitment phobia triggered by mobile phones.

He has used research methods before, telling AV Club in 2013 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/aziz-ansari-gets-candid-about-love-elusive-and-sad-92476>
: “I have no experience online dating, so I learned about it from interviewing 
audience members via crowd work. I learned about things like Grindr, and heard 
about a guy who met his wife by typing ‘Jewish’ and his zip code into 
Match.com. Both those things turned into bits.”

Klinenberg, meanwhile, is similarly steeped in the study of modern 
relationships. His book Going Solo: The Extraordinary Rise and Surprising 
Appeal of Living Alone, published last year, examined how solo living has 
become so prevalent in recent years that there are now more people living alone 
in the US than nuclear families living together.
 