
You can count on two hands the number of comedians who have sold out Madison 
Square Garden. Eddie Murphy is one. George Carlin is another. Last October, 
Aziz Ansari did it twice in a single night, performing his fourth standup 
special in four years to 40,000 people. Five years ago, Ansari was the 
hipster’s comedian-in-chief; his material skewered pop culture and was builton 
anecdotes about celebrity parties and the daily absurdities of his own life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqB2X7-j9KQ>. Now, Ansari has emerged as one 
of the most original voices on the circuit, a social chronicler of his age 
talking about immigration, factory-farming and relationships. He has crossed 
into the mainstream with his credibility intact.

Aziz Ansari’s guide to dating by text: ‘We shud hang out sumtimez’ is a bad 
start
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/08/aziz-ansari-modern-dating-extract-guide>
To TV audiences, he is probably best-known for playing scene-stealing, 
smooth-talking, woman-repellent government workerTom Haverford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/06/parks-and-recreation-meet-characters>
 in Parks and Recreation – a part written for him. (Sample line: “Yes, I’m 
married. But my wife understands that a good politician has to be appealing to 
the ladies. The fact that I haven’t even gotten close to cheating on her is a 
disappointment to us both.”) The show, created in 2009 by the team behind the 
US remake of The Office, was a critical hit in the States until it wrapped 
after six years last February; in time-honoured British broadcasting tradition, 
it was farted out haphazardly at odd times and random days for three seasons 
before coming off air.

But it’s in his standup specials that he has picked up most of his fans: by 
and large, left-leaning city-living millennials whose lives and neuroses are 
refracted by this second-generation Tamil Indian American who grew up in a town 
of 8,000 people in South Carolina. (“I’m always psyched when I see older people 
in the audience,” he says. “If I see people that look like us, young people of 
every race and ethnicity, that doesn’t surprise me.”)

Now, he’s written a book for those fans. Unlike the sortabiographies of his 
peers, or the cash-in Christmas toilet books so big with British comedians, 
Ansari has gone academic: having talked about the dating game at length in his 
standup, he scored a $3.5m book deal in 2012 and, over the course of 18 months, 
interviewed thousands of people from all over the US while he toured his shows. 
Still curious to find out how love and sexuality operate across cultures, he 
workshopped the book’s themes with focus groups in Tokyo, Paris, South America 
and the UAE. The result, Modern Romance, written with sociologist Eric 
Klinenberg, is published in the UK next week by Allen Lane.

We meet today in the courtyard of Robert De Niro’s New York hotel. “I had to 
go to a friend’s wedding, I just got back today,” he says. “After this I’m 
gonna go see Mad Max, so this is a little hour of work and then I’ll see a 
movie and have a rest.” It’s small talk deployed as a subtle power move; a 
sneaky way to set the tone for brisk efficiency.

Modern Romance by Aziz Ansari review – for everyone whose date never texted 
back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/04/modern-romance-aziz-ansari-review>
Ansari’s energy onstage is huge: boggle-eyed and fast-talking, every joke and 
routine is rattled out in a buzzy Southern twang that has a nasal cadence 
elasticated and amplified by several notches when he’s performing. Real-life 
Aziz is far more quiet and closed off. Dressed preppy-casual style in a navy 
blazer, striped polo and khakis, he cups his ear and leans forward when I 
speak, then often sits back and offers polite, but clipped responses. 
Occasionally, he clucks: a teeth-kissing Ansari-ism that he uses, I think, when 
he’s humouring a question he’s already bored by. Take this, on his formative 
years, as a way to explain how he graduated from NYU in 2004 and landed his 
first lauded show –Human Giant <https://www.youtube.com/user/HGiantVid> – on 
MTV, within a year: “There was no theatre department, nothing to foster that 
interest in my town.” He wasn’t ambitious. “I didn’t know what I wanted to be 
but I remember a specific moment, as a kid, thinking: ‘Every adult has a job. 
What am I going to be?’ And nothing appealed.” He says he enjoyed public 
speaking – “I don’t know, I enjoyed making people laugh. Which is a bozo 
answer” – and was curious and clever in school. “People think I’m reserved but 
I would hate to interview someone like that where the person is AHAHAHA, all 
the time,” he says. “It would be insufferable.”

Ansari’s prolific career is probably best viewed in two halves, with the first 
two recorded sets (2010’s Sensual Moments for an Intimate Evening and 2012’s 
Dangerously Delicious) all about the goofy sketch comedian, brash and wide-eyed 
about hanging out with Kanye and Jay Z, meeting women in bars or his fat little 
cousin Harris. The latter two – 2013’s Buried Alive and this year’s Live at 
Madison Square Garden – are more thoughtful, built around themes rather than 
scattergun comedy bits. Now he does topical riffs on the way humans deal with 
one another, how technology enabled Ansari’s generation “to be the rudest, 
flakiest people ever” and how it changed sex and relationships more 
dramatically and quickly than any time before it.

“Does every generation look at the younger one and think, ‘They’re just 
idiots’?” he asks, rhetorically. “Is there a real shift, or is it a case of 
people looking back at it? I would say I was a nice guy 10 years ago but I am 
definitely a much more evolved person just from growing older.”

Aziz Ansari review – a smooth night of cool comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/01/aziz-ansari-review-hammersmith-apollo-london>
Ansari confronts America’s racism, politics, fear of feminism and gay rights 
more now than he did at the start of his career. Earlier this year he joked on 
Letterma <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r_a7PdGAOCg>n about the US needing “a 
brown Al Sharpton” in a time whenRupert Murdoch can hatefully tweet about 
Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rupert-murdoch-muslims-must-be-held-responsible-for-france-terror-attacks>
 and the “growing jihadist cancer” they’re all responsible for. Ansari, who 
isn’t remotely religious (“I grew up in South Carolina, there was never a 
religious community so it was never a big thing for me”),tweeted back at 
Murdoch: 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rossalynwarren/murdoch-probably-doesnt-even-know-who-ginuwine-is#.uozVrpQxX>
 “Rups, can we get a step-by-step guide? How can my 60-year-old parents in NC 
help destroy terrorist groups? Plz advise.” He kept going until the press 
coverage piled up and Murdoch apologised.

“It was fascinating to me that no one had said anything apart from JK Rowling. 
I was, like, ‘What? Why?’ If you were going against [Murdoch] you clearly had 
ample ground because he clearly said an awful racist thing.”

Would his edge become neutered if his celebrity got much bigger? “I don’t have 
any fear of being whitewashed because to get really exciting stuff, you usually 
have to write it yourself,” he says. “The stuff other people get excited about 
probably gets given to Bradley Cooper and Jennifer Lawrence. A lot of people 
would have had to say no, before they got to Aziz on that list.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433518021367%2Fe51c8f5c-bbb3-442d-bf7f-6481bb4deb50-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aziz%20Ansari%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20always%20been%20a%20feminist.%20There%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20a%20period%20when%20I%20was%20against%20women%20and%20then%20started%20dating%20one%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aziz%20Ansari%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20always%20been%20a%20feminist.%20There%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20a%20period%20when%20I%20was%20against%20women%20and%20then%20started%20dating%20one%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433518021367%2Fe51c8f5c-bbb3-442d-bf7f-6481bb4deb50-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ansari on stage in 2014. Photograph: Chris McKay/Getty Images 
Plus, he says, of all the things he’s talked about in public, discussing 
feminism, again on Letterman last year 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sz7ZzQbSiGA 
https://www.youtube.com/user/AzizAnsari>, got him the most overwhelmingly 
positive response. “Some people wrote: ‘Er, Aziz’s girlfriend turned him into a 
feminist,’ and that’s not true, I’ve been a feminist my whole life. There 
wasn’t a period where I was really against women and then started dating one 
and was like, ‘You know what? Men and women are equal.’ That definitely didn’t 
happen.” What prompted him to talk about it? “It’s interesting, you see 
interviews with female celebrities and they’re very scared of that word. It’s 
such an easy concept to get behind and a big part of it is that people don’t 
really know what it’s essentially promoting.”

Aziz Ansari: 'It’s time to get serious'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/14/aziz-ansari-parks-and-recreation>
Ansari’s blog – azizisbored.tumblr.com – and his friends confirm that he is 
endlessly restless but intensely interested in people, food and bands. 
“Spending time with Aziz doesn’t feel like spending time with the guy the world 
sees,” Parks co-star Adam Scott tells me. “He’s a truly humble, smart, nice 
person. It’s weird. I watched his latest special and remembered, ‘Oh yeah, holy 
shit, Aziz is a superstar.’ If I could fill Madison Square Garden, I’d at least 
be kind of a dick.”

Ansari has an ongoing preoccupation with “douchebag bro culture”, and the 
jocks he says got “an unfair advantage” when he was growing up because texting 
and social media didn’t exist to show potential girlfriends how witty and smart 
you could be. Having come out of a relationship in his mid-20s into a 
heightened set of new dating rules about when to text, what to say, where to 
hook up and what any of it means, Ansari, now 32, became a touch obsessed with 
the paradox of choice; where decisions – from which person to be with to what 
toothbrush to buy – are arrested by the tyranny of endless options.

“When do you know that you’ve found the right person and should stop looking? 
Online dating is a clear example. The good is, like, you can meet anyone in the 
world. You can meet all these different people, you can find anyone, you have 
this huge resource. But the bad is, how the hell do you sort through all of 
that? And how do you know when you’re done? New people are always going to have 
an attraction to them because they’re new, and we’re so attracted to novelty. 
But at a certain point, being attracted to new and variety is a dangerous thing 
to go on.”

He describes Modern Romance as a sort of pop-sociological study of digital 
culture; examining the way everything from the baffling algorithms of Match.com 
to the swipe-as-you-like tech of Tinder has warped the way conventional romance 
plays out. It’s both insightful and cringe-making – built to resonate with 
anyone ever left wondering why their Tanya (“everyone has a Tanya”) never 
texted back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433518073839%2Fa057ff7a-ddf9-438c-ba14-9c8b78f1332b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aziz%20Ansari%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20always%20been%20a%20feminist.%20There%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20a%20period%20when%20I%20was%20against%20women%20and%20then%20started%20dating%20one%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aziz%20Ansari%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20always%20been%20a%20feminist.%20There%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20a%20period%20when%20I%20was%20against%20women%20and%20then%20started%20dating%20one%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Faziz-ansari-comedy-politics-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F5%2F1433518073839%2Fa057ff7a-ddf9-438c-ba14-9c8b78f1332b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ansari (far left) in Parks & Recreation. Photograph: Rex Features 
He talks about interviews in the book conducted with women in retirement 
homes. “One study of women in 1967 [revealed] 76% of women said they would 
marry someone they were not romantically in love with. And that, like, blew me 
away. Women wanted to escape their parents’ homes and gain freedom – bygetting 
married.”

Ansari’s fear of commitment, settling down and babies was the basis of at 
least two of his shows, one of them titled Buried Alive. “I’m not 
super-enlightened. I’ve talked to a lot of people and I have a lot of 
experiences to draw from, but like any other relationship, it’s tough, man – 
it’s work. My relationship is about two years in now and it’s, like, you have 
to deal with difficult logistical issues to maintain it. Like, I’m doing this 
[Netflix] show in New York right now and she moved [from New York] to LA to be 
with me and now I’m here.”

The as-yet-untitled Netflix project due later in the year, written, directed 
and starring Aziz (and his brother Aniz, and his doctor dad), is being made 
with his friend Alan Yang and produced by Parks and Recreation creator Mike 
Schur, who calls it “comedy investigative journalism”. But Ansari has also had 
a number of talked-about bit-parts in Judd Apatow and Adam Sandler movies, and 
wrote several film scripts that were bought and dropped; is full-blown movie 
megastardom coming next?

“Movies are such a frustrating experience,” he sighs. “You can dream about 
awards but I dream the smart way: I just hope the show is really good and that 
people I respect really like it. If you dream in that way, everything else 
falls into place. If you dream the other way, you’re always going to be 
disappointed and a curmudgeon.”

Ansari has always dodged ethnic stereotypes in the characters he plays, doing 
his bit to broaden the representation of south Asians in entertainment. But 
it’s still unavoidable in his day-to-day existence. A few years ago, in a 
last-minute slot at the Largo in LA, he did a short standup set where a woman 
in the audience heckled: “Why don’t you have a red dot on your forehead?”; 
Ansari asked her why she didn’t have “cunt” on hers. Politically, does he think 
a post-Obama America will be better or worse off? “I’m not qualified to answer 
that,” he stutters. “I’ve no cluuuee. I wouldn’t pretend to know an answer like 
that, I don’t follow politics closely enough to, I’d rather say that I don’t 
know rather than act like I have any insight.”

After he leaves our interview, I find out from the hotel staff that just 
before he came out to meet me, a British couple had stopped him in the lobby: 
they thought he was their taxi driver. Their bags were ready to be picked up, 
they kept pointing out, until Ansari had to put his hands up in the air in 
front of everyone and insist: “No, nope, still not your driver.”

• To order Modern Romance for £13.59 (RRP £16.99) go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 