
In his 2012 stand-up show, Aziz Ansari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/16/aziz-ansari> does a bit about 
meeting "some dumb guy at a party" who has a three-year-old son. Later, he 
overhears the same man proclaiming to a crowd that he's tried to have sex with 
a bowl of macaroni cheese. "How are you going to do something like that?" he 
says, with the bright zeal that's defined his comedic style since his days 
writing MTV sketch comedy Human Giant. "He'd never be able to tell that kid 
anything. 'Hey son! Be nice to people! Do good in school!' 'Really? I saw you 
fuck a bowl of macaroni and cheese.'"

Ansari's new show, Buried Alive, is full of similar tales, except now the 
inappropriate parents are the 30-year-old's friends, flooding his inbox with 
pictures of their offspring all the while still wearing pocket chains. "When 
your friends start settling down you can't help but feel a little bit of 
pressure," he says, talking from Los Angeles, where he's currently filming 
season six ofParks And Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/06/parks-and-recreation-meet-characters>
. "But from doing this show and talking to people, I've realised that there are 
plenty of people who feel as scared as me about it. I find it baffling that 
people are ready."

This makes for a more serious Ansari than we've seen before. Although he's 
still wickedly funny, there are no bits about messing with his cousin Harris 
and only one celebrity anecdote – about introducing Seal at a fundraiser for 
Brad Pitt's foundation (spoiler: he singsKiss From A Rose 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ateQQc-AgEM>, just beautifully). "The part 
about Seal nearly didn't make it in. Anybody hates it when people put them in a 
box."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEM6LxJkcrKg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEM6LxJkcrKg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEM6LxJkcrKg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

That means he "didn't want to do anything about rappers", although he does 
riff on the way club music seems to exist solely to trick you into thinking 
you're taking part in luxurious activities, rather than the reality of spending 
money you don't have on marked-up cava. "If I thought something was funny, but 
it didn't fit the topics of marriage or getting older or dating, then it didn't 
make it into the show. It wouldn't work to get deep and then be, like, 'Shit, I 
just noticed something funny about Ice-T.'"

Instead, he ribs the front row about their marriage proposals and, in one 
frenzied section, polls the audience on the subject of men texting images of 
their penises. "I've never had an experience of a guy sending me a photo of his 
penis," he laughs, "but you speak to women and it's a totally different 
perspective. I didn't expect so many women to have received penis photos. I 
thought it would be like, 40%. It was 80% in every city I went to."

He looks on his audience as a useful resource. "If I want to talk about a 
subject like divorce, well, I only have one friend who has gone through 
divorce. At a comedy club there are a whole range of people. You can say 
anything and they'll talk to you. You end up learning a lot. For the next show, 
there's a lot more of it." As well as culling material for the show, Ansari has 
begun work on a book for Penguin ("not due until September 15 probably," he 
says), teaming up with academics to explore the topic of modern romance in more 
detail.

But if there's one joke that sums up Buried Alive, it's the story Ansari tells 
of asking his friend how he met his wife. The answer: at US homeware shop Bed 
Bath & Beyond. He seems genuinely fascinated with the hilarious and terrifying 
idiosyncrasies that result in marriage. This time it involves drain blocker and 
a housemate's stomach upset. "These casual decisions that you make can result 
in huge things," he says. "What if you make a different decision and you don't 
meet that one person? That isbeyond." You mean it's like fear of missing out on 
an existential level? "Yes! That is FOMO. It's not just missing out on a party 
where everyone got drunk and had a lot of fun. It's like, 'I MISSED OUT ON THE 
LOVE OF MY LIFE!'"
 Photograph: Andrew Baasch 
Of course, one way to meet that person is to date. Tom Haverford, Ansari's 
character in Parks And Rec, is an expert. He's been married (for visa reasons), 
he's a believer in peacocking, and in the third season he confesses to having 
set up 26 different online dating profiles to attract all types of women from 
"brave and athletic" to nerd ("collects globes, favourite movie is books"). Has 
Aziz tried online dating himself? "No! In researching the show, I set up a 
dummy account to see how it works. But if I did it for real, I'd be afraid I 
would get murdered by someone! For me it's more about how technology changes 
the way we treat each other. Does the way we text all the time make us shittier 
to each other? It's harder to settle down now in an era when there are so many 
choices. Right now, you can pretty much have a relationship with anyone in the 
world. That is pretty unprecedented. I think that makes it harder to commit and 
settle down."

Even if it's good for collecting stories, being a touring comic presumably 
isn't the best career in which to maintain long-term relationships? "For sure. 
I don't live in one place. I'm always travelling. When I'm filming Parks I live 
in LA, otherwise I live in New York. It's a difficult situation to have a 
relationship…" Which is as much as he'll say about his current love life before 
clamming up.

"I don't like to talk about things that are going on with me," he says. "Which 
is weird because when I'm doing stand-up, I say themost personal things." Looks 
like we'll just have to watch the show…•

Aziz Ansari: Buried Alive is available on Netflix in the UK from Friday
 