
The BBC has been found to have breached its editorial guidelines over the 
payment of appearance fees totalling £6,700 to Labour shadow ministerDiane 
Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>.

In a ruling published on Thursday, the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust's editorial standards committee 
said that the corporation had breached its own editorial guidelines with the 
£839-per-episode fee to Abbott, for eight appearances on the BBC1 politics 
show, This Week, since the Labour MP became shadow minister for public health 
in October 2010.

Abbott often appears on This Week alongside Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> and the former Tory MP Michael 
Portillo to discuss the political issues of the day.

In the ruling, the trust's editorial standards committee said that a 
"realistic disturbance fee" should have been paid to Abbott for her eight 
appearances since October 2010.

"However, the payment of such substantial appearance fees to Ms Abbott since 
she took up her frontbench position in 2010 was a breach of the guidelines," 
the ESC added.

A BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> spokeswoman said the 
ruling was unlikely to prompt a change in how the corporation uses serving 
frontbench politicians as guests on its current affairs shows, because no other 
similar examples have been raised.

It followed a complaint to the outgoing BBC director general, Mark Thompson, 
that it was inappropriate for Abbott to receive between £839 and £869 an 
episode to express her party's policy on the show.

BBC guidelines state that MPs should not be paid for appearances when they are 
"speaking as a member of their party or expressing political views".

The producers of This Week argued that the programme was an exception because 
it was "not a traditional political programme".

But this was rejected by the ESC. In its ruling, the trust committee said BBC 
executives had acknowledged it had been wrong for Abbott to have received such 
substantial payments during the course of its investigation.

BBC executives also accepted that Abbott had appeared on This Week too 
frequently since becoming a shadow minister. They said her appearances should 
have been limited to once or twice a year, not eight times in 17 months.

Abbott appeared almost weekly on This Week, which airs on Thursday nights on 
BBC1 after Question Time, as a backbench MP before she was appointed shadow 
minister for public health in October 2010.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 