
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and ITV are to launch a 
Netflix-style TV service, called BritBox, which will initially target the US 
market.

The broadcasters, which have been investigating launching a “best of British” 
on-demand service since at least March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/10/bbc-and-itv-in-talks-to-launch-a-netflix-style-streaming-service>
, intend to offer a mix of dramas including Tutankhamun, Cold Feet and Silent 
Witness as well as soaps such as EastEnders and Emmerdale.


The broadcasters said that the pricing of the subscription service, which will 
be ad-free, will be revealed at its launch in the first quarter next year.


Netflix, which has more than 46 million paying subscribers in the US, charges 
from $8 (£6.28) to $12 a month for its various packages.


“BritBox will be the best and most comprehensive British streaming service in 
the US,” said Simon Pitts, managing director of online, pay TV and interactive 
at ITV. He said the service would include “a rich catalogue of classic, new and 
exclusive shows easily accessible to US viewers in one place”.


The service will offer a “now” category that will screen soaps and some series 
just 24 hours after airing in the UK. There will also be drama premieres of 
shows never seen in the US.

A classics section will feature oldies including Brideshead Revisited, Pride 
and Prejudice, Upstairs Downstairs, Fawlty Towers and Keeping Up Appearances.


The ambition is to launch the service in other international markets, 
including the UK.


According to one source, BritBox will not replace either the BBC iPlayer or 
ITV Player services in the UK. Instead, it will offer a subscription service 
primarily for “box set” content of shows that have moved out of the 30-day 
catchup window of iPlayer and ITV Player.


It is not thought that rivals such as Channel 4 and Channel 5 will join the UK 
service.


ITV and BBC Worldwide have also partnered with US cable broadcaster AMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> Networks, maker of hit shows including 
Breaking Bad and The Walking Dead, which will take a minority stake in BritBox 
but will not have any voting rights.


It is also known that the broadcasters held talks with NBC Universal, owner of 
the producer of shows including Downton Abbey.


AMC Networks jointly owns US cable channel BBC America with BBC Worldwide.


Last July, the BBC scrapped the global version of its iPlayer service 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-32718259>, which charged users 
subscription fees to watch programmes via an app in western Europe, Australia 
and Canada.


In 2007, ITV, BBC Worldwide and Channel 4 joined forces to attempt to launch 
an online TV service, the ill-fated Project Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/04/project-kangaroo-blocked-by-competition-commission>
.


The project was scrapped after competition regulators blocked its development, 
deeming it wastoo much of a threat to competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/04/project-kangaroo-blocked-by-competition-commission>
 in the then-nascent UK video-on-demand market.

 