
The mood around Pinewood studios is one of hushed awe and deep secrecy. Bear 
Grylls is rehearsing for Endeavour, a stadium tour with a difference, the 
difference being that this is surely the first time – or the first time I can 
think of, anyway – that a person has toured their personality. Singers sing, 
comedians are droll and people like Malcolm Gladwell sometimes do after-dinner 
speeches without the dinner, but Endeavour is none of those things.

“Open your mind, open your eyes, open your heart,” it begins. “This is 
Endeavour. The universe is on a scale that no human mind can ever truly 
capture.” Assuming you’ve opened your eyes, you will be looking at the face of 
a mighty mountain. At the moment, though, it’s just a great flank of plywood, 
which I will shortly attempt to scale with Grylls. I have brought my climbing 
shoes but, otherwise, I really didn’t think this through.

Bear Grylls: ‘Anywhere in the wild, you can make tea from something. But 
deserts are tricky’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/17/bear-grylls-brewing-tea-obama-deserts>
To turn this into a spectacle (his show, not my climbing), around 40 
projectors are needed. Under their glare, this wall will change from icy peak 
to outer space to deepest jungle, while TV’s No 1 Survivalist leaps from 
precarious ledge to impossible toehold, re-enacting the escapades of the most 
extreme adventurers of all time. The enterprise is somewhat secretive, but 
Grylls’ heroes are well known: Scott; Shackleton;Nando Parrado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/may/18/extract.features11>, who 
survived a plane crash in the Andes by eating his friends;Aron Ralston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/15/story-danny-boyles-127-hours>, 
the mountaineer who chopped his own arm off; andJuliane Koepcke 
<http://www.rd.com/true-stories/survival/survival-stories-the-girl-who-fell-from-the-sky/>
, who plummeted 3km out of the sky, still strapped to her plane seat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85a921b858d2e6a5b4cff58daa2962421147329f%2F595_544_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20'My%20son%20says%20I'm%20too%20old.%20But%20that's%20stinking%20thinking'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20%27My%20son%20says%20I%27m%20too%20old.%20But%20that%27s%20stinking%20thinking%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85a921b858d2e6a5b4cff58daa2962421147329f%2F595_544_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
 ‘I’m actually a bit scared’ … Bear puts Zoe through her paces on the wall that 
projectors will turn into icy peaks, deep jungle and even outer space. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
They have a rather similar profile, these survivors: extraordinary endurance, 
an epic will to survive (the first casualty of adventure is human variety, as 
all the flakes and deadbeats end up getting eaten). But we are all, by now, 
signed up to Grylls’ core proposition: to see humankind pitted against the 
elements, finding inner strength, is an inherently uplifting thing. The 
difference is that, previously, we were uplifted from the comfort of our sofas. 
In an arena, the adventures will apparently be so real we can almost touch them.

“It was amazing,” says Grylls, after rehearsals, “learning about the 
technology and what you can do with these huge arena spaces – how you can turn 
them into jungles, deserts, mountains, so that people feel in them. Imagine if 
you could take people to the top of Everest and show what happened when a party 
got hit by avalanches or fell down crevasses. It’s all just so clever.”

I tell him there’s a mysterious atmosphere here: it’s almost like a terrorist 
training camp. “Our team are all former military friends,” he says. “As we 
travel round the world making films and TV shows, it does feel a bit like we 
have our own private militia.”

There are only three things the British love in a classless way: dogs, alcohol 
and former members of the military

There are probably only three things the British love in a completely 
classless way: dogs, alcohol and former members of the military. While Grylls 
will mention the army pretty freely, it doesn’t come across as the thing he’s 
most proud of. He’s most proud of the times he nearly died. Take the parachute 
that, in 1996, ripped when he was 5km up, and only partially opened, leaving 
him with three smashed vertebrae and near-paralysed. Today he is no different, 
steering the conversation towards the damage the show has inflicted on him. 
“It’s definitely physical,” he says. “I’m always pretty fit for my job, but 
then you get here and start hanging out with the young aerial acrobats who are 
training me. And you suddenly realise how good they are, how strong they are. 
I’ve hurt myself so many times.”

I find myself wanting to help, but all I can think to say is: “Stop jumping 
off things!” So I don’t. “I came home the other day,” he continues, “and I’d 
really hurt myself – I’d fallen over so many times, really smacked my head. 
Jesse, my 13-year-old, said, ‘Maybe over 40 is not the age to be doing this.’ I 
said, ‘That’s stinking thinking. But probably true.’”

This is a peculiarity of the climbing/adventuring/survivalist tendency: these 
people absolutely love scars and bruises, but even a reasonable amount of 
scepticism about the limits of human ability is met with a doughty phrase that 
normally rhymes (“stinking thinking”; “no pain no gain”), as if the serendipity 
of the rhyme were proof that the universe wants you to get to the top of the 
frozen waterfall, whatever human intelligence says to the contrary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbd8eb7e46443f161fd8ec929b3fbb63441d26c9%2F0_37_2192_1315%2F2192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20'My%20son%20says%20I'm%20too%20old.%20But%20that's%20stinking%20thinking'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20%27My%20son%20says%20I%27m%20too%20old.%20But%20that%27s%20stinking%20thinking%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbd8eb7e46443f161fd8ec929b3fbb63441d26c9%2F0_37_2192_1315%2F2192.jpg>
 Grylls going wild with Barack Obama in Alaska. Photograph: PA 
I actually really like climbing, but came to it late, so can only critique – 
and never internalise – its mindset. Anyway, here we are, at the wall, a vast 
slope of plywood with rudimentary chunks of two-by-four where, on the night, 
proper climbing holds will be. “It’s going to be much bigger,” Grylls says, and 
tries to explain the virtual element again. He gestures towards the expanse: 
“So that will suddenly become an ice wall. The ice will be falling off, 
hurtling towards you – or it could be covered in jungle vines. I’ll go to grab 
one, it won’t be there.”

He’s right to think I haven’t entirely got it, though wrong to think that 
every time he mentions being chased by a bear, he has to add “not a real bear”. 
The more he talks about Endeavour, the more I believe in it, but I’m on my 
guard, because I know this is what motivational speakers do.

And motivational speakers who climb do one other thing: get you into a 
position where you don’t realise you want to go back until going back is 
actually more difficult than carrying on. I have very little natural aptitude 
for climbing, but I do have preternaturally strong fingers – everyone says so – 
and can usually get to the top of things. On Grylls’ practice wall, these are 
no good to me at all. Nobody can hold on to a block of wood. There’s no 
friction on the surface, and being harnessed to a wire offers no greater 
reassurance than the sense that, when I fall off, I will injure my body parts 
in a weird order.

As his book covers show, he has about 17 expressions for 'determined', never 
slipping into 'puzzled' or 'constipated'

Our wires cross and I can hear one of the aerial acrobats below saying “Mind 
those wires” in that tone of studied mildness that climbing people use to 
convey wildly imminent danger. I stop for a few seconds, thinking about the 
hastily thrown together disclaimer I wrote earlier in the day, promising not to 
sue anyone. I always merrily do that, and never stop to think what it means.

“I’m actually a bit scared,” I say, a third of the way up, with finality. I 
definitely don’t mean: “Say something encouraging.” I mean: “This has been 
real, but I’m going back down now.” He doesn’t get that at all. “You can do 
it,” he says. “I’ve got your wire.” I want to enter into some discussion on 
this, tell him I don’t think that will help – but it’s hard to be a smartarse 
on a cocktail of sweat and adrenaline. I have no option, it turns out, but to 
trust him. I make it on to a ledge. We’re probably 12ft above the ground. It 
feels – and I can say this confidently, having read Jon Krakauer’s Into Thin 
Air – like the top of Everest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1277a4194f0fbcebef561221e672a6c4189d46e%2F214_189_1438_863%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20'My%20son%20says%20I'm%20too%20old.%20But%20that's%20stinking%20thinking'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bear%20Grylls%20on%20his%20acrobatic%20show%3A%20%27My%20son%20says%20I%27m%20too%20old.%20But%20that%27s%20stinking%20thinking%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fbear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1277a4194f0fbcebef561221e672a6c4189d46e%2F214_189_1438_863%2F1438.jpg>
 Grylls on a desert adventure 
The idea for Endeavour came to Grylls in 2013, just after he had published 
True Grit, potted versions of the world’s greatest man-overcometh-the-elements 
stories. He is an extremely prolific author, with books covering not just how 
to survive but how to eat, think, raise your children, and climb up mountains. 
The cover is usually a picture of his face, but his facial range is incredible, 
with about 17 different versions of “determined”, none of them slipping into 
“puzzled” or “constipated”. Probably every house has one Bear Grylls book, but 
if you had them all, that would signal a problem.

True Grit constitutes the spine of the show and he plays all the big parts, 
with two male acrobats in supporting roles, and one woman, because “some of the 
stories are incredible, but they are with women – and that would be weird, me 
playing that”. They don’t teach you how to do that on Outward Bound weekends, 
dress up as women, no siree. Instead, he becomes “this ghost – that’s the story 
that’ll make you cry. I’ll emerge like an angel and give her strength. It’s 
cool, that story.”

The core business of Grylls’ TV shows, which is hard to distill into a single 
word like “survivalist”, is coaching physically incompetent people – from 
Hollywood stars with a number on themselves to reality TV-sters who hate the 
mud but love the weight loss – to push themselves beyond what they thought 
possible. Which is pretty much what he’s doing in Endeavour.

“There are four wires attached to one connection point,” he says. “So at high 
speed, I can fly, sweep down here, rip up there, land on that ledge. You don’t 
see how it works. So for young people, especially for families, it’s gonna be 
like, ‘Wow!’”

• The Endeavour tour <http://www.beargryllslive.com/> starts at Wembley Arena, 
London, on 7 October.
 