
40 Godspeed You! Black Emperor – Allelujah! Don't Bend! Ascend!

What we said about Godspeed: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/18/godspeed-allelujah-dont-bend-review>
 "A decade on from their split, this Montreal collective still sound like 
nothing else … It's beautiful, thrilling and exhausting. The Godspeed ethos of 
wordlessly eliciting universal truths is remains as devastatingly effective as 
ever."

39 Killer Mike – RAP Music

What we said about Killer Mike: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/23/why-hip-hop-deserting-obama> 
"Earlier this year, Killer Mike made quite a splash with his latest album, 
R.A.P. Music. Critics couldn't help but marvel at the unlikely pairing of Mike, 
with his distinctly southern credentials (and drawl to match), and New York 
producer EL-P, an underground figure known for his aggressive, frenetic sound. 
But it was one track in particular, Reagan, that really raised eyebrows."

38 Fiona Apple – The Idler Wheel Is Wiser Than the Driver of the Screw and 
Whipping Cords Will Serve You More Than Ropes Will Ever Do

What we said about Fiona Apple: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/jun/12/fiona-apple-every-single-night>
 "Over a musical backdrop of chimes, feedback and bursts of percussion, Every 
Single Night at times teeters on the brink of exploding with emotion ('I just 
want to feel everything,' Apple sings), but the restraint gives it power. In 
fact, it's so good you ignore the squid and just focus on the anguish."

Fiona Apple - Every Single Night 
<http://www.muzu.tv/fionaapple/every-single-night-music-video/1420990/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
37 Orbital – Wonky

What we said about Orbital: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/01/orbital-wonky-album-review> "Title 
aside, Orbital's first album in eight years doesn't induce the comeback cringe. 
It's that rare thing: a reunion album that's neither dated nor desperate. The 
90s electronic titans use vintage analogue synths, subtly retro-fitting their 
sound in a way that, ironically, brings it bang up to date."

36 Beach House – Bloom

What we said about Beach House: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/10/beach-house-bloom-review> "Every 
song is like an Arctic landscape: Victoria Legrand's husky voice skates across 
glacial keyboards and Alex Scully's shimmering guitar, layers of sound 
compacted together so tightly that no note feels inessential. It's a surprise 
when each track ends, because it could go on for ever."

35 Nite Jewel – One Second of Love

What we said about Nite Jewel: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/16/nite-jewel-review> "Ramona 
Gonzalez still hovers under the radar, despite being a gifted songwriter with a 
knack for reconfiguring the smoothest sounds of 1980s rock ballads and 1990s 
R&B into alluring new shapes. Her most recent album, One Second of Love, was 
inspired by a love of Kraftwerk, but amid a superstructure of strict robotic 
heartbeats, her unearthly voice – with echoes of both Tracey Thorn and Florence 
Welch – imbues every synthesised drum loop with emotion. It's affecting on 
record, and even more so live, with Gonzalez backed by a multi-tasking 
three-piece band."
 Still running … Dexys. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
34 Dexys – One Day I'm Going to Soar

What we said about Dexys: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/31/dexys-one-day-im-review> "Kevin 
Rowland hasn't written mere songs for his Dexys comeback; rather a West End 
musical. To call it a concept album underestimates its high-camp, red-velvet 
theatricality … Even if it isn't autobiography, the man's heart-on-sleeve 
individualism and resistance of any attempt to 'overpigeonary' him are pure 
Rowland."

33 Mala – Mala in Cuba

What we said about Mala: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/sep/13/mercury-prize-2012-shortlist> "The 
result of a trip that dubstep pioneer Mala – aka Digital Mystikz – made to Cuba 
with Gilles Peterson last year. Back in London, stitching together sounds that 
he sampled including contributions from the likes of pianist Roberto Fonseca, 
he created an album of hypnotic beauty, rhythms and melodies echoing in the 
cavernous space carved out by the bass of south London."
 Farrah Abraham and daughter Sophia 
32 Farrah Abraham – My Teenage Dream Ended

What we said about Farrah Abraham: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/sep/28/farrah-abraham-teenage-dream-ended>
 "What's the weirdest record you've heard this year? Whatever it is, chances 
are it won't register on the same WTF scale as Farrah Abraham's debut. Boasting 
the tragicomic title My Teenage Dream Ended, and released as an accompaniment 
to her premature autobiography, this is a truly bizarre mix of generic 
Guetta-pop beats, those dubstep drilling sounds that feature heavily on 
Ministry Of Sound brostep compilations, and Abraham's abrasive AutoTuned 
vocals."

31 Marina and the Diamonds – Electra Heart

What we said about Marina and the Diamonds: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/26/marina-diamonds-electra-heart-review>
 "The album's highlights are those Diamandis came up with in collaboration with 
the producer of The Family Jewels, Liam Howe. On Fear and Loathing and Teen 
Idle, they strip back most of that album's excesses to let the melodies breathe 
and focus attention on Diamandis's singing: coolly enunciated and slightly 
folky, her voice is much more appealing than you might have realised, 
overshadowed as it was on The Family Jewels by her apparently unquenchable 
desire to shriek, deploy a horrible vibrato and do animal impersonations."

Marina and The Diamonds - Primadonna 
<http://www.muzu.tv/marinaandthediamonds/primadonna-music-video/1336026/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
30 Angel Haze – Reservation

What we said about Angel Haze: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/12/angel-haze-reservation-review> 
"Her craft – lyrics, hooks and storytelling – has been tightened up without 
losing any of her intense intimacy. Entire worlds are at stake when Haze raps, 
whether she's penning dreamy love letters of cosmic scope to current and former 
girlfriends (Hot Like Fire, Gypsy Letters), piecing together her fractured life 
experiences (the emotionally draining closer, Smiles N Hearts), or rattling off 
scornful contempt over clattering beats (New York, Werkin' Girls)."

29 Jack White – Blunderbuss

What we said about Jack White: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/19/jack-white-blunderbuss-review> 
"Presenting something deeply weird as entirely straightforward may be the whole 
point of Blunderbuss. Leaving aside the lyrics, the most striking thing is the 
way White uses his melodic skills to mask some off-the-wall musical ideas, next 
to which the fidgety prog-rock riffs that open the album and the irresistible 
vaudevillian arrangement of Hip (Eponymous) Poor Boy are relatively 
straightforward. Elsewhere, the listener is treated to structures so wildly 
episodic that the closing Take Me with You sounds like three different songs – 
including a 70s stadium-rock anthem and a piece of library music – lashed 
together"

Jack White - I'm Shakin' 
<http://www.muzu.tv/jack-white/im-shakin-music-video/1588277/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
28 Tribes – Baby

What we said about Tribes: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/12/tribes-baby-review> "The songs are 
big on riffs, hooks, choruses, sex and swagger, although there's enough going 
on lyrically to suggest more depth … Every new year brings another guitar band 
burdened with expectations, but Tribes have every chance."

27 Poliça – Give You the Ghost

What we said about Poliça: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/06/polica-review> "Auto-Tune, the 
pitch-correction software that squares off wobbly vocals until they resemble 
Tetris blocks, has come to symbolise everything that is garish and wrong about 
modern music. Yet Poliça have become one of 2012's most alluring acts by 
deploying the technique in unexpected ways. Their funereal, deep-sea R&B has 
made fans of everyone from Bon Iver to noted Auto-Tune sceptic Jay-Z."

NME - Polica - 'Lay Your Cards Out' 
<http://www.muzu.tv/nme/polica-lay-your-cards-out-music-video/1282201/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
26 Bright Light, Bright Light – Make Me Believe in Hope

What we said about Bright Light, Bright Light: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/26/tim-jonze-on-pop> "The best thing 
about pop is that you don't need a scene to emerge to have a good time. There 
are always good songs to be found, be they by indie bands doing the sparkly 
crossover thing or the stylish Bright Light Bright Light album, Make Me Believe 
In Hope."
 Actress, AKA Darren Cunningham 
25 Actress – RIP

What we said about Actress: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/14/actress-darren-cunningham-rip> 
"RIP [is] a narrative that takes in death, ascension, blessing, and a journey 
across a purgatorial landscape dodging temptation and ravens, all before 
returning to Earth. This struggle isn't picked out in lyrics, but in track 
titles and a supremely evocative sound that lurches between blissful chiming, 
jacking snares and industrial churn. You could tag it 'techno', but that would 
do a disservice to Darren Cunningham, who has created for himself a totally 
singular voice."

24 Dawn Richard – Armor On

What we said about Dawn Richard: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/19/dawn-richard-armor-on-review> "Few 
artists have integrated R&B and dance as dazzlingly as Richard and producer 
Druski do here, from the intertwining snares and strings of Heaven to Faith's 
climactic filterdisco explosion and the tactile flair of percussive details in 
every song. Along with fellow ex-Dirty Money singer-songwriter Kalenna, Richard 
is setting the pace in R&B."
 Jam City, AKA Jack Latham 
23 Jam City – Classical Curves

What we said about Jam City: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/14/best-albums-2012-so-far> "There's 
something initially offputting about Jack Latham's version of post-dubstep 
funk: it's cluttered and jarring, almost inhuman-sounding. Stick with it, 
though, and it draws you inexorably into its world."

22 The Cribs – In the Belly of the Brazen Bull

What we said about the Cribs: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/03/cribs-belly-brazen-bull-review> 
"The Cribs' fifth album couldn't be more 90s if it styled its hair into 
curtains, donned a Global Hypercolor T-shirt and bought itself a ticket to 
Lilith Fair … It suits them, particularly when they adorn the feedback and 
squalling riffs with singalong melody, as they do on the raucous Chi-Town."

21 Bat for Lashes – The Haunted Man

What we said about Bat for Lashes: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/11/bat-for-lashes-haunted-man-review> 
"The uncluttered approach seems to fit Khan's voice – you notice her affecting 
ability to suddenly switch from strident to bruised in the middle of a phrase 
better when it's not fighting for sonic space – and the material. Opener 
Lillies has one of those effortless melodies that sounds immediately familiar. 
The piano ballad Laura doesn't need colouring with anything more than a gentle 
shading of woodwind because it's a fantastic song, with a simple, naggingly 
effective piano line and a chorus irresistible enough to make its lowly placing 
on the singles chart seem a bit baffling."

Bat for Lashes – All Your Gold 
<http://www.muzu.tv/batforlashes/all-your-gold-music-video/1557061/> on MUZU.TV 
<http://www.muzu.tv/>.  