
The headlines on Monday afternoon were big and bold declaring that Better Call 
Saul, the Breaking Bad prequel that debuted Sunday night on AMC,broke a record 
for the biggest cable premiere of all time 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/tv-ratings-better-call-saul-771750>
. While its 6.9 million premiere is a record, we have to look at in context to 
see what it really means.


Almost 7 million people is huge for cable (and twice the size of some network 
mainstays), but to get the full picture of Better Call Saul, you have to look at
The Walking Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>. 
That show, the highest rated on television, scored 15.6 million viewers on 
Sunday night. That means that Saul lost more than half the audience provided by 
its zombie-smashing lead-in. If that happened on network television, Saul would 
be on the chopping block right away. But this is cable, and Saul has already 
been renewed for a second season.

Better Call Saul recap – season one episode one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/feb/08/better-call-saul-recap-series-one-episode-one>
The other thing that a lot of those articles didn’t really examine is what 
would happen when Saul moved to its normal time slot on Monday night, with no 
lead-in at all.AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> (and HBO, and 
Showtime, and others) has only been able to hit it big on Sunday nights. In 
trying to move Saul to Monday, it hopes to establish an anchor on which it can 
grow more shows with less competition from the other prestige heavyweights. HBO 
tried this with Six Feet Under about a decade ago, but sent it back to Sundays 
when ratings sagged.

And indeed, the numbers for Monday’s premiere, without The Walking Dead and 
perhaps after people decided they don’t want to invest more time in the series, 
did almost half (to 3.4 million). But the real success of Saul will be gauged 
both when we see how many viewers it consistently drags to Monday and also how 
many people tune in via DVR and downloads, something that cable networks prize 
more than networks.

Like I said, Saul is already lined up for another season, because cable has a 
different way of looking at ratings. Breaking Bad, which we all think of as a 
huge hit, only drew 1.4 million viewers for its premiere. By the time people 
caught up thanks to strong interest on Netflix, the final season averaged north 
of 5 million viewers and the finalescored slightly over 10 million 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2013/09/30/breaking-bad-series-finale-ratings>.

The Walking Dead: a somber and odd mid-season premiere
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/feb/09/the-walking-dead-a-somber-and-odd-mid-season-premiere>
Saul could have the same trajectory, with more people piling on and driving 
its average up. But Saul had bothBreaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> and The Walking Dead to 
draft off of and it still got 7 million viewers. They could disappear within a 
few weeks, so it might not be the sure-fire blockbuster that AMC really needs 
it to be.

AMC is a publicly traded company. In order to drive up its stock prices for 
investors, it needs to have big hits. It especially needs to show it can 
generate more success with Breaking Bad off the air and Mad Men ready to end 
this year. That’s why we’re hearing so much about Better Call Saul’s 
record-breaking performance – AMC wants to cultivate the perception that it has 
a huge success on its hands.

And they very well might. We just have to wait for the curiosity factor of 
Breaking Bad fans and the leftover viewers of The Walking Dead to go away and 
see how well Saul does standing on his own. I’m not saying it’s all gloom and 
doom, but let’s wait a little bit before busting out the champagne.
 