
"The Valley of Amazement doesn't waste any time. The long opening sentence 
leads us quickly into the only high-class courtesan house in Shanghai run by a 
white woman, where innumerable complications soon arise. Amy Tan maintains the 
pace skilfully as we follow the story of three generations of women, spanning 
the transition from dynastic rule to the early 20th century and travelling from 
Shanghai to San Francisco and on to a remote village deep in the mountains of 
China."Krys Lee in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/fe40d834-3b39-11e3-87fa-00144feab7de.html#axzz2l6MRMzoB>
 welcomed Tan's sixth novel, and pointed out that although the author has been 
"accused of exoticising her Asian roots, particularly by Asian readers", and 
althoughThe Valley of Amazement "can indeed be seen as romanticising cliches of 
Asia as it conjures a world of courtesans in elaborate vermilion costumes and 
boudoirs", as the narrative progresses "we see more subtlety as Tan reverses 
and revises some of the cliches".John Sutherland in the Times noted that "Tan's 
fan base, who have, by the usual hooks and crooks, got early copies, are 
somewhat miffed by the unexpectedFifty Shades crudity of this latest offering. 
There is certainly more about the cultivation of the courtesan pudenda than I 
personally relish, instructive as some readers may find it."In the Independent, 
Katy Guest 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/book-review-the-valley-of-amazement-by-amy-tan-8942245.html>
 identified Tan's usual themes as "difficult mother-daughter relationships, the 
wobbly connections between America and modern China, and family secrets" and 
praised her for language "replete with sumptuous detail".

Among the slew of books marking the 50th anniversary of JFK's assassination is 
The Letters of John F Kennedy, edited by Martin W Sandler, which, argued Simon 
Schama in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/4fc8d5ce-4d16-11e3-9f40-00144feabdc0.html#slide0>, 
"although padded with some anodyne stuff – writers wanting to know if his teeth 
were false – manages to reveal some sides of JFK we either never knew or had 
forgotten … he sends letters of wry, gently rib-poking fun to the many children 
who write to the White House … Reading Sandler's selection is to realise, 
wistfully, in an age where the form is all but extinct, how much this president 
enjoyed writing letters." ForGerard DeGroot in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/historybookreviews/10452191/The-truth-about-John-F-Kennedy.html>
, however, the book is evidence that the "desire to sanitise the Kennedy image 
remains strong … It's interesting and beautifully presented, but the 
correspondence is censored. Sandler did not include the lurid notes the young 
Kennedy wrote to his friends, boasting of sexual conquests."

Jane Shilling in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-2507423/Anjelicas-badly-girl-face-gnu-A-STORY-LATELY-TOLD-COMING-OF-AGE-IN-IRELAND-LONDON-AND-NEW-YORK-BY-ANJELICA-HUSTON.html>
 enjoyed Anjelica Huston's memoirA Story Lately Told: "Her dry wit, eloquent 
understatement and her vivid memory for the places, people and feelings of her 
childhood and early adulthood make this one of those very rare celebrity 
memoirs that you'll want to read and re-read for the sheer beauty of its 
writing." "Don't let young girls read this book – they might just die of envy", 
wroteLynn Barber in the Sunday Times: "Anjelica Huston, the daughter of the 
film director John Huston, grew up in a grand house … She learnt to ride at an 
early age … As a teenager, she moved with her mother to Swinging London where 
she had all the fun of bunking off school (Holland Park comprehensive) to go 
shoplifting at Biba, before moving to New York to become a model. Her memoir 
ends there – but she went on to become an Oscar-winning actress and the 
long-time mistress of Jack Nicholson." The book has "the superficial appeal of
Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous, combined with a psychological mystery worthy 
of Patricia Highsmith. Heady stuff."
 