
Banned in Ireland when it first appeared in 1932, and removed from shelves and 
objected to ever since, Aldous Huxley's Brave New World is still making waves 
today. The novel of a dystopian future was one of the most complained about 
books in America last year, with readers protesting over its sexually explicit 
scenes, "offensive" language and "insensitivity".

The American Library Association (ALA) has just released its list of the 10 
books which Americans tried hardest to ban last year 
<http://ala.org/ala/newspresscenter/news/pr.cfm?id=6874>. Topped yet again by 
Justin Richardson and Peter Parnell'sAnd Tango Makes Three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/may/23/booksforchildrenandteenagers.richardlea>
, a picture-book telling the true story of a chick adopted by two male Emperor 
penguins at New York's Central Park zoo, the list is a compilation of 
complaints made to libraries and schools requesting a book be banned because of 
its content. Dozens of attempts were made to remove And Tango Makes Three from 
library shelves, said the ALA, with those seeking to ban the title protesting 
at the "homosexuality" of the two penguins and its "religious viewpoint".

Parent protests in Missouri over masturbation scenes in Sherman Alexie's The 
Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/teenage.sherman.alexie> helped 
the award-winning young adult novel into second place in the most-challenged 
list. Brave New World – ironically, set in a world in which books are banned – 
made it into the top 10 in third place. Huxley's novel is no stranger to 
complaints: in 1980 it was removed from classrooms for making promiscuous sex 
"look like fun", and it has been the subject of frequent challenges in the US 
over the years.

Brave New World is the only classic title in 2010's list. In 2009, JD Salinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/11/jdsalinger>'s Catcher in the Rye,
Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
's The Color Purple and Harper Lee'sTo Kill a Mockingbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/10/kill-mockingbird-harper-lee> all 
provoked complaints from angry parents, but last year it was modern bestsellers 
that caused the most trouble. From Suzanne Collins's post-apocalyptic hit The 
Hunger Games to Stephenie Meyer's vampire bestseller Twilight, American parents 
have been making it their mission to complain about some of the most popular 
books published in recent years.

"[It's] a dubious honour" 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Natasha-Friend-Official-Fan-Page/382949251517>, 
said novelist Natasha Friend, whose book Lush – about a teenage girl with an 
alcoholic father – made the list in sixth place for its mentions of drugs, its 
"offensive language" and "sexually explicit" scenes. "[But] as my editor at 
Scholastic says, this is 'just a part of being a Judy Blume for a new 
generation!' I guess I'll take it."

There were 348 reports of efforts to remove books from America's shelves in 
2010, down from 460 the previous year. But the ALA believes the majority of 
challenges go unreported, and called on Americans to "protect one of the most 
precious of our fundamental rights – the freedom to read".

"While we firmly support the right of every reader to choose or reject a book 
for themselves or their families, those objecting to a particular book should 
not be given the power to restrict other readers' right to access and read that 
book," said Barbara Jones, director of the ALA's office for intellectual 
freedom. "As members of a pluralistic and complex society, we must have free 
access to a diverse range of viewpoints on the human condition in order to 
foster critical thinking and understanding."

The ALA's top 10 most frequently challenged books of 2010

1. And Tango Makes Three by Peter Parnell and Justin Richardson

Reasons: Homosexuality, religious viewpoint, unsuited to age group

2. The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian by Sherman Alexie

Reasons: Offensive language, racism, sex education, sexually explicit, 
unsuited to age group, violence

3. Brave New World by Aldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley>

Reasons: Insensitivity, offensive language, racism, sexually explicit

4. Crank by Ellen Hopkins

Reasons: Drugs, offensive language, sexually explicit

5. The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins

Reasons: Sexually explicit, unsuited to age group, violence

6. Lush by Natasha Friend

Reasons: Drugs, offensive language, sexually explicit, unsuited to age group

7. What My Mother Doesn't Know by Sonya Sones

Reasons: Sexism, sexually explicit, unsuited to age group

8. Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By In America by Barbara Ehrenreich

Reasons: Drugs, inaccurate, offensive language, political viewpoint, religious 
viewpoint

9. Revolutionary Voices: A Multicultural Queer Youth Anthology edited by Amy 
Sonnie

Reasons: Homosexuality, sexually explicit

10. Twilight by Stephenie Meyer

Reasons: Religious viewpoint, violence
 