
A TV ad featuring a fashion blogger promoting breast enlargement has been 
banned for irresponsibly implying to young women that surgery will make them 
more popular and confident.

Cosmetic surgery company Transform ran a TV ad featuring 21-year-old fashion 
blogger Sarah Ashcroft <http:// https://www.instagram.com/sarahhashcroft/?hl=en>
, also known as That Pommie Girl, who has almost 600,000 followers on Instagram 
andTwitter <https://twitter.com/SarahhAshcroft>. 

The ad featured Ashcroft talking enthusiastically about the positive impact 
enlarging her breasts has had on her life.

“I never really looked at any part of my body past my neck because it wasn’t 
something I liked,” she said.


“I feel like a new person, from having nothing to then looking at yourself 
with boobs, it was the weirdest thing. Everyone was like ‘wow, they look so 
natural, I’m so impressed’. And to come away from it feeling 10 times more 
confident than you were I think is just an amazing feeling.”


The Advertising Standards Authority, which in 2014 warned YouTube and social 
media stars to be careful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/26/vloggers-must-tell-fans-paid-adverts-asa-rules>
 how they promote products, received a complaint that the ad was irresponsible 
and harmful to young women under the age of 18.

The complainant said ad exploited young women’s insecurities about their 
bodies by implying that breast enhancement surgery would make them more 
confident and popular.


Defending the ad, Transform said that there are some people out there who just 
dislike cosmetic surgery per se.


It said that Ashcroft was representative of “many independently minded, 
responsible, thoughtful, sophisticated and successful young females who chose 
to undergo cosmetic surgery”.


Transform said that Ashcroft’s testimony “could be viewed with neutrality” 
because she chose to use Transform for her own reasons and paid for her 
procedure prior to being approached to feature in the ad.


The company also said that her testimony was unscripted.


On Transform’s website, in a section called “meet the girls” 
<https://www.transforminglives.co.uk/news-blog/news/2016/03/meet-the-girls-sarah-ashcroft/#7kCCw0OyW2x8BCUE.97>
, Ashcroft’s before and after shots were shown.


The company boasted that the tie-up with Ashcroft, which included a series of 
pre- and post-surgery videos, resulted in more than 250,000 video views on 
YouTube.


The ASA said the ad’s focus on Ashcroft’s personal experience meant it would 
have a direct appeal to young women and teenage girls. Ashcroft recently 
retweeted one fan’s post and picture spotting her in the Transform ad on TV.

Daisy Grace Jeffery (@DaisyJeffery) 
Minding my own business watching @KUWTK <https://twitter.com/KUWTK> and 
@SarahhAshcroft <https://twitter.com/SarahhAshcroft> pops up on my TV! 😍 
#whatababe <https://twitter.com/hashtag/whatababe?src=hash> #fbloggers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/fbloggers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Kd6cOWdSqF 
<https://t.co/Kd6cOWdSqF>
 <https://twitter.com/DaisyJeffery/status/750048359973523460> July 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/DaisyJeffery/status/750048359973523460> 
“We were concerned that the focus on the negative perception she had of her 
body prior to cosmetic surgery might encourage viewers, particularly young 
women and teenage girls, to think about their own insecurities about their 
bodies,” said the ASA.


“While we appreciated that Ms Ashcroft did not explicitly link cosmetic 
surgery with her popularity or success, we considered that viewers would 
nevertheless infer from Ms Ashcroft’s emphasis on her personal transformation 
and the degree of confidence she said she had gained that her popularity and 
success as a fashion blogger had been, in part, a result of cosmetic surgery.”


The ASA banned the TV commercial for breaking the advertising code relating to 
social responsibility and harm and offence.


“Although Ms Ashcroft’s was a personal story, we considered that the ad 
suggested more generally that success and popularity would be enhanced by 
achieving an idealised body image, which could be done by ‘correcting’ any 
perceived imperfections,” said the ASA. “In light of those factors, we 
concluded that the ad was irresponsible and likely to cause harm to those under 
18.”
 