
A quarter century after the events of American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
, what would murderous Patrick Bateman be doing in 2016? The answer, according 
to the controversial novel’s authorBret Easton Ellis 
<http://breteastonellis.com>, seems to involve flashing his bling on Instagram 
and trolling people on Twitter.


The original Wolf of Wall Street, Bateman was a product of the “greed is good” 
80s, where self-obsession was an art form and you lived or died by the label 
sewn into your underwear. Ellis’s antihero was a pre-crash Master of the 
Universe, and while, deep down, the world might not seem so very different a 
place today, we do in fact inhabit a whole other dimension of life online. Most 
of us have also woken up to the realisation that bankers are not gods to be 
revered.

Bret Easton Ellis and Alex Israel: California Uber alles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/01/bret-easton-ellis-alex-israel-california-uber-alles-gagosian-gallery>
So would Ellis’s controversial novel about a depraved banker work today? Let’s 
– like most people – ignore the events of the movieAmerican Psycho 2 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/american_psycho_2/>, in which Bateman is 
himself offed in the first five minutes. Ellis has offered his own take on what 
the serial killer might be doing now.

Writing for the magazine Town & Country 
<http://www.townandcountrymag.com/leisure/arts-and-culture/a4954/american-psycho-today/>
, Ellis says that the outcomes of chasing the American Dream – “Isolation, 
alienation, the consumerist void increasingly in thrall to technology, 
corporate corruption” – still hold sway three decades after the late-80s 
setting of the novel.

Ellis writes: “We are in a time when the one per cent are richer than any 
human has been before, an era when a jet is the new car and million-dollar 
rents are the reality. New York today isAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> on steroids. And despite 
the idea of interconnectivity via the internet and social media, many people 
feel more isolated than ever, increasingly aware that the idea of 
interconnectivity is an illusion.”

In the 1991 book – and the subsequent movie starring Christian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/apr/21/breteastonellis>, plus the 
musical which debuted in London and opens on Broadway next month 
<http://americanpsychothemusical.com/?gclid=CjwKEAiA9om3BRDpzvihsdGnhTwSJAAkSewLFjqel8gWNp8YuoA9pIMXcfuGL7h_0FPJERyM8s89BhoCaiLw_wcB#introduction>
 – Bateman embarks on series of increasingly grotesque and sickening killings 
as a response to the narcissism of money-chasing Wall Street and the faceless 
anonymity that comes when everyone else is purely focussed on themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbret-easton-ellis-broadway-american-psycho-online-troll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd7bec6eea3c4a2d7d63a26e04a94db5f0129856%2F0_344_3957_2378%2F3957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%3A%20today's%20American%20Psycho%20would%20be%20an%20online%20troll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbret-easton-ellis-broadway-american-psycho-online-troll%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bret%20Easton%20Ellis%3A%20today%27s%20American%20Psycho%20would%20be%20an%20online%20troll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbret-easton-ellis-broadway-american-psycho-online-troll%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd7bec6eea3c4a2d7d63a26e04a94db5f0129856%2F0_344_3957_2378%2F3957.jpg>
 Christian Bale as Bateman in the film adaptation of American Psycho. 
Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate/Sportsphoto Ltd 
So in 2016 would Patrick Bateman – by now well into his 50s – still be 
carrying out his murders? “In the period when the novel takes place Bateman is 
a member of the as yet unnamed one percent, and he would probably still be now. 
But would Patrick Bateman actually be living somewhere else, and would his 
interests be any different?” says Ellis. “Would better criminology forensics 
(not to mention Big Brother cameras on virtually every corner) allow him to get 
away with the murders he tells the reader he committed, or would his need to 
express his rage take other forms?”

Although today we are much less anonymous, thanks to surveillance and the 
ubiquity of over-sharing on social media, Ellis thinks Bateman could use this 
to effectively hide in plain sight.

He writes: “Would he be using social media – as a troll using fake avatars? 
Would he have a Twitter account bragging about his accomplishments? Would he be 
using Instagram, showcasing his wealth, his abs, his potential victims? 
Possibly.”

The thing is, it barely seems likely trolling people on Twitter (or maybe the 
Guardian comments section) would scratch that particular Bateman itch, the one 
that led him to … well, you’ve either read the scene with the rat or you 
haven’t. Suffice to say, it’s not one for dwelling on here.

Instagram, though, with its coterie of rich kids bragging about their material 
possessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/02/rich-kids-of-instagram>, 
does seem a perfect fit with Bateman’s reverence for expensive brands. The 
question is, would anyone do anything other than pity a man in his 50s showing 
off his Rolex and his Genesis vinyl, no matter how buff his chest?

Perhaps an ageing Bateman just wouldn’t work in 2016, though a reboot of the 
whole concept to retell the story with a young investment banker might. Ellis 
says: “There was the possibility to hide during Patrick’s 80s reign that there 
simply isn’t now; we live in a fully exhibitionistic culture. Because he wasn’t 
a character to me as much as an emblem, an idea, I would probably approach him 
the same way now and address his greatest fear: Would anyone be paying any 
attention to him?”

Before anyone gets excited though, this is all just conjecture. Ellis does not 
appear to actually have any plans to revisit Patrick Bateman – who originally 
appeared in a cameo in Ellis’s 1987 novelThe Rules of Attraction 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1987/09/19/books/books-of-the-times-today-s-students.html>
 – with either a sequel to the novel or a reboot of the story for the current 
day.

He says: “Like many characters a writer creates, Patrick Bateman lives on 
without me, regardless of how I felt or how close we became during the years it 
took me to write about him. Characters are often like children leaving the 
nest, going out into the uncaring world and being either accepted or not 
accepted, ignored or extolled, criticized or prized, no matter how the writer 
might feel about them. I check in with Patrick every now and then … but he has 
been living his own life for some time now, and I rarely feel as if I have 
guardianship over him, or any right to tell him where he would or would not be 
today, decades after his birth.”

Still, just to err on the side of caution, remember your internet safety, 
kids, and never give out your real-life address on Twitter. Especially to 
someone who follows Black & Decker.
 