
Bret Easton Ellis appears to be pondering a sequel to his most famous novel, 
American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>, in which 
his antihero Patrick Bateman might stalk Gavin Rossdale, murder David Beckham 
and slit Chris Martin's throat.

The novelist told his quarter of a million Twitter followers on 10 March 
<http://twitter.com/#!/breteastonellis> that it was 1am in Los Angeles, and 
that he was "sitting at my desk finishing a script and suddenly I'm making 
notes on where Patrick Bateman's now". Easton Ellis seemed uncertain about 
whether or not to go ahead with the sequel, but finished his Twitter session 
having produced at least 14 pages of notes mapping out the likes and dislikes 
of a 2012 version of Bateman, and with tentative plans to start writing.

"Maybe I'll call my publishers on Monday … But have to figure out what the 
structure is … Definitely murders at prep school," he wrote. "If thisAmerican 
Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> sequel pans out I'd 
get in touch with my agent first but will have to spend the weekend seeing if 
it works."

First published in 1991, and satirising the money-focused New York of the late 
1980s,American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330536301/american-psycho>
 is unreliably narrated by Bateman, a 26-year-old Wall Street operative 
obsessed with appearances and ruled by his appetites for food, clothes and sex. 
He sleeps with "hardbodies", loves Les Misérables, discusses the "emotional 
honesty" of Phil Collins and devotes a chapter to analysing all of Whitney 
Houston's albums. He also indiscriminately rapes, kills and eats (or does he?) 
his victims – "thirty, forty, a hundred murders" – but goes unnoticed.

A modern version of Bateman would, Easton Ellis speculated, be a hedge fund 
manager in Los Angeles. He would hate Obama but love Kim Kardashian and Michael 
Hutchence, with his questionable taste in music and television revealed in his 
fondness for The Celebrity Apprentice, his favourite film (The Help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142864/help>) and his "very long 
dissertation about Coldplay's oeuvre … His favourite song beingFix You. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JI-o25K6B-E&ob=av3e>" A later scene would see 
"Chris Martin and Patrick Bateman eat waffles and talk about how cool St 
Vincent is … and then Patrick slits his throat". In an echo of the cash machine 
in the original novel that asks to be fed a stray cat, Bateman's iPad would 
start speaking to him, "telling him Adele's cover of the Cure drove him to 
killing, well, just about everybody".

"Patrick's first killing would not have been at Harvard. It would have been 
before … it would have been his father's mistress," suggested Easton Ellis. The 
novel's antihero would "post pics of murdered girls on Facebook and either no 
one would notice or post 'Fuck yeah'".

Throwing out ideas rapidly, Easton Ellis considered having Bateman murder 
David Beckham in an elevator in Manchester and stalk Bush singer Gavin Rossdale 
in West Hollywood. "Patrick would complain about Spotify and the Cloud and 
Tumblr … but he would find victims via Blendr while listening to Beyoncé andOAR 
<http://www.ofarevolution.com/>," speculated the author.

Signing off, Easton Ellis wondered if he was really going to go ahead with the 
American Psycho sequel. "Making new notes. Going to bed. Can't believe this 
happened. Am I really going to start doing this? PB says yes," he wrote, 
telling his followers: "Please keep sending me ideas … You won't get credit … 
But they help …"
 