
There are plenty of novelists out there whose work pulses with the influence 
of contemporary music, but none use music references quite so effectively as
Bret Easton Ellis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis>. Few 
divide opinion quite as much as him either. Those who love him,really love him. 
His critics, however, dismiss him as an empty stylist, a yuppie or, even worse, 
a misogynist.

While Ellis's work over the past quarter century (doesn't that make you feel 
old?) has always been littered with enough casual sex, drugs, designer clothes, 
dark humour and nihilism to pull in younger readers, it's his connection to, 
and appetite for, pop culture that has ensured his work continues to influence 
music as much as literature.

Pop culture has responded to the work of Easton Ellis by writing songs about 
his characters (Bloc Party's Song For Clay 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ciR33xgnlCI>, Manic Street Preachers' Patrick 
Bateman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vGoJtuFJXU>) and there are more songs 
and bands that allude to American Psycho than you can shake a glinting cleaver 
at. And without even realising she is basically a minor Bret Eason Ellis 
character, even Peaches Geldof got in on the act when she attempted to launch 
the short-lived, Less Than Zero-inspired magazineDisappear Here 
<http://www.mtv.co.uk/shows/peaches-disappear-here/episode/peaches-disappear-here>
.

Fans are currently excited about his new novel Imperial Bedrooms 
<http://notanexit.net/past/2009/11/24_imperial_bedrooms_cover_and_synopsis.shtml>
, the long-awaited follow-up to his epoch-defining debut Less Than Zero, novels 
which are named after an Elvis Costello album and song respectively. Imperial 
Bedrooms covers similar ground to Less Than Zero – broadly-speaking, the moral 
bankruptcy of Hollywood's wealthy – and reads like an oncoming anxiety attack. 
That's meant as a compliment, by the way; no-one does anxiety and foreboding 
quite as brilliantly as Easton Ellis. And, true to form, among the rising 
levels of paranoia, there are nods to contemporary bands like Bat for Lashes, 
The National and The Fray, each casually namedropped to give an insight into 
the mind and tastes of its protagonists.

It's an effective scene-setting ploy. I dare anyone to read American Psycho 
Patrick Bateman's articulate and impassioned monologues on the recorded output 
ofPhil Collins <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-kWsXUdYm4M> or Huey Lewis and 
the News, delivered in the dry, humourless tones of a particularly joyless type 
of music critic, and not crack a twisted smile. Ellis's underlying message was, 
of course: a) only tasteless fools found any depth or meaning in the emotional 
platitudes that Phil Collins squeezed out in the mid-80s and b) innocuous pop 
is just as likely to drive people to murder as anything. And also possibly c) 
music critics are borderline sociopaths.

You think of the white, affluent, empty characters of Less Than Zero and you 
think of the early days of MTV. White, affluent, empty pop, basically. Music 
plays a big part in the glossy world of Glamorama too, whose disconnected 
male-model lead, Victor, spends his nights spotting the major pop stars of the 
mid-90s (including, memorably "the two Aphex Twins") and yawns out Green Day 
lyrics rather than actually form sentences of his own.

Fortunately, as writers go, Easton Ellis appears to have good taste – his 
recent preferred listening choices were compiled from many months of his tweets 
in aVice magazine playlist 
<http://www.viceland.com/wp/2010/02/a-musical-journey-to-the-center-of-bret-easton-ellis/>
. But I have to admit to feeling a twinge of disappointment when he recently 
tweeted that "the happiest I have been in a long time" was when The Psychedelic 
Furs' Richard Butler performed the amazing Pretty in Pink live with the 
decidedly drab Killers.

Then again, given they've always sounded like they're writing songs for 
mid-80s brat pack movies about rich white kids and are called The Killers, it 
all kind of makes sense.
 