
Recently, I climbed Maol Chean-dearg, a mountain in the far north-west of 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. Down in the glens, it was 
not far above freezing, and the cold air pooled as mist. But up on the summits 
the sun blazed, and the temperature touched 15C. The result was one of the most 
dazzling cloud inversions I have seen in 30 years.

In the high corries of the peak, I climbed out of the mist and into clearness. 
To the west, jagging from a glowing sea of cloud, were the Black Cuillin of 
Skye and the Clisham on the Outer Hebrides. Nearby were the graceful Torridon 
tops: Beinn Alligin, whose Gaelic name means the jewelled hill, and Liathach, 
the grey one. Far to the east rose the white domes of the Cairngorms. I had a 
sight-span of almost 200 miles, across mountain, glen, sea and loch. There was 
nowhere I would rather have been than there.

Country files: nature writers on the books that inspired them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/30/country-files-nature-writers-books-inspired-them>
There are certain places, wrote the Scottish climber WH Murray, “where the 
natural movement of the heart is upwards”. Our landscape is astonishingly rich 
with such places. It is easy to forget – from behind a desk or in front of a 
screen – that the landmass uneasily known as the United Kingdom comprises 
thousands of islands, hundreds of hills and rivers, and a coastline almost 
20,000 miles long.

A passion for wilderness is grained deep into our literature. Among the 
earliest literary works are the poems of the peregrini, the early Celtic 
Christian monks who retreated to lonely peaks and skerries in pursuit of their 
faith. “Swarms of bees, beetles, soft music of the world, a gentle humming; 
brent geese, barnacle geese, music of the dark wild torrent,” wrote a nameless 
hermit one October in the 10th century. “O let them be left, wildness and wet,” 
wrote Gerard Manley Hopkins almost a millennium later, “Long live the weeds and 
the wilderness yet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8af18229398c7b2a5e8272c5bbc6900c63ba9dd%2F0_159_4780_2868%2F4780.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8af18229398c7b2a5e8272c5bbc6900c63ba9dd%2F0_159_4780_2868%2F4780.jpg>
 Where you can hear the silence ... the summit of Maol Cheann-dearg, Scottish 
Highlands. Photograph: Alamy 
The languages and dialects of these islands also register our long, 
imagi-native relationship with the wild. We have hundreds of words for 
elemental phenomena, from grimlins (Orcadian for the “night hours around 
midsummer when dusk blends into dawn”) to moor-gallop (Cumbrian for “wind and 
rain moving fast over high ground”), and hundreds more for aspects of 
creaturely life, from airymouse (Cornish for a bat) to zebn-slaper (Somerset 
dialect for a dormouse, literally a “seven-sleeper”).

We also, though, live in an increasingly populated, urbanised country, where 
64.5 million people share 93,600 square miles of land. Our road network is more 
than 246,000 miles long: stretch out that tarmac, and you could drive to the 
moon and beyond. Over the last century, nature has come under immense pressure. 
We have irreparably damaged remarkable landscapes, and pushed scores of species 
towards or over the brink of extinction. Wilderness is not vanished in these 
islands – as EM Forster once declared it to be – but it is endangered, and what 
remains is both hugely powerful and precious.

When I can’t sleep, and when I’ve been in the city too long, I occasionally 
send my mind out travelling through some of the wildest places I know. The 
Fairy Pools on Skye, where you can dive into gin-clear water, and swim under a 
submerged rock arch; the Undercliff at Lyme Regis, a slip-sliding jungle of 
gunnera and hawker dragonflies; the ridgebacked Snowdonian peak of Tryfan; and 
the salt marshes of the Essex estuaries, where waders flock above the shipping 
lanes. I also dream of places I’d like to reach: the Kielder forest on a clear 
night, where the skies are the darkest in England; or the pink sea-fan coral 
colonies that lie off the Cornish coast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402dc209a2211fd2bedfeb6f50f0790a88830be9%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402dc209a2211fd2bedfeb6f50f0790a88830be9%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A walk in the clouds ... Robert Macfarlane experiences cloud inversions in the 
glens. Photograph: PR 
I think also about the importance of nearby nature: the wildlife that weaves 
with our everyday existence in cities and edgelands. Last year, a pair of 
peregrine falcons bred successfully on a building in the centre of my city, 
Cambridge. Gothic stonework gave them the perfect nest site. They used the 
spires of a nearby church as their plucking posts. This year, the falcons are 
back again. I cycle past their nest each day, and gawp skywards, hoping for a 
glimpse of the birds.

A peregrine nest in the heart of a city, a woodland near a suburb, a 
mountain-top with a 200-mile view: such places are vital to our imaginations, 
and to the ways we value and fight for the nature of which we are part. They 
are – as the great American writer Wallace Stegner put it in 1960 – “a means of 
reassuring ourselves of our sanity as creatures; a part of the geography of 
hope.”

A passion for wilderness is grained deep into our literature. Among the 
earliest literary works are the poems of the peregrini, the early Celtic 
Christian monks who retreated to lonely peaks and skerries in pursuit of their 
faith. “Swarms of bees, beetles, soft music of the world, a gentle humming; 
brent geese, barnacle geese, music of the dark wild torrent,” wrote a nameless 
hermit one October in the 10th century. “O let them be left, wildness and wet,” 
wrote Gerard Manley Hopkins almost a millennium later, “Long live the weeds and 
the wilderness yet.”

The languages and dialects of these islands also register our long, 
imaginative relationship with the wild. We have hundreds of words for elemental 
phenomena, from grimlins (Orcadian for the “night hours around midsummer when 
dusk blends into dawn”) to moor-gallop (Cumbrian for “wind and rain moving fast 
over high ground”), and hundreds more for aspects of creaturely life, from 
airymouse (Cornish for a bat) to zebn-slaper (Somerset dialect for a dormouse, 
literally a “seven-sleeper”).

We also, though, live in an increasingly populated, urbanised country, where 
64.5 million people share 93,600 square miles of land. Our road network is more 
than 246,000 miles long: stretch out that tarmac, and you could drive to the 
moon and beyond. Over the last century, nature has come under immense pressure. 
We have irreparably damaged remarkable landscapes, and pushed scores of species 
towards or over the brink of extinction. Wilderness is not vanished in these 
islands – as EM Forster once declared it to be – but it is endangered, and what 
remains is both hugely powerful and precious.

Robert Macfarlane’s Landmarks will be published in paperback by Penguin on 5 
May at £9.99. To order a copy for £7.99 with free UK p&p, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com> or call 0330 333 
6846.


Top five wild hotspots

1. Fairy Pools <http://wildswim.com/the-fairy-pools-isle-of-skye>, Skye
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b89f79faf749c0d4ec5666eb5d04b4a6573c2c%2F0_31_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b89f79faf749c0d4ec5666eb5d04b4a6573c2c%2F0_31_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
These crystal-clear waters lie in a sheltered glade of lilac rocks and rowan 
trees. There is also an underwater arch to swim through, and a good jump.

2. Undercliff <http://jurassiccoast.org/walkthroughtime>, Lyme Regis, Dorset

A national nature reserve, where sandstone and chalk slipping over clay and 
limestone have created a dramatic coastline.


3. Kielder Dark Sky Park <http://visitkielder.com/visit/kielder-observatory>, 
Northumberland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8830e3f45f13e452fb46af93e3c2ad63b6dc0f96%2F0_49_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8830e3f45f13e452fb46af93e3c2ad63b6dc0f96%2F0_49_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 Photograph: Mike Dickson/PA 
This stargazer’s paradise boasts the largest expanse of dark night sky in the 
whole of Europe, thanks to minimal light pollution.



4. Essex saltmarshes <http://visitessex.com>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27263210d452cbef0f68791d2ea532640df68fd0%2F0_1075_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20wild%20places%20are%20vital%20to%20our%20imaginations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbritain-wild-places-vital-our-imaginations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27263210d452cbef0f68791d2ea532640df68fd0%2F0_1075_2832_1699%2F2832.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Expanses of salt marsh and mudflats are two of Britain’s last remaining 
natural wildnernesses; bleak but scenic, and teaming with wildlife. A hidden 
gem.


5. Coral colonies <http://wildlifetrusts.org>, Cornwall 

Off the Lizard peninsula are the Manacles, a set of treacherous rocky reefs 
rich in marine wildlife that can be viewed on a scenic coastline walk.



 