
Thousands of Brooklynites are nursing hangovers on Monday having swarmed the 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> borough's Prospect Park 
over the weekend for a massive festival of food and music.

The first annual Great GoogaMooga Festival <http://www.googamooga.com/about/> 
was the apotheosis of Brooklyn foodie hipsterdom. A celebration of Brooklyn's 
many culinary wonders first and foremost, it was a day in the park dedicated to 
gustatory miracles ranging from artisanal pickles on sticks to wild boar sloppy 
joes to foie-gras stuffed doughnuts.

"GoogaMooga is a place of discovery â€“ discovering new things and creating a 
conversation about food," said Rick Farman of Superfly Presents, the same group 
that organizes the Bonnaroo festival in Tennessee.

And as with any large first-time event, GoogaMooga was not without its 
problems. In many ways it was two festivals in one: one, called Extra Mooga, 
for the haves, and other main event for the have-nots.

The luscious green "nethermead" of the Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert 
Vaux-designed park was lined with local vendors and open to anyone who had 
registered for free tickets in advance.

With very little shade, thousands of event-goers were forced to wait in 
epically long lines to buy small plates of local delicacies. Drink lines were 
even longer and the special ticketing system to purchase select beer and wine 
broke down completely for much of Saturday.

"I thought it was going to be a music and food place, but I waited an hour for 
a burger," complained Jon Weissberg, who came into Brooklyn from Manhattan's 
East Village. "It's poorly managed."

Some wags took to Twitter, as wags are wont to do.
Lockhart Steele (@Lock) 
Great Googamooga: The Hunger Games. #TheGoogz 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523TheGoogz>
 <https://twitter.com/Lock/status/203936615360507906> May 19, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Lock/status/203936615360507906> 
But not everyone minded the crowds.

"The lines are great," said Ben Morrissey of the Brooklyn Brewery, which 
concocted its own brew for the festival, the Googa Doc Pomus. "All the 
restaurant owners are very excited the lines are long."

Meanwhile, in the shade-dappled woods behind the main stage, Extra Mooga was a 
far superior event held for VIP pass holders who had paid $250 for unlimited 
access to food and booze. There were also more intimate talks, food 
demonstrations and comedy shows.

"It's nice to have this," said comedian and singer Reggie Watts, who was 
standing in line at the tasting tent after having seen friends perform. "Very 
Bonnarrooian."

But even some of the performers bristled at the huge difference between the 
two halves.

"Why would you do this elitist shit?" asked comedian Kristen Schaal in 
half-mock outrage. "A friend told me he was going to Googa Mooga but that he 
couldn't see my show because it's in 'Rich Googa Mooga'."

She and her comedy partner Kurt Braunohler performed in Extra Mooga on Sunday. 
Both said they loved the event, and have no problem with people paying extra to 
get something more, but it made little sense to hold a festival and then deny 
people access to half of it.

"This is class war!" joked Braunohler.

Still, there was some bang for the extra buck: No Reservations host Anthony 
Bourdain <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain> gave a 
typically foul mouthed Extra Mooga talk in which he took questions from the 
audience, including whether he'd ever eat a human ("fuck yeah!") and how he'd 
cook a unicorn. He also said he'd "deep fry Dick Cheney's head" and sodomize 
him.

And the free event was, nonetheless, a free event. Attendees were by and large 
positive in their reviews, especially once some of the organizational kinks had 
been worked out on Sunday.

Googa Mooga had an "issue of oversuccess," Jacob Fain, a Sony executive, put 
it diplomatically.

"It's a free show, at the end of the day, so I can't complain," said Glen 
Straub who had been born and raised in the neighborhood.

Part, if not all, of the draw was also music. With two stages on either side 
of the park, bands played hourlong sets throughout the weekend.

Highlights of the daytime shows included the Preservation Hall Jazz band on 
Saturday's main stage. And on the secondary stage, dubbed "Hamaggedon", Lez 
Zeppelin, an all-girl Led Zeppelin cover band boasting Jimmy Page and Robert 
Plant lipstick lookalikes, played an impressively faithful and swaggery set on 
Sunday.

Saturday night's headliners were the Roots, who dedicated their performance to 
Chuck Brown, the godfather of go-go who died last week. But it was Sunday 
afternoon's main act that seemed to dissolve any aggravation that had 
accumulated over the two sweaty days.

Hall and Oates tapped a deep vein of 1980s nostalgia with a set of hits that 
had an entire field of tired, tipsy festivalgoers unironically and 
enthusiastically singing along through two encores.

"There was so much dancing," said Brooklynite Jessica Gomez, "my face melted 
off with joy."
 