
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/buzz-aldrin>, the 
second person to walk on the moon, responded to questions posed on Reddit’s Ask 
Me Anything (AMA) feature on Tuesday. He was on the site to promote the 45th 
anniversary of the Apollo 11 moon landing, which is on 20 July, and a social 
media campaign connected to the event.

Read the full discussion here. 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/>


He thinks that the first people who visit Mars shouldn’t come back 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/cirs2i0>


“I have considered whether a landing on Mars could be done by the private 
sector. It conflicts with my very strong idea, concept, conviction, that the 
first human beings to land on Mars should not come back to Earth. They should 
be the beginning of a build-up of a colony / settlement, I call it a 
'permanence'.

"A settlement you can visit once or twice, come back, and then decide you want 
to settle. Same with a colony. But you want it to be permanent from the get-go, 
from the very first. I know that many people don't feel that that should be 
done. Some people even consider it distinctly a suicide mission. Not me! Not at 
all. Because we will plan, we will construct from the moon of Mars, over a 
period of six to seven years, the landing of different objects at the landing 
site that will be brought together to form a complete Mars habitat and 
laboratory, similar to what has been done at the moon.

"Tourism trips to Mars and back are just not the appropriate way for human 
beings from Earth – to have an individual company, no matter how smart, send 
people to mars and bring them back, it isvery very expensive. It delays the 
obtaining of permanence, internationally.”

He had a pleasant time yelling at the moon with Tina Fey on 30 Rock 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/cirsw74>

“My father, in 1925, 1926, in the Reserve of the Air Corps, worked as Aviation 
Fuel Manager for Standard Oil of New Jersey, that's where I lived at that time, 
and he would go into NYC and work at 30 Rockefeller Plaza. So when I was asked 
to consider participating, I jumped for joy, and I can't remember a more 
pleasant episode of discussions with Tina Fey as we talked about her fictitious 
mother's (I think it was) love affair that she had with me, Buzz Aldrin. And 
then we looked at the moon, and we both sort of cursed at it for various 
reasons and said – I'll never forget the line – 'I walked on your FACE! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=adz4rbKSsDI>'”

He had a really great time on the moon 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/cirsu5z>

“My first words of my impression of being on the surface of the moon that just 
came to my mind was 'magnificent desolation'. The magnificence of human beings, 
humanity, Planet Earth, maturing the technologies, imagination and courage to 
expand our capabilities beyond the next ocean, to dream about being on the 
moon, and then taking advantage of increases in technology and carrying out 
that dream – achieving that is magnificent testimony to humanity. But it is 
also desolate – there is no place on earth as desolate as what I was viewing in 
those first moments on the lunar surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbuzz-aldrin-ama-mars-colony-moon-landing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F8%2F1404850847782%2F88fd4302-f748-4b84-b4cb-b76d50750bd3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buzz%20Aldrin's%20AMA%3A%20colonising%20Mars%20and%20the%20moon's%20'magnificent%20desolation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbuzz-aldrin-ama-mars-colony-moon-landing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buzz%20Aldrin%27s%20AMA%3A%20colonising%20Mars%20and%20the%20moon%27s%20%27magnificent%20desolation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbuzz-aldrin-ama-mars-colony-moon-landing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F8%2F1404850847782%2F88fd4302-f748-4b84-b4cb-b76d50750bd3-1020x612.jpeg>
 US astronaut Buzz Aldrin in 1969, who many years later was able to shout at 
the moon 'I walked on your FACE!' Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
"Because I realized what I was looking at, towards the horizon and in every 
direction, had not changed in hundreds, thousands of years. Beyond me I could 
see the moon curving away – no atmosphere, black sky. Cold. Colder than anyone 
could experience on Earth when the sun is up – but when the sun is up for 14 
days, it gets very, very hot. No sign of life whatsoever.

"That is desolate. More desolate than any place on Earth.”

He is impressed by the movie Gravity 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/cirt35v>

“I thought that the movie Gravity, the depiction of people moving around in 
zero gravity, was really the best I have seen. The free-falling, the actions 
that took place between two people, were very, I think, exaggerated, but 
probably bent the laws of physics.

"But to a person who's been in space, we would cringe looking at something 
that we hoped wouldnever, ever happen. It's very thrilling for the person who's 
never been there, because it portrays the hazards, the dangers that could come 
about if things begin to go wrong, and I think that as I came out of that 
movie, I said to myself and others, 'Sandra Bullock deserves an Oscar.'”

He doesn’t take people who think he faked the moon landing seriously 
<http://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/2a5vg8/i_am_buzz_aldrin_engineer_american_astronaut_and/cirtgyb>

“I personally don't waste very much of my time on what is so obvious to a 
really thinking person, of all the evidence – we talked about Carl Sagan 
recently, who made a very prophetic observation. He said that "extraordinary 
observations require extraordinary evidence to make them believable." There is 
not extraordinary evidence of (as far as I know) all the claims that have been 
made that we didnot go to the moon.”
 