
A major debate about the future of investigative journalism is being staged 
next month by theLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Press Club in 
partnership with the polling company YouGov.

The four panellists will be Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> and four journalists with 
admirable records as investigative reporters - Tom Bower, Heather Brooke, 
Andrew Gilligan and Tom Harper. Broadcaster, and former Sunday Times editor, 
Andrew Neil will be in the chair.

YouGov is carrying out a poll ahead of the debate, which is entitled "Can 
investigative journalism survive?" 
<http://pressnews.londonpressclub.co.uk/can-investigative-journalism-survive/> 

There will be plenty for the speakers to talk about, given the attacks on 
whistleblowers, attempts by the authorities to reveal the identities of 
confidential sources, the slashing of editorial budgets and the requirement to 
feed the 24-hours news cycle.

Rusbridger is likely to address The Guardian's use of material from the NSA 
whistleblowerEdward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>
, the arrest of David Miranda, the Wikileaks revelations and, possibly, the 
phone-hacking scandal.

Bower, whose in-depth investigations inevitably lead to revelatory 
biographies, such as those on Conrad Black andBernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone>, may well explain why his 
Richard Desmond book remains unpublished.

Gilligan, the Telegraph's senior reporter, will forever be associated with his 
Today programme claim that Tony Blair's government had "sexed up" an Iraq 
dossier.

Brooke, the freedom of information campaigner, is best known for her role in 
exposing the parliamentary expenses scandal that culminated in numerous 
resignations and prosecutions.

And Harper, The Independent's investigations reporter, has a series of scoops 
to his name, including the Soca cover-up of the use of private investigators by 
blue-chip firms.

The debate will take place at the Stationers and Newspapermakers' Hall on 22 
October from 6.45pm. Entry is by ticket only, and places are limited. Priority 
among London Press Club's allocation will be given to members. To apply for a 
place, emailevents@yougov.com <>

Ahead of the debate, members of the London Press Club, the Society of Editors 
and Women in Journalism are taking part in the YouGov poll. You can also take 
part in the survey, which closes in a week's time, by goinghere 
<https://survey.yougov.com/v90Ksjdzd3gFhg>.

The revival of the London Press Club

The investigative journalism debate is the opening to a series of autumn 
events organised by the London Press Club.

Its committee, led by chairman Doug Wills, managing editor of the Independent 
titles andLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, is bent on 
reviving the club.

Two events already planned are a breakfast with The Sun's editor David 
Dinsmore on 5 November (fireworks optional, I would guess) and a women-in-media 
forum in partnership with theHuffington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post> and the Standard on 19 
November.

All are free to London Press Club members. If you wish to join, or to renew 
your membership, go towww.londonpressclub.co.uk 
<http://pressnews.londonpressclub.co.uk/> or email info@londonpressclub.co.uk 
<mailto:info@londonpressclub.co.uk>.
 