
As the film Philomena <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156219/philomena>
 heads into awards season, draped with nominations for Oscars and Baftas, you 
might think nuns are having a bad PR moment. But then over at Team Convent,Call 
the Midwife <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/call-the-midwife> is the 
star of BBC TV's Sunday nights with a much more sympathetic crew. Both these 
are fictionalised versions of real stories, and they are just the tip of the 
iceberg: there are large numbers of nuns in books – surely higher than their 
incidence in the real-life population – with nearly all the descriptions coming 
from women authors, though there are a few good men below. (Strangely, I made
the same point about flat-sharing in books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/oct/29/fictional-female-flatshares-muriel-spark>
 – is it something to do with women and single-sex groups?).

Muriel Spark <https://www.theguardian.com/books/murielspark> liked her nuns – 
one of the main characters in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie ends up as Sister 
Helena, and there is a Marxist Church of England convent inSymposium 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symposium_%28novel%29>: in one splendid scene the 
haloes on the figures in a mural are revealed as the fur hats of Lenin and 
friends.The Abbess of Crewe 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/97/05/11/reviews/spark-morality.html> is wholly 
set in a convent, but is well known to be a satire on the Watergate scandal.

And that demonstrates a key feature of convents, fictional or otherwise – they 
are not actually mysterious hotbeds of unknowable religious transcendence or 
wickedness. They are communities like any other, with secrets, dramas and 
troublesome elections. And so, ideal as a vehicle for a good story: any closed 
community is interesting (see also: country house party, boarding school), 
there is an opportunity to have good strong female characters without their 
being framed by their relationships with men, and there is always the 
underlying question: "Why did these women become nuns?"

Roman Catholic women of a certain age will remember being obsessed as 
teenagers withKathryn Hulme's The Nun's Story 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Nun%27s_Story>, book and film – "Is God 
calling me to be Audrey Hepburn?" It's still a good strong read, and even more 
fascinating when you know the story behind it. It is a novel, but based on the 
life of the author's long-term companion, a former nun.

One aspect of nuns in books is that the names are confusing and you get your 
Sister Mary mixed up with Sister Maria – and apparently the considerable 
profits from The Nun's Story are languishing unclaimed because no one knows 
which nuns should have inherited them. More straightforwardly non-fiction are 
books fromKaren Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/06/society1> (Through the Narrow 
Gate) andMonica Baldwin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monica_Baldwin> (I Leap 
Over the Wall – so much the better name) dealing with the challenges of leaving 
the convent behind in, respectively, 1981 and 1949.

Of course we all like to read about nuns going off the rails: Rumer Godden's 
Black Narcissus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781844088393/black-narcissus-a-virago-modern-classic>
 is an overwrought and enjoyable look at a convent in the Himalayas, and a nun 
who wants a last chance. There is also the very splendid Lambs of God by the 
Australian authorMarele Day <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marele_Day>, with its 
feral nuns including sheep in their community.Aldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley>'s The Devils of Loudun 
(overshadowed now by the 1971 notorious-in-its-day Ken Russell film) is 
non-fiction, full of hysterical and demonic sisters in 17th-century France. The 
book very much reflects its author's non-believing, child-of-the-enlightenment 
stance, though it's a rattling good read, and he does his best to be fair.

Other men who have bravely written about nuns include the American novelist 
Ron Hansen, with his well-imaginedMariette in Ecstasy  
<http://www.harpercollins.com/author/authorExtra.aspx?isbn13=9780060981181&displayType=readingGuide>
(1991), paralleling the story ofSt Therese of Lisieux 
<http://www.catholic.org/saints/saint.php?saint_id=105>, and Mark Salzman with 
Lying Awake <http://www.salon.com/2001/01/10/salzman/> (2000) – an 
extraordinary look at a nun who has visions and writes poetry, but fears both 
may disappear if she has treatment for epilepsy.

These have all been books with the nuns as the direct focus, but there is also 
a subgenre looking at them through the eyes of girls attending convent schools. 
In Edna O'Brien'sCountry Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/12/country-girl-edna-obrien-review> 
(1960), Cait and Baba deliberately get themselves expelled, amid some fairly 
unsympathetic nuns. Antonia White wrote what amounted to a misery memoir in
Frost in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/17/amodernclassicimnotsure>
 (1933), a lightly fictionalised version of her own experiences.

(But then it turns out her memories weren't reliable – Samantha Ellis writes 
rivetingly about this in hernew book on literary heroines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/04/how-to-be-heroine-review>.) Much 
more enjoyable isLand of Spices 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_land_of_spices.html?id=6CM4AAAAIAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 (1941) by the under-rated Kate O'Brien – the title comes from aGeorge Herbert 
poem <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173636> and shouldn't be taken to 
imply anything exotic or cosmopolitan in the content (it means prayer) but, the 
relationship between Reverend Mother and a child at the convent school is 
engrossing. And adults get pulled in too:Iris Murdoch 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/book-of-a-lifetime-the-bell-by-iris-murdoch-7573964.html>
's The Bell (1958) is set in a religious community attached to a convent, but 
the nuns' role is mostly symbolic.

There are astonishing numbers of detective stories with nuns as sleuths or key 
characters: Antonia Fraser's 1977Quiet as a Nun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quiet_as_a_Nun> (convent, boarding school and the 
estimable Jemima Shore – triple threat) stands out, and the US author Jane 
Haddam <http://www.janehaddam.com/>'s crime books often feature religious 
settings to great effect.

Once you start looking at nuns in history from a modern perspective, there 
comes a whole new topic – was it actually fun being a nun? Of course there must 
have been an unknown percentage of women closed up against their will, but it's 
rewarding to examine the idea that being a nun wasn't that bad an option in 
earlier times. In fact, dare we say it, was it the feminist choice? Look what 
they missed: a nun was free from the horrors and dangers of childbirth and the 
rigours of unwanted marriage. Often they could pursue an interest in medicine, 
horticulture, art or music. They didn't have to wear corsets or attract men …

This is what fascinates female authors and readers. Sarah Dunant's marvellous 
Sacred Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/18/sacred-hearts-sarah-dunant-review>
 – published 2009, set in 1570 in Italy – looks at the idea of different 
choices for different women.Sylvia Townsend Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/02/sylvia-townsend-warner> in The 
Corner That Held Them (published 1948, set in an English convent in 
14th-century Norfolk) gives us gossip, politics, particular friendships and 
details of church music.

Charlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/10/charlottebronte> – daughter of 
the parsonage – is deeply suspicious of Roman Catholicism in general, and the 
figure of the nun in Villette is quite troublesome. But as s/he isn't a real 
nun – well, perhaps we won't examine the psychology of that too closely. She 
was certainly reflecting back to Gothic fiction and supernatural, creepy 
religious figures, rather than looking at career opportunities, and she and her 
heroine Lucy Snowe take a good Protestant line against Papist nonsense.

But Brontë is the exception: most authors understand more and condemn less.

Which other writers created convents worth reading about, and which books make 
the life sound attractive? Please offer up your thoughts …
 