
Yotam Ottolenghi, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/yotam-ottolenghi-recipes> 
Claudia Roden <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/claudia-roden>and Anthony 
Bourdain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/27/anthony-bourdain-parts-unknown-family-values>
 are among the dozens of authors and chefs contributing soup recipes to a 
forthcoming cookbook that will raise money for the Syrian relief efforts.

Soup for Syria was dreamed up by author Barbara Abdeni Massaad 
<http://barbaramassaad.com/> and Michel Moushabeck 
<http://www.arabicfiction.org/trustee/47.html>, publisher and editor at US 
press Interlink, last autumn. Massaad lives in Lebanon, near a Syrian refugee 
camp, and told Moushabeck that she had been taking ingredients to the camp at 
weekends to make soup for the refugees.

“She said that after several trips she thought about self-publishing a soup 
cookbook with recipes donated from friends and neighbours, and using the 
proceeds from the cookbook sales to buy ingredients to enable her to continue 
her weekend visits to the camp. Hearing her talk about her idea, my brain 
immediately went into fast forward. I thought it was a brilliant idea from 
someone with a big heart, but that it would achieve very little considering the 
magnitude of the crisis,” said Moushabeck.

Cookbooks' key ingredient now design not recipes, says food writer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/cookbooks-key-ingredient-design-recipes-prue-leith>
“There are four million refugees and the international community has largely 
abandoned them. I was convinced that if we could get celebrity chefs to donate 
soup recipes then we have a good chance at selling a huge number of copies 
throughout the world, in many languages, and turn this from a one-person 
initiative to an international movement to bring food relief and ease the 
suffering of Syrian refugees.”

Moushabeck said there had been an “outpouring” of support from celebrity chefs 
and authors when they were approached. More than 80 have now contributed 
recipes, with Ottolenghi, Sami Tamimi, Bourdain, Alice Waters, Paula Wolfert, 
Sally Butcher and Roden the first to come on board.

Roden, with a borlotti bean and pasta soup, hopes “the book helps to keep the 
plight of Syrian refugees in people’s minds and that it will raise funds to 
alleviate their awful living conditions until their future is settled”.

“Having a few big names supporting the project from the start opened the door 
for us and encouraged others to become contributors. In the end, it took us 
less than one year to put together the 208-page cookbook,” Moushabeck said. 
“The author, an accomplished photographer, took numerous photos on her weekend 
visits to the camp. The book has wonderful food photography as well as 
photographs of the refugees she got to know.”

Interlink is donating all the proceeds from the sales of the US edition of 
Soup forSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> to the UN refugee 
agency UNHCR, which has assured the publisher that 100% of the donations will 
go to fund food relief. Pavilion, which will publish in the UK, is donating “a 
minimum of £2”, and co-edition publishers around the world can donate a 
percentage of their choosing to an organisation of their choice, with the only 
condition that all donated funds go to food relief for Syrian refugees.
 