
If there is one thing better than a famous person writing about themselves, it 
is a famous person writing about their famous family. Not convinced? Well, 
publishers hope the lineup of new celebrity biographies and autobiographies 
this autumn will entice readers with a rich harvest of real-life dynastic 
sagas. Among the illustrious families offered up for dissection are the Bush 
clan, the Spencers, the Hustons – via the memoirs of the actress Anjelica – 
and, of course, the Kennedys again.

In some cases the perspective on offer is particularly intimate, with Charles 
Spencer, brother to the late Princess of Wales, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/aug/26/monarchy.theobserver> writing about 
his own ancestry and George W Bush bringing out an appreciation of his father. 
And the Britishliterary biographer Selina Hastings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/sep/19/secret-lives-somerset-maugham-hastings>
 has published the life story of her father, the rakish 16th Earl of Huntingdon.

"Generally, readers like history with a human face on it. You can position 
yourself against them, as a family, when it comes to how fathers and mothers 
treat their sons and daughters," said Gordon Wise, a senior editor at the 
literary agency Curtis Brown. "There is also a family history element, aWho Do 
You Think You Are? quality to it. These can be epic stories if they are about 
people who were historically involved with public life."

The biography of George HW Bush, the 41st president of the United States, 
written by his son, the 43rd president, has been seen by some as a well-timed 
reminder of America's most successful recent political dynasty ahead of the
decision still to be made by George W's younger brother Jeb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/06/jeb-bush-decide-republican-presidential-run>
, the former governor of Florida, about his own White House run. Asked about 
Jeb's ambitions in 2016, George W said: "I think he'd be a great president. He 
understands what it's like to be president, for not only the person running or 
serving, plus family. He's seen his dad. He's seen his brother. So he's a very 
thoughtful man and he's weighing his options."

The Ebury Publishing imprint WH Allen, which has acquired the British rights to
41: A Portrait of My Father, is promising a "highly personal" and "unique and 
intimate" biography, due to be released on 11 November, as the American edition 
comes out. Publicising the book earlier this year, the author – whose previous 
book,Decision Points, detailed the most important dilemmas in his life – said: 
"George HW Bush is a great servant, statesman and father. I loved writing the 
story of his life and I hope others enjoy reading it." The US publishers say it 
will cover the "entire scope of the elder President Bush's life and career, 
including his service in the Pacific during the second world war, his 
pioneering work in the Texas oil business, and his political rise as a 
congressman, US representative to China and the United Nations, CIA director, 
vice-president and president". The first printing will be of one million copies 
in America. His last book sold just under 30,000 copies, according to Nielsen 
Bookscan.

Fans of a more glamorous presidential family can look forward to publication 
of two more books about the Kennedys on 28 October.The Good Son: JFK Jr and the 
Mother He Loved by bestselling biographer Christopher Andersen is said to 
contain revelations about John Kennedy Jnr's girlfriends and the night of his 
death in a plane crash on 16 July 1999. However, the focus is firmly on his 
relationship with his mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and will chart her 
depression following the assassination of her husband in Dallas and her 
attitude to the succession of celebrated women her son was linked with, 
including Madonna, Sarah Jessica Parker, Daryl Hannah and his wife, Carolyn 
Bessete.

The other Kennedy chronicle out that day is Barbara Leaming's "sensitive" 
biography of the former first lady.Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis: The 
Untold Story will describe her struggle with post-traumatic stress disorder 
following the killing.

The most famous British family in public life to be affected by a brutal 
sudden death, the Spencers, are the subject of a new history out last month 
which traces their aristocratic family from its beginnings in medieval sheep 
farming, through centuries of service to the crown, to the marriage of the 
author's sister to the Prince of Wales. The book, which has won praise from 
critics for its storytelling skill, has benefited from the 9th earl's access to 
private papers.

Hastings's book, The Red Earl, also plunders aristocratic vaults to tell the 
story of her father, Jack Hastings, who in 1925 rebelled against his 
conservative background by eloping with a beautiful Italian and leaving England 
for Australia to become a painter. The couple then moved to an island in the 
South Pacific before heading back to England by way of California, where 
Hastings led a glamorous social life with Charles Chaplin and Douglas Fairbanks.

Wise suspects that Hastings has been shrewd to focus on just one of her 
well-bred forefathers. "The difficulty with a family saga is that you usually 
get a generation or two who are not as interesting, so sometimes it can feel a 
bit stretched."

The aristocracy in general is in vogue, Wise said, partly because of the 
interest in Eton and in the activities of the Bullingdon Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/25/after-benefits-street-watch-posh-on-bond-street>
, the Oxford undergraduate dining society featured in the filmThe Riot Club. 
"It all provides a kind of soap opera," he said. "These stories just fall into 
place with all the complexities around property and wills. It is often more 
Downton than Downton. Readers are intrigued that this goes on in what is now 
meant to be a democracy."

Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, is to bring out his study of Sir Winston 
Churchill later this month. His book,The Churchill Factor, will examine both 
the war leader's relationship with his father, Randolph, and the historic prime 
minister's enduring standing as a political role model. "Boris, although a 
former journalist and editor like Churchill, is in awe of his achievements," 
said Wise, who admits that the authors of books about great dynastic figures 
are often also saying something about themselves. "If they belong to the 
family, they are often trying to distinguish themselves against famous 
relatives or to say something about their own standing."

Anjelica Huston's new book may fall into this category. Following her 
acclaimed memoirA Story Lately Told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/17/anjelica-huston-a-story-lately-told-review-memoir>
, the actress picks up the story of her battle to establish her career in the 
shadow of the careers of her father, the late film director John Huston, and 
her famous former partner, Jack Nicholson.

And what are the commercial prospects for these dynastic sagas? According to 
Wise, they can sell well if the story is ably told. "Heritage books tend to do 
fine in Britain because of the appeal to National Trust and English Heritage 
members, but newspaper serialisation is not worth as much as it once was and so 
publishers are often relying on a book being shortlisted for a high-profile 
prize."
 