
Swimming with dolphins. Everyone yaps on about wanting to do that before they 
die. But swimming with tuna? For some reason, when you tell people you're going 
swimming with tuna, they laugh in your face. It sounds inherently absurd, and 
I'm not entirely sure why. I think it's because we often encounter tuna in 
tins. Also – and I know this is a stupid thing to think, but it's hard not to 
think it – there's that smell. You expect tuna to smell like, well, to smell 
like tuna, even though they're still alive, still in one piece and, most 
importantly, they're underwater where you can't smell anything.

My lack of knowledge was, in retrospect, stunning. I figured the tuna was a 
fairly docile fish, probably about the size of a shoe. I was to be disabused of 
this and several other notions during my visit to Australia. But it wasn't 
"regular" Australia I was heading for. Most overseas tourists visit Sydney or 
the Gold Coast. I was bound for South Australia, an area that's often 
overlooked. Would this be the equivalent of visiting Britain and staying only 
in Croydon?

Adelaide quickly struck me as a superb place to live. It's clean, it's pretty 
and despite being the largest city in South Australia, it's easy to walk 
around. We stayed in a variety of eccentric and inviting heritage homes run by 
the equally eccentric and invitingRodney and Regina Twiss 
<http://www.adelaideheritage.com/>. Staying in a house in a residential area 
would be frustrating in many cities; given the compact nature of the city, it's 
a great idea in Adelaide. After 24 hours, you feel like a local, even though 
you absolutely aren't.

Adelaide makes an ideal base for touring the region. For sun worshippers, 
there are beaches a short tram ride away; for alcoholics, the Barossa Valley 
lies just to the north-east; and for people who want to swim with tuna – or 
sharks – a short plane journey will take you toPort Lincoln 
<http://www.visitportlincoln.net/>. Australians seem to catch small planes like 
we catch buses. It takes less time to fly from Adelaide to Port Lincoln than to 
take the 159 bus from Streatham Hill to Oxford Circus. Unlike the 159, they 
serve snacks on the plane and nobody tries to stab you.
 Charlie Brooker and his wife Konnie Huq relax on the beach after another 
day's hard work at sea: 'There may be photographs of me in a wetsuit 
accompanying this article. I urge you not to look at them. They will be images 
of overpowering sexuality.' Photograph: Kingsley Griffin for the Guardian 
There's not much to see in Port Lincoln itself: its appeal lies in the water, 
in the scenery of Boston Bay and the fishing and diving opportunities there. 
Our tuna-swimming expedition was going to be part of a two-day "ocean safari" 
withAdventure Bay Charters <http://adventurebaycharters.com.au/>, run by the 
affable Matt Waller. Once on board, we sailed to Matt's tuna farm (he's a 
fisherman, see) which essentially consists of a huge floating bowl made of 
netting – picture a giant sieve wafting in the ocean and you're not far off. 
At this point we had to don wetsuits. There may be photographs of me in a 
wetsuit accompanying this article. I urge you not to look at them. They will be 
images of overpowering sexuality.

Anyway, fact file: contrary to earlier statements, a tuna is not about the 
size of a shoe. It's massive. Bloody massive. It has cold, unknowable eyes and 
is covered in sharp scales. And it swims very quickly indeed, especially when 
you hold out a smaller, dead fish for it to eat. It leaps and snatches the 
damned thing out of your hand so fast, you can't even see it: it's like being 
mugged. Mugged by a fish. And the giant underwater tuna bowl teems with them. 
In summary: although "swimming with tuna" sounds inherently comic in theory, in 
practice it's bizarre, exhilarating and faintly scary.

From the tuna farm, we made our way to a nearby island, where we jumped off 
the boat to swim with sea lions. Sea lions are so outrageously cute, even I had 
to concede they were charming, and I usually vomit at the sight of rainbows. 
They were friendly, too, and swam alongside us, diving, rolling and generally 
behaving like something from a Disney film: almost like Care Bears of the sea, 
except, unlike Care Bears, you don't want to kill them with hammers.

Then it was on to a prime spot for great white sharks. The viewing cage went 
in the water, and I went in after it. I'll admit to being nervous at this 
point: having been shocked by the size of tuna, I was trying mentally to 
prepare myself for a moment of life-altering terror. Most tours toss buckets of 
bait into the water, whereas Matt has a more eco-friendly method of attracting 
sharks. He lowers speakers into the water and pumps out rock music. He claims 
great whites are particularly attracted to AC/DC 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/acdc>.

Floating in a cage underwater, keeping watch for sharks like Richard Dreyfuss 
in Jaws 
<http://www.starstills.com/product_images/k/ss2419066_-_photograph_of_richard_dreyfuss_as_matt_hooper_from_jaws_available_in_4_sizes_framed_or_unframed_buy_now_at_starstills__21319.jpg>
, while simultaneously listening to loud, driving rock, is a uniquely surreal 
experience. It could have been bettered only by the appearance of an actual 
shark. Sadly, on the day, none was forthcoming. This didn't seem to be down to 
the music, incidentally: neighbouring boats, hurling berley into the water by 
the bucketload, were having no luck either. Sharks aren't predictable. If they 
were, no one would ever get eaten by them.

It's a measure of how much fun the rest of the ocean safari was that the 
nonappearance of the most fearsome creature on the planet wasn't much of a 
downer. The following day we visited another island to peer at a larger sea 
lion colony, caught fish, stuffed our faces and ate fresh oysters (once 
I managed to overcome my inherent fear of eating anything with a 1% chance of 
making me puke). Then it was back to Port Lincoln, the airport and Adelaide.

The next day, we caught another shuttle flight, this time to Kangaroo Island. 
Kangaroo Island sounds like a sarcastic nickname for Australia itself: fitting, 
in a sense, because it's almost like a compressed version of how Australia 
looks in your head as a child. It's known as Australia's Galapagos because of 
its abundance of wildlife. There are creatures everywhere. Kangaroos hop along 
the roadside, koalas laze in trees, echidnas shuffle through the undergrowth: 
it's like a huge safari park with no fencing.

We stayed at the Southern Ocean Lodge <http://www.southernoceanlodge.com.au/>, 
a place so confidently swish and friendly, I instantly felt like a burglar. 
It's easily the most upmarket place I've ever stayed: I was almost ashamed to 
go to the toilet. The architecture is straight out ofGrand Designs 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/grand-designs/>: all floor-to-ceiling 
windows and understated modernity, not to mention stunning views across the 
ocean – the lodge is perched atop a cliff, overlooking a beach, situated in 
between two national parks. If it housed a death ray (which I'm fairly sure 
it doesn't), this would be precisely the sort of place a taste-conscious Bond 
villain might construct.

Not that you're there to laze around indoors. A tour of Kangaroo Island is 
essential, particularly if your time is tight, as ours was. We were shown round 
the island by Rob Ellson 
<http://www.australiantraveller.com/city-highlight/kangaroo-island-s-best-beaches>
, a former local newspaper editor turned tour guide. The nature here truly is 
bizarre and fascinating: not only the kangaroos, which, if you're quiet, you 
can sneak hilariously close to, but the plant life, and I say that as someone 
who yawns himself half to death at the mere mention of a stamen. Kangaroo 
Island has a species of tree that thrives following a fire: theXanthorrhoea 
<http://www.pawlan.com/monica/australia/> (or "Grass Tree", for those who 
prefer words you can actually pronounce) flowers and sheds seeds when burnt. It 
even flowers when exposed to smoke. Just as well: in 2007, a series of 
bushfires destroyed 95,000 hectares of woodland. Today, the casual visitor 
would be hard-pressed to tell where the flames had been.

It's hard to describe how relaxing a place Kangaroo Island is. There are so 
few people, so few cables and billboards and cars and buildings andthings, that 
your mind soon starts to stretch out and lie down. It was almost like being 
deprogrammed. Accommodation isn't cheap, and it's easy to see why. Leaving the 
place was a wrench, like knowing you have to get out of bed on a cold morning 
and turning back beneath the duvet in a bid to get a few more moments of 
comfort.

Having never visited the other bits of Australia, I had nothing to directly 
compare South Australia with, but if the rest of the country gets any better 
than this, it's quite frankly taking the piss as a nation.

• Black Tomato <http://www.blacktomato.com> can arrange an exclusive 12-night, 
three-centre trip to South Australia, taking in Port Lincoln, Kangaroo Island 
and Adelaide, from £4,199pp (based on two sharing). For more information on 
South Australia, go tosouthaustralia.com <http://www.southaustralia.com>. For 
more information on Adventure Bay Charters, go toadventurebaycharters.com.au 
<http://adventurebaycharters.com.au>. For more information on Southern Ocean 
Lodge, go tosouthernoceanlodge.com.au <http://www.southernoceanlodge.com.au>. 
For more information on the North Adelaide Heritage Group, go to
adelaideheritage.com <http://www.adelaideheritage.com>.

• WIN: Surfing lessons in France. For full details of the holiday on offer, 
plus how to enter the competition and full terms and conditions, go toweekend 
travel competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/jan/27/weekend-travel-competition>
 