
Further to the Guardian’s obituary on Chris Nawrat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/14/chris-nawrat-obituary>, the 
former Sunday Times sports editor, I must put on record one particular example 
of his journalistic skills.

I was producing the Sunday Times’s news pages on that awful day in April 1989 
when theHillsborough disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> occurred.

As the details of the tragedy began to emerge, the editor, Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>, decided it was important to 
have input from a journalist who knew more than us about football.

He summoned Nawrat, who passed on his sports section responsibilities to his 
deputy, and then joined us on the back bench to help oversee the news section.

He rose to the occasion. His knowledge and insight, along with an astonishing 
recall of facts and figures, took our breath away. When the scale of the 
tragedy became clear, he also exhibited great sensitivity as we debated which 
photographs we should use. It is fair to say that his input utterly transformed 
the quality of our output.

It also transformed Nawrat’s standing in the office. In spite of having 
crossed the Wapping picket lines in 1986, and having been expelled from the 
communist party for his trouble, some senior executives remained suspicious 
about him because of his politics.

Perhaps that hostility never went away and it may well have played a part in 
the controversy surrounding his departure from the paper in 1994 in a dispute 
over sports books carrying theSunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> imprimatur.

But I will never forget that, when the heat was on, Chris Nawrat performed 
brilliantly. In subsequent conversations, I discovered a man who liked to talk 
about politics and literature as much as sport.

That’s also the recollection of his friend, Peter Wilson, who has written a 
wonderful tribute on the Sports Journalists’ Association website 
<http://www.sportsjournalists.co.uk/members-news/chris-nawrat-man-who-brought-gonzo-to-fleet-street/>
.

They met at the Morning Star <https://www.theguardian.com/media/morning-star> 
and Wilson tells how, following the murder of John Lennon, they incorporated 
the titles of Beatles songs into every headline on their paper’s sports page.

Nawrat spent his last couple of years in Spain and used a wheelchair following 
a fall. He was pictured in it when marrying his third wife, Angelica Bender, in 
2014.
 