
When one man is said to have called another a “pleb”, but no incontrovertible 
evidence exists that he has done so, how do you get to the truth? At the Royal 
Courts of Justice for most of the last fortnight, politicians, police officers, 
lawyers and journalists have assembled in court 13 and attempted to provide an 
answer, starting from the surreal proposition, unique to the law, that there 
has to be one. Given that cast of characters and the absurdity of the question, 
one suspects that the general public would have hit on a pretty simple 
solution: toss in a couple of highly poisonous snakes and lock all the doors.

For whatever reason, this didn’t seem to occur to Mr Justice Mitting, whose 
courtroom it was. Instead, we had 26 witnesses, astonishing piles of documents 
and three legal teams. That was the sledgehammer. The nut was a short 
conversation that took place on 19 September 2012 between the government chief 
whip, Andrew Mitchell, and PC Toby Rowland, a police officer who was on duty at 
the gate to Downing Street that night.CCTV footage suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/dec/19/pleb-cctv-andrew-mitchell-downing-street-video>
 it began at 19:36:45, and lasted no more than 11 seconds. Mr Mitchell 
is accused of uttering three “toxic phrases”, a total of 20 career- and 
life-defining syllables, one of which counted above all the rest. He sued the 
Sun, which published the claim. PC Rowland, with the financial backing of the 
Police Federation, sued him. The establishment of the legally accepted facts 
that would resolve these parallel cases, and with them bring some sort of 
closure to a dreadful parable of class and entitlement that has haunted the 
country for more than two years, has run up a total legal bill of about £3m. 
Whatever else, the snakes would have been cheaper.

But no dice. Instead, two men in salmon pink ties move through the packed 
courtroom. Mitchell’s supporters lined up behind his lawyers, and Rowland’s 
behind his. One side is all heavy-set coppers bursting out of their dark suits; 
the other home counties sorts in scarves and tweed, and David Davis. (Waiting 
to file in one afternoon, I play a game with myself, trying to guess which side 
each spectator will sit on, and achieve 100% accuracy.)

Ties aside, the two protagonists could hardly be more different. The first day 
I attend, they both take the stand. In theory, this is more Rowland’s home turf 
than Mitchell’s; during the course of his career he must have been in court 
many times, whereas Mitchell used to be an investment banker. In fact, though, 
it’s the policeman who appears ill at ease. He spends most of the trial staring 
at his lap, and in breaks between sessions confines his conversation to 
the small circle of allies with whom he presumably feels secure.

I try to talk to him a couple of times, but on both occasions he just says 
“sorry” with a well-rehearsed shrug. He looks grateful when I say “fair enough” 
the second time, and I think: God, why would you be grateful to a vulture like 
me? No one could doubt that he’s been through the wringer, largely thanks to 
the attentions of the press. “Youngest tearful n attached to me,” he wrote, in 
a text sent on Christmas Eve 2012 as he tried to contend with the doorstepping. 
“Eldest had nightmare that man broke into her room and took her photo. Reb [his 
wife] trying really hard, but suffering. I’ve lost a stone so far … trying to 
eat but feel sick.” I talk to someone who has spoken to him a number of times 
during the trial. “He is what you’d think he is,” I’m told. “He calls everyone 
sir. He doesn’t want media attention at all. He just says: ‘I can’t wait for 
this to be over.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417194571107%2F5010d5c0-4dd1-4414-ac82-085dc08b8dae-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Class%20war%20by%20distant%20proxy%3A%20the%20Andrew%20Mitchell%20trial%20from%20inside%20court%2013&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Class%20war%20by%20distant%20proxy%3A%20the%20Andrew%20Mitchell%20trial%20from%20inside%20court%2013&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417194571107%2F5010d5c0-4dd1-4414-ac82-085dc08b8dae-2060x1236.jpeg>
 “He just says: ‘I can’t wait for this to be over.’” … PC Toby Rowland, the 
police officer the court says Andrew Mitchell probably did call a ‘pleb’. 
Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP 
Not surprising, then, if he comes across as wounded and defensive 
under cross-examination. Mitchell’s lawyer, James Price QC, holds his feet to 
the flames; there’s no jury, but if there was, you suspect they would find his 
interrogation thoroughly alienating. Whereas Rowland is stout and damp, with an 
obstinate set to his jaw, Price – Eton, Oxford – is vulpine, ruthless, and even 
posher than Mitchell. He dissects Rowland’s testimony with the abstracted 
interest of a child operating on a fly with a pair of tweezers. Indeed, while 
his case is that his client never said “pleb”, his tone seems to imply it would 
have been jolly well merited if he had.

“You must have known,” Price says – laconic, nasal, one leg casually hitched 
up on the bench, endlessly jingling coins in his pocket – “that to givea senior 
public figure an arrest warning could lead to a complaint direct to the 
commissioner’s office.” Do you not see how important Mr Mitchell is? Do you not 
see the trouble you’ve caused him? I’m waiting, boy. In the overflow gallery 
upstairs, one heavy-set Mitchell partisan – who, he later confesses, has no 
connection to the case beyond a general fascination with libel proceedings – 
cackles with glee. “He’s fatter than I am!” he hoots. “He’s on the rack! Well 
done, Andrew!”

Indeed, Mitchell appears to be in his element. He’s composed and sympathetic 
in the witness box, and a dominant figure outside of it. Where Rowland keeps to 
his corner, Mitchell works the room like it’s a fundraiser, reserving much of 
his time for the journalists sat in the jury box near his own perch. During one 
of the shorthand breaks, I’m tapping out an email on my phone when I hear a 
voice say: “Where are you from?” He’s polite, genial, complimentary about the 
Guardian’s coverage, charming in a brittle sort of way, and it’s probably 
unfair that I feel a bit as if he’s asked which school I went to.

And yet there’s something fragile about that bravado. Whatever you ask him, 
his answer reverts to an explanation of his confidence in the outcome, based on 
his reading of the judge’s body language. At one point I’m on my way out of the 
loo when he starts to chat from the urinal, and so I shift from one foot to the 
other, not absolutely sure of where to look, as he explains his analysis of the 
last round of evidence. I suppose it’s illogical to feel for him and Rowland 
alike, but I can’t help it: if the policeman’s stolid timidity makes you want 
to give him a hug, the politician’s confidence is so lavishly performed that it 
seems to betray something else altogether: a submerged terror of the 
consequences if it all falls apart, and a desperate hope that by saying all is 
well he can make it so.

It’s said that Mitchell has few friends. If this is so, the lineup of grandees 
he manages to assemble to speak for his character is all the more impressive. 
There are politicians and peers, columnists and generals, even a rock star, or 
whatever Bob Geldof is, exactly. There are normal people too, but it’sGeldof’s 
testimony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/18/plebgate-trial-bob-geldof-andrew-mitchell-pleb>
 that sticks with me. “I am in fact a pleb,” he said. “Never once in all our 
time did he patronise me.” The thing is, Bob, you aren’t a pleb. You haven’t 
been for years. And the idea that a man who can deal with you necessarily has 
the common touch seems unlikely to wash outside of the pop-political community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417194842425%2F7965bda9-37fd-421d-9639-2f426b987d23-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Class%20war%20by%20distant%20proxy%3A%20the%20Andrew%20Mitchell%20trial%20from%20inside%20court%2013&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Class%20war%20by%20distant%20proxy%3A%20the%20Andrew%20Mitchell%20trial%20from%20inside%20court%2013&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclass-war-by-distant-proxy-andrew-mitchell-trial%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417194842425%2F7965bda9-37fd-421d-9639-2f426b987d23-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘I am in fact a pleb. Never once in all our time did he patronise me’ … Bob 
Geldof, who appeared as one of Andrew Mitchell’s character witnesses at the 
trial. Photograph: Karwai Tang/WireImage 
In the end, it was plain that none of that counted for very much with Mitting. 
You couldn’t help but be lost in admiration for his forensic command of the 
detail: you’d need a memory palace to keep it all straight. And yet it almost 
all seemed irrelevant. A judgment that took over an hour to read boiled down to 
the fact that two phonetic experts judged that Mitchell would have had time to 
say the “toxic phrases”, and that he had told his deputy that he didn’t know 
what he had said very soon after.

As for Rowland, well, he couldn’t have made it up, Mitting explained, 
indifferent to the sweeping nature of his verdict on the character of the 
claimant: he lacked “the wit, the imagination, or the inclination” to do so. I 
wondered how it felt for Rowland, his vindication over one insult from a public 
schoolboy sealed with an insult from another one. Victory for the plebs? It was 
hard not to think, as the Oxford-educated judge used his fountain pen to take 
notes on the submissions of two opposing QCs who were contemporaries at Eton, 
and who all, like Mitchell, wore cufflinks, that if this was a class war, it 
was by very distant proxy. I only saw one chink in Rowland’s impassive armour: 
his customary nod to the judge, as Mitting left, accompanied by a movement of 
the lips that looked very like “thank you”.

As Mitting read his verdict, Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> sat with his wife and 
daughters, as well as David Davis, who is said to have urged him to press on 
with the case, but who has at least remained scrupulously loyal. Throughout 
the trial, Mitchell had sat forward, energetically nudging his junior lawyers 
with queries and suggestions, fixing his eyes on the judge with a strange 
half-smile that never seemed to leave his lips. Now, with every other person in 
the gallery leaning in, the Mitchells pressed themselves conspicuously back 
against the benches, like the last characters standing in a game of Guess Who?, 
the visible anxiety on their faces turning to a different sort of tension as 
their defeat became clear. Mitchell himself was hunched smaller than he had 
been on previous days, leaning against his wife a little for support. If 
Rowland has been insulted, he has been ravaged, and he will have to live for 
ever with the knowledge that he could have avoided it all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fandrew-mitchell-miserable-two-years-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Mitchell%3A%20this%20has%20been%20a%20miserable%20two%20years%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fandrew-mitchell-miserable-two-years-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Mitchell%3A%20this%20has%20been%20a%20miserable%20two%20years%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fandrew-mitchell-miserable-two-years-video&media=>
The press pack went outside to get a prime spot for Mitchell’s statement. 
After the crowd had gone, one of Mitchell’s daughters – the other had left – 
reached over and squeezed his arm. Then the family gathered themselves and made 
their way down to the entrance on the Strand, pausing to let the stragglers out 
before them, knowing the grand exit that was expected, and prepared to do their 
bit. There’s a man who always stands outside the court with a banner advocating 
a utopian Christian constitution. He also has a dog with a banner of his own, 
which says “no nukes”. Earlier in the trial Mitchell had petted it on his way 
home, but now, as the flash bulbs went off, the terrier – which has a muzzle as 
well as a banner – started to bark furiously. Master and pet inserted 
themselves directly behind the family as they crossed the road and made their 
way down the street in a phalanx of photographers, and so that’s how Andrew 
Mitchell made his exit from the most notorious day of his life: ducking into a 
doorway, buffeted by strangers, with an angry dog headbutting his calves.

Was it worth it? I don’t mean for Mitchell and Rowland and the Sun, for whom 
the answers are pretty obvious, but for the rest of us. Did we come to a better 
understanding of an event that had taken on such disproportionate importance? 
Not really. The strange but intuitively obvious conclusion I drew from hearing 
Mitchell and Rowland is that they both absolutely believe themselves to be 
telling the truth. The only way to proceed is to accept that, in such 
circumstances, it is as relevant and possible to assess the facts of the matter 
as it is to judge the smell of the moon.

Unfortunately, that kind of approach doesn’t work here. Instead, whereas 
before we all believed that this silly thing definitely didn’t happen, now 
we all believe that it definitely did – even though the best a court can do 
is a balance of probabilities. You can count syllables, and watch CCTV and 
listen to witnesses. But in the end, you just pick a side. “This happens in 
trials,” Mitting said at one point. “Differences narrow. Things become 
clearer.” And so they do. They are forced to, so that we can all stop thinking 
about it, and get on with our lives.
 