
If Rafael Benítez thinks he has problems Chelsea's manager should have a chat 
to Hossam El-Badry in Japan next week. Like Benítez, theAl Ahly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> coach is fairly new to his job 
but, unlike the Spaniard, he faces the peculiar problem of being in charge of a 
team who last played a league game in February.

As the African champions, the Cairo club are representing that confederation 
in theClub World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldclubchampionship> despite a singular 
lack of matches in Egypt for nearly 10 months.

Everything ground to a halt following the Port Said stadium disaster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/feb/01/egypt-football-match-violence-dead>
 last February. Immediately after Al-Masry, the local team, beat Al Ahly 3-1, 
home supporters invaded the pitcharmed with swords, knives and stones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/feb/02/egypt-football-violence-knives-swords>
 before attacking Al Ahly fans. At least 74 people died, scores more were 
injured and there has been no league football in Egypt since.

Although a date has been set for its resumption later this month not everyone 
is overly optimistic that the league will actually kick-off as scheduled. When 
an autumn restart was mooted, angry Al Ahly "Ultras" stormed the offices of the 
Egyptian FA demanding a postponement until trials ofthose accused of causing 
the carnage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/mar/15/egyptian-football-riot-75-charged> 
were completed.

Not surprisingly José Manuel, Al Ahly's Portuguese coach, resigned. "I have to 
think about my life," he said. "I was beaten with fists and kicks to the head 
and legs. Fans fled to our dressing room and died in there." Cue El-Badry, last 
seen managing in Sudan, returning for a second stint in charge of a club 
restricted to playing friendlies and African Champions League games.

Captained by Hossam Ghaly, once of Tottenham, the Egyptians enter the 
seven-team World Cub contest at the so-called quarter-final stage, where they 
meet the winners of Thursday's tournament curtain raiser between Sanfrecce 
Hiroshima and Auckland City.

The current traumas involved in Egypt's tricky transition to democracy pale 
into insignificance next to the events of Monday 6 August 1945 in Hiroshima, 
when at 8.15am late in the second world war the United States dropped an atomic 
bomb on the western Japanese city. Estimates place the death toll somewhere 
between 80,000 and 140,000 and many thousands more suffering horribly from the 
effects of radiation.

More than half a century on, the Oleander is the official flower of Hiroshima 
in recognition of it being the first flower to grow again after the bomb and 
Sanfrecce Hiroshima are the J-League champions who, in Hisato Sato, possess the 
most feared striker in Japan.

They trust Sato's left foot will see off Auckland and Al Ahly to set up a 
semi-final with Corinthians of Brazil next Wednesday.Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, too, enter in the penultimate 
round and will meet either Ulsan Hyundai of South Korea or Mexico's CF 
Monterrey next Thursday.

By then television viewers may have enjoyed Sanfrecce's trademark goal 
celebration which sees the entire team line up, drop to one knee and take 
imaginary aim as if they were archers holding bows and arrows.

An explanation as to why is contained in the club's name. San is the Japanese 
number for three while frecce derives from an Italian word for arrows. It 
originates from the ancient story of Mori Motonari, who told his three sons 
that while a single arrow could easily be snapped, three arrows held tightly 
together would not be broken. The message was that, for the good of their 
family, their clan and its retainers they should stay united.

As the only semi-professionals involved in the Club World Cup Auckland City, a 
club who consider attendances of more than 3,000 bumper crowds, face a fairly 
formidable task on Thursday. Auckland may just have been voted the third best 
place in the world to live by Mercer's 2012 quality of living survey – the city 
comes in behind Vienna and Zürich but ahead of Munich and Vancouver – but it 
hardly ranks as a football hotbed.

Auckland City, though, do possess a trio of potentially key Spanish 
influences. Coached by a Catalan, Ramon Tribulietx, their team includes Albert 
Riera. Not to be confused with the former Liverpool player, Riera was a former 
ambulance driver and lower division midfielder in northern Spain who joined 
Auckland during a supposed gap year intended to be spent travelling the world 
and learning English. Instead he ended up staying put in New Zealand and, in 
exchange for fluency in a new language, is helping introduce Auckland's squad 
to tiki-taka.

If Riera helps his team-mates retain possession, Manel Expósito brings them 
goals. A former Barcelona striker, he made his first-team debut at Barça on the 
same day as Lionel Messi (16 November 2003) against José Mourinho's Porto but 
saw a promising career halted by injuries so serious they prompted him to seek 
a new life on the other side of the world.

"One day I was at Barça and I thought I'd be playing my entire life in La Liga 
and then suddenly I got hurt and everything changed," says Expósito. Now though 
life is finally looking up again. "I still have friends at Barça, although 
obviously not Messi and Xavi because they live in another world," he says. "And 
they are all very jealous because the Club World Cup is huge in Spain."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzkHx0lD8j6w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzkHx0lD8j6w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzkHx0lD8j6w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Club World Cup in video, by Paul Campbell

The best goals in the competition's history:

British clubs do not have a great record in the Club World Cup or its 
forerunner, the Intercontinental Cup. In 1967, Celtic became the first British 
side to play in the competition, against Racing. The tie is still remembered as 
one of the most violent in the sport's history. After drawing 2-2 over two 
legs, a third match was played in Montevideo. Celtic lost 1-0 and had four men 
sent off. The manner of Celtic's performance reportedly cost Jock Stein his 
knighthood in the New Year honours list. ThisCeltic TV documentary, the Battle 
of Montevideo, <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6J-QtPWmGNU> tells the story 
from the point of view of the Celtic players.

Manchester United became the first English team to play in the Cup in 1968. 
United lost to Estudiantes over two legs. The tie was decided by points rather 
than aggregate score, with the Argentinian side winning three points to one due 
to their 1-0 win in Buenos Aires and a 1-1 draw in Old Trafford. The tie was 
almost as brutal as Celtic's the year before; Nobby Stiles was sent off in the 
first leg and George Best went in the second. As the match ended, the Old 
Trafford crowd booed and the players scuffled on the field. Surprisingly, 
United became the first British team to win the competition in 1999, with 
Nottingham Forest (1980) Liverpool (1981, 1984) and Aston Villa (1982) all 
losing to South American opposition. United went on to win the competition 
again in 2008 and remain the only British winners.

1967 Racing Club 1-0 Celtic (after play-off) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3hONr7cJuE>

1968 Estudiantes 3–1 Manchester United (points) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ClYEYok-ftU>

1980 Nacional 1–0 Nottingham Forest 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eYkLd74Ari4>

1981 Flamengo 3–0 Liverpool <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d59xjbkQ3KM>

1982 Peñarol 2–0 Aston Villa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=stYW2yaOTVM>

1984 Independiente 1-0 Liverpool <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8HVoq6rvhB4>

1999 Manchester United 1–0 Palmeiras 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ryMqC824HUU&feature=player_detailpage#t=21s>

2005 São Paulo 1-0 Liverpool <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_uxpneas9Og>

2008 Manchester United 1–0 LDU Quito 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSf0a8olfMg>
 