
Is black a colour? No, say scientists. In the visible spectrum, white reflects 
light and so is actually a presence of all colours. But black absorbs it, sucks 
it all in. True black is the absence of colour. Black is what happens when no 
light at all reaches your eye. Except, of course, that we almost never see pure 
black. Unless you happen to have the misfortune to be gazing into a black hole, 
everything you perceive as black has some light, however small, bouncing back 
at you.

Throughout history, for many cultures and societies, black and white have 
stood as opposites: white the positive, pure light, black its negative 
counterpart. From the Greeks, who sat the god of the underworld, Hades, on a 
black ebony throne to the Romans – death, in Roman poetry, was thehora nigra, 
or the black hour – black was not a friendly colour.

The invention of the colour purple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/12/the-invention-of-the-colour-purple>
The association with death, with symbolic as well as literal darkness, with 
funerals and the afterlife is a common theme throughout history, from Nordic 
legends to European paintings, where the devil was often painted in deep black.

Yet without the pigment black, where would we be? Not reading this, for a 
start – aren’t you reading this in black text on a white background? So instead 
of trawling through the negatives, let us revel in the absence of light – from 
cultures that celebrated it, to practical uses, to the future. Let us go back 
to black.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9e748d2aa60c07f2eb52c0f4644c42a19852e01%2F0_0_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9e748d2aa60c07f2eb52c0f4644c42a19852e01%2F0_0_4096_2461%2F4096.jpg>
 The rich soil of the Nile Delta. Photograph: Khaled Elfiqi/EPA 

The source of life

Most ancient cultures associated black with death. But while for the Greeks 
and Romans it was symbolically laden with all the worst things, for the ancient 
Egyptians this proved a more positive link. Black was the colour of the rich, 
alluvial soil watered by the Nile river that provided fertility and growth – 
the source of life itself. And while it was also the colour of Anubis, the god 
of mummification and of the afterlife, he was not a negative figure or evil 
presence, but actually one who protected the dead against evil. So black was 
the colour of death, but also the colour of resurrection. Indeed, as the 
“inventor” of embalming, Anubis was worshipped – after all, by embalming, 
people were preserved that they might one day live again.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac37cbea5e1394bc29d3565b70e97c0a808654aa%2F0_0_2811_4212%2F2811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac37cbea5e1394bc29d3565b70e97c0a808654aa%2F0_0_2811_4212%2F2811.jpg>
 Dear Sir,
Thank you for black ink … 
 Photograph: Brian Jackson / Alamy/Alamy 
Inky fingers

Black ink was invented in both Ancient China and India. In China, an inventor 
named Tien-Lcheu mixed soot from pinewood and lamp oils to create a dark 
pigment. In India, ink from burned bones, tar and other substances was used. 
But whatever it’s original source, without it, would anything be so legible? It 
is the extreme contrast between black ink and white paper – or black font and 
white screen – that makes it clearest to read. And when a new, easily 
whipped-up version of ink was created in the 15th century, it suddenly became 
possible to print things on a bigger scale – books, prints and engravings 
proliferated – and with them, ideas and thoughts could spread freely. From the 
Protestant reformation to propaganda pamphlets, print democratised ideas and 
gave them wings.

A nice silhouette

Black, surely, is the most flattering colour. Blue jeans might be iconic but 
black ones are so much more slimming – there is a reason why Chanel’s little 
black dresses have proved so popular since the 1920s. It’s also practical, 
rarely fades in modern fabrics and goes with everything – in fashion, black is 
not a negative but a neutral. In fact, it was the colour of choice for the chic 
and rich as far back as the 14th century, where rulers and courts began to wear 
the austere but elegant shade. It began – don’t so many trends? – in Italy, 
where the Duke of Milan, the Count of Savoy and other rulers began to don it. 
This quickly spread to France and then England, where under Richard II the 
whole court adopted the colour. It was, for rulers, a colour of power and 
dignity. I have no need of showy shades, says regal black – I have all the 
power I need here in my person.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff84b9bf0765297e6ab1d8f8fb769a714983e54fc%2F0_145_3900_2343%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20out%20of%20the%20dark%3A%20why%20black%20is%20such%20a%20positive%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fcoming-out-of-the-dark-why-black-is-such-a-positive-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff84b9bf0765297e6ab1d8f8fb769a714983e54fc%2F0_145_3900_2343%2F3900.jpg>
 Lucky for some? Photograph: James Denk/Getty Images 
Black cats

Everyone knows that a black cat crossing your path is lucky. Everyone in the 
UK and Japan, anyway. Black was the top choice for a ship’s cat and some 
fishermen’s wives also kept black cats at home, for added luck. But why? After 
all, according to theCat Fanciers’ Association 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat_Fanciers%27_Association> (CFA) there are 22 
catbreeds <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breed> that can come with solid black 
coats so can they be that rare, and therefore special? It’s a link back to 
ancient Egypt again – specifically to the cat goddess Bast. Eygptian households 
kept black cats in their households and looked after them in the hope of 
currying favour with the powerful goddess. In the rest of Europe, though, they 
can’t get past the suspicion that those felines are hanging out with witches, 
and therefore up to no good. Though in Germany, there is an oddly specific 
superstition that a black cat crossing someone’s path from right to left is 
bad, whereas left to right is good. Presumably it’s cheating if you dash across 
the road to reverse your perspective. Pity the poor black cats of the US – it 
has been found that black cats have a lower chance of adoption compared with 
moggies of another hue – and, in fact, black animals in general take longer on 
average to rehome. Let’s hope they do well on 17 August 17 – “Black Cat 
Appreciation Day”.

Black to the future

In 2014, a British company, Surrey NanoSystems, produced a material so black 
that it can barely be seen. This new material, named VantaBlack, absorbs all 
but 0.035% of visual light – a new world record for black. It is made of carbon 
nanontubes, each 10,000 times thinner than a human hair. It is so dark, that it 
is impossible for the human eye to work out what it is actually seeing and 
shapes or folds in this material simply seem to disappear. The scientific 
applications are numerous – but perhaps on a more sinister note, so are the 
military applications. On that, the company have been silent. Presumably, it’s 
gone to work on some Black Ops.
 