
1) All hail the associates – again

The associate nations, made to feel like unwelcome guests by the 
pre-tournament words of the ICC chief executive, Dave Richardson, have been the 
life and soul of the party. Following onfrom Ireland’s defeat of West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/16/cricket-world-cup-ireland-beat-west-indies>
 and theirepic last-over victory against the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/25/cricket-world-cup-ireland-uae-match-report>
 came the delight that was Afghanistan versus Scotland,where a historic first 
World Cup win was up for grabs for both sides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/26/cricket-world-cup-afghanistan-scotland-report>
. The Afghans, who had played no international cricket until 2001, became the 
first team batting second to recover from a collapse of five wickets for 12 
runs – they were 97 for seven at one stage, needing another 114 runs - and 
still emerge victorious. Does the drama of these contests not belong on the 
biggest stage of all? Or should they be played out at a low-key qualifying 
tournament, such is the plan before the 10-team edition slated for 2019? The 
current format (not perfect but at least inclusive) was given a stay of 
execution four years ago when Ireland left England red-faced in Bangalore. 
Whether the delights of Shaiman Anwar’s first ever World Cup century by a UAE 
batsman, Ireland’s fourth entry into the list of top-10 World Cup run chases or 
the nerve-shredding 19-run 10th-wicket stand between Hamid Hassan and Shapoor 
Zadran prompts another rethink is uncertain. If not, they are going to be 
missed.

2) One in, one out

Since when did the concept of a 15-man squad become so fluid? In sending the 
fast bowler Al-Amin Hossain home for breaking a 10pm curfew, after he was 
curiously dobbed in by a member of the ICC’s anti-corruption unit, the 
Bangladesh management sent a strong message to their players that rules are 
rules. Fine. But does the ICC technical committee’s subsequent decision to 
allow them to fly out a replacement player in Shafiul Islam not set an easily 
exploited precedent? Players have, in the past, been replaced for injuries, 
mental health problems and even doping bans – all of which are factors beyond a 
team’s control. But given matters of discipline are an internal matter, who is 
now to say a side cannot swap out a player who is short of form by insisting he 
broke a golden rule such as, say, whistling?

3) Building a monster

With a tip of the hat to Beanio, a contributor below the line last week who 
suggested this, comes an examination of when runs are being scored in those 
biggest of totals. And the message is clear: Getting off to a flyer is old hat 
… it’s all about the late surge. There have been 11 instances of sides topping 
300 batting first (with all but one of these totals successfully defended), 
boosted by the following contributions from the last 10 overs: 102, 105, 142, 
83, 124, 115, 80, 78, 152, 115 and 150 – an average of 113 runs. And the lowest 
of those finishes is still higher than the best start, with the first 10 overs 
of those innings seeing the following scored: 77, 66, 28, 42, 40, 46, 36, 58, 
43, 51, 30 – an average of 47 runs. West Indies are the experts at backloading 
the innings, sticking three scores of 300-plus on the board in their first 
three matches, all with 100-plus finishes including that chart-topping 158 
against Zimbabwe. They are, however, the only team to have also suffered a 
defeat defending such an imposing total, when Ireland chased down 305 in 
Nelson. Rather predictably, that 78 from their last 10 belongs to England 
against the might of Scotland. Getting to the 41st over remains the challenge.

4) Zings seem clearer now

The Ireland No3, Ed Joyce, enjoyed the flukiest of reprieves when his off 
stump was struck by the UAE seamer Amjad Javed in their Gabba thriller, only 
for the flashing Zing bail to plop neatly back into the groove. The incident is 
also a reminder that in such instances where umpire’s call is invoked for a 
ball predicted by Hawk-Eye to be clipping the outside of the stump, it may not 
necessarily be breaking the wicket.

5) Still behind on caught-behinds

On the subject of umpire’s call, why is that principle sacrosanct in making 
lbw decisions and yet flies out of the window when it comes to caught-behinds? 
In the first fortnight of this World Cup there have been two such instances 
where, without any howling evidence to the contrary, the TV umpire has 
overruled his on-field colleague in such a way.In Pakistan’s defeat by India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/15/2015-cricket-world-cup-india-beat-pakistan-to-launch-title-defence>
 Umar Akmal was sent packing by the third umpire, Steve Davis, despite umpire 
Richard Kettlebrough detecting no edge on the field. Some say they saw one, 
others did not. Either way there was no smoking gun. This was followed by the 
wicket of Brendan Taylorin Zimbabwe’s defeat by West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/24/cricket-world-cup-chris-gayle-first-double-century>
, who looked none-too worried when Dinesh Ramdin and Marlon Samuels sent one 
upstairs. Again, no concrete proof was forthcoming but the on-field decision of 
not out was overturned. After deadball-gate at the end of England’s opening 
fixture, it all adds to the long-held suspicion that it is not the decision 
review system that is the problem, it is the officials in charge of it.

6) Form is temporary
 Chris Gayle acknowledges the crowd after his record-breaking knock. 
Where did that come from? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/24/chris-gayle-west-indies-cricket-world-cup-zimbabwe-record>
 Chris Gayle,in smiting 215 from 138 balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/24/cricket-world-cup-chris-gayle-first-double-century>
, not only became the first man to hit a World Cup double century but also 
pulled out a full handbrake turn on his own personal battles in 50-over 
cricket. Gayle, fresh from an official rebuke for publicly questioning the 
selectors and a nasty retweet from his board’s president Whycliffe ‘Dave’ 
Cameron, took his fury out on Zimbabwe’s bowlers to see records tumble. Scoring 
more runs in that single knock than in his previous 12 innings, he became the 
first man to hit a one-day double outside India, the fastest to do so in all 
one-day cricket and set a World Cup record of 16 sixes, equalling the one-day 
landmark to boot. The brutal exhibition of hitting followed a two-year spell in 
which he averaged just shy of 21 runs. And to think England dropped their 
struggling left-handed opener when, during the same period, his median was 
eight runs higher …

7) India look the business

Don’t tell England’s players and management but we are not sure India took the 
Tri-Series that seriously. Peter Moores and Co have repeatedly pointed to their 
two wins over the world champions in that warm-up event as proof that they are 
no shoal of fish up a tree in the 50-over format. But since the tournament 
started MS Dhoni’s side have been transformed,blowing away Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/15/2015-cricket-world-cup-india-beat-pakistan-to-launch-title-defence>
and South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/22/cricket-world-cup-shikhar-dhawan-india-south-africa>
 with such ease as to suggest those fixtures were simply a regrouping exercise 
following a tough Test series in Australia. With a batting line-up packed full 
of runs now Shikhar Dhawan has rediscovered his mojo, and three gun seamers in 
Umesh Yadav, Mohit Sharma and Mohammed Shami, all of a sudden they look genuine 
contenders again. Why did we ever doubt them?

8) How good are the Proteas?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fi-dominated-against-west-indies-says-south-africas-ab-de-villiers-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425044858049%2Fcrop_KP_107578_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20AB%20de%20Villiers%20hails%20win%20over%20West%20Indies%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fi-dominated-against-west-indies-says-south-africas-ab-de-villiers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20AB%20de%20Villiers%20hails%20win%20over%20West%20Indies%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fi-dominated-against-west-indies-says-south-africas-ab-de-villiers-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425044858049%2Fcrop_KP_107578_640x360.jpeg>
 South Africa’s AB de Villiers hails win over West Indies.Link to video. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/feb/27/i-dominated-against-west-indies-says-south-africas-ab-de-villiers-video>
While England and Pakistan fans are down in the dumps, the most confused must 
be those of South Africa. Among the favourites for the tournament, AB de 
Villiers’ men experienced a harrowing match against India, sandwiched in between
two impressive showings against Zimbabwe and West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/south-africa-cricket-team>. In their captain 
De Villiers –who chalked up the fastest one-day 150 in history in 64 balls on 
Friday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/27/south-africa-ab-de-villiers-west-indies-cricket-world-cup-report>
 – and Hashim Amla, they possess the best two one-day batsmen in the world 
currently. Dale Steyn needs no introduction, while Imran Tahir has the best 
strike rate for a spinner with over 50 wickets, nabbing one every 27 balls. And 
yet somehow nagging doubts remain given the absence of a genuine all-rounder at 
No7 (apologies to Farhaan Behardien) and their ability when batting second 
under pressure, with only one win from five chasing 250-plus runs in the last 
two years. Hmmm …

9) Federer lets himself down

Roger Federer has had his Andy Murray moment during this Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> World Cup. On Monday the Swiss 
master apologised to his fans in Pakistan for being pictured admiring India’s 
World Cup shirt, stressing it was simply a photoshoot for sponsors Nike and he 
is supporting South Africa in the World Cup – his mother’s country of birth. 
Murray rightly held firm against a barrage of abuse – including hate mail sent 
to the locker room – after his joke that he would support “whoever England were 
playing against” before the 2006 football World Cup. So while it is impossible 
not to admire the debonair 17-time grand slam-winning tennis superstar with a 
penchant for a Richie Benaud-style cream jacket, he has lost a smidgen of 
respect this week.

10) Selection back in the Ballance

There was more than a glint in the eye of the England captain, Eoin Morgan, at 
the toss in Christchurch when he informed the broadcaster Mike Atherton of an 
unchangedteam to face Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/23/england-jubilation-on-hold-despite-win>
. To change would have been to admit to fault in selection for the defeatsby 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/14/australia-crush-england-cricket-world-cup>
 andNew Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/23/england-jubilation-on-hold-despite-win>
, something rarely seen from an England captain. But now the 119-run victory 
seems to have freed up the brains trust to rethink things. Gary Ballance, 
dropped into the deep end at the last minute, is understandably the man most 
vulnerable, meaning one of Alex Hales or Ravi Bopara could get a recall. As my 
colleague Barney Ronay remarked on Twitter: “Steady, England. Two long weeks of 
planning have gone into that team.”
 