
1 The best-laid plans

Sitting rock-bottom in Pool A after two harrowing defeats – albeit from their 
two toughest fixtures – England will wonder how the grand idea of a winter 
one-day boot camp blew up in their faces so spectacularly.

The England and Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board’s decision to clear the decks for a diet of white-ball cricket before the 
World Cup, by shifting the Ashes forward 12 months, has not only led to the 
break-up of the Test side but now looks a wasted opportunity courtesy of months 
of indecision.

England dithered over the captaincy of Alastair Cook, moved Ian Bell from 
opener to No3 to out of the side to opener and then parachuted Gary Ballance 
into the side with a single warm-up game under his belt, shunting James Taylor 
down from first-drop in the process. I’ll spare you the gruesome analysis of 
the bowling.

The commercial pay-off for the pre-tournament Tri-Series was, if you remember, 
a five-match home clash with Australia in 2012 – at the expense of a fourth 
Test against South Africa –handsomely won 4-0 to help Cook’s side claim the No1 
spot in the rankings by the end of that summer.

It felt at the time like they were on to something.

2 The Kiwis are flying

Shorn of their regular dark horse status and installed as the thinking man’s 
favourites ahead of the World Cup, Brendon McCullum’s side have so far lived up 
to the pre-tournament hype.

A gameplan based on aggressive batting – they’ve scored at just under seven 
runs an over– and a deadly pace attack – 30 wickets at 17 runs apiece – has 
seen the co-hosts race out of the traps in week one with three clinical wins.

What England’s samey all right-arm attack would do for quick leftie Mitchell 
McGlenaghan, who takes a one-day wicket every 25 balls. He currently can’t get 
a game.

3 The Aussies are in disarray

OK, that might be putting a ripping spin on things. But for all the electric, 
exciting cricket on displayat the MCG against England last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/14/australia-crush-england-cricket-world-cup>
 – albeit with a Mitchell-reliant attack – it has been curious to watch from 
afar as the narrative surrounding their team has centred on Michael Clarke’s 
comeback from a hamstring tear.

The return of a batsman who averages 44.86 in ODIs – and 83.62 in World Cups – 
would be a formality for most sides. And yet with Clarke it never seems to be 
simple.

George Bailey, the man set to step aside, has led the side impeccably with 
seven wins from his past seven, despite having lost the toss six times. From 70 
for three, his 55 in a stand of 146 with Aaron Finch was the platform for the 
England evisceration.

Clarke meanwhile has played just six one-dayers since the start of last year – 
twice pulling up lame – while the buildup to the World Cup has been dogged by 
talk of a rift with the selectors and a team more than happy in his absence.

With Cyclone Marcia looking set to delay his slated return against Bangladesh 
in Brisbane on Saturday, the chatter will continue.

4 There’s a gaping hole in the ODI playing regulations

When Australia wrapped up a 111-run victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/14/australia-crush-england-cricket-world-cup>
 (it felt like more) against England last Saturday with the run-out of James 
Anderson, a glitch in the ICC ODI playing regulations was exposed and as yet it 
remains worryingly unresolved.

When James Taylor successfully overturning an lbw decision via the decision 
review system, the events that followed should have been irrelevant with the 
ball called dead as per 3.6a of appendix 6 of the DRS.

Say the delivery had been the last of the innings, with England needing four 
to win (unlikely, granted). Even if the ball shot down to the boundary rope off 
the pad, a successfully overturned lbw decision would still go down in the 
scorebook as a dot ball – and not leg byes – with the fielding side emerging 
victorious.

However this anomaly is resolved, best to do it before the scenario painted 
above comes to pass, surely.

5 It’s one rule for the players …

How two on-field umpires, a TV umpire, a fourth umpire and a match referee can 
experience such a collective meltdown –as explored by my colleague Mike Selvey 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/17/england-world-cup-umpires-icc>
 – was baffling, not least because England’s James Taylor, two runs short of a 
maiden ODI century, was quite clearly seen pointing out their error at the time.

That Ireland’s John Mooney and West Indies’ Darren Sammy were docked 30% of 
their match fees for on-air expletives during their World Cup opener, mistakes 
similarly made during the heat of the moment, and the five officials were left 
free to carry on their tournaments without the ignominy of being stood down for 
a match or two, sticks in the craw somewhat.

6 Fletcher strolling towards the exit door

Seating plans, as any married couple knows, are an awkward affair at the best 
of the times. But the sight of Ravi Shastri at the front of the Indian balcony 
intheir 76-run victory over Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/15/2015-cricket-world-cup-india-beat-pakistan-to-launch-title-defence>
, with Duncan Fletcher very much planted at the back, told its own story.

Fletcher’s position as India’s head coach looked shaky when Shastri was 
parachuted into the management setup as the team director after their 3-1 Test 
defeat to England last summer. More so when the Zimbabwean’s trusted 
lieutenants Joe Dawes and Trevor Penney were subsequently relieved of their 
duties after the tour.

Fletcher continued in the role. But the issue was raised again when the Indian 
news outlet Times Now released footage on Tuesday of what they claimed was 
Fletcher out for a stroll in Melbourne while Shastri held an impromptu team 
meeting to discuss tactics for Sunday’s Pool B clash with South Africa at the 
MCG. The BCCI spokesperson Dr RN Baba hit back at the report, claiming it was 
baseless.

Either way, don’t expect a change of heart and fresh terms for the 66-year-old 
when his contract expires at the end of the tournament.

7 Kohli has Sachin in his sights

With a seemingly effortless 107 chalked up against Pakistan in Sunday’s cruise 
at the Adelaide Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/15/2015-cricket-world-cup-india-beat-pakistan-to-launch-title-defence>
, Virat Kohli now has just the great Sachin Tendulkar looking down on him from 
on top of the list of Indian one-day centurions.

At just 26, the right-hander drew level with the next-best Sourav Ganguly’s 
tally of 22 hundreds in just his 151st appearance – 157 games fewer than the 
Prince of Kolkata.

At the same point of his career, caps-wise, Tendulkar had registered just 12 
of his eventual 49 one-day hundreds. At his current rate, Kohli will boast 67 
three-figure scores should his career to enjoy the same longevity as the Little 
Master’s 463-cap epic.

Sachin never had the luxury of just four men outside the circle, of course.

8 Irish ire

Matt Prior recently told Guardian sport about the dangers to public support 
caused by sportsmen operating as “media-trained robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/matt-prior-cycling-media-trained-robots>
”.

Not so the Irish who, emboldened by their win over West Indies in Nelson on 
Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/16/cricket-world-cup-ireland-beat-west-indies>
, have spoken openly and angrily about the governing body’s plan to cut the 
current 14-team format by four sides in 2019.

“I feel it’s a retrograde step to move to a 10-team World Cup,” said the 
batsman Ed Joyce, who then made a point of tweeting a link toAndy Bull’s latest 
Spin column on the subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/the-spin-icc-associate-nations-cricket-world-cup>
. “I don’t see how that contributes to growing the game.”

“It’s not like that in any other sport,” bristled the captain, William 
Porterfield, on the subject of Test and associate status. “I don’t see why it 
has to be like that in ours.”

They’re not going away quietly.

9 Fix talk is tweet

The old adage that a stopped clock tells the right time twice day (once if it 
is digital) sprung to mind after speculation that the India versus Pakistan 
match was fixed due to the prediction of a mystic tweeter.

Social media became awash with such chatter after one @AslamkhanTanoli 
<https://twitter.com/aslamkhantanoli> tweeted, five hours before the end 
result, that India would post 300 and Pakistan make 220 in reply (our man was 
four runs out on the latter, as it happens).

The scribe in question – who describes himself as a supporter and worker of 
the ruling Pakistan Muslim League – has shot to fame in Pakistan, even 
appearing on the evening news. He maintains he just called it the match as he 
saw it. Others believe his trick was to tweet a host of scenarios multiples of 
10 before deleting all but the one that came closest.

The US embassy in Kabul copped similar fix accusations when their Twitter feed 
congratulated Afghanistan on their win over Bangladesh just 10 overs into the 
match. They went on to lose, naturally.

10 It takes time

The sight of the diminutive Bangladesh wicketkeeper, Mushfiqur Rahim, 
demolishing the stumps tofinish off Afghanistan in their Pool A opener in 
Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/18/afghanistan-bangladesh-cricket-world-cup>
, before leading his side on a lap of honour, was one of genuine unbridled joy.

But that did not stop a mean-spirited reaction online (you’ll never guess on 
which platform), scoffing at how a Test nation could derive such pleasure from 
beating a lowly associate side when Ireland had, just the day before, been 
subdued at sinking West Indies.

That the ICC, who cynically over-promoted Bangladesh to the top table 15 years 
ago, will squeeze out the chasing pack with a 10-team tournament in four years’ 
time still seems a poor reason to sniff at a band of young, enthusiastic 
cricketers, five of whom tasted a World Cup victory for the first time.

As the shrewdies pointed out when Scotland slumped to 12 for four in Dunedin 
on Tuesday, it took New Zealand, the tournament frontrunners, 26 years and 45 
Test matches to record their first win. Development in international cricket 
takes time and Bangladesh – the team – are still in the early stages of their 
own journey.
 