
Aziz Ansari <http://azizansari.com/> has the most beautiful brown eyes – huge, 
like a cow’s, and full of more enthusiasm than words could convey. He’s also an 
actor and a brilliant standup, and has showcased these skills via a wildly 
successful television show (he plays lackadaisicalTom Haverford 
<http://parksandrecreation.wikia.com/wiki/Tom_Haverford> on Parks And 
Recreation) as well as a series of hilarious comedy specials. His most recent,
Live At Madison Square Garden <http://azizansari.com/>, was a sold-out affair. 
The man is going places.

Ansari is a first-generation American, born in South Carolina to Indian 
parents. He has gagged about this (“They were trying to find a place that 
combined racism and horrible public schools”) but his routines are more often 
riffs on modern life and human foibles. His jokes are multi-layered, filled 
with tiny details that betray his intense interest in other people. He never 
seems mean, even when he’s talking about human weakness; instead, he provides 
confirmation of your own neuroses, from the fraught question of when to text a 
potential partner, or the tension between your belief in animal rights and your 
need to eat delicious fried chicken.

His authenticity is evident in his choices: he’s a foodie, so he co-hosts a 
web series calledFood Club <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jk9bmMWS2Kk&t=81>. 
He has called out racist and gay jokes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDvUsIrBhb0> bandied about by other comedians, 
and hedescribes himself as a feminist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sz7ZzQbSiGA>: at one point in a standup show, 
having asked the women in his audience to raise their hands if they’ve ever 
been followed by a creepy guy, he says, “Everyone look around. That should not 
be happening.”

Aziz Ansari <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aziz-ansari> is a funny, 
principled guy – and he cooks. He just might be perfect.

• Follow Bim on Twitter <https://twitter.com/bimadew>.
 