
Arsenal’s 3-1 victory against Bournemouth perfectly summarised their recent 
performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
: three shots on target and three goals. It means their total for November, 
traditionally the month where Arsène Wenger’s side endure a slump in form, is 
10 goals from just 11 shots on target – an entirely unsustainable rate.

In a flat performance, Arsenal’s standout performer was Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis>. Reverting to his 
centre-forward role having played wide in the 2-2 draw with Paris 
Saint-Germain, the Chilean demonstrated his all-round ability here, scoring two 
goals, hitting the bar with a powerful shot from a tight angle, and also 
creating five chances for his team-mates, the most of any player on the pitch. 
He was Arsenal’s chief provider, and most dangerous goal threat.

Alexis Sánchez double helps Arsenal fend off tenacious Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
In last weekend’s 1-1 draw at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/19/mourinho-wenger-reflect-draw-between-manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-video>
, Sánchez was guilty of dropping too deep, but here he varied his position 
intelligently without abandoning his centre-forward role entirely. When he did 
move towards play, Theo Walcott drifted inside to become a temporary 
centre-forward, and Mesut Özil made sporadic runs in behind too. There were 
signs that Sánchez and Özil are becoming a proper partnership, combining 
regularly in counterattacking situations.

From the moment Steve Cook was cautioned for a clumsy late foul on Sánchez in 
the right-back zone, inside five minutes, it seemed the Bournemouth defender 
was set for a tricky afternoon. Sure enough, Sánchez’s opener came when he 
exploited a woefully underhit Cook backpass before converting easily. It felt 
somewhat similar to his opener in the 3-0 victory over Chelsea in September – 
his only previous goal at the Emirates this season – when he exploited Gary 
Cahill’s sloppiness in possession. Cook’s mistake was entirely unforced, but 
Arsenal are nevertheless more likely to win the ball in advanced positions with 
Sánchez up front, always prowling dangerously in the hope of an error. He also 
tracks back when required – at one stage, withBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> building play in central 
midfield and Özil seemingly not interested in regaining possession, Sánchez 
sprinted back 30 yards, won the ball, and Arsenal were on the attack again.

This was not a flawless individual performance: it was Sánchez who conceded 
possession shortly before Bournemouth were awarded a penalty, when Nacho 
Monreal was adjudged to have fouled Callum Wilson. A more natural 
centre-forward might have held up the ball, and while Sánchez is surprisingly 
strong for a man of his size, playing with his back to goal remains his major 
weakness as a centre-forward.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/premier-league-10-talking-points-arsenal-manchester-city-liverpool>
Nevertheless, he repeatedly drove Arsenal forward, lifting the tempo when the 
Emirates was quiet at 1-1, and later gestured forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> to calm the game and retain 
possession reliably after they’d taken the lead. For such a frantic, high-tempo 
player, Sánchez is also intelligent in a tactical sense and capable of altering 
his style to suit the nature of the game. He was also seen commanding his 
team-mates against PSG, and is arguably Arsenal’s most natural leader.

His best contributions came when Arsenal were 2-1 ahead, after Walcott headed 
home from Monreal’s cross. That meant Bournemouth pushed men forward and 
Arsenal had space to break into. When attacking into the inside-left channel 
Sánchez nearly found Özil with a delicate pass after the German had shown 
fantastic movement to drift towards the far post before suddenly producing a 
lightning near-post run, and the Chilean played the game’s best pass with a 
truly outrageous outside-of-the-boot ball in behind, which Özil should probably 
have made more of.

It was only fitting that Sánchez wrapped up the scoring, a tap-in after good 
work from Olivier Giroud, who was introduced as a substitute, down the right. 
Giroud will feel his constant contributions from the bench merit a permanent 
place in the side, but realistically Wenger will consider this evidence Giroud 
is a fantastic plan B. Sánchez is now his main man up front, and, in this mood, 
as dangerous as any footballer in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>.
 