
Much has been made of the fact that this Pep‑project Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> is a work in progress, a 
mutable thing, still looking to find its rhythms and shapes. At the Etihad 
Stadium, for 20 minutes either side of half-time, City seemed to be evolving at 
an irradiated speed as first David Silva and then Kevin De Bruyne dug their 
fingernails into this game and wrenched it their way.

Until that point Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> had been the 
outstanding figure on show. So keen right now to assert his own market value, 
Sánchez had whirled and sprinted at Manchester City’s defence in that familiar 
amphetamine-crazed Action Man-style,so barrel-chested he looks from a distance 
like a yellow‑shirted cube, propelled about the place by two furiously pumping 
pistons, arms paddling the turf.

Raheem Sterling completes Manchester City turnaround against Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
At the other end City were all feints and tickles, cute angles, nice nudged 
passes but without anyone to apply the swift punch to the solar plexus. With 
Sergio Agüero still banned, the centre-forward spot was occupied instead here 
by a revolving peloton of attacking midfielders. At times in the first half 
City were ten thousand elegantly turned spoons, when all they really needed was 
a single prong of the knife.

Sánchez had produced the telling moment to help put Arsenal 1-0 up, dropping 
deep into the pocket in front of the centre-halves, reading Theo Walcott’s run 
and producing a lovely backspun nudged through pass into his path. Walcott’s 
finish was fine, opening his body and slotting the ball past Claudio Bravo as 
City’s goalkeeper lay down. What riches right now! The scoring pass to Walcott 
made it six goals and four assists in his past six games for Sánchez – great 
news not just forArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and 
Sánchez himself, but for the mini‑industry of Sánchez-affiliated interests 
currently chuntering about that move.

Manchester City 2-1 Arsenal: Five talking points from the Etihad | Jamie 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-five-talking-points>
Right now he and Mesut Özil are in that stage where pre-contract rumblings 
begin, figures are bandied, demands floated. Both want a serious boost, the 
kind of weekly wage that would take them from the merely ludicrously well-paid 
into the real overclass.

Sánchez and Özil are both lovely players. But here they were given a lesson in 
a creative leadership as Silva took this game in the most artfully insistent of 
headlocks. City went from 1-0 down to 2-1 up in 20 minutes during which he 
flexed his shoulders and reminded the Etihad Stadium of his own enduring 
brilliance, aided by some fine moments from De Bruyne.

Silva is a venerable old creative ace these days, the bottle of fine wine in 
that City cabinet – small, dusty, very expansive – who was suddenly everywhere 
here, floating into the space just behind City’s rejigged twin No10s, Leroy 
Sané and De Bruyne. The pressure paid off three minutes into the second half as 
Arsenal’s midfield slackened and three simple passes cut them open. Sané was 
probably offside but his run, spin and finish were evidence of his brilliantly 
supple athleticism. The pass floated over the top by Silva was a familiar piece 
of brilliance.

Arsenal looked shocked, unable to rouse themselves into keeping the ball after 
playing on the break for so long. Özil spent much of this period just walking 
around the Etihad Stadium, a man with time to kill, just enjoying Manchester, 
taking in the air.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Referees%20are%20protected%20like%20lions%20in%20the%20zoo'%2C%20says%20Wenger%20after%20loss%20to%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Referees%20are%20protected%20like%20lions%20in%20the%20zoo%27%2C%20says%20Wenger%20after%20loss%20to%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video&media=>
‘Referees are protected like lions in the zoo’, says Wenger after loss to 
Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/18/referees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video>
Meanwhile, with a quarter of the game still to go, the transformation was 
complete. De Bruyne took an instant touch and produced a wonderful diagonal 
crossfield pass, stretching the play to City’s right wing. Raheem Sterling took 
the ball in his stride, cut inside Nacho Monreal and found a stinger of a 
left-foot shot that zipped past Petr Cech. It was a lovely moment for Sterling, 
who was also a growing source of menace here. He has worked hard on his 
finishing. This was tangible reward, as was the attention he received from 
Guardiola in the second half, the manager leaping up to point and shout and 
instil on the hoof some tactical tinker whenever Sterling strayed to his side. 
And with that the game was effectively done. Arsenal’s own heavyweights were 
unable to rouse themselves again for a second push. Silva’s silky little 
passing triangles, a malevolent, insistent presence, always able to put the 
ball in the tenderest of spots, remained the dominant image of the second half.

For Guardiola this felt like evidence of real progress, if only in his team’s 
ability to respond so positively to the rejig after half-time. The no-tackles 
business last weekend was always likely to be taken out of context. Who really 
does coach tackles at this level anyway? Apart from the English FA in the 
1980s, of course, which produced six pages dedicated to tackling in its Winning 
Formula (sic) coaching guide. In the second half at the Etihad City’s switch to 
twin No10s, with Silva prowling behind and Yaya Touré a powerful passing 
presence, was as devastating as any reducer, any statement tackle.

Arsenal reeled and found no second wind. By the end Sánchez and Özil were 
pressed to the margins, outmanoeuvred by Silva in full playmaker mode and by 
the relentlessly effective De Bruyne, all crisp, clean incision, a pair of 
creative midfielders restating their own worth as part of this fun, frantically 
evolving Guardiola team.
 