
Dennis Griffiths, one of Fleet Street’s most prolific and, arguably, its most 
punctilious historian died on Christmas Eve. He had just celebrated his 82nd 
birthday.

He was the author of six lengthy books, including an acclaimed history of the 
London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, where he spent 18 
years as its production chief.

Renowned for his attention to detail, he was tireless in his determination to 
rescue newspaper history after falling in love with what he regarded as the 
enchanted garden of Fleet Street.

Griffiths spent the best part of 30 years researching and writing about the 
characters who peopled the national and provincial papers of the past.

At least one eminent historian regarded him as the founding father of 
newspaper history by seeking out so much rich material.

Griffiths was born in Swansea, the son of the chief compositor (and chief 
reporter) of the South Wales Evening Post. He left school early to follow his 
father, George, into newspapers, initially as a copyboy.

He trained as a printer and after his national service, in the Royal Signals, 
in which he saw service in Cyprus and Suez, he took a job with the Uxbridge 
printers and newspaper publishers, King and Hutchings.

In 1968, he replied more in hope in expectation to an advert for a production 
job at theLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Evening Standard. He 
progressed quickly up the ranks from assistant production manager to become its 
production director.


He illustrated his skills early on to the Standard’s mercurial managing 
director, Jocelyn Stevens, by helping to bring off one of the paper’s famous 
scoops. Ahead of the 1969 Apollo moon landing,the paper dared to pre-print a 
front page colour picture of Neil Armstrong making his “giant step for mankind.”
 
<http://londonpressclub.co.uk/how-jocelyn-stevens-made-newspaper-history-with-the-moon-landing/>

The facsimile photograph was prepared for publication 24 hours before 
Armstrong walked on to the moon’s surface and it trumped the opposition.

After the Standard changed hands, Griffiths became research and development 
director withExpress Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/express-newspapers> and was involved in the 
1978 launch of the Daily Star. But he grew increasingly unhappy during the 
decline of the Express group and departed in 1986.

It was then that he began to research and write, beginning with the 
Encyclopaedia of the British Press 1422-1992, a book that has proved invaluable 
to media academics.

He went on to produce the definitive history of the Evening Standard. In a 
foreword to Plant Here The Standard the paper’s former owner,Viscount Rothermere
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/viscount-rothermere>, praised Griffiths for 
his scholarship, noting that he had skilfully shown that “there are almost as 
many stories about the Standard as there are stories in it.”

Griffiths was also noted for his energetic chairmanship of the London Press 
Club, from 1999 to 2002. During his period of office he was a leading figure in 
organising the 300th anniversary of the launch of the Daily Courant, the UK’s 
first regular daily newspaper.

The current club chairman, Doug Wills, said: “Dennis was a significant and 
influential figure in the Press Club for many years, both as a director and as 
chairman, as well as being a senior executive in Fleet Street at a time when 
the industry was at its most exciting. He will be sorely missed.”


Another former chairman, George Westropp, said: “Dennis took over after I had 
been in the chair for nine years and was running out of steam and ideas.

“He was terrific. He injected enthusiasm into all of us and lifted the annual 
awards to a new level. I sincerely believe the Press Club would not have 
survived without Dennis.”

In 2006, Griffiths was the lead curator of exhibition of newspaper front pages 
at the British Library. Hismost recent rescue of newspaper history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/mar/12/national-newspapers-dailyexpress>
 was Blum & Taff: A tale of two editors, about RD Blumenfeld and HA Gwynne.

He is survived by his wife of 55 years, Liz, their daughter Jane and son Mark, 
a botanist and journalist whowon this year’s British Society of Magazine 
Editors’ scoop-of-the-year award 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/editors-choice/country-life-wins-scoop-of-the-year-79848>
 for a Country Life article in which herevealed the only known portrait of 
Shakespeare drawn in his lifetime. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/19/shakespeare-writer-claims-discovery-of-only-portrait-made-during-his-lifetime>
 It made his father especially proud.

His funeral will be held on 6 January at 3pm at the South Oxfordshire 
crematorium in Garford, Abingdon, Oxfordshire.


*Dennis Griffiths, journalist, born 8 December 1933; died 24 December 2015
 