
Devo <https://www.theguardian.com/music/devo>'s next song is about Mitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mittromney>'s dog. The American new wave 
band are putting an Irish setter front and centre on Don't Roof Rack Me, Bro! 
(Remember Seamus), which takes fire at the Republican presidential candidate.

Twenty-nine years ago Romney took his family on a 12-hour road trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jun/29/usa.mittromney> from Boston to 
Ontario, strapping the family dog to a kennel on their car roof. As the 
Chevrolet station wagon barrelled down the highway, Seamus clung on for dear 
life; even after the dog suffered a diarrhoea attack, Romney just sprayed 
everything down and continued with the journey.

Although Seamus may not be at the forefront of Romney's election battle 
against Barack Obama,Devo <https://www.theguardian.com/music/devo> have not 
forgotten him. On Tuesday the band announced their next single, due 25 August, 
with cover art depicting Romney behind the wheel and a terrified dog on the roof

The song is part of a campaign by Gerald V Casale, one of Devo's founders. 
Remember Seamus <http://www.rememberseamus.com/> proposes to "make 2012 the 
year where animals like Seamus are valued and honesty is praised". The group 
has rallied behindDogs Against Romney, a Facebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/DogsAgainstRomney> with more than 70,000 fans, and 
Casale has also contributed to a forthcoming video game, The Crate Escape: 
Seamus Unleashed <https://www.facebook.com/CrateEscapeGame>, which is due on 26 
August â€“ National Dog Day in the US.

As for Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts insists that Seamus 
enjoyed being on the car roof. "The dog loved it," said his wife,Ann Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney>, in April. "He would see that 
crate and, you know, he would, like, go crazy because he was going with us on 
vacation. It was to me a kinder thing to bring him along than to leave him in 
the kennel for two weeks."
 