
Egypt's national football team often plays to empty stadiums these days, under 
orders from the security forces. Some of the players don't get paid. And 
recently, many team members got stranded at Cairo's airport by the 7pm curfew.

In a time of revolution, even Egypt's beloved football stars have suffered 
from violence and economic crisis. Now, an unusual figure – an American – is 
trying to hold the team together in its improbable quest to qualify for the 
World Cup despite amilitary crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/14/egypt-military-crackdown-muslim-brotherhood-protestors>
 that has divided the country.

"Inside our team, clearly not everyone sees things the same way," said Bob 
Bradley, whobecame Egypt's coach two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/14/egypt-bob-bradley> after 
managing the United States national team. "Like everywhere in Egypt, that means 
there are discussions and disagreements. But inside the team, there's still a 
strong bond."

The stakes for the Pharaohs, as the team is known, go well beyond a few 
football games. The squad has vaulted into the last stage ofqualifying for the 
World Cup finals in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/03/africa-world-cup-qualifying-2014>
, a tournament that Egypt hasn't reached since 1990. Winning one of the 32 
berths in the 2014 tournament could rally a nation rent by politics and 
religion, where more than 1,000 people have been killed since themilitary 
deposed an unpopular elected government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/03/mohamed-morsi-egypt-second-revolution>
 in July.

"The national team is the only thing that unites all Egyptians," said a fan, 
pharmacologist Marwan Mohammad, 28, who was attending a recent packed 
"friendly" match between two domestic teams,Al Ahly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> and Shibin.

In this football-mad nation, the national pastime has long been more than just 
a sport. Toward the end of President Hosni Mubarak's 30-year reign, hardcore 
football fans known as ultras often skirmished with police, a sign of how 
Egyptians were chafing under authoritarian rule. The ultras of Al Ahly turned 
into the toughest defenders of Tahrir Square during the 2011 uprising that 
toppled Mubarak, and football diehards have played a role in demonstrations 
since then.

Bradley, a New Jersey native with a no-nonsense manner, is well aware of how 
politics has been entwined with football in Egypt. He has been trying to keep 
the national team from getting sucked into the fray. "This is a difficult 
period, a tough time in the country," said Bradley, 55, as he sat in a cafe 
overlooking the Nile one recent afternoon. "Throughout all of that, we always 
tried to talk [with players] about the fact that during this period we had a 
chance to do something special, something that was important to everyone inEgypt
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, and that we had a big 
responsibility."

Just months after Bradley started his job, he got a taste of how political 
tensions could flare in Egyptian football. In February 2012,Al Ahly fans were 
attacked by ultras of their rival Al Masry in the Suez Canal city of Port Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/10/riots-egypt-death-sentences-football-disaster>
. Police looked on impassively as at least 74 people were killed with knives 
and clubs. Al Ahly fans claimed that police allowed the bloodbath in revenge 
for the ultras' role in bringing down Mubarak, a charge denied by the 
government.

Bradley watched the scenes of carnage with horror from Cairo. In his long 
football career – which includes positions as an assistant coach with DC United 
in 1996-1997 and head coach of Chicago Fire, New York/New Jersey MetroStars and 
Los Angeles-based ChivasUSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> – he had seen fights. But 
nothing like this. He met several of his players at a memorial service for the 
victims a few days later. "The emotion, the look on their faces told the 
story," he said. Bradley had players on both teams. He counselled his men to 
get over their anger, honouring the dead but maintaining their responsibility 
to their team and country. One of his stars, Al Ahly midfielder Mohamed 
Aboutrika, initially threatened to quit the sport, but he backed down.

Still, another problem loomed. Because of the tragedy, Egyptian authorities 
suspended play in the domestic football league, which employed many of the 
national team members. "We had to come up with a plan to keep them motivated, 
fit, sharp," said Bradley. He and his assistants scrambled to set up friendly 
matches in Sudan, Lebanon and other countries.
 Common goal … Bob Bradley, head coach of Egypt's national team, looks on 
during their 2014 World Cup qualifier against Zimbabwe. Photograph: Khaled 
Desouki/AFP/Getty 
Egypt's political turmoil has escalated since then. In August, the Pharaohs 
were in the Red Sea resort of El Gouna, preparing for a match, when phone calls 
started arriving from Cairo. Security forces firing guns and teargas had broken 
up two massive sit-ins organised by the Muslim Brotherhood to protest against 
the ousting of President Mohammed Morsi. Hundreds of civilians were killed.

The coach met with his distraught players. "We said this, 'Look, the result of 
our match today doesn't change what's taking place, but it's still our chance 
for 90 minutes to go on the field and be a symbol of being strong and being 
united,'" Bradley said. The team defeated Uganda 3-0 in an empty stadium, as 
state security has often required during the charged political times. That 
night, the Pharoahs flew back to Cairo, which had been slapped with a 7pm 
curfew. Many players, unable to get through police checkpoints, had to stay at 
the airport hotel.

With the Egyptian domestic squads idled, some of Bradley's players have joined 
European teams. Others are unpaid, living off their savings. "They're not sure 
what's happening with their careers," said Bradley. "And yet every time we had 
national team camp, they came into camp, ready to be there, still honoured to 
be part of the national team."

The Pharaohs have already finished top of their World Cup qualifying group, 
thereby qualifying for the African playoffs this autumn as one of 10 teams that 
will vie for five places at the 2014World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> finals in Brazil.

Even before moving to Egypt, Bradley had seen his share of ups and downs in 
football. He coached the US men in the 2010 World Cup but was fired the 
following summer. Getting the Pharaohs into the tournament would be a different 
kind of World Cup dream, one he shares with millions of Egyptians.

"It would unite people and make people love the Egypt they knew," said Abdul 
Rahman Mustafa, a 69-year-old football fan standing outside the friendly match 
in Cairo. "The joy would make us forget what is happening now."

Steven Goff in Washington and Amer Shakhatreh in Cairo contributed to this 
report

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>, 
which incorporates material from the Washington Post
 