
Since the violence erupted in Port Said on Wednesday night, leaving more than 
70 dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/02/port-said-football-disaster-revolution>
, debate in Egypt has centred on whether it was deliberately plotted by police 
to get back at the fans, or was simply a case of football hooliganism – the 
kind we see all over the world (as Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi, head of the 
ruling military council, said in a TV interview after the tragedy).

It is probably a mix of both. In an atmosphere of brutal rivalry between the 
Cairo and Port Said fans, football violence comes as no surprise.

But the Ultras football fans, known for their anti-establishment behaviour, 
have taken part in many of the clashes with police in and around Tahrir Square 
during the last year. Young and excited, they always formed the front line and 
acted as protectors against the onslaught of security forces. They have also 
brought the revolution to football stadiums and turned its stands into a 
political battlefield.

So it is also very likely that the police didn't think of the Ultras as worthy 
of their protection or interference. In the eyes of the police, they are the 
enemy, and a bunch or worthless teenage hooligans.

The Egyptian state is more than capable of successfully securing a football 
match given the vast size of the army and police forces. I have been to 
Egyptian stadiums dozens of times and, typically, heavy security is used to 
make it virtually impossible for opposing fans to clash, even outside the 
stadium, let alone invade the pitch.

Egypt's security forces successfully maintained order during the tense 
parliamentary elections, in which almost 30 million voters participated, so how 
could they possibly fail to keep a football match with 20,000 fans under 
control? Clashes betweenAl-Ahly <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly> 
andAl-Masry <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Masry_Club> in Port Said have 
turned violent before and extreme security measures are normally in place to 
prevent clashes from exploding.

On the other hand, most stadiums in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> have very poor or non-existent safety 
measures – with the result that if serious trouble does break out it can easily 
turn deadly.

This inefficiency of the security forces is a result of a police-state culture 
that lacks accountability: officers know they will not have to face any 
consequences for their actions.

Just one week after a partial lifting of the 30-year-old state of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/24/egypt-state-of-emergency-lifted>
, the Port Said violence raises many questions about the police. Are they 
unable to do their jobs without resorting to outright brutality, or are they 
virtually on an unspoken strike to blackmail the public into asking for the 
return of a police state?

The latest deaths are also seen as yet another attempt to turn people against 
the revolution: to make them believe that Egyptians are not ready for 
democracy, as former vice-presidentOmar Suleiman stated 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxXnMDngyCE> a few days before Hosni Mubarak 
stepped down. The president, too, had claimed that the choice was between 
himself and chaos. But we must realise that democracy is different from 
lawlessness. No society can function in a complete absence of law and order.

There is clearly more to the Port Said tragedy than everyday football 
hooliganism. It may pose the biggest threat so far to military rule in Egypt, 
or it may help the military to become even more entrenched. It could go either 
way, depending on how the struggle for democracy unfolds in the coming days and 
weeks.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://twitter.com/commentisfree>
 