
England kept alive their hopes of reaching the semi-finals of an increasingly 
captivating World Twenty20 tournament – but did so only after scrambling toa 
15-run victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/england-afghanistan-world-twenty20-match-report>
 against Afghanistan in Delhi. The English batsmen, who had astounded the 
much-heralded bowlers of South Africa five days ago witha brilliant run-chase 
in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
, succumbed haplessly against an assortment of spinners from Afghanistan. This 
time the bowlers had to come to the rescue.

England recover to avoid shock against Afghanistan at World Twenty20
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/england-afghanistan-world-twenty20-match-report>
England lost three wickets in their sixth over; from there they hobbled to 85 
for seven before man of the match Moeen Ali and David Willey combined to add a 
vital 57. The crucial over in the recovery was the 19th of the innings when 
this pair plundered 25 runs, enabling England to set a target of 143, way 
beyond their mid-innings expectations. Thereafter the English bowlers, who had 
been regularly pummelled around the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai, imposed 
themselves on the Afghan batsmen, who seemed disorientated by the prospect of 
an unlikely victory.

Afterwards Eoin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, who 
had left his first ball unwisely since it was straight, did his best to hide 
his relief at England’s escape and to react as if this was a routine win, 
without really convincing anyone. “We came for a win,” he said, “and we won. We 
didn’t quite get it right with the bat but we fielded well and bowled well. We 
talked a lot about the wicket and it was the type we expected. But we did not 
adapt to the surface.”

But Morgan could not hide his gratitude to Moeen, who after a patient, sketchy 
start to his innings finished on 41 not out. “Mo played really well,” said 
Morgan. “Starting was difficult on that wicket and it was very different from 
what we have been playing on in Mumbai. That 19th over was very important. The 
difference between 120 and 140 is huge.”

Moeen himself put it a little more prosaically. “We wanted to give ourselves 
time, take it to the last three overs and have a hack at the end.” Those hacks 
were mighty influential. In that over, bowled by Amir Hamza, Moeen cleared the 
boundary once and Willey did so twice.

Morgan said he had not been surprised by the combativeness of Afghanistan in 
the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/23/england-v-afghanistan-world-twenty20-2016-cricket-live>
. His team had been well aware of the strength of their spin attack, anchored 
by the long-standing skills of Mohammad Nabi and the exciting wrist-spin of the 
17-year-old Rashid Khan. “They arethe best associate side at the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/afghanistan-cricket-world-twenty20-the-spin>
,” said Morgan and no doubt Afghanistan’s performance in this World T20 – even 
though they have not won a game in the second round of matches – will amplify 
the pleas to expand the next 50-over World Cup.

Their captain, Asghar Stanikzai, gave a brief no-nonsense assessment, which 
brooked no argument. “The guys in the top order lost wickets early to poor 
shots. The pitch wasn’t difficult and they didn’t take responsibility. That’s a 
big reason why we lost.”

For Afghanistan it was a golden opportunity missed just as, later in the 
evening, Bangladesh, fellow qualifiers from the first round, squandered an even 
better chance of causing a major upset against India in Bangalore.

Afghanistan miss their chance after lbw let off for England’s Moeen Ali
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/afghanistan-england-world-twenty20> 