
State agents who cross the often blurred line between legitimate intelligence 
gathering and instigating criminality is not a new phenomenon to those who have 
covered theNorthern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> 
Troubles.

While there is understandable outrage over revelations that a long-term police 
agent infiltrated a non-violent green activist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2011/jan/09/undercover-office-green-activists> 
group which attempted to close a Nottingham power station, this scandal is 
nothing compared with what went on during Ulster's "dirty war".

A Green party councillor in London quite rightly pointed out this week that it 
was disgraceful that the police treated the environmentalists as if were they 
were dangerous terrorists worthy of infiltration. Yet even when the security 
forces did actually recruit or send agents of the state into real terrorist 
organisations in the north ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>
 they too all too often crossed the line and broke the law.

The history of the secret war directed against the IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> and INLA on one side and the loyalist 
terror groups on the other is littered with real life Le Carresque tales of 
morally dubious double-dealing spy craft.

Take two relatively recent scandals of agents the forces of law and order were 
running within two main paramilitary force as evidence of this.

It is now beyond doubt that by the early 1990s the British state had agents 
littered all over the most effective paramilitary movement in the western world 
â€“ the Provisional IRA. One of its most notorious "assets" was the provisionals' 
head of counter-intelligence, the head of its internal security hunter Freddie 
Scappaticci.

Codenamed "Stake Knife", this son of an Italian immigrant was in charge of the 
so-called "head hunters", the unit that searched for, tracked down, brutally 
interrogated and then killed suspected informers.

"Stake Knife" commanded a tightly knit group of men who were responsible for 
the deaths of many IRA members, some informers, others who it turned out were 
"set up" by the agent, that were murdered, their bodies normally dumped on side 
roads along the South Armagh border after hours and days of torture.

The "head hunters'" quarry included true-believers that the British state 
security apparatus (or at least some parts of it) were happy to be rid of such 
as IRA Derry Brigade activist Paddy Flood, whom most republicans in the city 
now admit was not an informer. Indeed on occasion as with the Flood case one 
branch of the security forces would not necessarily know what the other one was 
doing.

A former RUC Special Branch officer-turned-author under the nom de plume Alan 
Barker told me that his undercover unit in Derry could not believe the news 
that the IRA had shot Flood. His death among the police was a cause for 
celebration. They had not known that agents operating for the British 
military's Force Research Unit had smeared Flood as an informer and brought 
about his death.

On the loyalist side we have the case of an entire unit of the Ulster 
Volunteer Force, most of whose members were agents of RUC Special Branch. The 
Mount Vernon UVF in north Belfast carried out a spate of murders in the run-up 
to and even after the 1994 ceasefires. Their victims ranged from a young 
Catholic woman who was visiting Protestant friends to a young former RAF cadet 
from a loyalist working class area who had fallen foul of the Mount Vernon UVF 
boss.

The latter victim, Raymond McCord Jr, was killed three years after the 
loyalist ceasefire and his death prompted his father to embark on a 10-year 
campaign to bring his son's killers to justice. Raymond McCord Sr's crusade led 
ultimately to Operation Ballast, an investigation by the then police ombudsman 
in Northern Ireland, Nuala O'Loan, into the activities of the Mount Vernon UVF 
and the role police agents played in acts of criminality up to and including 
murder.

O'Loan's findings were startling and disturbing: several active terrorists 
engaged in crimes were paid secret servants of the state.

They, like their counterparts who had been recruited within the IRA, were 
crossing the line continually during and even after the Troubles supposedly 
ended.

There may be an argument that the secret war was unfortunate but necessary. 
That by infiltrating and directing warring illegal groups the state helped 
grind terrorism down in parallel with the peace process. That without the often 
morally-questionable clandestine war there would in fact be no peace process, 
historic compromise and eventual power sharing settlement.

The Stake Knife and Mount Vernon scandals are but two of a whole slew of 
examples where agents broke the law while working for the forces of law and 
order. Some both within and without Northern Ireland have called for a 
comprehensive, wide-ranging international inquiry into the dirty war.

The only problem this poses is that it would expose not only the moral 
duplicity of those in power who paid for and directed these agents but also 
some of the key players in the peace process itself, some of whose leading 
figures were themselves either assets for the state or worked within the 
penumbra of illegality and legitimate intelligence-gathering.

Henry McDonald is co-author of "INLA-Deadly Divisions", the 3rd edition of 
which is currently on sale published by Poolbeg.
 