
In the opening scene 
<https://www.facebook.com/FearTWD/videos/1480203318964446/?permPage=1> of Fear 
the Walking Dead, the“companion series” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/11/fear-the-walking-dead-comic-con-trailer-reveals-first-look-at-las-zombies>
 to AMC’s zombie blockbuster, a man stumbles upon a zombie feasting on the 
flesh of the living and scampers away to safety only to be hit by a car. It’s 
classic The Walking Dead, where someone flees the dangers of the undead only to 
be felled by something incredibly human.

That’s sort of where the similarities between the original and this new show 
end. The biggest difference between Fear and its bigger, badder brother is that 
there are actual cars still operating – and cell phones and the power grid and 
all of the other modern conveniences that we take for granted. It’s so nice to 
see characters running around wearing nice clean clothing and not the same 
gnarly outfits caked in months of dirt, sweat, and walker gore.

Fear takes place in Los Angeles in the very first days of the outbreak that 
causes society’s collapse and follows one family as it tries to survive. 
Madison (Kim Dickens, whom you may recognize from House of Cards and Treme) is 
a high school guidance counselor who lives with her boyfriend, English teacher 
Travis (Cliff Curtis), and her teenage daughter, Alicia (Alycia Debnam-Carey). 
Her junkie son Nick (Frank Dillane) is the one who stumbles upon the zombie in 
the opening scene and no one quite believes the horrors that he’s seen or the 
danger that it puts them all in.


How actor Cliff Curtis avoids playing 'repetitive stereotypes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/17/actor-cliff-curtis-fear-walking-dead-avoid-stereotypes>
The first couple of episodes that were made available for reviewers center 
around the family’s escape from the city to the desert, where they think it’s 
safe, and the characters picking up Travis’s son Chris (Lorenzo James Henrie) 
from his ex-wife, Liza (Elizabeth Rodriguez, who plays Aleida on Orange Is the 
New Black). The streets are dangerous as the cops try to stop the first few 
marauding infected and people begin to riot, attempt escape, or succumb to the 
sickness.

While The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/10/walking-dead-season-six-trailer-comic-con>
 concerns itself with the terror of trying to rebuild civilization after it has 
been lost, Fear is about what it would be like to lose the civilization that we 
know today. This tactic hits a lot closer to home, because the world that The 
Walkind Dead’s Rick Grimes and his fellow survivors inhabit is one completely 
foreign to us, and, while it tells us some things about our own humanity, it is 
not something we are actively afraid of. After all, there aren’t zombies 
tapping at our windows and gun-wielding hordes canvassing the streets. The fear 
in Fear is induced by picturing just how we would do when the apocalypse 
finally came. How quickly would we go from worrying about our jobs, family, and 
petty problems before we had to start worrying about where our water comes 
from, how we’re going to eat, and our colleagues succumbing to a virus and 
attacking us in the hallways.

The frights here are less about 100 zombies storming someone’s house and more 
about a slow, creeping dread, about the one or two monsters that no one 
understands getting loose in the neighborhood. Co-creators Dave Erickson and 
Robert Kirkman (who writesThe Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> comic) and director 
Adam Davidson do this perfectly, showing us less rotting flesh and more ambient 
eeriness, like a homeless man who disappears behind a tree, a tattoo that looks 
like a heart descending into chaos, or some passing graffiti that depicts 
skeletons coming back to life. It takes the everyday and makes it sinister in a 
way that will have viewers inspecting the locks on their front doors and 
worrying about every little cough.

Fear is not lacking in drama, but it is lacking in action. Getting away from 
one undead assailant is difficult, but not as heart-racing as having to 
extricate one’s band of survivors from a train station inhabited by cannibals 
with a cavalcade of zombies attacking the gates, for instance. Without that 
action, the pace here is a lot slower, like a family drama that just happens to 
coincide with the end of the world (just imagine Brothers & Sisters, retitled 
Brothers Eat Sisters).

Better than the original? An abridged guide to recent TV drama spinoffs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/18/television-spinoffs-drama-better-call-saul>
The lack of action calls attention to just how formulaic some of the plotting 
is and just how leaden some of the dialogue. Maddie’s boyfriend actually says 
to her at one point, without irony: “Come away now, angel. Come away.” There 
are not enough eye rolls in the universe.

While some of the actors struggle a bit with subtlety (especially Dillane, who 
looks too close to Johnny Depp circa Benny and Joon for comfort), Dickens puts 
in some stellar work, as she usually does, as a woman who is trying to hold 
together her family and herself as everything is falling apart around her.

That brings up the question of this show’s future. How many seasons can it 
take to get this family out of LA and into the desert? And what happens once 
they get there and have to start worrying about basic survival? Will they hook 
up with other survivors to fight the enemies from within and without? At that 
point this just becomes The Walking Dead: Los Angeles, a copycat of a familiar 
formula like NCIS: Los Angeles.

But the future is very far away and entirely uncertain in these first few 
episodes. The programme’s problems are small detractions from a show that is 
otherwise compelling and extremely effective in ruining your sleep schedule. I 
mean that as a compliment. Fear may be about the end of the world as we know 
it, but it is also about figuring out what is really important to us when 
tragedy strikes. That, too, is a wonderful similarity between this andits 
parent program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/14/the-walking-dead-season-six-trailer-best-yet>
.

 * Fear of the Walking Dead premieres on Sunday 23 August at 9pm EST
 