
With much of Aleppo lying in ruins and reports of Russian and Assad-backed 
killing squads roaming the streets, ConservativeAndrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> secured a two-hour 
emergency debate on the crisis in the Syrian city. A debate that was rather 
better attended by the opposition; the government has enough on its hands 
trying to work out what to do about Brexit to worry too much about a 
humanitarian disaster taking place 2,000 miles away.

Mitchell began by cataloguing some of the horrors of Aleppo and compared them 
to those ofSrebrenica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/srebrenica-massacre> 
andDarfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/bashir-charged-with-darfur-genocide>
. Something must be done and done now. We must insist on a ceasefire to allow 
food and medical supplies into the city. He didn’t sound very hopeful about 
this, but inaction was no longer an option. So if we couldn’t talk the Russians 
round, then we could at least air-drop some supplies by drone. A gesture was 
what was needed – even a futile one.

Aleppo’s people are being slaughtered. Did we learn nothing from Srebrenica? | 
Nedžad Avdić
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/aleppo-people-slaughtered-srebrenica-genocides-atrocities-syria>
A rather more hawkish line was taken by the former chancellor, George Osborne. 
An emergency debate suggested that Aleppo was a crisis that had come out of the 
blue, he observed. “It hasn’t,” he said. “It’s a situation that has been 
developing since 2011 andsomething could and should have been done 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/aleppo-syria-commons-debate-george-osborne>
 about it.” Osborne went on to point out that the Commons was given the 
opportunity to authorise military action in 2013 when the Syrian government was 
found to have used chemical weapons against its own people but voted against 
it. “I spoke of the costs of intervention in 2003, but now we are seeing the 
costs of not intervening.”

Osborne forgot to mention the costs of intervening in Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
 in 2011. Politicians don’t like to be made to feel inadequate but the 
inconvenient truth is that almost every action they have authorised in the 
Middle East has turned out badly: they’ve tried putting troops on the ground in 
Iraq and that turned out to be a disaster; they’ve tried bombing Libya and 
managed to further destabilise the country; they’ve tried doing nothing in 
Syria and that’s led to the current nightmare.

But politicians are a resilient, megalomaniacal, counter-factual breed, 
instinctively reluctant to accept there may be world events over which they 
have no influence, and primed to believe that if only they had done the exact 
opposite of whatever it was they had done, then everything would have turned 
out OK. So once Osborne had set the tone of the debate the floor was handed 
over to a succession of Labour MPs keen to put the boot into their former 
leader,Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/02/ed-miliband-syria-strike>, under 
the guise of a personal mea culpa.

“I still feel sick about seeing the former leader of the opposition entering 
the whips’ office after the 2013 vote and congratulating himself on preventing 
a war,” said John Woodcock, an MP who has made a career of getting on the wrong 
side of every party leader under whom he has served. Miliband had wisely 
decided this was a debate he could afford to miss.

Fight for Aleppo is almost over – but a new chapter of misery begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/fight-for-aleppo-is-almost-over-but-a-new-phase-of-misery-begins>
Ben Bradshaw was similarly full of angst –and conspiracy theories, at one 
point suggesting that the Russians had interfered in the result of the EU 
referendum. “We had the chance to do something in 2013 and we blew it,” he 
said. “The consequence has been that we now sit back and watch the far left and 
the far right celebrate thehumanitarian disaster of Aleppo as a liberation 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/morning-star-labour-mps-aleppo_uk_584f2931e4b0b7ff851db424>
. Why do we tolerate appeasement?”

It was left to Boris Johnson to supply the answer in his reply to the debate. 
Albeit in so many words. What was going on in Aleppo was truly terrible, he 
said, but there’s really not a lot we can do about it except be appalled. For 
the first – and probably only – time, the foreign secretary found himself in 
agreement with the SNP’s Tommy Sheppard, who had said we should probably try to 
sit down and have a nice chat aboutSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> with the Russians over several shots 
of vodka. It probably wouldn’t work, mind, but it was the best he could offer. 
And certainly better than doing nothing.

Boris left the chamber to the sound of one hand wringing and parliament 
returned to the main business of the day. A five-hour debate about the 
neighbourhood planning bill. It’s all a matter of priorities.
 