
When I was four and five and six years old we watched the moon landings on TV 
then waited nervously for thesplashdown 
<http://moonpans.com/apollo_11/apollo_11_splashdown.jpg> and the astronauts' 
release from their seared capsule with its orange flotation bags bobbing on a 
white and blue sea. In the same way millions of people watchedFelix Baumgartner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/felix-baumgartner>'s astonishing fall through 
the empty sky on YouTube. In his protective suit the Austrian daredevil looked 
for all the world like some Apollo astronaut of the 1960s. But did this daring 
deed truly recreate the images of the space age, or only an empty pastiche of 
them?
 Buzz Aldrin walking on the moon during the Apollo 11 mission. Photograph: AP 
History always repeats itself, said Hegel. He forgot to add, said Marx – the 
first time as tragedy, the second as farce. Not that Baumgartner's dive was 
farce. It was heroic, if not foolhardy. In terms of sheer mad bravery it was 
stupendous. But surely those seductive, glorious, beautiful images with their 
evocation of the great moments of space exploration are so appealing because 
they fill a void in our collective heart, a void of aspiration and the belief 
in progress that a daredevil's leap, however gallant, cannot ever really match.

In the end, Baumgartner's achievement is just a great stunt, with a commercial 
sponsor. It is in essence the same as tumblingover Niagara Falls in a barrel 
<http://www.niagarafallslive.com/daredevils_of_niagara_falls.htm>. People have 
always done brave things, and in the early 20th century going over Niagara 
Falls in a barrel became the leap of choice for publicity-conscious stunt 
people (first over the top was a woman, in 1901). Yet amazing as such jumps 
were, did they add to human knowledge and capacity? No – the first powered 
flight by the Wright brothers, which was much less spectacular, just off the 
ground in fact, changed the world in a way stunts do not. The images of this 
leap look like exploration but actually are mere entertainment.

The visual similarity between Baumgartner's record-breaking fall and the feats 
of engineering audacity that took human beings on to the surface of the moon 
and then, even in the cash-strapped 1970s, built a landable and reusable 
spacecraft is cruelly deceptive. Baumgartner's freefall is not the same as the 
public-funded, state-sponsored efforts of an entire scientific generation that 
not so long ago sent Neil Armstrong on to the silver dust of the lunar surface. 
Look closer and the visual image of this 21st century hero is not so 20th 
century, after all. His helmet has the words Red Bull on it, not a stars and 
stripes. Indeed, Red Bull logos and inscriptions are all over his space suit.

The confusion between a publicity stunt and the great space missions of the 
last century is fully intended by the sponsor, to judge from images of what it 
calls "Mission Control" at Roswell, New Mexico. Mission Control is written in 
big letters on the wall with all those echoes of white-shorted bespectacled 
geeks getting Apollo 13 safely home. But again the none too subtle visual 
give-away: this isRed Bull Stratos Mission Control 
<http://i2.mirror.co.uk/incoming/article1378894.ece/ALTERNATES/s510/Red+Bull+Stratos:+Mission+Control>
, says the sign. Not Nasa after all.

Seeing the earth from Baumgartner's helmet is spectacular and sad: wondrous to 
see this orb as the astronauts saw it, amazing that he is so high he can see 
the planet as a planet, but sad because he is plummeting back. All he has done 
is stretch gravity's elastic a bit further. What happened to breaking it 
entirely?

The epic state spending that sent serious missions to the moon is a thing of 
the past. As Baumgartner prepared for his stunt, the space shuttle, relic of an 
age when in Apollo's wake space exploration seemed destined to become ever 
better,was being ferried to its final resting place in a Los Angeles museum 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/10/15/uk-usa-space-idUSLNE89E00C20121015>. 
Today, private money pays for record-breaking achievements that come nowhere 
near the optimism of Nasa's golden age. Is exploration still a marvelwhen James 
Cameron can buy his way into the record books 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-17503395>?

The digital age is not an age for astronauts. Google the words "Moon landings" 
and one of the most popular search phrases offered is "moon landings faked".

So in place of true exploration we idolise this pseudo-astronaut: the man who 
fell to earth, with style.
 