
Reaching 60 certainly doesn't mean we lose the twinkle in our eye. The media 
often presents a glamorous image of dating, full of whirlwind romances for 
twentysomethings or enviable hormone-crazed flings by the likes Carrie Bradshaw 
or a Desperate Housewife. As a sixty-something singleton, it's easy to feel 
daunted by the dating scene.

Well, you'll be relieved to know that the older generation is becoming a major 
part of it. Increasing divorce rates and the disparity in life expectancy for 
men and women have led to huge numbers of people facing retirement alone. 
According toeharmony.co.uk <http://www.eharmony.co.uk/>, 30% of men over 65 and 
a whopping 60% of women don't live as part of a couple.

The internet dating industry <http://dating.theguardian.com/s/> is cottoning 
on to that fact.Match.com <http://uk.match.com/> claims the baby boomer 
generation is its fastest-growing market.
Many niche websites have popped up, specifically targeting an older 
demographic.The Senior Dating Agency <http://www.seniordatingagency-uk.co.uk/> 
andSenior Dating Group <http://www.seniordatinggroup.co.uk/> are both free to 
join and are targeted at over-50s.Singlesover60.co.uk 
<http://singlesover60.co.uk/> and Online Senior Dates 
<http://www.onlineseniordates.com/> focus on a slightly higher age bracket, 
with the majority of its members over 60. If you're stumped on how to write a 
profile, browse others to gain a feel for how much you need to divulge.

If you're still not convinced about releasing your details into the cyber 
abyss, then there'sDateline Platinum <http://www.datelineplatinum.com/> - the 
equivalent of old-fashioned dating agencies. It offers a personalised 
introductory service and vets all its members in person.

Traditional courting, without the aid of a keyboard, isn't dead either. A 
35-year-old female friend recently complained her 65-year-old mother goes on 
more dates than she does - and none of them were organised through cyberspace.

The film industry has also seen an opportunity with the rise of the dating 
baby boomer.Last Chance Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128611/last-chance-harvey> hit cinema 
screens this month, prompting comment about the unusual choice of 40-plus 
characters in a love story.

Remember James and Peggy Mason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/nov/20/lifeandhealth.britishidentity>? 
They are proof you certainly don't have to be young to get married. They became 
Britain's oldest newlyweds in 2007 after their eyes met across a crowded day 
centre in Devon.

Don't panic, though; we're not suggesting a date should lead to selling your 
home and rewriting your will. Casual companionship is perfectly acceptable. 
Pauline Stone (64), from Arundel in West Sussex, lost her husband from a heart 
attack four years ago.

"Being suddenly single made me feel young again. It wasn't my choice to be on 
my own, of course, but when you're thrown into it you either sit and vegetate 
or you get out. I joined a singles' club for my area and have met lots of 
people.

"I'm not looking for someone to move in with, just someone to share a bit of 
fun and go to dinner. I miss having a person to make plans and go on holiday 
with."

Most later-life single status is down to separation or bereavement, and the 
sentiments surrounding each are very different. The former brings a greater 
fear of rejection, and the latter can carry a huge sense of guilt. A small 
percentage of people have never settled down, and others may have an ailing 
spouse and be seeking a platonic friendship.

Whatever the reason, there's a huge network of single sixty-, seventy- and 
eightysomethings who have not lost their lust for life or their desire to be 
loved. If you've found romance after 60, are still looking, or want to share 
your concerns about returning to dating, post your comments below.
 