
Alexis Sánchez will attempt to empty Arsenal’s coffers by dropping into 
conversation a £400,000-per-week offer he’s had from theChinese Super League as 
leverage for a bumper new deal. The Gunners will pretend to be unperturbed but 
are secretly quite perturbed, not least because Sánchez is narrating the club’s 
nativity play and his booming voice is irreplaceable. Arsène Wenger is 
frantically searching for a stand-in behind the scenes and Marco Reus is his 
prime target (football-wise – the German has a famously reedy voice).

Tottenham to offer Toby Alderweireld new contract to overwrite £25m clause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/tottenham-toby-alderweireld-new-contract-25m-clause>
Slaven Bilic refused to watch any of the weekend’s football highlights 
followingWest Ham’s drubbing by Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, which is why he is interested 
in a January move forMarouane Fellaini. Everton, having witnessed Fellaini’s 
impact first-hand on Sunday, are instead chasing fellow United fringe players
Memphis Depay, rated at £25m, and Morgan Schneiderlin – though the latter is 
also being eyed by Leicester, West Brom and Milan for good measure. Should 
Ronald Koeman bring in his preferred Old Trafford cast-offs, he will cast off 
his current United cast-off, Tom Cleverley.

Manchester City and Chelsea are preparing offers for Celtic’s 13-year-old 
wunderkid,Karamoko Dembele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/celtic-karamoko-dembele-13-year-old-debut>
. Chelsea are also browsing the Premier League high street for a new 
centre-back and Middlesbrough have seen them coming, quickly slapping a £35m 
price-tag onBen Gibson’s forehead and moving him to the back of the shop, 
presumably hidden behind David Nugent. The Blues face stiff competition for 
their alternative option, Napoli’sKalidou Koulibaly, from Altético Madrid. 

And Frank Lampard is considering whether to join Gareth Southgate’s England 
backroom staff afterSammy Lee was given the elbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/sammy-lee-has-left-role-england-football-assistant-manager>
 earlier this week.
 