
Undoubtedly, the moon landing is one of the most celebrated events in human 
history. An estimated 600 million television viewers around the worldwatched 
<http://video.nationalgeographic.com/video/kids/science-space-kids/1969-moonlanding-vin-kids/>
 the Apollo 11 astronauts walking on the surface of the moon on 20 July 1969. 
Even for today's standards with easy access to broadcasting, I do not know any 
other event that could attract such a worldwide attention.

Today marks the 44th anniversary of moon landing and provides an opportunity 
to look at the renewed interest in space exploration from a different 
perspective including theefforts to redirect asteroids 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/asteroids/initiative/index.html>, mining 
them and going to mars. This occasion cannot go without a sad note.Neil 
Armstrong <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neil_Armstrong>, the Apollo 11 
commander and first human to walk on the moon, died last August.

Despite the lingering criticism of the space program, we cannot abandon a 
future in space. The query, "is it worth the cost?" is simply a misguided 
perception when one looks at the fact that the money spent on space program is 
less than one percent of US federal spending since 1993.

Not surprisingly, when the moonwalkers returned to earth, many earthlings 
asked this very same question. Obviously, the lunar rocks and dust the 
astronauts brought back do not justify the cost. But, you can checkthis NASA 
link <http://www.nasa.gov/50th/50th_magazine/benefits.html> to see how space 
program benefited the people on earth.

Such criticisms are not unique or limited to any country or culture. When 
India's much celebrated moon mission Chandrayan-1 
<http://www.isro.org/chandrayaan/htmls/home.htm> led to the detection of water 
on the moon, people wondered, understandably, how come many in India walk miles 
each day in search of water? However, such contradictions are not to be 
mistaken as excuses to belie the explorations of other worlds.

The cold war ego that drove the space race does not exist anymore, yet it is 
shocking to learn that since the grounding of the space shuttles last year, 
NASA was completely dependent on Russian agency to make deliveries to 
astronauts on the International Space Station 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/main/index.html>. Private companies 
likeSpaceX <http://www.spacex.com/> have stepped in recently for low earth 
orbit missions. This could have been something anticipated and planned well 
before. If we could manage to land Eagle on the moon 
<http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/nmc/spacecraftDisplay.do?id=1969-059C> with the 
technologies of 1960's, there should have been a better solution for the low 
earth orbit transportations.

There were six successful moon landing missions between 1969 and 1972 with one 
aborted mission,Apollo 13 
<http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/history/apollo/apollo-13/apollo-13.html>. The last 
moon landing that happened in 1972 remained a mundane event and still remains, 
even after four decades, the last moon landing for now.

Recently, two US congressmen proposed a bill known as the Apollo Lunar Landing 
Legacy Act 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/07/15/congress-bill-favors-national-park-on-moon/2518193/>
 that would declare a national park on the surface of the moon to protect the 
Apollo landings. The rationale is to protect the landing sites at a time when 
commercial enterprises and foreign nations steadily increasing their ability to 
land on the moon. Setting aside the legal rights, which I am no expert in, does 
this site carry any scientific importance? Realistically, not much.

If we really want to celebrate and honor the spirit of Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing>, we should use it 
as inspiration to further space exploration. That's a lot better tribute than 
living with the decades old hangover from the Apollo landing. NASA's 2014 
budget proposal includes a plan to robotically capture a small near-earth 
asteroid and redirect it safely to a stable orbit in the earth-moon system 
where astronauts can visit and explore it. Again, all depends on the federal 
government's approval for funding, which we all know is contentious these days.

The US space agency has no plans for another manned mission to moon in the 
near future. NASA says it is focusing on efforts to send humans to an asteroid 
and Mars. In the private sector, a space-venturing project was announced by
Planetary Resources <http://www.planetaryresources.com/>, a company whose 
investors include Larry Page and Eric Schmidt of Google. The mission-harnessing 
valuable materials anything from water to platinum by mining 
theÂ asteroids-sounds like a science fiction idea or even lunatic.

This is exactly where the historic accomplishments like the Apollo 11 mission 
become relevant. Five or six decades ago, the thought of going to the moon was 
mere science fiction. Exploration of new worlds driven by curiosity is the mark 
of an advancing civilization, and they hold the key to heavens.

A proverb of the Buddhist religion often quoted by physicist Richard Feynman 
encapsulates the whole discussion, "To every man is given the key to the gates 
of heaven; the same key opens the gates of hell."
 