
Fifteen months have passed since Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/edward-snowden> began to explain to us how 
our networked world works. During that time there has been much outrage, shock, 
horror, etc expressed by the media and the tech industry. So far, so 
predictable. What is much more puzzling is how relatively relaxed the general 
public appears to be about all this. In Britain, for example, opinion polling 
suggests that nearlytwo thirds of the population think that the kind of 
surveillance revealed by Snowden is basically OK 
<http://memex.naughtons.org/archives/2013/07/27/18825>.

To some extent, the level of public complacency/concern is culturally 
determined. Citizens of Germany, for example, appear to be significantly more 
concerned about the Snowden revelations – and were so even before it was 
discovered that the NSA was bugging Angela Merkel's mobile phone. Germany was 
the European countrywhere Google's Streetview project ran into most opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/oct/13/google-germany-street-view>
, for example. But German wariness about comprehensive surveillance is easy to 
understand: after all, half of the country lived for decades under the Stasi's 
comprehensive analogue surveillance. Germans know all about being watched.

The relative complacency of the British, on the other hand, is also culturally 
determined. GCHQ emerged from Bletchley Park, and in the popular mind may still 
surfthe slipstream of Enigma glory <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bletchley_Park>
. The halo effect of the James Bond movies may also have something to do with 
it, which is odd given that until comparatively recently the senior ranks of 
007's employer harboured a nest of Soviet spies. Whenthe Regulation of 
Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa) 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/23/contents> – the statute which 
ostensibly "legalises" everything that GCHQ & co do in cyberspace – was going 
through parliament in 1999, those of us who campaigned against it were 
astonished to find that no more than a handful of MPs were interested. After 
all, their constituents weren't writing about it and they were happy to accept 
the home secretary's assurances that he was simply updating phone-tapping 
regulations for the digital age. This legislative indolence is a shocking case 
study of what complacent ignorance can do to a democracy, and we are now living 
with the consequences of it.

It's tempting for tech-savvy folks to resort to elitist explanations for the 
general public's lack of concern. The general tenor of this tech critique goes 
something like this: the poor schmucks don't know the first thing about this 
stuff; otherwise they wouldn't be signing up for "free" services that read 
their email and exploit their personal data; nor would they be storing their 
files – unencrypted – in the cloud, or enabling location services on their 
smartphones. And so on. And if they weren't schmucks, why would they fall for 
the official mantra that "if you have nothing to hide, then you have nothing to 
fear"?

Given that we live in a democracy, contempt for the electorate seems an unwise 
approach to persuasion. Those of us who worry about this stuff need to think 
differently. In particular, we need to get to the root of the problem – which 
is that people find it hard to imagine where current technological, political 
and economic trends could be taking us. To put it bluntly, we are heading for a 
society that is comprehensively surveilled. And I mean comprehensively: if you 
think it's bad now then just wait until the "internet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet-of-things>" bandwagon really 
rolls.

The problem we have, therefore, is one of imaginative failure. If people could 
really conceive what it would be like to live in such a society, then perhaps 
they would be more concerned about what is happening now. But most of us don't 
have imaginations that are up to the task. Fortunately, though, there are 
people among us who do. We call them novelists.

In a previous era, the most prophetic evocations of where we were headed were 
produced by two Old Etonian novelists – George Orwell and Aldous Huxley. Orwell 
thought we would be destroyed by the things we fear, particularlycomprehensive 
surveillance <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineteen_Eighty-Four>. Huxley 
conjectured thatwe would be destroyed by the things that delight us 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brave_New_World>. As it happens, we've wound up 
with both. NSA/GCHQ are doing the Orwellian stuff, while Google, Facebook, 
Apple, Yahoo, Microsoft, Skypeet al are taking care of the Huxleyan side of 
things.

But now we need an updated imaginative visualisation of what lies further 
ahead. Step forward Dave Eggers, whose novelThe Circle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241146507>
 is a vivid account of what happens when a digitalnaif enters the force field 
of an organisation that is a mash-up of Google and Facebook.As a novel it has 
some flaws 
<http://www.crassh.cam.ac.uk/blog/post/the-circle-totally-transparent> but as a 
picture of a possible future it is utterly, utterly brilliant. Put it on your 
Xmas list now.
 