
Those of us who have been monitoring the transition of Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> from first to second term 
Flotus briefly lowered our binoculars on Sunday morning to glance across at the 
One Who Might Have Been. In a navy satin jacket, with excellent blonde 
highlights (no bangs) on Fox News Sunday, Ann Romney sat beside her husband in 
San Diego as the pair answered searching questions from Chris Wallace on what 
life's been like since their November loss. ("Mrs Romney, as we sit here right 
now, have you got over the defeat or is that going to take more time?")

Advance word on the interview had already let us know that the shock of defeat 
had been greater for Anne than Mitt, and she got to the point that it had been 
a "CRUSHING disappointment" straight away with drama.

"My heart and my whole soul was: 'we're going to win.' I was there."

Mrs. Romney confirmed that she did indeed cry 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/a-detached-romney-tends-wounds-in-seclusion-after-failed-white-house-bid/2012/12/01/4305079a-38a9-11e2-8a97-363b0f9a0ab3_print.html>
 as previous reports had described. The tears were not for her, she took pains 
to point out, but for the country. "The dream was to make a difference. The 
dream was to serve," she said.

It's not unusual for those who run for president to use the word "serve" to 
describe their colossal ambition. Maybe they really do see being in charge of 
the most powerful country in the world as service. Maybe it's really possible 
for the enormously wealthy who employ plenty of help to see themselves as 
humble servants.Ann Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> has 
always wanted us to believe this is so.

"In our church we are used to serving," she said during the interview. "And 
you can be in a very high position â€¦ and then all of a sudden you're released 
and you're nobody."

She was speaking as a Mormon of course, but it was an analogy that resonates 
more widely when the first pope in 600 years has just retired. The "nobody" 
part of her self-description hinted at how hard she has found the past few 
months. To listen to her speaking of "mourning" the fact that Mitt wasn't 
president, was to wonder whether someone had actually died.

"I'm mostly over it," she said bravely. "But not completely. You know you have 
moments where you look back and still feel the sorrow of the loss. But we're 
not mostly dead yet."

If we know one thing about political elections, it's that losers inevitably 
blame the media.

"I'm happy to blame the media," she laughed, suddenly brightening. Then she 
got steely. Obama had run an unfair campaign, she affirmed in a tone and with a 
look that gave a glimpse of what it must be like when you don't do exactly what 
the boss wants. Then, as she remembered she was on camera, she softened again, 
and clutched onto her husband who had sat affably at her side throughout the 
interview. If anyone gave the appearance of being over it,Mitt Romney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> did.

What is their life like now? Ann Romney confirmed she had been approached by 
Dancing With the Stars and had indeed seriously considered the offer, as she 
LOVES the show. She turned it down on age (she's turning 64) and flexibility 
grounds. She categorically denied that she'll be a candidate for John Kerry's 
Massachusetts Senate seat. Her part of the joint interview ended with some warm 
and cuddly grandkid chat, accompanied by playground video.

"They're our life!" said Mitt. No comment from Ann.
 