
Thanks for all your comments and suggestions on our last blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/nov/13/best-sport-journalism-nfl-basketball>
.

1) In Bed With Maradona: The 100 for 2013 reviewed 
<http://inbedwithmaradona.com/journal/2013/11/20/ibwm100-for-2013-a-year-in-review-week-1>

In Bed With Maradona's now annual collection of the 100 most exciting young 
footballers in the world is a joy to behold. This is not an exercise in lazy, 
click-grabbing list-based journalism. This series is extensively researched by 
editorJeff Livingstone <https://twitter.com/IBWMJeff> and his team. They watch 
stupid amounts of football and speak to scouts, coaches, fans and journalists 
from around the world before whittling the number down to 100.

The team compiled the list last December and are now reviewing how the players 
have progressed over the past 12 months. Twenty-five players will be graded 
every week for the next month, withMichael Atkinson 
<https://twitter.com/M_Atkinson_> providing beautiful illustrations to 
accompany each article.

When the 100 reviews have been posted, the main event will take place once 
again. The team will publish their new IBWM 100 for 2014 on December 18. For 
now, go get lost in the review.

2) 'I'm always scared when I jump'  
<http://www.awinningpersonality.com/2013/10/professional-base-jumper-chris-mc-dougall-im-always-scared-jump/>

Merike Taal has interviewed BASE jumper Chris "Douggs" McDougall for A Winning 
Personality and some of his responses are surprising. For a man who has made 
2,800 jumps in 40 countries, he seems oddly sensible: "I am always very scared 
when I jump or do anything that involves risk taking. Fear is what keeps you 
safe and stops you doing unnecessary craziness."

For all his measured thoughts, he's still a man who jumps from absurd heights 
for the thrill of it. Thankfully he has some advice for the calmer souls among 
us: "Stick with bungee jumping and roller coasters. They are great ways of 
totally shitting your pants in a very low-risk environment. Life is dangerous, 
so if you want to get into extreme sports you have to go full on. Although 
surfing in small waves is pretty safe as well, unless you get eaten by a shark."

3) The long revolution of the Ultras Ahlawy 
<http://roadsandkingdoms.com/2013/the-long-revolution-of-the-ultras-ahlawy/>

Midway through this article for Roads and Kingdoms, Patrick Kingsley tells us 
about his arrival in Cairo: "The night before that violence began, I had 
arrived inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> for the first time 
to live and work. I had hoped to spend a few days finding a flat, sorting a 
press pass and setting up a phone contract, but instead my very first 
experiences of Cairo involved wheezing on teargas and dodging stones hurled at 
the barricades."

Kingsley is working as the Guardian's Egypt correspondent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrick-kingsley> and has been reporting 
on the ongoing tensions in the country. In this piece, he tells the story of 
the country's recent past through the prism of the Al-Ahly ultras, the 
passionate supporters of the Cairo-based football club.

Seventy-four of the Al-Ahly fans who went to see their team play Al-Masry on 1 
February 2012 never returned from the match in Port Said. Since then, 21 people 
have been held responsible and sentenced to death. The Al-Masry fans were 
furious about the court's decision and more rioting ensued. Forty more people 
lost their lives.

The national league was stopped, the Egypt team suffered and the Ultras Ahlawy 
were left wondering what they had achieved through their politcal protests. 
Many of them just want to go back to watching football.

4) The story of Ireland's Listowel Races 
<http://www.grantland.com/story/_/id/9833364/the-listowel-races-ireland>

Charles P Pierce took a trip to Ireland for Grantland this week. As ever, we 
followed.

5) Faster than the fastest  
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/longform/peacock/>
 Jesse Owens of Ohio is shown taking a 100-yard dash beating from Eulace 
Peacock of Temple. Photograph: Charles Payne/NY Daily News via Getty Images 
The story of how Jesse Owens went to the 1936 Olympcs and won four gold medals 
is well known. The story of Eulace Peacock, the man who ran faster and jumped 
further than Owens in 1935, is not so familiar. In this piece of longform 
writing forSports Illustrated, Michael McKnight makes some amends for that.

On 4 July 1935, Owens and Peacock ran the 100m in Linoln, Nebraska. There were 
no starting blocks and the two men had to endure 11 false starts before they 
finally got away. Owens had broken three world records in the build-up to the 
race and was the clear favourite. But he came home in second, behind Peacock, 
who gained pace throughout the race "like a coin dropped from a skyscraper".

Peacock's time was 10.2 seconds. Later that day he beat Owens in the long jump 
with a leap of 26ft 3in. Owens was not running slowly; Peacock was just running 
faster. Peacock prefered the football field to the track, but he was now the 
fastest man on the planet and the Olympics were only a year away.

When the pair arrived for a race in New York City, the crowds turned up to 
watch Peacock. After another defeat Owens admitted: "I don't know whether I can 
defeat him again."

As it turned out, he never did. Peacock pulled his hamstring in Milan in 
August 1935 and then damaged it beyond repair in April 1936, just a few months 
before the Olympics.

He had beaten Owens the previous month – in a race that the future Olympic 
champion insisted they run again as Peacock had slipped on the starting blocks 
– but Peacock's injury kept him from the Berlin Olympics and prevented him from 
ever becoming a star. His greatest professional success in life was to become 
the owner of a modest liquor store in Harlem.

Peacock and Owens became lifelong friends through their sport, but only one of 
them had the chance to make himself known to the world.

6) A history of the WWF… Cubed 
<http://foo-gos.com/2013/11/11/a-history-of-the-wwf-revisited/>

Some people have too much time on their hands. But thank God for them.

7) Travels of a transsexual football fan 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/juliet-jacques/2013/11/travels-transsexual-football-fan>

Now that every football story is covered from every angle imaginable, it can 
be difficult to read something new about the game. That being said, not many 
sports journalists have written about sharing a train with some West Ham fans 
and worrying that they might broach the subject of transsexuality.Juliet Jacques
 of theNew Statesman has only gone and taken that angle away from the rest of 
us.

8) Social Media Showdown and Web Browser Championship 
<http://joegillibranddesign.blogspot.co.uk/2013/11/something-bigger.html>

What would happen if Facebook, Twitter, Google Chrome and Firefox had rival 
teams that played each other in a grand offline sports tournament? What would 
their badges look like and what strips would they wear? Let's be honest, we've 
all pondered it. But onlyJoe Gillibrand has done the designs.

9) The man who made Barça 
<http://www.blueprintforfootball.com/2013/11/the-man-who-made-barca.html>

When Laureano Ruiz arrived at Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> as a youth coach, there was a 
sign on the offices that read: "If you come with a youth who is shorter than 
1.80 meters, turn around!" That policy did not last for long.

Had Ruiz not forseen the folly of rejecting players because of their height, 
we may never have seen Lionel Messi, Xavi and Andrés Iniesta dominate the 
midfields of Europe.Paul Grech traces Ruiz's football philosophy in this 
article forBlueprint for Football. It's a must-read for anyone interested in 
football tactics.

10) Jingle Hoops  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=EYEHUOpwNvE>

It's not even close to Christmas yet, but this is superb.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEYEHUOpwNvE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEYEHUOpwNvE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEYEHUOpwNvE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Recent highlights from the Guardian Sport Network

1) The parallels between the 2013-14 and 2006-07 Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/99-94-cricket-blog/2013/nov/20/cricket-ashes-series-striking-parallels-2006-2013>
2) Magomed Abdusalamov is in a coma because of us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/queensberry-rules-boxing-blog/2013/nov/12/magomed-abdusalamov-coma-because-us>
3) How Belgium kept Holland out of the 1986 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/18/how-belgiums-last-gasp-goal-kept-holland-out-of-the-1986-world-cup>
4) Best XIs, top 100s and the lure of cricket lists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/19/all-time-best-xis-top-100s-and-the-inescapable-lure-of-cricket-lists>
5) We should stop comparing Cristiano Ronaldo to other players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2013/nov/15/cristiano-ronaldo-compare-other-players-messi>

Debate the articles and share your own suggestions below
 