Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsokeAMDm7mk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsokeAMDm7mk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsokeAMDm7mk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

Ten years ago, I interviewed Missy Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/missyelliott> just after the Madonna, 
Christina and Britney faux lezfest at the 2003 MTV VMA Awards. I asked her why 
she hadn't joined in with the snogging. She looked at me aghast and nearly 
choked on an M&M. "No, no, no," she gasped, "Hip-hop would never do that. 
Never, never, never in a million years."

A decade later and, sometimes, you'd be forgiven for thinking that Missy was 
right and nothing had changed. Despite trotting out the old "I don't have a 
problem with gay people. I even have some gay homies" line, Snoop Lion né Dogg 
recently echoed Elliott's thoughts when he said that hip-hop would struggle to 
accept a gay rapper. "Rap is so masculine… You can't be in a locker room full 
of motherfucking tough-ass dudes, then all of a sudden say, 'Hey, man, I like 
you,'" he mused.
 Brooke Candy. Photograph: Alis Pelleschi 
"Hip-hop is so homophobic," sighs Californian rapper Brooke Candy. A lesbian 
who is open and (often explicitly) frank about her sexuality, she is a living 
riposte to Elliott's suggestion that gay rap would never be allowed to 
flourish. "I don't understand why that mentality exists and I don't understand 
why Snoop would say that, especially because I've met him and he's such a cool 
guy. To say that though is so regressive."

New York-based rapper Angel Haze <https://www.theguardian.com/music/angel-haze>
, who describes herself as "pansexual", agrees. "I think it's a cop-out. It's 
like a dad who has spent his whole life telling his son not to be gay, only for 
the son to turn out to be gay. Also, people can be gay without being 
excessively flamboyant or constantly throwing themselves at other men. That's 
crazy. I think there's room in hip-hop for tons of gay rappers. I'm sure 
there's already loads of them who are too scared to come out."
 Angel Haze. Photograph: David Levene 
The fact is that things have changed. Despite the culture articulated by 
Snoop, despite the breezy, bigoted catchphrases like "no homo", gay rappers are 
coming out and taking centre stage. There have always been exceptions to the 
rule, of course, a smattering of openly gay rhymers such as Yo! Majesty or 
QBoy, but they never gained much attention and their music became defined by 
their sexual identity. This year, things are different. Two male rappers, Mykki 
Blanco and Zebra Katz, are beginning to enjoy some success, touring the world 
and, in the case of Blanco, gaining critical kudos from publications as varied 
as Pitchfork and Spain's El País. Blanco is a female character played by 
Michael Quattlebaum, whose lyrics are highly sexualised and backed up by 
barnstorming live performances. "I think that that's the one thing that I pride 
myself on, that I don't give myself any limits," he told The Quietus. "And that 
took a long time; that wasn't an easy thing. If I can congratulate myself on 
anything, it's that I was able to break down my fears of myself, or what people 
didn't like, or what maybe at one time my parents or even those close to me 
didn't like, and really just did what I wanted to.

"Honestly, for me what it really feels like is that I now actively… explore 
life now in my natural gay, homosexual, masculine way, and in this very 
different feminine way. The themes that I think about, the motifs that I think 
about. I feel like my place has been as a character, and I liken it to people 
like Wu-Tang and Nas and other rappers who built a mythology within their own 
arena."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdHULK1M-P08%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdHULK1M-P08%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdHULK1M-P08%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

Creating their own space and identity is the next challenge for the generation 
of performers ready to admit to their sexuality in a notoriously resistant 
culture. Indeed, one artist declined to take part in this feature for that very 
reason, preferring to be known first as a rapper rather than a "gay rapper".

Brooke Candy is sympathetic: "What is so bothersome to me, with these emerging 
gay rappers, is that they've created a new genre called 'queer hip-hop'. Why 
the fuck is there a new genre for the same-sounding music? Half of the people 
rapping up there are gay and people don't even know it. I understand people 
being sick of being labelled as 'gay rappers', but stand strong."

Brooke and Haze aren't the only openly gay/bisexual/pansexual females in rap: 
Odd Future's Syd Tha Kid is loud and proud,Azealia Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/azealia-banks> has talked about being in 
relationships with both men and women, while Birmingham MC RoxXxan has been 
going out with Stooshe's Karis Anderson for over a year. "I want to be 
perceived as 'RoxXxan' but if people label me as 'gay rapper RoxXxan' I'm not 
offended," she says. "Being gay today isn't what it was 10 years ago; people 
are so much more relaxed. That said, I'm glad that I'm a girl rapper who's gay 
than a boy rapper who's gay. It would be so much harder. Especially where I'm 
from. All you ever hear in the hood is, 'Shut up, you're gay'. You're brought 
up to believe that it's wrong. It took me ages to come out and tell everybody, 
but life is a lot easier for me now."
 RoxXxan 
If there's a reluctance on the boys' side to step out, the girls seem less 
reticent. "I think evolution comes to people who want to change things," notes 
Haze. "If people want to be confined, then we will for ever be confined. If 
they're too afraid to break out of the boxes that society places them in, then 
we'll for ever be stagnant."

Not only are these rappers "out and proud" but, according to RoxXxan, they're 
ahead of the cultural curve. "Now that it's 'cool' to be gay, there's a lot of 
people pretending," she points out. "Rihanna might have kissed a girl, but 
that's probably about it.Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> claimed she was bisexual for 
about four months but went quiet about it when she became famous. You have Rita 
Ora and her 'wifey' Cara Delevingne, but I think it's all just to appeal to a 
bigger fanbase and appear edgy. You can't just 'stop' being gay when you become 
famous. It's not an illness you can shake off."
 Zebra Katz. Photograph: Miikka Pirinen 
"The more that high-profile hip-hop artists like Jay-Z and 50 Cent acknowledge 
that it's OK to be gay, the more changes we will see within hip-hop," says 
1Xtra presenter Adele Roberts, who recently produced a radio show on her own 
experiences of coming out. "Eventually, someone will break through and change 
things and other people will follow. TakeFrank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> coming out – yes, he's an R&B 
singer – but he's part of a massive hip-hop collective, so that does make a 
difference. It's given momentum for other people going forward and I think 
someone else will follow soon because of that."

Thanks to her fashion friendships with Jeremy Scott and Terry Richardson, 
YouTube hits in the millions, and interest from major labels, it looks as if 
former stripper-turned-spitter Brooke Candy could just be the one to fly the 
(rainbow) flag in the charts. "I'm a woman, I'm white, I'm fucking gay in 
hip-hop; it's fucking hard," she admits. "I completely polarise myself in an 
industry that is homophobic and against women. But it's going to happen. 
Whether it's me or someone else, someone gay is going to break into the 
mainstream hip-hop world."

Brooke Candy plays T In The Park, Sun; Angel Haze's No Bueno is out now
 