
A taskforce set up by the German government to determine the ownership history 
of more than 1,500 artworks discovered in 2012 has found that only five were 
wrongfully taken from Jews, drawing criticism from Jewish groups.

The mysterious Munich recluse who hoarded €1bn of Nazis' stolen art
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/04/nazi-art-hoard-munich-recluse-cornelius-gurlitt>
German tax inspectors discovered the art collection, which included works by 
Matisse and Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/05/picasso-matisse-nazi-art-munich>
, during a raid on the Munich home of Cornelius Gurlitt. His father, an art 
dealer, had sold what Hitler dismissed as “degenerate” art.

 After two years of research, the head of the taskforce, Ingeborg 
Berggreen-Merkel, presented the final report on Thursday.

 She said that only five pieces had been confirmed as stolen Nazi art, 
although 499 were determined to have a questionable history. Of the five, four 
were returned to heirs of their owners, including Max Liebermann’s Two Riders 
on a Beach and Henri Matisse’s Seated Woman.

The announcement drew sharp criticism from Ronald Lauder, the president of the 
World Jewish Congress. Lauder issued a statement calling the results “meagre 
and not satisfactory”. He said he “expectedGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> to do better, given that time is 
running out”, and accused the taskforce of managing its work poorly.

 Jewish groups have been pressing the German government to move quickly, since 
many of the heirs of the Nazi victims are elderly.

 Accused of carrying out her work without sufficient transparency, 
Berggreen-Merkel said a dispute over the validity of the will of Gurlitt, who 
died in May 2014 at the age of 81, had made it difficult for the taskforce to 
be more forthcoming.

In the will, Gurlitt designated the Bern Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Museum in Switzerland as sole 
heir to his collection. A cousin is challenging the claim, arguing that Gurlitt 
was not in good psychological health when he wrote his will. A court decision 
on the validity of the will is due in February.

 Monika Grütters, the culture minister, has announced that Germany is setting 
up a Lost Art Foundation in Magdeburg, which will continue research into 
Gurlitt’s artwork.

 