
The winner

David Fincher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-fincher>’s critically 
ravished Gillian Flynn adaptationGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> is triumphant, thanks to a 
career-best $37.5m (£23.3m) US opening for the director, just edging out horror 
spin-offAnnabelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle>. ($37.1m). (That 
record only stands without calculating for inflation.Panic Room’s $30m, in 2002 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/people/chart/?id=davidfincher.htm>, would be 
worth $39m.) Topping the global chart is no mean feat for what is ultimately a 
specialty flick (Fox have been using films such as Captain Phillips, Argo and 
The Departed as yardsticks). Compared to the director’s 2011 filmGirl With the 
Dragon Tattoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131882/girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo> – 
also drawn from a popular potboiler, but hobbled by an awkward, staggered 
Christmas roll-out – the studio opted to break Gone Girl big in 40 markets 
right out of the gate. It has done best in markets where the source novel sold 
well and the post-austerity emotional malaise that fills it has most resonance. 
So, again: Fincher bests in the UK ($6.9m) and Australia ($4.6m), and further 
significant No 1s in Russia ($2.95m) and Germany ($2.85m). But with thinner 
grosses further afield, and not many more major territories to come, you wonder 
if Ben Affleck and Rosamund Pike’s marital woes can go the distance. Dragon 
Tattoo’s global tally ($232m) should be doable (and Gone Girl cost $30m less); 
achievingBenjamin Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-curious-case-of-benjamin-button>’s 
($333.9m) might be stretching it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412183020300%2FGone-Girl-star-Ben-Afflec-021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gone%20Girl%20star%20Ben%20Affleck%3A%20'Usually%20the%20protagonist%20is%20full%20of%20shit'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gone%20Girl%20star%20Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%27Usually%20the%20protagonist%20is%20full%20of%20shit%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412183020300%2FGone-Girl-star-Ben-Afflec-021.jpg>
 Gone Girl star Ben Affleck: ‘Usually the protagonist is full of shit’ - video 
interview 
The runner-up

Critics seem to agree that John R Leonetti’s possessed-doll chiller Annabelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle> largely lacks the fear factor of 
its parent film, 2013’sThe Conjuring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156145/the-conjuring>. It opened 
slightly under the previous film ($41.9m) in the US, but it’s stillthe 
sixth-highest horror debut 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/genres/chart/?view=openings&id=supernaturalhorror.htm&p=.htm>
, and a bounce for a genre that, apart from The Conjuring, hasn’t seen a $100m+ 
global hit since 2013’sMama <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151428/mama>
. There’s little doubt it will be a steady little earner for distributor Warner 
Bros, firming up the franchise in preparation for aConjuring sequel proper 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3065204/> next October. Horror always translates 
well across different cultures, and many half-decent films with enough 
marketing oomph seem able to uncork primal urges and decent financial returns 
at the same time. Annabelle, in 15 fewer territories, has pulled in only $4m 
less than Gone Girl, with historic performances in some places. It had five 
No1s in Asia, with record horror debuts in Malaysia ($2.4m) and Singapore 
($1m), as well as a strong take in Korea ($3m); perhaps Catholic-tinged satanic 
panic has as much exotic appeal over there as their lank-haired girl ghosts do 
here.

Made in China
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujoteNscX4g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujoteNscX4g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujoteNscX4g&media=>
Easily the biggest overseas gross of the weekend ($38m) was for Ning Hao’s 
divorce road-trip comedyBreakup Buddies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IYhS9FDboPg>. Most of that was the mighty 
Chinese domestic haul, neck and neck with the US openings for Gone Girl and 
Annabelle – more proof of how that country is increasingly closing the gap with 
America. That takes its running total to $93m, having opened mid-week on 30 
September as the flagship release ushering in China’s Golden Week holiday. 
Comedy starsHuang Bo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huang_Bo> and Xu Zheng 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xu_Zheng_(actor)> – playing a washed-up singer 
and his best friend on the pull from Beijing to the south-western city of Dali 
– are reigniting their schtick from 2012 indie smashLost in Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/13/lost-in-thailand-lost-in-translation>
. With Ning directing (he’s had a string of local hits 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/q-a-breakup-buddies-director-738256>, 
often starring Huang), it’s a true A-list confab. And audiences bit hard: its 
opening day ($15.9m) more than doubled Lost in Thailand’s ($6.25m), a sleeper 
hit that wound up China’s most successful local film. Breakup Buddies looks a 
good bet to top its eventual $208m. If you still think the story is just 
provincial chatter, then – in contrast with LIT’s afterthought US release – the 
followup opened simultaneously in Australia, New Zealand and the US, with a 
punchy $240,000 on 20 screens in the latter. The day Sino-blockbusters are 
routine exports may not be far off.

The God squad
 No faith in the south for Nicolas Cage in Left Behind Photograph: PR 
The Lord smileth not on Nicolas Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolascage>, at the box office at least. His 
$16m-budgeted end-times thrillerLeft Behind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/left-behind> was bidding to become the fourth 
sizeable fundamentalist-Christian hit of 2014. A disappointing $6.9m opening 
leaves it quite a way off the pace set by Fox’sSon of God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159165/son-of-god> in February 
($15.9m), the independently produced high-school dramaGod’s Not Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/god-s-not-dead> in March ($9.2m) and Sony’s 
Heaven Is for Real 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/29/heaven-is-for-real-review-afterlife>
 ($22.5m). Maybe Cage’s star chops and messianic propensities can help close 
the gap overseas; some of the above found followers in Latin America, 
especially (though Left Behind has a rather optimistic Middle East-centric 
release schedule). But all four films taken as a trend, the Bible-belt is 
clearlyno longer regarded by the film industry as a desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/-sp-faith-films-hollywood-religion-christian-noah-heaven-is-real-bible>
 only touchable by acts of God like Mel Gibson’s Passion of the Christ.

The rest of the world
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYpv-zIdbPfw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYpv-zIdbPfw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYpv-zIdbPfw&media=>
Plenty of foreign flotsam flooded the global chart this week. Though, 
typically, half of it was just Hollywood in disguise.Bang Bang! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRARHtMzZQE>, Fox Star’s reworking of the 2010 
Tom Cruise-Cameron Diaz vehicle Knight and Day, swept off with the No 1 spot in 
that country and No 6 globally. It’s a boon for leading manHrithik Roshan 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004335/>, who underwent brain surgery after an 
accident on the set, and a massive result forFox’s Indian arm 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fox_Star_Studios>, its first palpable hit on the 
subcontinent; perhaps the Bollywood monopoly is breachable after all. Fox’s 
all-purpose local-film unit, FIP, was also busy in South Korea, where its comedy
Slow Video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwMC09qtbOY> ($5.2m) pipped 
stem-cell-research dramaWhistle Blower 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZgLddGipr8M> ($4.9m) to the top rung (and 16th 
spot globally). Another Golden Week release in China, Taiwanese cop-thriller 
sequelBlack & White: The Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ypv-zIdbPfw> looks to have built on its TV 
fanbase and 3D tart-up, passing its predecessor’s $14.9m lifetime take in a 
single week. And, in 16th place globally, thefifth in one-man-band Santiago 
Segura’s Torrente series <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEH4G2Qsk2U> – about 
a balding, bigoted, Franco-loving Madrid cop – became Spain’s biggest opening 
of the year so far. Local films are flying there – a market share of around 25% 
- despitean industry that’s been battered since the credit crunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/aug/07/russia-spanish-cinema-tengo-ganas>
.

The future
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F08%2Fglobal-box-office-annabel-asia-debut-breakup-buddies-gone-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412771411318%2Fc27543f3-1f68-4ef0-98f2-b59ea5aba568-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20box%20office%3A%20horror%20spin-off%20Annabelle%20gives%20Asia%20satanic%20panic%20with%20historic%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F08%2Fglobal-box-office-annabel-asia-debut-breakup-buddies-gone-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20box%20office%3A%20horror%20spin-off%20Annabelle%20gives%20Asia%20satanic%20panic%20with%20historic%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F08%2Fglobal-box-office-annabel-asia-debut-breakup-buddies-gone-girl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412771411318%2Fc27543f3-1f68-4ef0-98f2-b59ea5aba568-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pacified … Steve Carrell in Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, 
Very Bad Day Photograph: Dale Robinette/Disney Enterprises, Inc. 
No major worldwide rollouts next time, though Disney’s family comedy Alexander 
and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/alexander-and-the-terrible-horrible-no-good>
 – from the unlikely directorial hand ofMiguel Arteta 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0037708/> (Chuck & Buck) – kicks off in 20 markets, 
including the US and Russia.Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> finally adds its 
last major territory, China, where a respectable $100m+ show could see it 
leapfrog a number of titles to the No 2 position on the best-of-year list. 
Marvel have surely held it back to firm up its recognition factor elsewhere 
first, but it’s still an unfamiliar quantity for Chinese audiences, something 
that mutedThe Avengers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-avengers>’ take 
there. AndDracula Untold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dracula-untold>, 
which made clean puncture wounds at – hurrah! – the Romanian box office and 
beyond this week, could see proper box-office bloodlust kick in, as it 
expanding to the US, South Korea and Russia.

Top 10 global box office, 3-5 October

 * (New) Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>, $62.1m from 
40 territories – 39.3% international; 60.7% US 
 * Annabelle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle>, $57.1m from 25 
territories. $60.1m cumulative – 38.2% int, 61.8% US 
 * (New) Breakup Buddies, $38.2m from 4 territories. $93.2m cum – 99.7% int; 
0.3% US 
 * The Equalizer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-equalizer>, $32m from 
71 territories. $104.1m cum – 38% int; 62% US 
 * The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>, $28.5m 
from 62 territories. $193m cum – 61.7% int; 38.3% US 
 * (New) Bang Bang!, $25.4m from 9 territories. $25.4m cum – 94.6% int; 5.4% US
 * (New) Dracula Untold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dracula-untold>, 
$21m from 25 territories – 100% int 
 * The Boxtrolls <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-boxtrolls>, $18.4m from 
23 territories. $58.3m cum – 44.4% int; 55.6% US 
 * (New) Black & White: The Dawn of Justice, $10m from 3 territories. $19m cum 
– 100% int 
 * (New) Left Behind <https://www.theguardian.com/film/left-behind>, $6.9m 
from 1 territory – 100% US 
• Thanks to Rentrak <https://twitter.com/Rentrak>. All this week’s figures are 
based on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

• What should we be covering in our new global box office column? Let us know 
in the comments below.
 