
The tumbling gold price is expected to have slashed the profits of high street 
pawnbroker Albemarle & Bond when it reports its full-year results this week.

The chain thrived and expanded as the recession took hold and drove hard-up 
Britons to sell family trinkets for cash. But the company's gold-buying arm has 
suffered as the gold price has slumped to multi-year lows and A&B was forced to 
issue a direprofits warning 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=11557101>
 in April.

The change of fortunes has left the company struggling with a debt mountain of 
more than £50m and it was said to be scrambling to secure bailout funds at the 
weekend.

The business, which has about 230 stores, has blamed tough trading conditions 
for its falling profits and warned in April that the "significant drop" in 
earnings from gold buying would probably accelerate on the back of steep falls 
in the bullion market. The profits warning saw chief executive Barry Stevenson 
pushed out and Greville Nicholls, who was chief executive from 1995 to 2009, 
take the reins as interim executive chairman.

Analysts are forecasting a sharp fall in profits for the year to the end of 
June. Citing pressures from "poor trading and the falling gold price", Shore 
Capital forecast in July that adjusted pre-tax profits would have more than 
halved over the year to come in at £8.8m from £21.4m a year earlier.

That would leave the company in danger of breaching the terms of its loans and 
it may need to raise between £15m and £20m to cut its debt pile, the Sunday 
Times reported, citing sources.

It was not clear whether A&B would go for a rights issue or look to other 
sources for rescue money and the company declined to comment.

The company has yet to set a date for its full-year results but the City had 
been expecting them last week. They are now expected this week.

Shares in the company, listed on the junior Aim market, hit a peak of 400p in 
2011 as it benefited from the economic downturn and its attraction as an 
alternative to high street banks as they reduced lending levels.

But the shares have fallen back since then, knocked by tougher competition 
from rivals and volatile gold prices. The shares closed at 125p last week, down 
59% since the start of the year.

A&B's largest shareholder, US pawnbroker EZCorp, has also seen the tumbling 
gold price hit profits and its shares are down 37% since the start of the year.

Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold> prices have been buoyed in 
recent trading sessions by uncertainty surrounding the US budget negotiations, 
but the traditional safe-haven metal is down 20% since the start of the year.

Investors have been put off by the US Federal Reserve's plans to rein in its 
financial stimulus.

The Fed surprised the markets this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/18/federal-reserve-maintains-stimulus-ben-bernanke>
 by not starting its tapering of quantitative easing (QE), a move that would 
see the central bank cutting back its $85bn-a-month bond-buying programme. But 
expectations that such a change in policy is not far off hastaken the shine off 
gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/28/gold-price-low-federal-reserve-inflation>
.

The metal is used by investors as a hedging bet against rising inflation, but 
a reduction in QE is seen as easing price pressures because less central bank 
cash will flow into financial institutions.
 