
Dark mystery thriller Gone Girl, starring Ben Affleck as a man who finds 
himself a murder suspect when his wife goes missing, topped the US box office 
at the weekend 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-david-finchers-gone-738181?mobile_redirect=false>
 with an impressive debut haul of $38m (£23.7m). In the process the adaptation 
of Gillian Flynn’s bestselling novel secured director David Fincher’s highest 
opening film ever.
Gone Girl’s bow easily surpassed Fincher’s previous best, the Jodie Foster 
thriller Panic Room, which opened to $30.1m in 2002. Starring Affleck as Nick 
Dunne and Britain’s Rosamund Pike as missing wife Amy, with Neil Patrick Harris 
and Emily Ratajkowski in supporting roles, the film has drawn rave reviews from 
critics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412183020300%2FGone-Girl-star-Ben-Afflec-021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gone%20Girl%20star%20Ben%20Affleck%3A%20'Usually%20the%20protagonist%20is%20full%20of%20shit'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gone%20Girl%20star%20Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%27Usually%20the%20protagonist%20is%20full%20of%20shit%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F02%2Fgone-girl-ben-affleck-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412183020300%2FGone-Girl-star-Ben-Afflec-021.jpg>
 Gone Girl star Ben Affleck: ‘Usually the protagonist is full of shit’ - video 
interview 
Fincher’s film narrowly beat another new film, the horror prequel Annabelle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annabelle>, into second place. Centring on a 
doll possessed by a demonic spirit which was first introduced in the critically 
acclaimed 2013 chiller The Conjuring, John R Leonetti’s supernatural tale 
opened with a remarkable $37.2m, having been made for just $6.5m. With all 
figures still just estimates, it could yet emerge as the weekend’s top film 
when final figures emerge on Monday.


Last week’s top film, the Denzel Washington vigilante action movie The 
Equalizer, made third spot this time around with another $18m in its second 
week for a total of $64.5m. The top five was rounded out by animated fantasy 
The Boxtrolls, with another $12.4m in its second week for a haul of $32.5m, and 
futuristic dramaThe Maze Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>, with $12m in its third week 
for a total of $73.9m.
 The trolls raise Eggs, a human changeling, in The Boxtrolls Photograph: PR 
The only other new film to hit the top 10 this week was the apocalyptic 
thriller Left Behind from director Vic Armstrong. StarringNicolas Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolascage> as an airline pilot struggling 
to cope with the aftermath of a cataclysmic event, the film took $6.9m in sixth 
place.


US box office top 10 October 3-5 

1. Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl> $38m

2. Annabelle $37.2m

3. The Equalizer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-equalizer> $19m Total: 
$64.5m

4. The Boxtrolls <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-boxtrolls> $12.42m 
Total: $32.54m

5. The Maze Runner $12m Total: $73.92m

6. Left Behind <https://www.theguardian.com/film/left-behind> $6.85m

7. This is Where I Leave You $4m Total: $29m

8. Dolphin Tale 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dolphin-tale-2> $3.53m 
Total: $37.97m

9. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> $3.03m Total: 
$323.36m

10. No Good Deed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/no-good-deed> $2.5m Total: 
$50.16m

 