
Waiting at the gate to board the flight to Buenos Aires, an awful sense of 
disquiet creeps upon me. I'm making a huge mistake. I'm flying to Argentina for 
a week, on my own, to learn to dance the Argentine tango. What the hell am I 
doing? I don't speak a word of Spanish. I haven't danced a choreographed step 
since 1982, when I tapped non-rhythmically along toThe Red, Red Robin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9lvpqPqvOvo> in a community centre. The only 
things I know about Argentina are that it's very far away, we went to war with 
them once, and years ago I saw a film where their king appeared to beJimmy Nail 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0619700/>. And, worst of all, the Argentine tango 
(I've checked withYouTube 
<http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=argentine+tango&oq=argenti&aq=0&aqi=g10&aql=&gs_sm=e&gs_upl=1415l3057l0l4436l7l7l0l2l2l0l214l750l1.2.2l5l0>
) is a complex dance, built on instinct, litheness and a non-coy Latin American 
attitude to sensual proximity to strangers. I, on the other hand, am fully 
British in my dispensation of body contact. Grab me without permission and I go 
rigid and show fangs, like a tomcat being forced into a pet carrier.

As my flight is called, the terror of a week at the Tango Escuela de Carlos 
Copello <http://www.carloscopello.com/tango-escuela.htm> begins to take hold. 
Copello is a born-and-bred tanguero.His website <http://www.carloscopello.com/> 
is full of shots of women chucking their ankles over his shoulders and dancing 
with their bodies wrapped round his, their faces tucked intimately into his 
neck or gazing deeply into his eyes. "I feel a bit like crying," I confess 
pathetically to the Argentinian businessman stuck beside me and my anxieties 
for 13 long-haul hours.

"Oh, don't worry," he says, unfazed. "Everyone cries in Argentina. You'll fit 
in well. We're very dramatic people."

As it turns out, I do fit in rather well. Buenos Aires is beautiful, hot and 
glamorous, and the malbec is plentiful enough to make me feel roughly similar. 
I arrive at dawn on a bright November morning and jump into a dirt-cheap yellow 
cab that sneaks me into the well-heeled Recoleta district, toAlgodon Mansions 
<http://www.algodonmansion.com/index>, which is going to be my home for the 
week and which slightly ruins any future trips to Argentina – the suites are 
enormous, with showers that fit at least a dozen people (I estimate; I couldn't 
get a crowd large enough to test this) and attended to by 24-hour butlers. 
There is also a balcony full of flora and fauna on which my own chorus of birds 
gathers to chirp each morning while I eat pain au chocolat, the back of my hand 
resting on my forehead like a 1930s movie starlet as I wonder at what time it 
is polite to crack into the Algodon Estates pinot noir.

November and December are good months to be in Buenos Aires. The weather is 
warm, not yet searing, and the polo season is in full swing, as the pilgrimage 
of ruddy-cheeked, expat Prince Harry-alikes bumbling through the airport will 
denote. Do spend a Saturday afternoon at theCampo Argentine del Polo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Campo_Argentino_de_Polo> watching men on horses 
being macho, then carry on to after-parties inPalermo Hollywood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palermo,_Buenos_Aires#Palermo_Hollywood> with the 
great and good of Argentina's equestrian-obsessed party rabble. If you've read
Jilly Cooper <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/jilly-cooper>, you'll know what 
goes on.

Take a tolerant credit card and flat shoes for shopping in Patio Bullrich 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patio_Bullrich> and Arandú 
<http://www.fodors.com/world/south-america/argentina/buenos-aires/review-137616.html>
 (think Ibiza Town married with Knightsbridge) and pack clothes made of 
stretchable fabrics because you'll consume too many steaks, brioche-based pies 
and cocktails. Do pack bug repellant: the mosquitos are silent, invisible, 
industrious buggers who adore sweet British skin. And definitely, definitely 
try to learn tango.

I say the latter part with hindsight. On day one of lessons with Carlos 
Copello, stood in a dance studio, watching the Argentinians pass round a cup of
mate <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mate_(beverage)> (the never-ending communal 
equivalent of tea), wearing my stupid tango shoes – too low to be glamorous, 
too high to be practical, so truly useless – I want to run away. Carlos seems 
to sense I'm going to be trouble from the moment he explains that tango is a 
dance where the man leads, the man makes all the decisions and that – unless 
you want to be seen as either insane or a sex-crazed harpy – a woman never 
suggests a dance and monitors her eye contact with men.

"Pghhhgh," I say, a sound of feminist dissent I find is usually understood in 
all languages.
 Grace Dent takes to the dance floor, tanguero style: 'If you let go, float 
above your British worry and shame, and begin dancing round and round the 
floor, tango will grip you like a fever.' Photograph: Alejandro Kirchuk for the 
Guardian 
We begin with "the basic step", the one that carries two people round a 
dancefloor clockwise. Facing Carlos, my role goes: left foot forward, right 
sweeps to the side, two quick steps back, leaving left crossing right, right 
foot back, left sweeps across and both feet together. Repeat. It takes me two 
hours of stepping on Carlos's shoes and being moaned at to master this. Two of 
the most excruciating hours of my life. I can do the feet. I can even do 
"ochos", the twirly-feet steps that abbreviate the basic step. What I can't do 
is let Carlos lead while I wrap around him, pulling a distant, yet vaguely 
lustful expression. He seems furious at even the slightest hint of authority in 
my body language. "Tranquilo," he says, 275 times in the first lesson. I'm 
supposed to be looking into his eyes, or have my head tucked sensuously into 
his neck. To me, this feels wrong. In Britain, the only time someone touches 
you so tenderly, they're either your official "other half", someone you're 
about to get off with, or you're being sexually molested. So how come everyone 
else at tango school just gets on with it? I can't unlearn decades of social 
conditioning overnight, but I had better bloody well try if I don't want to be 
the pale English wallflower with the cat's bum mouth for the next seven days.

Days pass, as do my jet lag and my feeling of pointless anxiety. I'm paired 
with Carlos's son, Maxi, a strapping, 6ft 2in twentysomething with large, hazel 
eyes and broad shoulders. He begins lessons with long periods of making me gaze 
into his eyes and hum along to the music, so we are "sensing the rhythms in 
each other's bodies". Oddly enough, dancing with someone so gorgeous and whom 
I have no aversion to whisking me around the floor like a compliant rag doll 
makes things much jollier. A small flash of tanguero spirit takes hold – the 
music, the flamboyance, the leg kicks, the ability to grab a stranger and dance 
for four minutes emitting the vibes that you're wildly in love, then turn on a 
heel and walk off. Suddenly, it all begins to make more sense. If you let go, 
float above your British worry and shame, and begin dancing round and round the 
floor, tango will grip you like a fever.

By day three, the tutors roar with glee as I dance rather proficiently, 
pulling the trademark Argentinian face of aloof, undying love. I take group 
lessons, solo lessons and technical classes that explain precisely what muscle 
should be working where and when. By day five, I think nothing of venturing out 
into the rush hour traffic to dance with Carlos for a photoshoot. I don't care, 
and the passersby don't, either. Everyone is quite dramatic in Argentina – my 
travel companion on the flight out was right.

I miss Buenos Aires desperately. My tango shoes sit expectantly under my bed 
in wintery east London. I'm still 99% stiffly British, but now with a tiny 
touch of tanguero madness lying dormant in my soul.

• Grace Dent travelled with Latin American specialists Dehouche 
<http://www.dehouche.com> on their Tango Experience. Seven nights at Algodon 
Mansion, including five private lessons at Tango Escuela Carlos Copello, three 
group classes and aRojo Tango <http://www.rojotango.com/> show, starts from 
£3,200pp, including return flights with British Airways.

• WIN: Belly-dancing lessons in Morocco. For full details of the holiday on 
offer, plus how to enter the competition and full terms and conditions, go to
weekend travel competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/jan/27/weekend-travel-competition>
 