
The Grand National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> has a new 
sponsor lined up to take over for a five-year period from 2017, it was 
announced on Tuesday morning. Randox Health, a previously low-profile 
healthcare company based in Northern Ireland, is to succeed Crabbies, whose 
three-year period as backers of the Aintree race will end after next month’s 
running.

Crabbies’ departure from the scene has been well anticipated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/halewood-losses-crabbies-grand-national-sponsorship-doubt>
, particularly following losses sustained by its parent company, Halewood. The 
drinks manufacturer committed to the Grand National in August 2013, as a result 
of which deal the race offered £1m in prize money for the first time.

Halewood losses put Crabbie’s Grand National sponsorship in new doubt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/halewood-losses-crabbies-grand-national-sponsorship-doubt>
Halewood is to maintain its involvement with Aintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> by sponsoring a Grade One novice 
hurdle on the day before the National. The firm is chaired by Judy Halewood, 
whose late husband owned Amberleigh House, the National winner in 2004.

As in that case, a personal interest in horses held by a senior figure has 
helped to forge the association between Aintree and its new sponsor. Randox 
Health was founded in County Antrim in 1982 by Dr Peter Fitzgerald, who was 
described in one news report of 2014 as “one of just three key figures in 
Northern Ireland’s polo set”. In recent years, he has hosted point-to-point 
racing near Randox’s headquarters at Crumlin.

His firm manufactures and markets diagnostic equipment which is now used 
around the world. An Aintree press release claimed Randox products assist in 
the diagnosis of 5% of the world’s population. The company is apparently in a 
period of expansion, with clinics planned in Edinburgh, Manchester, Dublin and, 
relevantly for this sponsorship, Liverpool.

Aintree and the Jockey Club, which owns the racecourse, are plainly delighted 
to have nailed down a new deal before the running of the final race under the 
outgoing sponsor. Attracting a new sponsor into racing, rather than relying on 
the easy route of taking a bookmaker’s money, counts as something of a coup and 
serves to underline the pulling power of the National, which is expected to 
attract a TV audience of more than nine million in its new tea-time slot of 
5.15pm when staged on 9 April.

Aintree has timed it right to make switch to a late Grand National
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/01/aintree-timed-right-late-switch-grand-national>
“This is an incredibly exciting time Baker, the Jockey Club’s regional 
director, “because they are highly ambitious as a company and share our 
aspiration to promote the Grand National to the maximum number of people in the 
years ahead.”

Fitzgerald said: “We care about people’s health and this is the people’s race. 
The Grand National offers us a major public platform to raise awareness of 
preventative healthcare and to encourage people ing. We see this partnership as 
a natural fit, as both organisations invest heavily in the future and we aim to 
use our partnership to promote a positive lifestyle and to bring enjoyment to 
millions of people.”
 