
Guus Hiddink has stepped down as the manager of Anzhi Makhachkala after a year 
and a half in charge of the wealthy Russian club. He will be succeeded by the 
former Manchester United first-team coach Ren√© Meulensteen, who arrived at 
Anzhi in July after leaving Old Trafford. Following the news, Hiddink was 
immediately made the 1-3 favourite by bookmakers to take over at Barcelona
following Tito Vilanova's resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/19/barcelona-press-conference-tito-vilanova>
.

The Russian season is just two games old and Hiddink leaves Anzhi after 
recording one draw and a defeat. He said it was always his intention to move on 
once the club found a way to develop itself.

"This decision was not easy for me, but I've always said that my mission at 
Anzhi could end when the club is able to develop and continue to grow by 
itself, without my participation," Hiddink said. "Now that time has come. I am 
convinced that a great future awaits the club and I am happy that I was a part 
of this vast football project."

Hiddink, backed by a series of eye-catching transfers including Willian and 
Christopher Samba, led the side to a club-record third place finish in the 
Russian league last season and also guided them on a run in the Europa League.

"Anzhi FC has taken the decision to accept the request of the head coach and 
end their employment relations," the club said in a statement. "The club 
sincerely thanksGuus Hiddink <https://www.theguardian.com/football/guus-hiddink>
 for his significant contribution to the club's development and wishes him 
success in his future career."

Hiddink passes the baton to Meulensteen who was Sir Alex Ferguson's first-team 
coach at United but opted to move on after the Scot retired from the Old 
Trafford hot-seat.

Hiddink's destination is unclear but news of his departure from Anzhi 
immediately led to speculation he was set to succeed Tito Vilanova at Barcelona.

The widely-travelled Dutchman has managed in Spain before at Barca's 
arch-rivals Real Madrid as well as Real Betis and Valencia.

Barca announced on Friday Vilanova was standing down to continue to receive 
treatment for cancer.
 