
Every five years for the last decade and a half, a film has appeared out of 
nowhere and effortlessly dictated the next half-decade of horror. In October 
1999, for instance, The Blair Witch Project managed to wrestle the genre back 
from the gibbering self-awareness of the Scream years, scaring audiences stiff 
with little more than wobbly footage of trees and snot.

Then, a decade ago, Saw came along and set the agenda for torture porn by 
throwing a grisly series of moral conundrums – and Ben from Lost – into the 
mix. And then, after that, Paranormal Activity’s widest theatrical release in 
2009 turned everything upside down once again, by scaling things back and 
focusing on anticipation over overt scares.

And now it’s Halloween <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> 
2014. Another five years have passed. By rights, we should be throwing 
ourselves at the feet of a new gamechanger; a film that’s lurched out of 
left-field, reacted to the predominant horror tropes of the day, made buckets 
of cash and set us off on a new path of terror. Except, that clearly hasn’t 
happened.

The biggest horror film of the moment is Ouija, a knackered, critically 
reviled Hasbro franchise that half-heartedly hits all the beats you’d expect it 
to and then limps away again. That’s it. That’s the big Halloween release. 
Aside from that, this year’s horror output has been a soggy collection of 
sequels (The Purge: Anarchy), spin-offs (Annabelle), rip-offs (As Above, So 
Below), and reboots so graspingly unnecessary that they make your teeth hurt to 
even think about them (Dracula Untold and I, Frankenstein). Not only has there 
been no gamechanger, there’s barely even been an original idea.

Admittedly, the big films of 1999, 2004 and 2009 all wore out their welcomes 
especially quickly. Blair Witch essentially destroyed its own future in 2000 
with Blair Witch 2: Book of Shadows, a rush-released conventional horror so 
uniformly reviled thatits own writers used the DVD commentary to berate it at 
every turn 
<http://filmschoolrejects.com/features/28-things-we-learned-from-the-book-of-shadows-blair-witch-2-commentary-jkirk.php>
.

By upping the gore level of the previous instalment at the expense of such 
things as basic logic, the Saw sequels quickly descended into such irrelevance 
that they’re currently best known for inspiring a quite-good Thorpe Park 
rollercoaster. And, even though Paranormal Activity’s formula – 40 minutes of 
static shots of corridors followed by a vase falling over – was barely enough 
to sustain two films, that hasn’t stopped the producers from churning out 
sequel after sequel to increasingly jaded reactions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fhalloween-2014-where-will-next-big-movie-fright-come-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414675270001%2F638d0598-37d1-4122-a78c-6c956bcb6c90-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halloween%202014%3A%20where%20will%20the%20next%20big%20movie%20fright%20come%20from%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fhalloween-2014-where-will-next-big-movie-fright-come-from%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halloween%202014%3A%20where%20will%20the%20next%20big%20movie%20fright%20come%20from%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fhalloween-2014-where-will-next-big-movie-fright-come-from%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414675270001%2F638d0598-37d1-4122-a78c-6c956bcb6c90-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dispiriting … new horror film Ouija, produced by Michael Bay. Photograph: Matt 
Kennedy/AP 
In spite of all this, the kernel of each idea has been strong enough to force 
an entire genre down a new avenue. They’re each the product of an enterprising 
film-maker with a big idea that outstrips their budget or experience. And there 
doesn’t seem to be another one of these on the horizon.

The horror scene of 2014 looks a lot like that of 1994, with producers just 
idly spinning their wheels until the next big idea comes along. Then, as now, 
audiences had to make do with sequels like Leprechaun 2 and Watchers 3, or 
films that had post-colon subtitles such as Lord of the Dead (Phantasm 3 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcITGTx6SbI>) or Raven Dance (Mirror, Mirror 
2) where their plots should be.

But let’s not give up hope completely. It might just be the case that a film 
from 2014’s fallow crop is simply setting the scene for the next big thing. 
That happened 20 years ago, too – though disappointing, the Nightmare on Elm 
Street sequel Wes Craven’s New Nightmare demonstrated fleeting metatextual 
touches that laid the foundation for the phenomenon that was 1996’s Scream. So, 
perhaps the future of horror is simply hiding in plain sight. Who knows, maybe 
in 2016 we’ll be able to look back and see that the future of horror movies was
Zombeavers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/19/zombeavers-five-more-monster-movies>
 all along.

• Haunted heroines: women are taking the lead in horror films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/23/haunted-heroines-women-lead-horror-films-the-babadook>

• Read our series The film that frightened me most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/the-film-that-frightened-me-most>
 