
Coming from AMC, the Don Draper channel, Halt and Catch Fire 
<http://www.amc.com/shows/halt-and-catch-fire> was launched to an unreasonable 
assumption that the 80s-set tech drama would beMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> with computers. 
When it immediately became clear that this wouldn’t be the case, media 
attention evaporated, in effect punishing the show for not being something it 
had never been never intended to be. But for those of us who have stuck with 
it, the show has delivered. Totally original, it isn’t the next anything – it’s 
the first and last Halt and Catch Fire.

After a second season that put the programmer Cameron and the engineer Donna’s 
business relationship to the fore – a partnership that saw the more 
nuts-and-bolts Donna’s self-worth slowly diminish as the more creative, 
intuitive genius Cameron was showered with praise and credit – the third saw 
the show hit that sweet spot where all the groundwork laid in establishing the 
characters in previous episodes paid off.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtpimTVRJcv8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtpimTVRJcv8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtpimTVRJcv8&media=>
The core players were split up, then mixed and matched, as Cameron avoided 
Donna’s attempts to expand their fledgling gaming and social network Mutiny, 
preferring it to evolve incrementally to preserve its perfection; meanwhile, 
the brilliant computer engineer Gordon sequestered himself under the stairs 
with his ham radio, sending out messages to ether on his obsolete device. Joe, 
the show’s (sort-of) Steve Jobs-alike, stayed away for the most part, searching 
for the next big thing with disastrous, fatal consequences for his new acolyte 
Ryan. The cast, surely one of TV’s finest ensembles, delivered the drama with 
deft economy.

Some of the best acting was wordless, such as Cameron’s disintegration after 
being ousted from Mutiny, stubbornly forcing the board to move against her with 
their plans to make the company go public; or Donna and Gordon’s marriage 
falling apart. This collapse started small, with Donna’s casual admission that 
she hated their camping trips, memories of which Gordon cherished. Soon we saw 
the distance between them grow to the point where they could share a home but 
barely converse.

Annabeth Gish 
<https://twitter.com/annabethgish?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 (The X-Files, The West Wing) was a fine addition to the cast as Diane Gould, 
the rich and headstrong businesswoman who buys into Mutiny and provides some 
nicely grown-up romance with Bos, Mutiny’s mentor and Cameron’s unacknowledged 
father figure. Gish is the sort of talent this high-quality show easily 
attracts. When Amy Seimetz (best known to TV viewers for acting inThe Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-killing-episode-by-episode>
 andStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 as well as directing and writing much ofThe Girlfriend Experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/12/girlfriend-experience-steven-soderbergh-riley-keough>
) appeared in the penultimate episode as “that Michelle woman”, Gordon’s 
frizzy-permed employee and would-be girlfriend, the reaction is less surprise 
and more “what kept you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cd3188be2754d2a72615545db9e5eced51d2958%2F0_171_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20not%20Mad%20Men%20in%20the%2080s%2C%20but%20so%20much%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20not%20Mad%20Men%20in%20the%2080s%2C%20but%20so%20much%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cd3188be2754d2a72615545db9e5eced51d2958%2F0_171_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
 Kerry Bishé as Donna Clark and Mackenzie Davis as Cameron Howe in season 
three, episode two. Photograph: Tina Rowden/AMC 
Things started slow and steady this season, building up a head of steam that 
delivered jaw-dropping cliffhangers on a weekly basis: Joe’s sabotage of his 
company by admitting his theft from Gordon. Cameron losing control of Mutiny. 
Ryan’s suicide after he bought into Joe’s rebellious talk wholesale and 
released the source code to the anti-virus software, expecting to be hailed a 
hero but ending up a liability wanted by the feds. Every week a sock in the jaw 
that made you want to come back for more.

The four-year time jump for the final two episodes felt natural, even though 
the show has largely been defined by its 80s setting. The 90s were heralded 
with signifiers such as video dating, foodie bore “Gordo” and Donna’s now 
totally grungified surly teen daughter, Joanie, as well as a scene at the 
convention reminding us how much fun it is to dance to the Pixies’ Velouria, a 
song that seems to have improved with age.

Much had changed. Cameron had spent the time in Tokyo with Tom, the husband 
she married in secret then followed abroad, working on four installments of the 
unwinnable Space Bike, her computer game for Atari that girls love and boys 
seek to improve – the pushy fan offering her a bit of unsolicited 
“mansprogramming” at her convention signing table. Donna and Gordon had 
divorced, Donna going corporate, becoming a partner at Diane’s firm and 
reverting to her maiden name of Emmerson in order to take up more of the 
precious real estate on the company’s letterheads and signage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22013659094304958482c22fccacc20b7c374627%2F0_0_4240_2832%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20not%20Mad%20Men%20in%20the%2080s%2C%20but%20so%20much%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20not%20Mad%20Men%20in%20the%2080s%2C%20but%20so%20much%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhalf-and-catch-fire-season-three-mad-men%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22013659094304958482c22fccacc20b7c374627%2F0_0_4240_2832%2F4240.jpg>
 Scoot McNair as Gordon Clark: sending out messages to ether on his obsolete 
device. Photograph: Tina Rowden/AMC 
Gordon’s still managing his incurable medical condition, his brain slowly 
deteriorating thanks to exposure to the toxic chemicals his tech work exposed 
him to, and seemingly taking a relaxed approach to his successful business. Joe 
is running a consultancy business from home, a job that appears to consist of 
him repeatedly saying “no” to clients on his cutting-edge phone headset. Bos is 
retired, good for him but unfortunate for the finale as he is sidelined 
repairing his boat; his one scene with Cameron still managed to shine and had 
one of the night’s few, brief moments of genuine warmth. Another loss was the 
Mutiny team, the unruly army of Nerf gun-wielding programmers and coders who 
often provided a geek chorus to the main drama.

It ended, bravely, with a bottle episode, cutting away all distractions by 
placing the core players in the derelict Mutiny warehouse office. It delivered 
some classic Halt And Catch Fire moves, tech arguments that were really about 
personal issues, heavy metaphors made light by the skilled performances.

It turns out Donna might have been the show’s villain, with Kerry Bishé’s 
considerable charm and acting chops providing a smokescreen. Looking back, 
Donna has never managed to get ahead without ruining things for someone else, 
another example of how the show manages to hide things in plain sight – let’s 
not forget Cameron was pushed out of the company she led, a company called ... 
Mutiny. That’s two years of signposting an event that was still a huge shock 
when it happened – it’s hard to think of another show getting away with that. 
Then there was Joe and Tom butting heads over HTML and HTTP when they were 
clearly arguing about Cameron. Or having them all discuss how the various 
internet firms can’t work with each other, a blatant metaphor for the 
characters themselves.

This 10-episode run was written to be the last; the season finale was supposed 
to be the end of the entire story. It could easily have been a satisfactory 
capper to things, with the trio of Cameron, Joe and Gordon all huddled around a 
terminal, exploring the endless possibilities of a new startup. Leaving them at 
a stage where their new business is unpolluted and perfect would have been a 
deserved kindness. But fate – or rather AMC – had other plans and a last-minute 
reprieve came just last week when a fourth and final season was ordered.AMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> knows the show is something special; so 
do we. So why doesn’t everyone else?
 