
The hardest part of making the first season of Halt and Catch Fire  
<http://www.amc.com/shows/halt-and-catch-fire?gclid=Cj0KEQjw4qqrBRDE2K_z7Pbvjo8BEiQA39AImVPGQ-D52qBK8i1ZxUXfwN8xPhO105U7Rfpk4bNJqPEaAgPE8P8HAQ>
for the show’s creators Christopher Cantwell and Christopher C Rogers was 
watching it on AMC. “By the time it aired last summer, we had been working on 
it for two and a half years, and it lasts for 10 weeks and then it’s gone,” 
Cantwell says. “It’s the part you have the least control over. That was a new 
part of the process for us.”

While the show, about the 80s tech scene in Texas and the creation of a new 
personal computer, was praised by critics, the viewers didn’t exactly show up, 
which made that part of the process even harder. While the premiere attracted 
just over 1 million viewers, the finale only had about half as many, which is 
unfortunate because the series only improved as it went along.

“I think we were very happy from a creative standpoint with how the season 
ended,” Cantwell says. “We feel like we were putting out our strongest episodes 
by the end, but that doesn’t really jibe with a rise in viewership.”


There was some debate about whether or not AMC would renew the show and 
Cantwell and Rogers say that they network asked them, in broad strokes, where 
the show would go in a second season if they got the green light. AMC, the home 
ofMad Men <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, 
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> and The 
Walking Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, one 
of TV’s biggest hits, knows how to have patience to let a good drama catch on.

“It was a much DVR-ed show. People wanted to watch it and they didn’t show up 
live. Unlike Game of Thrones or The Walking Dead, we don’t really kill people 
off unexpectedly,” Rogers jokes. “TheNielsen ratings 
<http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/top10s.html> isn’t the only way to judge the 
success of a show anymore … [AMC] knows the TV landscape is changing and they 
made an up-to-date decision about the future of the show.”


That decision, naturally, was a renewal (or else we wouldn’t still be talking 
about the show) and Halt and Catch Fire returns toAMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> this Sunday 31 May, at 10pm EDT. What 
are Cantwell and Roger’s plans for season two? Since the team of slick salesman 
Joe (Lee Pace), nerdy hardware tech Gordon (Scoot McNairy), and renegade 
programmer Cameron (Mackenzie Davis) created the Giant computer for their small 
tech firm, Cardiff Electric, there has been some fallout. Cardiff gets sold off 
to a larger company to keep cranking out computers and Cameron has left to form 
Mutiny, an early version of an online gaming company where the modems are still 
dial-up and the most ingenious game is a full-colour version of backgammon. 
Cameron has also signed on Gordon’s wife Donna (Kerry Bishé), a skilled 
computer scientist in her own right, to help run the anarchic company.

“Out of the fires of Cardiff comes Mutiny and we’re going to see [Donna and 
Cameron] embark on a partnership that will feel very different from the one 
between Gordon and Joe,” Cantwell says. “We’ll also see how [the men] come back 
into the fold and how they start swirling around each other as we move into the 
proto-internet era.”


One of the most interesting things about this second season is that the women 
are in charge and the men, formerly driving the creation of the PC, are now 
rendered powerless and almost obsolete. This also allows for a feminist bent to 
the season, just as discussion about the role of women in technology companies 
in Silicon Valley comes to the fore in the modern world. Cantwell and Rogers 
say that all they were looking for was a natural extension of the story they 
started telling in season one, not that they were seeking something that would 
be a hot-button issue or lure in more viewers – though more viewers never hurt.


“Whether it’s the video games we show or Atari 2600s or people are programming 
for Commodore 64s is in service of the character drama, which is what drives 
the show,” Rogers says. “We want people to watch it and forget that it happens 
30 years ago. We hope it feels very modern and that means it’s universal.”

While that certainly happens at points during the first several episodes, 
there is still something fun about watching coders listen to music on giant 
headphones and blow the dust out of Atari cartridges to get them to work. “That 
pressure [to be historically accurate] is half of what is super fun about 
working on the show,” Cantwell says. “We’re going to make aDig Dug II 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4glpk6fD3fY> joke and have a character make a 
reference toMr Garrett [from the Facts of Life] 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0575453/>. Those opportunities are the most fun 
things about the show.”

Naturally both of the creators hope that more people will tune into something 
that they’ve worked so hard on. They say that while each season is a 
self-contained whole and people could tune into the first episode of season two 
without feeling lost, it’s still helpful to watch the first 10 episodes before 
wading in. Thanks to the internet, viewers have had time to catch up on the 
show, which was streaming on Amazon Prime and is now available in its entirety 
on Netflix. AMC is also making the entire first season available on demand for 
those who want to binge before the second season premiere.

Ironically enough, all this new technology poses its own set of problems for 
the creators. “I’ve had a friend or two watch it all in 24 or 48 hours,” Rogers 
says. “They tell me that and I’m always really flattered, but I think: ‘That 
was three years of my life that you just digested in a day!’”
 