
Kerry Bishé has a problem. More to the point, she has a problem with a line. 
“Can we change this? Can I say narcissist instead of diva?” she asks Halt and 
Catch Fire showrunner Chris Rogers and the director of the episode, Reed 
Morano. It’s not a surprising exchange for a series that has developed a 
reputation for putting forth some of the most well-rounded female characters on 
TV. Bishé’s character, Donna Clark, is in the process of disparaging her 
partner, Cameron Howe, played by Mackenzie Davis, in the tech start-up Mutiny. 
Their complex friendship and tumultuous business relationship are the heart and 
soul of a critical darling that is hoping to broaden its audience after a 
surprising and welcome season three renewal.

Halt and Catch Fire: retro computer drama’s creators discuss show's reboot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/31/halt-and-catch-fire-computer-drama-second-season>
The Halt set is a jolly place, overtaking a sprawling soundstage tucked amid 
the tree-lined freeways of Atlanta. Rogers and his partner, Chris Cantwell, who 
took over as showrunners from previous steward Jonathan Lisco, cultivate a 
cheerful yet diligent atmosphere. Cast and crew are rewarded with snowcones in 
celebration of the final day of shooting for guest star Annabeth Gish, who 
joins the series as a venture capitalist who becomes involved with Mutiny’s 
growth plans. The day’s work ceases for the snowcones and a quick speech to 
honor Gish’s work, ending earlier than anyone expected. Morano, an accomplished 
cinematographer-turned-director who is attached to helm the first few episodes 
ofHulu’s adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/30/the-handmaids-tale-hulu-tv-series-margaret-atwood-women>
 ofMargaret Atwood <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/margaret-atwood>’s The 
Handmaid’s Tale, is remarkably efficient for someone directing their first 
episode of television ever.

What began as a corporate thriller set amid the Silicon Prairie era of the 
computer industry, in Texas – led by Lee Pace as smooth-talking salesman Joe 
MacMillan and Scoot McNairy as the nebbishy Gordon Clark – has morphed into an 
ensemble piece that’s now set in 1986 Silicon Valley. Each season has felt like 
a software update – refreshing the user interface and fixing the bugs, while 
keeping the basic framework intact. “When we sat together and talked about what 
we wanted the show to look like, we were borrowing a lot from late 70s films 
like All the President’s Men andParallax View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/19/the-parallax-view-kennedy-assassination>
 and The Conversation,” producer Jeff Freilich says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F003e952c299d79c71be3c9c74654c44e42784c73%2F0_37_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20the%20best%20show%20on%20TV%20(that%20no%20one%20is%20watching)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20the%20best%20show%20on%20TV%20%28that%20no%20one%20is%20watching%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F003e952c299d79c71be3c9c74654c44e42784c73%2F0_37_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 Chris Cantwell and Chris Rogers. Photograph: James Minchin/AMC/AMC 
“We conceived this show in a different age of television,” Cantwell says. 
Rogers admits: “Maybe we started out apingMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> with the serious, 
prestige drama tone.” One of the early knocks on the show during its first 
season was that it felt too indebted to Matthew Weiner’s modern classic. “But 
then we kinda let in our kind of comic book, neon arcade sensibility and 
irreverence and a pace that seemed more us,” he adds.

Each season has felt like a software update – refreshing the user interface, 
while keeping the basic framework intact

That sense of playfulness has pushed the show toward the confident big swings 
that prevent a series from creative atrophy. The move to the San Francisco Bay 
area might seem like a curveball, but the way Rogers describes it, the choice 
was inevitable. “Success for these people in that world became California, this 
idea. The last episode of the last season is called Heaven is a Place, because 
they were all acting like Silicon Valley was going to solve all their problems.

“I had a friend who worked on [the WGN series] Manhattan [who said]: ‘We blew 
up the bomb. Now where do we go?’ To have stayed in Texas would have been to 
blow up our bomb.”

There aren’t any literal bombs on Halt and Catch Fire, nor do any seem to be 
heading our way in the future. This is a series that eschews the sorts of 
narrative pyrotechnics that one is used to seeing in the typical prestige 
drama. Cars don’t explode and no one walks away from said explosion slowly 
while a classic rock song plays. Absolutely no one carries a sword. There are 
no zombies. It’sAMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>, so there’s also no 
gratuitous nudity. Maybe that’s why it’s so hard to get the curious TV watcher 
to buy in to the show.

“It’s hard to sit there and diagnose why people aren’t watching it,” Cantwell 
tells me in a conference room in the production office. There was surprise and 
joy from TV critics whenthe show was renewed for a third season 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/amc-ignores-ratings-renews-halt-and-catch-fire-sea-226515>
, as it had a paltry average viewership of 530,000 per episode. “I have to live 
with the fact that you like what you like,” adds Cantwell. “If people like the 
show, they love it. People that don’t see the show, it’s hard to get people to 
turn it on, because they go, ‘What’s it called? What’s it about?’ It’s such a 
crazy, mysterious alchemy to me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6a6a675c337f79d40311f0abd587b8051bb1052%2F0_201_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20the%20best%20show%20on%20TV%20(that%20no%20one%20is%20watching)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20the%20best%20show%20on%20TV%20%28that%20no%20one%20is%20watching%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fhalt-and-catch-fire-amc-set-visit-kerry-bishe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6a6a675c337f79d40311f0abd587b8051bb1052%2F0_201_4240_2544%2F4240.jpg>
 Kerry Bishé as Donna Clark and Scoot McNairy as Gordon Clark. Photograph: Tina 
Rowden/AMC/AMC 
The secret weapons of Halt are Bishé and Davis, who had effortless chemistry 
from the moment they first shared a scene back in season one. The episode 
filming today is Donna-centric. Bishé has to play both subtle comedy and 
intense internal struggle. Her greatest asset as an actor is her ability to 
describe the full gamut of emotions with a single glance. A pivotal scene 
filmed toward the end of the day features at least five different variations on 
Bishé looking devastated, each one uniquely heartbreaking. Davis has the 
flashier role: impulsive, manic, brilliant, and (here’s that word again) 
narcissistic. What she is not is a diva.

“I don’t think describing her as a diva is very specific, actually,” Bishé 
says in the corner of the set that portrays her office, festooned with family 
photos, fake mail, and vintage San Francisco phone books from the period. “What 
I said to Chris when I asked if we could change that word just now was: it 
feels very gendered to say diva. Narcissist feels less gendered and more 
specific to the scenario and to her actual personality traits.”

Rogers and Cantwell have made a habit of both being open to change and to 
supporting the foregrounding of their female protagonists. The emphasis on 
Donna and Cameron in season two turned around the mixed reaction to the first 
batch of episodes and set it apart from the dark anti-hero dramas of The 
Sopranos, Breaking Bad and Mad Men.

“I think the pilot we conceived was an anti-hero pilot about Joe MacMillan, 
and then we kinda changed it to a three-hander, and over time, the show has 
evolved into a kind of five-hander,” Rogers says. “I think that’s just because 
TV has seen the anti-hero done. We thought there wasn’t a lot more to say about 
the white male psyche, a guy that’s difficult in business.”

TV has seen the anti-hero done. We thought there wasn’t a lot more to say 
about the white male psyche

Bishé tells me: “I was concerned that the character would be like any other 
wife and mom; frustrated, nagging wife that we see on TV a lot. There’s this 
one scene where I come home, he’s drinking a beer and I gotta get the kids 
ready, gotta make dinner, and in the midst of this, they broke their toy. I 
gotta look at this Speak-n-Spell and take it apart. And this is the first 
moment that we get this inkling that she’s not all that we think she is. I 
remember the director [Juan Campanella] said, ‘It’s OK if you fumble a little 
bit. You’re harried. You’re in a rush.’ And I was like, no, no. I need to be 
preternaturally good at this.”

This feels like a make-or-break season for Halt and Catch Fire. AMC has 
supported the show and allowed it to be exactly what its creators want it to 
be. The end of this run of episodes, which includes a bold plot twist, could 
function as a series finale, says Rogers, who believes audiences “deserve a 
degree of closure”. Whether closure will be necessary remains to be seen. 
Months after my visit, AMC released the first episode of season three two days 
early without any advanced warning. It got people talking about the show, even 
if the intended audience might not have been aware that the episode aired. 
Unconventional marketing strategies could be the best way to bring eyeballs to 
this underdog series.

“[Halt and Catch Fire] is about creative people collaborating to try and bring 
a brilliant product to market, and the compromises you have to make along the 
way,” Bishé says. “If that’s not analogous to a TV show, then I don’t know what 
is.”

 * Halt and Catch Fire seasons three starts on AMC on Tuesday 23 August 9pm ET 
 * This article was amended to correct the spelling of director Reed Morano. 
We had originally spelled it Moreno. This has now been changed.  