

It appeared to be a mundane parcel like scores of others lovingly posted 
across the ocean in the run-up to the holiday season: a package labelled “art 
craft/toy” with a value put at $37 (£24) and the message “Happy Christmas”.

But when US customs officers examined the contents, they found a stolen 
Picasso painting worth at least $2.5m, which had been lost for 14 years. The 
1911 Cubist masterwork, La Coiffeuse (The Hairdresser), had been registered 
missing from the storeroom at the Pompidou Centre inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> in 2001.

The package arrived in Newark from Belgium just before Christmas last year. 
Sent via FedEx, it was markedJoyeux Noël (Happy Christmas). Picasso’s small oil 
on canvas, measuring 33cm by 46cm, was hidden inside.

The package first arrived at a climate-controlled warehouse in Long Island 
City on 17 December. The next day, it was moved on to Port Newark and was 
seized. The sender was marked as someone named “Robert” with an address in 
Belgium,according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/27/nyregion/stolen-picasso-work-is-seized-in-newark.html?_r=0>
.

The identity of the person who sent it and the intended destination were not 
released. Loretta Lynch, the US attorney for the Eastern District ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, filed a civil suit to return 
the painting to France, announcing: “A lost treasure has been found.”

She said seizure of the painting would “extract it from the grasp of the black 
market in stolen art so that it can be returned to its rightful owner”.

Anthony Scandiffio, a special agent of Homeland Security Investigations, which 
took control of the painting after customs officials flagged it up, said: “The 
recovery of the La Coiffeuse sends a strong message to thieves that the market 
to sell stolen antiquities in the United States is drying up.”

The painting, which belongs to the French national collection, was last shown 
in Munich in 1998. It was then placed in storage at the Pompidou Centre in 
Paris but when a loan request was made by another museum in 2001, staff 
realised it was missing and reported it to police.

After the New York discovery, it was unclear whether the astonishing find in a 
postal depot at the busiest time of year for parcels was random good fortune by 
customs or part of a special operation. So far no arrests have been reported on 
either side of the Atlantic.

James Ratcliffe, director of recoveries and general counsel for the 
London-basedArt Loss Register <http://www.artloss.com/en> of stolen art, told 
the Guardian: “In our experience, we would consider this kind of discovery to 
be extremely rare. There must be a large number of similar parcels passing 
through customs every day. For this one to be spotted is either remarkably good 
luck – testament to the skill with which the Department of Homeland Security 
operate – or the result of some kind of tip-off or surveillance.”

He added: “It’s very rare indeed for a Picasso to simply turn up in the post 
and be spotted like this.”

In Paris, the Pompidou Centre said it hoped to get the painting back in the 
next few weeks. Its president, Alain Seban, said he was moved by “this happy 
ending” to the saga of the work’s disappearance and expressed “deep gratitude” 
to the customs services. He hoped to put the painting back on show to the 
public quickly, perhaps to coincide with a re-hanging of the modern collection 
at the end of May.

Picasso is the most stolen artist in the world because of his prolific output 
in a lengthy career, his recognisable signature and valuable works. There are 
almost 1,300 missing Picassos on theArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Loss Register. Many of the 
painter’s works have been stolen from galleries and museums across the world, 
raising issues about security.

In 2009 [
http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jun/09/picasso-sketchbook-stolen-paris
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jun/09/picasso-sketchbook-stolen-paris>
], a Picasso sketchbook worth more than €8m (£5.8m) was stolen from Paris’s 
Picasso museum. The red sketchbook of 32 pencil-drawings from between 1917 and 
1924 was believed to have been on display on the first floor in an unlocked 
exhibition case without an alarm.

In some cases, stolen Picassos have been quickly recovered. In 2011, a wine 
sommelier wearing dark glasses who walked out of a San Francisco art gallery 
with the 1965 Picasso pencil-drawing,Tête de Femme, under his arm, was arrested 
within 24 hours at a hotel. He later pleaded guilty after a further Picasso and 
other paintings were found at his apartment.
 