
Adorable little pop poppet Harry Styles raised a few eyebrows 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/harry-styles-twitter-answers-alain-1707279>
 among his 10 million Twitter followers this morning, when heshared 
<https://twitter.com/Harry_Styles> the following nugget of knowledge:

Socrates, born in Athens in the 5th century BCE, marks a watershed in Ancient 
Greek philosophy.

— Harry Styles (@Harry_Styles) February 13, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Harry_Styles/status/301628724372201472>

The message was slightly less random than it first appeared. In an interview 
in Metro 
<http://metro.co.uk/2013/02/13/alain-de-botton-my-ten-commandments-for-atheists-3446357/>
 today, Alain de Botton described meeting Styles briefly at a party, prompting 
the philosopher to speculate on how stars of popular culture could use their 
influence to create interest in the intellectual canon.

"My plan," he said, "is to shut the Arts Council and get people such as Harry 
Styles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles> to go on television and 
recommend to everyone they read Proust and Hegel, which would achieve more in 
five minutes than the Arts Council achieves year in, year out. David Beckham 
could do Aristotle and Plato. The cause of intellectual life in this country 
would be helped immeasurably."

We can presume (or hope) that de Botton's proposal was tongue in cheek, but I 
have to admit, I would love to live in a world where Perrie from Little Mix 
could be interviewed about their latest hit singleChange Your Life 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DzT_r6Xoizg> and say something like:

"Well, the opening metaphor of the dropped mirror plays on the central motif 
of Sartre's La Nausée, in which the mirror presents the individual as an 
external reflection that can never reflect the true essence of the self. The 
chorus, "Change Your Life", ironically echoes Roquentin's disdain for the 
autodidact. And it's also about, you know, boys and stuff."

As it happens, footballers at least have made occasional forays into literary 
and philosophical evangelism. Joey Barton may have added to the gaiety of the 
nation withhis musings on the work of Nietzsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/aug/04/joey-barton-nietzsche-philosophy-twitter>
, but I'm unaware of widespread discussions of The Will to Power on the 
terraces. Similarly, Eric Cantona'sdeclaration of his love for Rimbaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/03/eric-cantona-football> 
didn't have a huge effect on the popularity of the French poet, although it may 
have accidentally helped shift a few Sylvester Stallone DVDs to United fans.

Musicians, if not footballers, can and do influence the thoughts and the 
reading of their fans. I personally hold the Canadian prog rockersRush entirely 
responsible for the surge in popularity 
<http://www.rush.com/2112-spotlight-on-ayn-rand/> of the works of Ayn Rand in 
the 1980s, and I will never forgive them for it. I'll never forgive them for 
the drum solos either, but that is a different matter.

Bands with followers in their late teens and 20s could certainly point 
enquiring minds towards serious philosophy, and the likes of the Manic Street 
Preachers have done exactly that.Alain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> forgets that the role of 
bubblegum pop is to provide aural wallpaper on daytime radio, and its main 
commercial market is prepubescent girls who are more likely to be reading 
Michelle Paver than Marcel Proust. It's a pop star's job to be pretty and dumb, 
and there's nothing wrong with that – venture too far away from the formula and 
they will alienate their fans more than inspire them. Harry Styles could 
genuinely do something good just by telling interviewers or his Twitter 
followers that his plan for the day was to curl up under a duvet and read a 
book – any book.

There is something else I believe pop music could do, as an industry. 
Philosophy is not about knowing the century in which Socrates was born, but 
about learning how to think. My first pop obsession was for Blondie, and I 
remember spending hours and hours poring over lyrics, trying to make sense of 
verses like this: "The beams become my dream / My dream is on the screen / 
Dusty frames that still arrive / Die in 1955 / Fade away and radiate." What 
does it mean? I'm still not entirely sure, but I'd say the same about 
Remembrance of Things Past. I have a hunch the two works cover very similar 
ground. I do know that those happy hours spent untangling the riddles of pop 
lyrics were my first experiences in genuine intellectual challenge, and have 
stood me in good stead since. By comparison, the newOne Direction single is 
called Kiss You <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T4cdfRohhcg>, and contains 
lyrical gems like this: "Oh, I just wanna show you off to all of my friends / 
Making them drool down their chinny-chin-chins / Baby be mine tonight, mine 
tonight / Baby be mine tonight. Yeah."

So my own plea to the pop stars, their songwriters and svengalis would not be 
to harangue their fans with reading lists and address the nation with lectures 
on Hegel. Nobody wants that, not even Hegel. Just give them something to think 
about – and please, please stay well away from Ayn Rand.
 