
A Hooch ad featuring Vine and YouTube star Joe Charman has been banned after 
complaints his “juvenile” trick broke rules for marketing alcohol to under-18s.

Charman – whose catchphrase is “Yeah I got skills ... What you gonna do about 
it?” – ran a promotion for Hooch that appeared on his Facebook page.
Joe Charman (@JoeOnVine) 
#ImUglyBut <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ImUglyBut?src=hash> I've got skills 
so... What you gonna do about it?! 😝
 <https://twitter.com/JoeOnVine/status/751728653864689664> July 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JoeOnVine/status/751728653864689664> 
In the short clip, one of a number that Charman has done to promote Hooch, 
Charman was seen using an inflatable to surf across a swimming pool to deliver 
bottles to his friends.

BT's Ryan Reynolds ad banned after Virgin Media complaint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/12/bt-ryan-reynolds-ad-banned-virgin-media>
The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received a complaint that the ad showed Charman behaving in a juvenile manner.

The complainant contended that because Charman was so popular on Vine, 
particularly with young people, the ad breached the advertising code.

Global Brands, which trades as Hooch, saidCharman’s Facebook page showed him 
appearing to achieve seemingly impossible tricks, but his performances did not 
feature “juvenile or reckless behaviour”.

Charman said it was obvious his skills-related videos were “not real or 
achieveable” and they were intended to entertain, not to promote juvenile 
behaviour.

The ASA said that the advertising code states that alcohol ads are not meant 
to appeal particularly to under-18s and that people should not be shown 
“behaving in an adolescent or juvenile manner”.

“We considered that showing Joe Charman, who was the main focus of the ad, 
carrying out a stunt using a swimming pool inflatable depicted behaviour likely 
to be regarded as juvenile, and therefore likely to be of particular appeal to 
under-18s,” the ASA ruled.


“We concluded that the ad breached the [advertising] code. We told Global 
Brands Ltd t/a Hooch to ensure that those playing a significant role in their 
future ads were not shown behaving in an adolescent or juvenile manner.”
 