
"The more dignity is widely and freely available in a society," tweets 
philosopher Alain de Botton 
<https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/301783411855605760>, "the less people 
want to be famous." What a searing indictment of modern Britain, which has 
afforded so little dignity to Alain that he is forced to engage in a near-daily 
scramble for publicity.

His latest tilt at the limelight involves an attempt to harness the 
transformative powers of boybandOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction>, and we shall come to this 
intriguing collaboration very shortly.

First, though, let us recall an epigram attributed to Bismarck, who is said to 
have observed that those who love sausages and believe in justice should never 
see either being made. Having immersed itself in De Botton's Twitter account 
for a few hours, you see, Lost in Showbiz wonders if the same might not be said 
of philosophy. To behold Alain's timeline is to be granted an access-all-areas 
pass to a philosophy-processing plant, where all manner of rogue material is 
compressed into a wisdom-effect product. Every few hours another thought-patty 
is rolled off the production line, about which it seems best not to ask too 
many questions.
Alain de Botton (@alaindebotton) 
For all the wisdom of counting daily blessings, perhaps part of being fully 
alive is living ungratefully...
 <https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/301426816789405696> February 12, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/301426816789405696> 
"For all the wisdom of counting daily blessings," runs a typical pensee 
<https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/301426816789405696>, "perhaps part of 
being fully alive is living ungratefully ..." "Re exes,"goes another 
<https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/299314449427353601>, "never trust 
what you feel now, only what you knew then."

Whether you could tell the difference between this and Geri Halliwell's 
timeline <https://twitter.com/GeriHalliwell> in a blind-tasting is not for me 
to say. I do, however, nurse hopes that Alain will make like an unapologetic 
slaughterhouse owner and defend this column's impudent ribbing of his output, 
perhaps tweeting something along the lines of: "You get what you pay for, 
madam. Your beef, if I can call it that – which I don't think I technically can 
– is with the retailers." After all, Britain's livingest living philosopher 
does havea reputation for the defensive 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/ni/2009/07/caleb_crain_v_alain_de_botton.html>, 
once declaring to a critic who had reviewed one of his books unfavourably: "I 
will hate you till the day I die and wish you nothing but ill will in every 
career move you make. I will be watching with interest and schadenfreude."

Anyhow. Our business today is with Alain's latest wheeze, conceived after he 
met One Direction's Harry Styles at a party. "He was very interested in finding 
out about philosophy,"Alain told a reporter 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/4794446/harry-styles-friends-with-philosopher-Alain-de-Botton.html>
. "He seemed a very intelligent chap." Which got our hero THINKING. "In an 
ideal world," Alain went on, "Harry Styles would be teaching his 10 million 
followers a little more about Greek philosophy."

Ideal world indeed – in fact, the idea was first suggested in a forgotten 
passage of Thomas More's Utopia, right after the bit where control of 
agriculture is ceded to Cher Lloyd. Having said that, Lost in Showbiz feels 
feel forced to counter that in its ideal world, Harry would be telling his 
ten million followers all manner of secrets about Simon Cowell before 
announcing that he was "doing a Robbie" and going entertainingly rogue for a 
few years. And happily, I reckon we'll make landfall on my Utopia first.

But back to Alain's. "My plan is to shut the Arts Council and get people such 
asHarry Styles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/harry-styles> to go on TV and 
recommend to everyone they read Proust and Hegel," he continued. "David Beckham 
could do Aristotle and Plato, which would achieve more in five minutes than 
the Arts Council achieves year in, year out ... The cause of intellectual 
life in this country would be helped immeasurably."
Harry Styles (@Harry_Styles) 
Socrates, born in Athens in the 5th century BCE, marks a watershed in Ancient 
Greek philosophy.
 <https://twitter.com/Harry_Styles/status/301628724372201472> February 13, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/Harry_Styles/status/301628724372201472> 
And that, you might think, would be that, had Harry not got wind of the 
De Botton interview, andpromptly tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Harry_Styles/status/301628724372201472>: "Socrates, born 
in Athens in the 5th century BC, marks a watershed in Ancient Greek philosophy."

Well! At the time of writing, that little outburst had been retweeted no fewer 
than 42,000 times. Delving a little deeper into the reaction, do we encounter 
the Socratic dialogue of Botton's dream? From my cursory scan, there was a lot 
of WTFing, an impressive number of people criticising Harry for lifting the 
quote straight from Wikipedia, and a brilliantly succinct retort by someone who 
wrote: "I like you guys to get AWAY from knowledge – don't put more in my 
head." And therein, perhaps, lies the problem with Alain's fiendish masterplan.

Still, the exercise did remind Lost in Showbiz how much it adores 
Directioners, with their dental braces and devotion and diurnal death threats. 
Finally, a horrifyingly desensitised child army that it's OK to root for. After 
all, what's the point in not doing so? They are clearly coming for us all, one 
throwaway remark about Niall's hair at a time, and are a more fitting subject 
for a dystopian movie than climate change or misplaced worries about what would 
happen if Los Angeles were wiped from the map.

Whether they are ultimately a more awesome fighting force than Justin Bieber's 
Beliebers I couldn't begin to tell you: I just know that this is how it ends, 
somewhere on earth's plains, with two armies of homicidal fans facing each 
other for control of a post-apocalyptic wasteland. (And it will be two armies 
only – lesser fandoms will be forced to make alliances with either Beliebers or 
Directioners to ensure their survival. Sorry, the Wanted Family: nobody gets to 
be Switzerland in this one.)

As for how this final battle will compare with the bloodiest in human history, 
I imagine it will have something of a Stalingrad feel to it. During that most 
barbarous of conflicts, the opposing Russian and German commanders both 
developed nervous conditions, while the house-to-house fighting was so grimly 
incremental among the rubble of the city that the mirthless joke among the 
Germans was that they'd taken the kitchen but were still fighting for the 
living room. Picture much the same situation in the Great Fandom Wars, as 
Bieber's Jesus tattoo is obscured by a rash, One Direction succumb to a 
synchronised eye twitch on the key change, and a million tween footsoldiers 
tweet that they've captured the pink bunk beds but are still fighting for the 
study nook.

The question now, of course, is how things will pan out if the Directioners 
become philosophised. The De Botton intervention throws open all sorts of 
possibilities, so do adjust your endtimes arrangements accordingly.
 