



Bed peace


Emma Sulkowicz, the student who dragged her mattress everywhere she went for 
the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/19/columbia-university-emma-sulkowicz-mattress-graduation>
, graduated from Columbia university this week, 50lb mattress in tow. The 
visual arts student mobilised the mattress as a performance art protest against 
the school’s failure to expel her alleged rapist. On Tuesday, Mattress 
Performance (Carry That Weight) came to an end as Sulkowicz hauled it across 
the stage to applause during her graduation ceremony.

Lauren Gambino <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lauren-gambino> reported:

Sulkowicz and her mattress became a powerful symbol of the movement to reform 
campus sexual assault proceedings,

The protest has earned Sulkowicz international attention and an award from the 
National Organization forWomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>
. Lena Dunham, meanwhile, tweeted her support:





Cash for cleaning

On New York’s Upper East Side, one anthropologist has been studying what she 
has classified as a new “tribe”: the Glam SAHMs (glamorous stay-at-home moms).
Writing in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/17/opinion/sunday/poor-little-rich-women.html> 
this week, the anthropologist Wednesday Martin explained the so-called 
phenomenon of the “wife bonus”, granted by hedge fund husbands to their 
partners for good housewifery.

It might be hammered out in a pre-nup or post-nup, and distributed on the 
basis of not only how well her husband’s fund had done but her own performance 
— how well she managed the home budget, whether the kids got into a “good” 
school — the same way their husbands were rewarded at investment banks … Women 
who didn’t get them joked about possible sexual performance metrics.

Proof that wealth does, indeed, come with trappings.

‘Shouldn’t Beyoncé make Jay a steak?’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSz7ZzQbSiGA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSz7ZzQbSiGA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSz7ZzQbSiGA&media=>
As US readers bid farewell to David Letterman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-letterman> this week, Bustle ran with 
the opportunity to round up The Late Show’s Six Feminist Moments That Will 
Forever Be Iconic.

Cue your chance to watch Aziz Ansari’s disbelief at the lacklustre response of 
an audience asked to clap if they’re feminists . “I think the reason some 
people don’t clap is that now words are weirdly used in our culture,” says 
Aziz. “Now, people think feminism means some woman’s gonna start yelling at 
him.” But, he goes on, unless you go to a Jay Z and Beyoncé concert and come 
away thinking Beyoncé should get 23% less money than Jay Z, then you “have to 
say ‘yes’”. Hell yes.

Down at heel
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305082543%2F9809ccca-5d0e-442e-b02d-a75a8eaf5c71-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305082543%2F9809ccca-5d0e-442e-b02d-a75a8eaf5c71-1020x612.jpeg>
 Emma Thompson shunning her shoes. Photograph: Paul Drinkwater/AP 
Cannes might have opened with a female-directed film for the first time since 
1987, but the red carpet kicked up a real fuss once it was reported that women 
were allegedly barred from attending film screenings if they were not wearing 
high heels. The outrage was stoked by the revelation that one of the women 
chided for her flat shoes was an amputee. Film producer Valeria Richter, who 
has had her big toe and part of her left foot amputated, told BBC 5 Live that 
red carpet officials pointed at her shoes and said: “No, no, this won’t work, 
you can’t get in like this.”


Our own Hadley Freeman saw herself as a “modern-day Joan of Arc fighting the 
noble fight among the barricades” after she braved this year’s festival in 
flats. “But the fault here doesn’t lie with Cannes, or even film festivals,” 
she noted, “but with the hilariously retrograde assumptions about what still 
constitutes elegance in a woman”:

I’ve seen some commentators online – all men, funnily enough – snark 
<https://twitter.com/JLDlite/status/600755223443832833> that it’s no different 
to demand women wear high heels than it is to insist men wear bow ties. They’re 
absolutely right, of course – if bow ties render them next to immobile and 
leave them in crushing pain with lifelong foot problems … The assumption still 
is that in order to look elegant women have to be in some kind of 
self-restraining physical pain. Because that still, apparently, is the look of 
a human woman.

Twitter users rallied with, the hashtag #showmeyourflats. Alors! 

Director of the festival Thierry Frémaux denied the existence of a heels-only 
dress code, and said that ushers have been reminded that flat shoes are 
allowed. But the whole episode is embarrassing for the festival, in a year when 
the festival has tried to “put a feminist spin on proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/20/heels-cannes-red-carpet-flat-shoes>
”.

Yes we Cannes

And yet, 2015 is “the year for women in film”, according to John Fithian 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/women-box-office-family-films-1201476614/>, 
president and CEO of the US National Association of Theatre Owners.

It will, apparently, be a record-breaking year for the US box office. 
Something that Fithian goes on to say will be because of the number of films 
aimed at women or featuring women. Citing Cinderella, Insurgent and Fifty 
Shades of Grey as films with women in leading roles which sold at least 60% of 
their tickets to women, he said: “We have so much more to come, with big female 
roles in horror, comedy, science-fiction, animation, family, western, thriller 
and action. Personally, I am so pleased that my daughter can see more women in 
leading roles than ever before.”

 First pick of your films with feminist credentials? Todd Haynes’ adaptation 
of Patricia Highsmith’s novel Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/16/carol-review-cate-blanchett-captivates-in-woozily-obsessive-lesbian-romance>
, looks like it fits the bill.

How I understood my mother
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305527602%2F8da312b3-210e-49c4-9a7a-9eeb5476e717-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305527602%2F8da312b3-210e-49c4-9a7a-9eeb5476e717-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mad Men’s women. Photograph: Snap Stills/REX_Shutterstock 
For anyone still feeling emo about the end of Mad Men, Sarabeth Berman this 
week gave a thoughtful take on the series, and her mother, in a piece for 
Jezebel. InHow Mad Men Helped Me Understand the Anger in My Mother’s Feminism 
<http://jezebel.com/how-mad-men-helped-me-understand-the-anger-in-my-mother-1704832424>
, Berman writes:

Over the years, I’ve wondered: how true is it? I called my mother to talk to 
her about the show recently. She didn’t like it, she told me. It harkened back 
to an unpleasant and familiar time. It was then that I realized, this was what 
my mother came from. No wonder she was so angry. I was born 25 years later… 
into a time that felt so different precisely because of all that their mode of 
chest-beating feminism had achieved. I was lucky, I realized, that my mother’s 
breed of feminism felt so remote.

Today, though the issues are different, they’re no less urgent.


The wives of Westeros
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305938276%2F01528867-a53c-4b44-8c79-c126422508ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20mattress%20became%20a%20protest%20against%20sexual%20assault&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-cannes-falls-flat-mattress-protests-and-westeros-wives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432305938276%2F01528867-a53c-4b44-8c79-c126422508ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sansa Stark and Ramsay Bolton in the offending scene. Photograph: Helen 
Sloan/AP 
In another ongoing battle for the fair treatment of women in popular culture, 
Game of Thrones this week featured a rape scene that was, for many, a 
grotesquely pointless made-for-TV addition to the original plot of the books ; 
another example of the “programme recklessly mixing grisly violations with the 
tits-out titillation that is the USP of cable television.” Writing in New 
Statesman, Sarah Ditum 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2015/05/it-s-time-stop-defending-rape-scenes-game-thrones>
 worries where now for the series:

It’s hard at this point to think of any satisfactory way for Game of Thrones 
to proceed, short of Daenerys unleashing her dragons and barbecuing every man 
in the Seven Kingdoms, and maybe the executives of HBO for good measure.Thrones 
has stopped being a story about how women survive, if it ever really was that, 
and become something much more grim and ordinary: just another example of the 
shit we have to negotiate in a world that’s fundamentally hostile to female 
humans.

For those of us still gripped enough by the coming of winter and the White 
Walkers , let’s hope the series gets its act together.





ICYMI

Atena Farghadani, the Iranian painter and activist, is on trial in Tehran for 
insulting MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/20/iranian-painter-and-womens-rights-activist-on-trial-for-insulting-mps>

Laura Bates: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/may/22/want-daughter-earn-more-work-working-mother>
on the Harvard Business School study that proves why being a raised by a 
working mother is good news for gender equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/may/22/want-daughter-earn-more-work-working-mother>

Shereen El Feki: Is the Egyptian state using sexual violence against women? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/18/sexual-violence-egypt-women-report-shereen-el-feki>

Maggie Gyllenhaal: “I was told 37 is ‘too old’ for a 55-year-old love interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/maggie-gyllenhaal-too-old-hollywood>
”


 