
In every city, everywhere, those square boxes of flats stack up into modern 
living and, if you are very lucky, you get a little balcony to sit out on. But 
if all your outdoor space adds up to not much more than 1m x 3m, with average 
light conditions, what can you grow to eat?

The first thing to consider when growing on a balcony is this: it’s going to 
be windy. In fact, all the extremes are going to be felt more readily up there. 
Plants will dry out quickly in windy conditions, and this can dramatically 
affect their productivity.

Terracotta pots will dry fastest in windy conditions, wicking moisture from 
the soil; they also tend to be a lot heavier than metal or plastic pots. If you 
do want to use them, line the insides with plastic (reusing compost bags makes 
the most sense). Don’t squeeze plants into tiny pots or you will end up 
watering more and ultimately reduce their lifespan. The more roots there are, 
the more you get to keep on picking your supper.

Chillies and tomatoes are ideal for hot balconies. Smaller varieties of 
chillies, such as ‘Numex Twilight’ 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/pepper-sweet-and-chilli-seeds/chilli-pepper-numex-twilight/tp00452TM>
, will be happy in a five-litre pot; larger fruited chillies need pots of 10 
litres or more, as do tomatoes. Choose small fruiting varieties of these, such 
as‘Gardener’s Delight’ 
<http://www.rhsplants.co.uk/plants/_/tomato-gardeners-delight/classid.2000014688/>
,‘Sweet Aperitif 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/tomato-seeds/tomato-sweet-aperitif/tt38816TM>
’ or ‘Yellow Pear’ 
<https://www.victoriananursery.co.uk/Tomato_Seed_Yellow_Pear/>; you get a long 
succession of fruit that is perfect for snacking or salads, rather than larger 
varieties with which you tend to get less fruit.

If you have walls suitable for hanging baskets, try tumbling tomatoes such as 
‘Hundreds and Thousands’ 
<http://www.dobies.co.uk/Garden/Vegetables/Vegetable+Seeds/All+Vegetable+Seeds/Tomato+Seeds+-+Hundreds+and+Thousands_439547.htm>
,‘Tumbler’ 
<http://www.suttons.co.uk/Gardening/Vegetable+Seeds/All+Vegetable+Seeds/Tomato+Seeds+-+F1+Tumbler_182363.htm>
 or‘Balconi Red’ <http://www.seedpantry.co.uk/balconi-red-tomato-plants.html> 
and‘Balconi Yellow’ 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/tomato-seeds/tomato-balconi-yellow/390TM>
.

Kale, swiss chard, runner and french beans all give lots of pickings in small 
spaces; with these, put a single plant in a pot of at least 10 litres. All will 
cope with partial shade, too. You can get the beans to grow to the light with 
some inventive string supports.

I would add in herbs, because you get a lot for your money if you look after 
them well. Rosemary, thyme, savory, chives and sage are all more than tough 
enough to take balcony conditions. Bear in mind, though, that a mature rosemary 
will grow to at least 1 metre wide and 1.5 metres tall, so to keep it in a 15cm 
pot would be to torture it.

Alys Fowler: the trick to growing tricky vegetables
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/13/grow-your-own-tricky-vegetables-alys-fowler>
Basil won’t like windy conditions, so tuck it in between other large pots or 
add it around the base of tomatoes; they are good bedfellows, both improving in 
flavour from being together. Basil also wards off whitefly – not that most 
flying pests will like your conditions; they tend to hate wind. Aphids may take 
up residence, but they often target plants that are weak, usually because of 
erratic watering.

Salad leaves, particularly lettuce, dislike full sun and wind. If you grow 
them in such conditions, the leaves will be bitter and tough. Growing as 
cut-and-come-again makes more sense, but don’t sow too thickly – overcrowding 
will only add to the competition.

Peas and broad beans (try dried fava beans as a cheap seed option), sown 
regularly, will give you endless cuttings of sweet, delicious shoots.
 