
On the eve of the release of a film starring Dame Helen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> as the Jewish refugee who 
won a historic battle with the Austrian government over the ownership of a 
great painting, an expert at Christie’s has spoken of a force that is changing 
the shape of the international art market: the new understanding of the huge 
scale of wartime art thefts.

The number of legal claims against Austrian and German art galleries and 
museums has been rising every year, according to Monica Dugot, the global 
director of restitution at the auction house, and that was set to continue, 
despite the advanced age of many Jewish survivors. “While it was the first 
generation that remember most, many of the victims did not choose to follow up 
their ownership cases. Those who lost family members were not focused on the 
recovery of tangible property. It is often the next generation who really try 
to reconstruct what happened,” Dugot told theObserver.

“It can be very difficult then to speak to relatives who are still alive and 
awaken extraordinarily painful memories. But the second or third generation 
want to pursue art claims, as opposed to other financial assets, because it 
gives them a key to the taste of their grandparents and a glimpse of how their 
lives were before the Nazis.”

In Woman in Gold, Mirren plays the part of US citizen Maria Altmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/feb/11/maria-altmann-obituary>, 
niece of the muse of Viennese painter Gustav Klimt. Her aunt, Adele 
Bloch-Bauer, had been the striking model for the artist’s celebrated 1907 
painting,Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I, a work that once hung in her 
childhood home. Seized by a Nazi collector just before the outbreak of the 
second world war, the painting was for many years the proud possession of the 
national Belvedere gallery in Vienna. But in 2006, after Altmann won her long 
case by demonstrating her right to her dead family’s art collection, the Klimt
was sold for £73m <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jun/21/art>, 
making headlines around the world. It remains one of the 10 most expensive 
paintings ever sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/feb/10/the-10-most-expensive-paintings-ever-sold>
. Altmann,who died four years ago at 94 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/feb/11/maria-altmann-obituary>, 
donated much of the money to arts institutions and Holocaust survivors’ groups.

“It was justice,” Mirren said last week. “The Austrian government didn’t want 
to give them back.”

The villains of the new film are not just Hitler’s Gestapo, but modern-day 
Austrian officials. Instructed by the state to hang on to the Klimt, Viennese 
lawyers fought tooth and nail to show that Altmann had no legal claim.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fhelen-mirren-woman-in-gold-nazi-art-theft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F28%2F1427542607378%2F5c499e30-3163-4f19-9714-bf70b6248e42-1013x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Nazis%E2%80%99%20stolen%20art%20sparked%20a%20battle%20for%20the%20Woman%20in%20Gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fhelen-mirren-woman-in-gold-nazi-art-theft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Nazis%E2%80%99%20stolen%20art%20sparked%20a%20battle%20for%20the%20Woman%20in%20Gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fhelen-mirren-woman-in-gold-nazi-art-theft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F28%2F1427542607378%2F5c499e30-3163-4f19-9714-bf70b6248e42-1013x1020.jpeg>
 Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I by Gustav Klimt, 1907. Photograph: 
HO/AFP/Getty Images 
Woman in Gold is released in cinemas next month, but at its premiere in Berlin 
the Austrian reviewers were generous about its portrayal of a national 
reluctance to face the art crimes of the past, according to playwright Alexi 
Kaye Campbell, who wrote the screenplay. “The Austrian response is a delicate 
business. The case was an early case and a lot of the Austrian officials stuck 
their heads in the sand at that point. Of course, the Austrians did the right 
thing in the end. But there are hundreds of cases out there that are still 
unsolved. We are only beginning to realise that this was the most gigantic 
theft, aside from the terrible human loss involved.”

A critic at the German newspaper Der Spiegel seized on the moment in the film 
when an Austrian investigative journalist, played by German starDaniel Brühl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/daniel-bruhl>, tries to explain his desire to 
help Altmann as “a special kind of patriotism”.

“These sort of questions shine shyly through the action of the film all the 
way through,” the critic wrote. “What is it worth battling for in court? And do 
national identities play a part in that?”

When Kaye Campbell was offered the screenwriting job, he told the producers he 
could not go ahead until he had met E Randol Schoenberg, the US lawyer (played 
in the film by Ryan Reynolds) who gave up his job to help the octogenarian 
Altmann pursue her case.

“I felt it was mostly the story of Maria and Randy and, when I met him, I 
realised that at the heart of the story was a world that had been decimated. 
Randy himself is the grandson of Jewish Viennese composer Arnold Schoenberg, so 
it is a story about that lost artistic community and not a story about the 
value of a work of art, although in this case it did happen to be worth 
millions because Maria’s uncle had been Klimt’s patron.”

The film’s British director, Simon Curtis, who had success with My Week with 
Marilyn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/my-week-with-marilyn>, believes the 
story also has an important message for Europe today. “There was a particular 
emotional connection in this case because it was a family portrait,” he said. 
“Its strength is the link it makes between the past and the near present-day 
world. It has something to say about the resurgence of antisemitism we are 
seeing across Europe, although we didn’t realise it as we were making it.”

At Christie’s, Dugot puts the growing number of restitution cases partly down 
to new books about stolen art, but also to films and news reports about 
successful claims. But there was no set formula for a claim, she stressed. “It 
is always a difficult process, but you are really looking at each case on its 
own, and even each painting. The looting of art can mean different things, from 
the Gestapo taking it off the walls, as in the film, or a sale carried out 
under duress, which can mean a much more difficult case. A lot depends on where 
the painting is currently held. It takes quite a lot of courage to go ahead.”

Christies, Dugot said, was now continually educating staff and clients on the 
handling of restitution claims. “It is important we are as transparent as 
possible,” she said.

For the film’s British producer, David Thompson, Woman in Gold stands for a 
bigger story than the complexities of the ownership of art. “It is powerful 
because it is not just a film about someone getting their painting back; it is 
a means of unlocking everything that happened to those families.”

Next week the Neue Galerie in New York will open a new exhibition, Gustav 
Klimt and Adele Bloch-Bauer: The Woman in Gold 
<http://www.neuegalerie.org/content/gustav-klimt-and-adele-bloch-bauer-woman-gold>
, celebrating the story and the work of one of the most important artists of
fin-de-siècle Vienna.

Woman in Gold opens on 10 April

LOST AND FOUND

■ In November Christie’s auctioned a 1910 Egon Schiele watercolour, Town on 
the Blue River, in conjunction with a looted art restitution agreement that 
compensated its former owner’s heirs.

■ Works by Chagall, Monet and Picasso were found in the home of the Munich 
recluse Cornelius Gurlitt on his death in 2012. The room’s contents were 
confiscated by Bavarian authorities and some works have gone to the Kunstmuseum 
in Berne, Switzerland.

■ El Greco’s Portrait of a Gentleman was seized by the Gestapo in Vienna in 
1944. It has been returned to the heirs of Julius Priester, an industrialist 
who fled Vienna for Mexico on the eve of war.
 