A friend asks if you’d like to go for a bike ride at the weekend. Do you …  
Accept, but suggest upgrading to a car ride?  Accept and propose a nice 
leisurely 60km?  Tell them how you built all four of your bikes until they 
remember that, actually, they already have plans? What is a carabiner?  A 
crab-flavoured cordial.  Something you use to connect ropes and harnesses.  
Something you use as a nosering. What would be a typical breakfast for you on a 
weekday?  A choc ice.  Half a wholemeal bagel with peanut butter.  Fourteen raw 
egg whites. Where are your metal pins?  In my pin cushion.  In my collarbone.  
Hang on, I’ll just go and get the x-rays… How do you get to work every morning? 
 Segway, car, Segway, train, Segway, lift, Segway, desk.  A quick triathlon.  
Wingsuit. What did you do with your children during the summer holidays?  
Cinema, Minecraft, board games, a bit of everything really.  Camping, swimming, 
Pokemon Go.  Left them naked in a forest with a knife. You agree to run a 
charity marathon with some of your colleagues. How do you prepare for the race? 
 Hire a bear suit, show it round the office laughing, then pay some kid to put 
it on and run in your place.  Controlled diet, 10km daily run, building up the 
distance as the race approaches.  Stockpile clean urine samples. What does the 
acronym Base jumping stand for?  Best Attempted by Someone Else  Building 
Antenna Span Earth  Bugger All Safety Equipment How often do you go skydiving?  
About as often as I go snowboarding.  Most weekends.  I’m skydiving right now. 
What do you use a GoPro for?  Oh, so many things, I lose count. I don’t know 
how I ever lived without whatever it is. It’s a camera, right?  Recording 
mountain bike routes and studying other people’s technique.  So strangers can 
watch me nearly dying on YouTube.  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  