
Splash! There’s a ripple on the water and I grapple with my camera to focus on 
the river. An otter-sized ripple is radiating out across the current. But it 
turns out to be from a fluorescent stick that’s been tossed into the river and 
is now being chased by a swimming dog. I lower my camera. Even at 7am, 
dog-walkers are a ubiquitous hazard for anyone wanting to capture British 
wildlife.

In another life, perhaps I would have had a double-barrelled surname and 
swaggered across the savannah in khaki, paying off my mortgage with a single 
photograph of a lion mauling a wildebeest. It’s never too late to pursue your 
dreams, though – and that’s why I’m hunched by a Suffolk riverbank with a 
malfunctioning camera, failing to photograph an otter and instead capturing a 
blurry image of a dog.

I’m getting tips from David Tipling, who is not a posh savannah-swaggering 
type, but an acclaimed photographer who has travelled the world in pursuit of 
rare birds. Tipling also offers one-to-one tuition, and close encounters with 
real wildlife. We meet at 7am by the River Little Ouse in Suffolk to look for 
otters. Tipling keeps it simple: with tiny binoculars around his neck and a 
Nikon with a 600mm telephoto zoom, he moves unusually quietly through the 
countryside. Fieldcraft, as well as technical know-how, is essential in 
wildlife photography – and few of us have it since we don’t spend enough time 
outdoors. “I call it the three Ps,” says Tipling. “You need patience, 
perseverance and planning. If you’re at the wrong time of day, or wrong time of 
year, you’ll miss the wildlife.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6fc9403cf2cc7a59efd3b960f50783de315f1d0%2F0_0_2592_3888%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6fc9403cf2cc7a59efd3b960f50783de315f1d0%2F0_0_2592_3888%2F2592.jpg>
 David’s verdict on Patrick’s shot … ‘This has nice light and the poses are 
good. There is too much dead space, though. I would’ve placed the perch a 
little to the left, so the chaffinch is facing more space’ 
Otters hunt by swimming fairly slowly upstream, Tipling explains. While 
there’s only a 50/50 chance of finding one, once you do they are surprisingly 
easy to follow, providing you move quickly ahead the moment they dive 
underwater.

The elusiveness of most creatures is one reason why many keen photographers go 
on a course with a professional. Tipling may have travelled the world taking 
shots to illustrate Birds & People, Mark Cocker’s majesterial book from 2013, 
but he also knows exactly where to find a barn owl in Norfolk, and he has a 
special trick (I could tell you, but then I’d have to kill you) to get close to 
wild hares.

Unfortunately, even Tipling fails to turn up any otters during two hours of 
lovely riverside walking. We do enjoy seeing five kingfishers darting across 
the water, however. But these are gone in a flash – even Tipling doesn’t 
attempt to photograph them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3263a676efc7582f97116e5f6d39d31132047702%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3263a676efc7582f97116e5f6d39d31132047702%2F0_130_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 David’s verdict … ‘A very good picture by Patrick: good composition against 
the water, with strong eye contact’ 
Have you ever admired a lovely shot of a kingfisher perched on a bare branch, 
silver fish in beak? Well, it was almost certainly set up. To photograph a 
kingfisher, Tipling says, you need to prepare a riverside branch, removing 
other branches so there’s no visual clutter, then build a shelter to conceal 
yourself. You may also need bait.

In fact, many amazing wildlife shots are created with a surprising amount of 
human intervention. So for our next lesson, we head to a Norfolk wood where 
Tipling has built a hide with special one-way glass imported from Barcelona. 
With the help of a feeder cleverly concealed behind an old oak stump, he has 
photographed sparrowhawks, green and greater-spotted woodpeckers, rare 
woodcocks and dozens of forest birds, not to mention stoats, squirrels, 
badgers, buzzards and red kites.

We sit, concealed, on comfortable chairs and talk technology. Keen amateurs 
are sometimes said to have “all the gear and no idea”. I’ve just got no idea. 
In the decade since I bought a basic Canon digital single-lens reflex (one of 
those “proper” cameras where you look through the lens to take a shot) I’ve 
specialised in mediocre pictures on automatic settings. I don’t know what half 
my camera buttons do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd8546c6306510a4373a467d5c3336ac8b152fa%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd8546c6306510a4373a467d5c3336ac8b152fa%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 The verdict … ‘I like this, but a professional might have focused more on the 
water and less on the clouds, leaving something to the viewer’s imagination. 
You want to make people think about what they’re looking at’ 
While digiscoping – hooking a camera phone to a telescope with the help of a 
simple adaptor – is a big trend, Tipling prefers traditional technology. 
“There’s no substitute in photography for spending money, unfortunately,” he 
says. Many keen amateurs purchase a basic telescopic zoom lens for £1,000. But 
there is secondhand kit and it’s possible to innovate cheaply: for his aerial 
work, instead of a drone Tipling attaches a £150 camera to a kite.

The big revelation is to be shown features my own camera has 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/nov/16/photography-camera-tips> 
that I never knew existed. There’s a “depth of field” preview button so I can 
see what will be in focus before I take a shot. Tipling explains white balance 
(just keep it set to automatic), quiet shutter mode (a normal shutter click can 
spook a barn owl – Tipling recommends allowing a barn owl to fly as close as 
possible before taking that first photo) and the importance of technicalities 
such as Adobe RGB (the amount of colour information stored on a picture file). 
We also change my ISO setting from 100 to 800, which enables faster shutter 
speeds in lower light to better freeze movement.

We examine a photo of a swan I took that morning. My automatic light settings 
overexposed the white bird against the dark water. Relying on automatic 
settings is too crude for most wildlife photography: Tipling sets his shutter 
speed and aperture manually. If I had done the same, I could have underexposed 
the photograph, making it darker, and thereby revealing the beautiful detail of 
the swan’s feathers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40677c627c04ba047c0c41fa1f601cce0d6283a3%2F0_325_4921_2953%2F4921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40677c627c04ba047c0c41fa1f601cce0d6283a3%2F0_325_4921_2953%2F4921.jpg>
 David’s swan and, below, Patrick’s  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25023a7e8ad40930a34aecef62e6c27a0d328917%2F0_174_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25023a7e8ad40930a34aecef62e6c27a0d328917%2F0_174_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 The pro’s verdict … ‘The automatic settings have made Patrick’s swan 
overexposed. In my photograph (above), I underexposed to get the detail in the 
white plumage. This also made the water darker and the reflection clearer’ 
Tipling demonstrates how to quickly change shutter speeds and aperture scales 
manually – and how this relates to wildlife. The quicker the shutter speed, the 
more sharply a camera captures movement: 1/1,000th of a second should be enough 
for a moving bird wing, although big flappy birds such as herons can be 
photographed in flight at lower speeds. The aperture (f2.8 to f22 on most 
cameras) sets the depth of field, or how much is in focus (f22 gives the 
deepest focus but lets in least light). Because Britain is often gloomy, you 
usually need a low f-stop.

This is no bad thing for wildlife photography, though, because a shallow depth 
of field blurs the background and isolates the subject – just what we want. 
Novices are often so focused on their quarry, they don’t pay any attention to 
what’s behind it. Avoiding placing background tree branches through the head of 
a bird in the foreground is harder than it sounds. And even if you blur out 
what’s behind, patches of light can still distract the eye. “I keep backgrounds 
as clean as possible,” says Tipling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55ca69629618f0680fc733c458e39a3df7b728b%2F0_0_2000_2320%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa55ca69629618f0680fc733c458e39a3df7b728b%2F0_0_2000_2320%2F2000.jpg>
 Out in the field … David Tipling. Photograph: David Tipling 
Meanwhile, I snap away at blue tits and great tits, miss a shrew and get a 
blurry squirrel. While this is unspectacular, it’s a revelation to be so close 
to nature. I’ve sometimes wondered if photographers rather miss the joy of 
wildlife because they are too busy fiddling with technology, but I find myself 
actually observing and noticing more – the peachy hue of a coal tit; the 
surprising grace of a female chaffinch.

In the afternoon, we head to one of southern Britain’s wildest, most 
people-free landscapes: the wide open salt marshes of the north Norfolk coast. 
Tipling has checked the tides and we jump creeks and walk a mile across flat 
sand. On a distant bank lie more than 100 grey and common seals. “The biggest 
photographic challenge here is to make order out of chaos,” says Tipling. 
“You’ve got a chaotic jumble of bodies lying across the sand and you’re trying 
to create a picture that takes away that chaos and gives some sort of impact. 
You’ve got to get in reasonably tight, otherwise you lose the impact of the 
seals looking at you.”

2016 wildlife photographer of the year finalists - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/aug/31/2016-wildlife-photographer-of-the-year-finalists>
We also have a “fieldcraft” challenge: getting closer without disturbing them. 
“Low and slow” is Tipling’s mantra, and we approach a group of a dozen seals, 
extremely slowly and at a zig-zagging angle, as if we might be walking past 
them. I disapprove of disturbing wildlife but by using this approach, which 
takes a full hour, we get astonishingly close – and the seals are undisturbed. 
Tipling advises me to shoot at seal’s eye-level to create a more intimate 
picture, slowly shifting position to squeeze out distracting lumps of other 
seals in the background.

After a couple of hours, we quietly leave these beautiful beasts. I’m glowing 
from a day outside, from my close encounters with wildlife, and from finally 
understanding what I can achieve with all those different buttons on my camera.

• David Tipling runs personalised Norfolk photographic safaris 
<http://www.davidtipling.com/>: £275 per day; £390 for two people.

Tipling’s tips

1. The “rule of thirds” applies well to landscapes and wildlife: 1/3rd 
foreground, 1/3rd subject, 1/3rd background tends to create a nicely balanced 
picture.

2. Give your subject space to breathe, don’t just plonk it in the centre.

3. Focus on the eyes: our eye is drawn to animal eyes in photographs – if an 
eye is blurry, it’s rare for a picture to work.

4. Check your background: lower your aperture/f-stop to reduce your depth of 
field and blur distracting backgrounds.

5. Even professionals get wonky horizons on their landscapes – these can be 
retrospectively straightened with Photoshop or other computer software.

6. Dare to go manual: If you want to capture action, go for a high shutter 
speed; if you desire texture and depth of field, set your aperture at f11 or 
higher.

The shot that almost sank a plane
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b36a547929a4d218fce02a68bf949bd61c802cf%2F0_0_3421_5286%2F3421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20(and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20sneak%20up%20on%20a%20seal%20%28and%20other%20wildlife%20photography%20tips%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fwild-wildlife-photopraphy-masterclass-david-tippling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b36a547929a4d218fce02a68bf949bd61c802cf%2F0_0_3421_5286%2F3421.jpg>
 Emperor penguins in Antarctica Photograph: David Tipling 
David Tipling went to extreme lengths to capture his most popular photograph – 
an emperor penguin and its chick. He flew to the Antarctic on a Hercules and 
camped 400 miles from the south pole before taking two flights in a Twin Otter 
2,000 miles to the penguin colony. While camping on sea ice for 10 days, he was 
caught in a storm that began breaking up the ice. He and his group had to fly 
up into the blizzard or the plane would’ve been lost. With almost no fuel left, 
they landed on the Antarctic plateau. He then had to walk ahead of the plane 
for 13 miles to make sure the ice was safe for it to taxi to the nearest 
refuelling spot. “It’s the most fantastic thing I’ve ever done,” he says.



 