
Look, I’ve got nothing against books. Some of my best friends are books. Book 
clubs, though, are another matter. I’ve always had an almost pathological 
aversion to joining one. They seem to me to be an excuse to drink wine and be 
pretentious, and I don’t need an excuse to do either. My antipathy for book 
clubs means I’m not one of the 68,640 people who, at the time of writing, have
joined Emma Watson’s feminist book club <>. Launched last week, the club is 
called Our Shared Shelf andis hosted on Goodreads.com 
<https://www.goodreads.com/group/show/179584-our-shared-shelf>. The first book 
isMy Life on the Road by Gloria Steinem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/09/my-life-on-road-gloria-steinem-feminist-activist-reflections>
.

Emma Watson starts feminist book group on Twitter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/07/emma-watson-to-start-feminist-book-group-on-twitter-our-shared-shelf>
I applaud Watson’s initiative, but I can’t help but wish she had set up a 
feministNetflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> club instead. Not 
just because I’m anti book clubs, but because it would serve the greater good. 
I mean, let’s be real, only 1% of any book club actually read the book. That’s 
the first rule of book clubs. Meanwhile, 99% of people with a Netflix 
subscription regularly binge-watch programmes and are actively seeking ways to 
justify this binge-watching as an important social exercise. Right?

Since Watson is busy, I’ve decided to start a feminist Netflix club myself. It 
will be called Netchicks. No, no, it won’t. Streaming Feminists? Nah, not right 
either. Let’s take a leaf out of Watson’s book club and call it Our Shared 
Netflix Password. While finding a name is easy, deciding on the content is a 
little trickier. After several hours down a Google research rabbit hole I am 
depressed, disoriented and dubious. Every show I Googled had been alternately 
described as both the best thing and the worst thing to ever happen to 
feminism. I had gone deep into the feminist-pseudoacademic-industrial complex 
and it had given me a complex. But, after much debate, here is my preliminary 
list of feminist Netflix club picks. And if there is one discussion point that 
governs the lot of them, it’s this: have we outgrown theBechdel test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2010/nov/24/2> now? 
And if we have (and I think we have), what do we replace it with?

Jessica Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jessica-jones>

 Netflix’s first female-fronted superhero show is an obvious choice. Jones 
uses her super-strength to save the world from the evil manipulations of
Killgrave, a straight, white man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2015/nov/13/david-tennant-on-playing-a-villain-in-marvels-jessica-jones-people-are-compelled-to-do-whatever-he-says>
. Right on! But it isn’t Jessica’s strength that makes the show noteworthy; 
it’s her weaknesses. Forget having it all or leaning in, Jessica is an angry 
alcoholic loner. Partly, this is a result of Killgrave’s abuse. But Killgrave 
is too pathetic, too undeveloped a character to be entirely convincing as a 
villain and the most fascinating element of Jessica Jones is the struggle 
around agency. How much is Jessica a victim and how much is she clutching at 
the idea of victimhood as an all-absolving identity? Feminism, like everything 
else, has its flaws, and Jessica Jones makes no attempts to hide them.

Scream <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0117571/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5636927239d5c1d782c032f6a6ad19796e3e799f%2F0_222_2998_1800%2F2998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5636927239d5c1d782c032f6a6ad19796e3e799f%2F0_222_2998_1800%2F2998.jpg>
 Courtney Cox, Jamie Kennedy and Neve Campbell in Scream. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar/Dimension 
 Horror movies aren’t known for their feminism. The promiscuous die first; 
middle-class virgins survive; women are generally slashed, raped and tortured. 
However, one of the first mainstream, category-defying horror films was 90s 
classic Scream. The film repeatedly draws attention to misogynistic horror 
tropes, then upturns them. In one scene, Sidney Prescott, the main character 
and “final gir <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Final_girl>l” is told: “You’re 
not a virgin. Now you got to die. Those are the rules.” But Sidney kills her 
would-be killer and stars in several sequels, becoming a self-help author.

The Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F140c5761cabe14264c4a3860ba8675189e24eec5%2F0_171_4221_2534%2F4221.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F140c5761cabe14264c4a3860ba8675189e24eec5%2F0_171_4221_2534%2F4221.jpg>
 Gillian Anderson plays DSI Stella Gibson in The Fall. Photograph: BBC/The Fall 
S2/Helen Sloan 
 In The Fall, Gillian Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gillian-anderson> plays a detective 
hunting down a serial killer who targets young women. There is a strong female 
lead, an almost painful peeling back of the layers of sexual and structural 
violence against women, and a lot of feminist speechifying. Now, speechifying 
can backfire. Take season four ofScandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/oct/17/scandal-box-set-review>, 
for example, in which Olivia Pope’s intermittent tirades against the wage gap 
or the words used to describe women seem as if the drama has been paused for a 
public service announcement. Anderson’s speeches, however, are so brutally 
matter-of-fact that they make a point without belabouring it, and it’s a joy to 
watch. When confronted about a one-night stand, for example, Anderson says: 
“Man fucks woman. Subject: man; verb: fucks; object: woman. That’s OK. Woman 
fucks man. Woman: subject; man: object. That’s not so comfortable for you, is 
it?”

Pretty Little Liars <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1578873/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca139c84e9109ee6094a6acbac6a4a3c67236b8e%2F0_72_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca139c84e9109ee6094a6acbac6a4a3c67236b8e%2F0_72_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Pretty Little Liars stars Lucy Hale, Troian Bellisario, Shay Mitchell and 
Ashley Benson. Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
 This show revolves around a group of girls who are being tormented by a 
mysterious antagonist, defying numerous murder attempts in high heels and 
perfect makeup. There are many reasons why this shouldn’t be a feminist show 
but – largely due to its excellent depiction of friendship – it is. When one of 
the girls comes out as gay, it’s a non-issue. She’s a character; she’s not the 
“gay character”. I wish this show had been around when I was a teenager.

Master of None 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/dec/12/best-of-tv-2015-no-6-master-of-none>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619ccc2dd9c03ca2d51dc78086f163970b5bfc0c%2F0_20_3600_2162%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20watch%20Netflix%20as%20a%20feminist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fnetflix-feminist-emma-watson-book-club-our-shared-shelf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619ccc2dd9c03ca2d51dc78086f163970b5bfc0c%2F0_20_3600_2162%2F3600.jpg>
 Aziz Ansari as Dev and Lena Waithe as Denise in the Netflix original series 
Master of None. Photograph: KC Bailey/Netflix 
Creator Aziz Ansari <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aziz-ansari> follows 
30-year-old Dev as he wanders New York doing mundane things with a group of 
friends. The show also regularly illustrates everyday racism and sexism, with 
episode seven, for example, juxtaposing a woman’s experience walking home alone 
at night (terrifying) with a man’s (unremarkable). Unfortunately these points, 
much lauded by the media, often feel heavy-handed and a recognition of – wow! – 
a male writer articulating the female experience. Really, the show is on this 
list for one reason only: Denise. Denise is a black lesbian who is friends with 
Ansari’s character and frequently nails, deadpan, in one sentence, what every 
stretched out “feminist” scene completely overstates.
 