
Your body is a temple under siege from advertisers lobbing promises of a 
smoother, leaner, healthier, less-likely-to-die-tomorrow you. But while you can 
go to town when touting a life-changing pair of trainers – or an unachievable 
vision for the future of a country –strict rules govern the advertising of 
pharmaceuticals 
<https://www.cap.org.uk/Advertising-Codes/Broadcast/CodeItem.aspx?cscid={0b8049ba-38eb-473f-868c-746c7ed75366}#.V3OvljYrKhc>
. Go too far and there’s blowback from the Advertising Standards Authority 
(ASA), as Reckitt Benckiser, the firm that makes Nurofen, found out this week.

Nurofen TV ad banned over painkilling claims in landmark ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/29/nurofen-tv-ad-banned-over-painkilling-claims-in-landmark-ruling>
Joint/back

You sell bananas and you want to sell more bananas, so you market a range of 
bananas: porridge bananas, sport bananas, travel bananas, pretend-gun bananas. 
Whack up the prices while you’re at it. That’s basically what Reckitt Benckiser 
has done by selling “targeted” painkillers for different ailments: period pain, 
migraines and headaches. This week, theASA banned 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2016/6/RB-UK-Commercial-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_338459.aspx#.V3OyaTYrKhc>
 an ad for Nurofen Joint and Back because, despite appearances, the pills in 
the range have no specific targeting powers.

Face

You can’t advertise prescription-only drugs, as the deals website Groupon 
found to its cost in 2012 when theASA banned an ad for Botox 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2012/3/MyCityDeal-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_180836.aspx#.V3OyRzYrKhc>
. The voucher for a “choice of facial injection treatments” at Bath Facial 
Aesthetics could have been used for non-prescription treatments including 
fillers, but tightened rules for online marketing led to a ruling that the ad 
implicitly referred to Botox. Groupon said it took the decision “very 
seriously”.

Stomach

More than 200 people complained to the ASA about a TV and YouTube ad for 
slimming pills. In the 20-second spot, two healthy young women, preparing for a 
holiday, exchange selfies and recommendations for XLS Medical slimming pills. 
They end the ad on a beach, looking basically the same. Theauthority ruled in 
February 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2016/2/Omega-Pharma-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_311551.aspx#.V3OymTYrKhc>
 that the ad“presented an irresponsible approach to body image and confidence” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/03/slimming-pills-xls-medical-ad-banned-irresponsible-approach-body-image>
. Last year, the ASA cleared a controversial “beach body ready” ad for Protein 
World. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan,is trying to pull it from tube carriages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/13/sadiq-khan-moves-to-ban-body-shaming-ads-from-london-transport>
.

Nose/sinuses

Prince Charles got a heavily diluted telling-off in 2009 when a Duchy 
Originals promotion email was found to breach guidelines 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/princes-firm-misled-public-with-advert-for-remedies-6778125.html>
 by promising that a herbal tincture could treat a range of ills including 
colds. The company accepted the ruling and said it would take measures to stop 
such claims being made again.

Hair

Australian bowling legend Shane Warne threw his image behind a 2006 ad for 
hair-loss treatment only to be caught out forunwittingly breaking rules on 
celebrity endorsements for medicines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/may/17/advertising1>. The ad for the 
Advanced Hair Studio showed the cricketer above the lines: “Advanced Hair, 
Yeah, Yeah!”, and the phrase: “Warnie, Warnie, Warnie.” The use of the medicine 
minoxidil in the laser treatment concerned the ASA, which had previously ruled 
that the“So where the bloody hell are you?” campaign 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TebeNC-_VjA> by the Australian Tourist Board 
did not breach decency rules.

Ovaries

“For women who are trying for a baby, zinc contributes to normal fertility and 
reproduction ...” claimed an ad for Vitabiotics’ Pregnacare Conception vitamin 
pills. But two people pointed out that the assertions in the ad were not backed 
up by the EU register of nutrition and health claims for food supplements. 
Vitabiotics argued the toss, but theASA requested the ad be pulled in its 
current form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/04/asa-bans-advert-implying-vitamin-pills-could-help-women-conceive>
.
 