
I have come to a terrible and shaming realisation, and I'm going to share it 
with you. I love reading (wait, that's not the realisation). I read when I was 
at school and at university. Now I read for fun and for work. I read to relax 
and to widen my horizons and because I can't really think of much else I'd 
rather be doing. I've read a lot. My bookshelves bulge.

But it turns out I can remember almost nothing of what I've read.

I already knew that less "important" books slide out of my mind fairly 
rapidly: I can sometimes find myself well into a thriller or a piece of 
romantic fiction before I work out I've read it before and I know exactly 
whodunnit or who ends up with whom. But it turns out the classics I thought 
were a solid part of my reading CV are just as forgettable.

Knowledge of this immense stupidity was brought home to me at the weekend. We 
had friends staying. We were talking about books. Great. My friend had just read
Catch-22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/10/catch-22-50-years-joseph-heller>
. Great – I've read that, I thought. I said it was hilarious. And then I 
stopped. I literally could not remember a thing about the novel, other than 
that it is funny. There's a character called Major Major Major Major. And it's 
on an island … isn't it?

Momentary aberration? It wasn't. He'd also recently read Brave New World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/17/classics.margaretatwood>. I love 
that book, I thought. I love dystopian fiction, and I'd definitely cite it as 
one of my top dystopian reads. But could I remember anything about it? Here is 
what I could dredge up. There's a savage. There's a lighthouse. Something about 
eugenics.

Thinking about it, I was horrified to find that much of the classic literature 
I've read has been boiled down in my mind to a few scant details. War and Peace 
– I was so proud of finishing that one! But if I had to say something, 
anything, about it now … hmm. I mainly remember being confused by all the 
nicknames.

It gets worse the more I think about it. Tom Jones? Well, I could tell you 
there's a foundling. And it's by Henry Fielding. Important insights, for sure.
The Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/03/what-makes-great-gatsby>? Boats 
beating against the current. Daisy. Death. The shame! It's only about 100 pages 
long.

This is a nightmare. There I was, thinking that I had made some headway across 
the great sea of literature, and it turns out I'd never left the shore. Not 
that I want toturn reading into a numbers game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jan/16/bad-goodreads-reading-challenge-literature-numbers>
, but I thought I had ticked at least some of the great works off my list. And 
more great books are coming all the time.

Here's something I do remember: the autodidact in Sartre's Nausea, reading his 
way alphabetically through every book in the library. Please tell me that my 
reading life isn't equally hopeless … or at least that I'm not alone …
 