
There really is nothing more ghastly than a Tory MP calling a policeman a pleb 
– except, perhaps, people who jostle to get 50% off a telly.

Have I got that right? That many of the same people who deemed Andrew Mitchell 
poisonously patrician seem perfectly able to sneer at peopletaking advantage of 
a Black Friday shopping bargain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-sales-police-attend-supermarkets-amid-scuffles>
 attests to the eternally impenetrable mysteries of our class system – and 
that’s before we even chuck a high court judge into the mix.

“He is not the sort of man,” opined Mr Justice Mitting of Mitchell’s nemesis 
PC Rowland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/andrew-mitchell-plebgate-gamble-career-fails>
, “who had the wit, the imagination … to invent in the spur of the moment what 
a senior cabinet minister would have said to him.” You know what that sounds 
like? Judicialese for pleb. I’m not so much reading between m’lud’s lines, 
there, as simply reading his lines. Certainly, his verdict has been something 
to be snorted at with laughter by many sworn enemies of the type of snobbery 
Mitchell was found to have exhibited. If PC Rowland did not “learn [his] 
fucking place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/27/plebgate-timeline-key-events-andrew-mitchell>
” after Mr Mitchell ordered him to, Mr Justice Mitting has certainly brought 
him up to speed now.

You have to be a judge to get away with it, as far as I can make out, or 
someone quoting a judge – I think a Queen’s counsel might struggle. Let’s see 
how it sounds: “You are not the sort of cabbie to have had the wit or the 
imagination to come up with a better route between Buckingham Palace and Tower 
Bridge than that preferred by a former cabinet minister.” Then again, maybe
David Mellor would have got away with that one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/25/david-mellor-black-cab-boycott-unions>
 if his cab driver had prefaced it with a remark about the size of flatscreen 
he was planning to grab onBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/28/black-friday-nothing-to-do-with-religion-shopping>
. (And obviously a lot depends on how much traffic there was on the Embankment.)

Actually, I’m going to have to lay it on the line here: I’m confused. It’s 
been a hell of a week for the British class system. AsTony Blair once wibbled 
so madly <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/1575434.stm>: the kaleidoscope 
has been shaken, the pieces are in flux, soon they will settle again.

But where will they settle? Where? Creating diversionary class rows is fast 
becoming our last great manufacturing industry. And as real inequality becomes 
more entrenched, these weekly rows seem more of a displacement activity than 
ever. So establishing the rules of the game isn’t the greatest challenge 
facing us today – but it increasingly seems much, much easier to talk 
about than those challenges.

Fourteen years after John Major’s classless society 
<http://www.britishpoliticalspeech.org/speech-archive.htm?speech=137> was 
supposed to have come to pass, all people in public life are but one step away 
from the sort of class-based faux pas that will eventually make them a shoo-in 
for the redemptive possibilities ofI’m A Celeb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/i-m-a-celebrity> 2016, where their 
campmates could include Mitchell, PC Rowland,Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/24/emily-thornberry-tweet-clegg-ukip-farage>
, the serially class-demonisedTulisa Contostavlos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/25/tulisa-contostavlos-fined-assault-celebrity-blogger-savvas-morgan>
,her sometime nemesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/03/mazher-mahmood-tulisa-contostavlos>
Mazher Mahmood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/07/fake-sheikh-mazher-mahmood-safety-fears-panorama-bbc-indentity-court>
, and Mellor’s cabbie.

If Ant and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/23/will-we-ever-get-sick-of-ant-and-dec>
 have had enough by then, I would like to see the show presented bysocial 
mobility tsar Alan Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/17/social-mobility-tsar-inequality-poverty-milburn>
. Idea for a task: the Downton Prison Experiment, in which PC Rowland, the 
cabbie and Tulisa are the above-stairs overlords of Mahmood, Mitchell and 
Mellor. Will their innate working-class nobility translate into benevolent 
paternalism, or will it take two days before it descends into mindless 
patrician violence and producers have to step in? Text YOB to 80531 or SNOB 
to 80532.

(Incidentally, I know it’s not relevant, but I wish to thank the 
encyclopaedically hilariousCraig Brown for quoting a forgotten passage 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2851204/CRAIG-BROWN-Just-think-Mellor-PM.html>
 from Edwina Currie’s forgotten diaries this week. “I will have a crack at the 
leadership as soon as I can,” writes Edwina in 1988. “I look at rivals like 
David Mellor and I like me better.” It feels too sledgehammer-like to remark 
that humour is tragedy plus time. But you can’t ignore the fact that this week 
found David failing to best a London cabbie and Edwina taking lectures in moral 
philosophy from a former Playboy bunny in the I’m A Celeb jungle.)

For now, though, guidelines on the vagaries of class attitudes seem 
dangerously vague. Back in 1955, there was Nancy Mitford’s essay to make sense 
of the times. InThe English Aristocracy 
<http://www.unz.org/Pub/Encounter-1955sep-00005>, Mitford took a romp through 
the idea ofU and non-U speech <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U_and_non-U_English>
, dividing the upper and middle classes so affectlessly that, in Britain, her 
words could only inspire what social historians often describe as a fevered 
or anxious national debate. Whether or not they worried about little else on 
1950s Teesside is itself a matter of debate: but perhaps we can all agree that 
we are far from having resolved such ineffably important matters 60 years on.

It being 2014, though, we can at least crowdsource the new rules of class, so 
I must state that what follows is merely an attempt to get the ball rolling 
with a few simple examples culled from this last week .

And so: is Mellor’s “do you know who I am?” shtick U or non-U? I hope you will 
agree it is very much non-U. Anyone inquiring “do you know who I am?” is 
effectively asking: “Do you know who I was?” Meanwhile, as far as Black Friday 
goes, it looks open and shut. Talking about Black Friday – whether on air, in 
print, or in online comments – is decidedly U. In fact, the mere act of not 
shopping on the day elevates one to a position of innate U-ness. No one takes 
advantage of Black Friday – they are taken advantage of by it. They are non-U. 
And may I reiterate that quoting a snooty high court judge with a giggle is 
absolutely U. But if you tweeted a picture of Mitting in his wig and robes, 
don’t for God’s sake append a Thornberryian #imagefromthehighcourt.

Over to you now – but you have to say, what a very classy country we are. The 
cabinet minister versus the copper, the lawyer versus the black cab driver, the 
Labour law luvvie versus the person who prefers the back of an England flag to 
a window – with the sole exception of the journalist versus the estate agent, 
these have to be the least appealing possible ties in public life. As a friend 
muttered of the Mellor contretemps this week: “God, it really is that 1986 
Argentina-Germany World Cup final, isn’t it?”
 