
Horror movie Annabelle has been withdrawn from several French cinemas after 
the spooky prequel about a demonic doll saw teenage filmgoers rioting in 
auditoriums <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/world/europe/article4236489.ece>
.

Managers in Marseille, Strasbourg and Montpellier have cancelled screenings 
until further notice for security reasons after under-16s began fighting, 
throwing popcorn and even ripping up theatre seats.

Didier Tarizzo, owner of the 450-seat Les 3 Palmes cinema in Marseilles, told 
the Times that more than a thousand people had arrived for a screening of the 
film on Saturday. “Some didn’t have the most elementary notion of how to 
behave,” he said. “They were throwing popcorn and talking at the top of their 
voices or walking round.

“It’s not up to me to teach young people how to respect the law,” added M 
Tarizzo, when asked why he had cancelled future screenings. “What worried me 
was that a cinemagoer irritated by all the noise could have had a go at an 
adolescent.”

Film critic Alain Grasset told French news channel BFMTV: “It’s a very young 
audience, for whom the screening is a time to let loose. They go to see it as a 
joke, but it’s a pretext to go a little wild.”

It’s not the first time a horror film has sparked teenage riots in France. 
According to Le Parisien 
<http://m.leparisien.fr/cinema/actualite-cinema/cinema-le-film-d-horreur-annabelle-deprogramme-dans-plusieurs-salles-12-10-2014-4207645.php>
, a similar phenomenon took place during screenings of Paranormal Activity and 
Sinister, with the latter film pulled from more than 40 screens in 2012.

Annabelle is a prequel linked to the 2013 horror smash The Conjuring. Despite 
receiving lukewarm reviews, the film has been a global box office smash,taking 
$129m (£80.6m) worldwide so far on a budget of just $6.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/08/global-box-office-annabel-asia-debut-breakup-buddies-gone-girl>
.
 