
The International Cricket Council is understood to be considering widening the 
pathway to the controversial10-team World Cup in 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/26/icc-dave-richardson-2019-cricket-world-cup-associate-nations>
 in a move that will provide greater hope of qualification to teams such as 
Ireland and Afghanistan.

As it stands, the next edition of the 50-over showpiece will see the top eight 
of the 12-team ICC rankings – on 30 September 2017 – go through by right, with 
the final two spots decided by a qualifying tournament the following year.But 
following criticism of that structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/feb/28/ireland-afghanistan-cricket-world-cup-2015-2019-icc-associate-nations>
 as part of the World Cup’s overall reduction from 14 teams down to 10, the ICC 
is mulling over whether to cut the number of sides that book their places via 
the rankings to six, leaving four berths up for grabs.

By plunging the bottom six teams into the ICC World Cup qualifier in 
Bangladesh in 2018, the tweak would also add increased context to one-day 
internationals played over the next two years with the top sides more fearful 
of dropping into the bottom half of the table.

England are currently sixth in the rankings – they would be assured of their 
place as tournament hosts – and were the cut-off point to occur today, full 
members Bangladesh, West Indies, Pakistan and Zimbabwe, along with leading 
associate sides Ireland and Afghanistan, would vie with four additional teams 
for the final four places.

The ICC – giving with one hand, taking twice as much with the other? | Andy 
Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/the-spin-icc-associate-nations-cricket-world-cup>
The news will be a further jolt for West Indies in particular, with the 
two-times World Cup winners having recently missed out on qualification for the 
2017 Champions Trophy – also being played in England – after slipping to ninth 
in the rankings when the cut-off point for that competition came at the end of 
last month. Ireland, who along with Afghanistan were added to the official 
one-day rankings in January this year,were among the most vocal critics of the 
World Cup’s slimming down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/22/associate-nations-cricket-world-twenty20-ireland-scotland>
 when it was confirmed in November last year afterfive wins against full member 
sides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/02/ireland-beat-england-cricket> in 
their last three appearances in the finals.

In addition to this, the ICC found the reduction castigated by both Fica, the 
umbrella group for seven players’ unions, and the MCC WorldCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Committee, which described it as “a 
retrograde step that damages the potential for growth in cricket’s developing 
nations”.

The 10-team format will continue through to the 2023 World Cup at least under 
agreed television broadcasting rights but should this proposed change be 
adopted, their chances of reaching the finals would be at least increased from 
the previously agreed qualification system.

In addition to the mooted restructure, which is still under discussion, future 
qualifying tournaments after the 2018 round-robin in Bangladesh could be held 
in the United Arab Emirates, where England are currently playing Pakistan in 
their three-match Test series.
 