
What’s the name of the show? Into the Badlands.

Is this a remake of the Sissy Spacek movie? Ha. No, that was just Badlands. 
And there is nothing out there like Into the Badlands.

When does it premiere? Sunday, 15 November, at 10pm EST, right after The 
Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-walking-dead-episode-by-episode>
, which means AMC is really invested in its success.

It’s on AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>, so it has to be a 
prestige drama with lots of antiheroes going through existential angst in the 
suburbs, right?Oh, golly, how wrong you are.

So, what is this thing, then? You know, just your standard martial arts show 
about warring barons and their minions in a post-apocalyptic America. Well, 
actually, we don’t know if there was an apocalypse or if it’s in America. It 
sort of looks like 1886 but it also sort of looks like the future, so who 
knows. It could be a galaxy long, long ago and far, far away.

That’s not really helping. What exactly happens? So, seven different barons, 
who are sort of like plantation owners, rule this country. They each make all 
their money off of one crop. The baron we know the most about is Quinn (Martin 
Csokas), who grows opium poppies, for instance. He has both a bunch of “cogs”, 
who are the slaves who work the fields, and highly trained “clippers”, who are 
his enforcers. There are also marauding packs of “nomads”.

This is making a bit more sense. Quinn’s main clipper is a guy called Sunny 
(Daniel Wu), whom he found orphaned as a child and treats as a member of the 
family. In the series opening, Sunny finds MK (Aramis Knight), a cog who has 
been kidnapped by a bunch of nomads. It turns out he has some mysterious dark 
powers that make him special.

Each sequence is incredibly choreographed, like a tap-dance number with 40 
dancers

OK, you lost me again. And didn’t you say something about martial arts? Yes. 
Sunny, the clippers and the barons all are masters of martial arts, the 
over-the-top kind you see in Hong Kong action movies where it seems like they 
can fly.

Is the fighting good? It is the absolute best fighting you’ve seen on TV. It’s 
sort of in the Kill Bill style, where each fight is a dramatic tableau set in a 
picturesque location – a rainy street, a factory, a forest glen – that quickly 
fills with bloody corpses and snapped limbs. Each sequence is incredibly 
choreographed, like a tap-dance number with 40 dancers all doing the same thing 
at once.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Finto-the-badlands-amc-kung-fu-science-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65d7f23cdf288c0375fa21d64ad8b923f3bf16d%2F0_185_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Into%20the%20Badlands%3A%20slavery%20sci-fi%20with%20a%20kung%20fu%20edge%20that's%20unlike%20anything%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Finto-the-badlands-amc-kung-fu-science-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Into%20the%20Badlands%3A%20slavery%20sci-fi%20with%20a%20kung%20fu%20edge%20that%27s%20unlike%20anything%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Finto-the-badlands-amc-kung-fu-science-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65d7f23cdf288c0375fa21d64ad8b923f3bf16d%2F0_185_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Ally Ioannides as Tilda in Into the Badlands. Photograph: Patti Perret/AMC/AMC 
This show sounds insane. It is absolutely bonkers and there is nothing else 
like it on television, which is what makes it so appealing to me. Yes, Sunny is 
your classic TV antihero who has to choose between serving his baron and 
escaping with his pregnant girlfriend, Veil (Madeleine Mantock). There is a bit 
of a Game of Thrones vibe too, with this universe that is like ours but very 
different. Also, each baron has his own color scheme, banner and allegiances, 
as with the different houses on Game of Thrones. But even so, there is no real 
comparison to this show.

It may be different, but is it good? I think so, yes, with some caveats. I’m a 
big fan of comic books, and watching Into the Badlands is kind of like starting 
a new comic book series. You’re welcomed into this fully immersive universe 
with its own rules, words, fashion and way of doing things. The viewer just has 
to accept a lot of different things and go along for the ride. If any of the 
elements seem too outlandish for certain viewers, the show is probably going to 
lose them, but those willing to submit to the world-building will be thoroughly 
rewarded. Also, the show doesn’t really elevate the comic-esque material as The 
Walking Dead does. This show is happy to just be a genre piece, a bit of 
grindhouse fare on an arthouse channel.

The way the show is shot is a little odd. There are ornate sets and costumes, 
but they’re all rendered in a sort of saturated color scheme that reminds me 
mostly of Hercules: The Legendary Journeys, the one with Kevin Sorbo. So, yeah, 
it looks a little cheap, even though it clearly isn’t. Combine the sci-fi 
elements and the artistic decisions and you end up with something that looks, 
well, cheesy.

That said, cheesy isn’t necessarily bad. Empire can be mighty cheesy. So can 
The Walking Dead. So can just about every superhero movie. There is nothing on 
Earth outside of the Kraft factory that is cheesier than Full House, and that 
is getting a revival on Netflix. There is something about cheesy done right 
that is simultaneously comforting and exhilarating, and I think Into the 
Badlands finds that sweet spot.

Come on, a show this crazy can’t be all good. Yes, there are some problems 
with it. Some of the acting isn’t great and some of the dialogue could use some 
fine-tuning, but most of what you’re seeing is engaging and interesting. And, 
for the first time in a long time, I have absolutely no idea where this show is 
going. So, like wearing a caftan as a wedding dress, it may not win points for 
quality, but it definitely scores for ingenuity and nerve.

So you think I should watch this show? I gave it the season pass on the DVR, 
just because I’m curious how this thing is going to play out, and the fight 
scenes are worth the price of admission. That said, this isn’t for everyone. If 
you like comic books,Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, Kill Bill, or things 
that really make you scratch your head, give this a whirl. More conservative 
viewers should probably sit this fight out.

Into the Badlands starts Sunday 15 November at 10pm EST on AMC 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/media/amc> in the US, and Tuesday 17 November on 
Amazon Prime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/01/the-man-in-the-high-castle-new-on-amazon-prime-in-november>
 in the UK
 