
The wit of the Republic of Ireland's Green and White Army will be put to the 
test in Poland this weekend. One of their fellow supporters' presence at Poznan 
for Ireland's opening match in the European Championship provides the fans with 
a golden opportunity for some creative chanting before the clash with Croatia. 
An Irish politician has escaped a storm at home over evading the taxman to the 
tune of more than a million euros by skipping off to the game this Sunday.

However, this is a politician with a difference. Rather than the sober dark 
suit, conservative tie and pristinely polished shoes Mick Wallace brings some 
colour to the normally dull surroundings of Irish main parliamentary chamber, 
the Dail. With his long straggly blonde hair resembling the children's TV 
character "Worzel Gummidge" or a Led Zeppelin tribute band member and his 
ubiquitious pink shirts Wallace has become one of the most instantly 
recognizable political figures in the Republic. Ever since he was first elected 
as a TD for Wexford 15 months ago Wallace has defied dress codes and 
conventions, his dress-down Friday appearance a means of connecting with the 
ordinary voter.

Wallace insists that his instant-recognition status is as much to do with his 
radicalism as his fashion sense. His politics is a mixture of parochial 
largesse (he has poured tens of thousands of his own money into sporting and 
community projects in his native county) and leftist stances on issues like 
Europe, the bail out, austerity and the raft of household charges the current 
Fine Gael/Labour has sought to introduce in order to plug the gaping hole in 
Ireland's public finances. The builder, soccer fanatic, vineyard owner and 
restaraunteur has urged ordinary Irish citizens not to pay the â‚¬100 Household 
Charge. He belongs to the so called "Technical group" of TDs who are by and 
large leftwing independents.

So the revelations that Wallace has not paid money owed to the exchequor from 
the sale of properties has left the "Technical group" in an embarrassing 
situation. He is refusing to quit the Dail despite demands from Labour, Fine 
Gael and the opposition Fianna Fail that he is no longer fit to hold office. 
Fine Gael's chairman Charlie Flanagan said it was a "pretty dismal precedent" 
that a member of the Dail would admit to knowingly filing inaccurate returns, 
which Wallace in his defence insists was only done to save his company from 
insolvency and rescue the jobs of his workers.

Since the story broke on Thursday Wallace has remained defiant:

No, I won't quite and I shouldn't have to. The idea I'm a serial tax defaulter 
is unfair.

That is not how the majority of TDs see the Wallace affair and its 
implications for a group in the Dail that prides itself on leftwing purity, 
probity in public office and not being part of the dominant political cartels 
so often in they past they accused of corruption and cronyism.

The No 1 song in the Irish pop charts is a take on an old traditional ballad, 
repackaged for the 2012 European Championships as "The Rocky Road to Dublin". 
The pink shirted champion of the people, so beloved of his workforce, so 
admired in his native Wexford, may be about to find out what the rest ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> thinks of him if he gets spotted in 
Polish stadia by the Green and White Army. For Wallace and indeed for his 
fellow TDs from the "Technical group" back at home it might an even rockier 
road around Poland over the next few weeks.
 