
American Psycho is one of the greatest novels of our time. Since its 
publication, its petulant, unerring and uncompromising face-off with this age 
has the effect of making most serious literary works seem obscured by an 
unedifying veil of sophistry. It is one of the two zeitgeist pieces of fiction 
that defined America at the end of the last century and the start of this one, 
the other beingChuck Palahniuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chuckpalahniuk>’s Fight Club 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/fight-club.html>. The latter novel looks at 
disaffection from the perspective of an excluded new underclass of youth, 
debt-shackled and devoid of opportunity.American Psycho, on the other hand, 
focuses on the ennui of morally bankrupt extreme privilege.

The seismic effect of both books was genuinely felt, yet in the case of 
American Psycho, there also followed a highly disingenuous outrage. Those 
reactions were mainly directed towards the passages of extreme violence 
contained in the book, the objectification of women, the use of pornography and 
the supposed “manipulation” of the reader. Yet, they were often acts of bad 
faith and were based on fatuous notions.

American Psycho holds a hyper-real, satirical mirror up to our faces, and the 
uncomfortable shock of recognition it produces is that twisted reflection of 
ourselves, and the world we live in. It is not the “life-affirming” (so often a 
coded term for “deeply conservative”) novel beloved of bourgeois critics. It 
offers no easy resolutions to suburbanites, serves up no comforting knowledge 
that the flawed but fundamentally decent super guy is on hand to rescue them 
from the bad folks. There is no suggestion that either love or faith can save 
the day. All that remains is the impression that we have created a world devoid 
of compassion and empathy, a fertile breeding ground for monsters to thrive 
while hiding in plain sight. But though the novel offers no such hiding place 
for the reader, it furnishes us with that most impenetrable of shields: dark 
humour and irony. More than anything else,American Psycho is a black comedy, a 
satire on our dislocating culture of excess.

The tone is set when the protagonist, Patrick Bateman, and his co-worker, 
Timothy Price, take a cab to Bateman’s fiancee’s home. Price narcissistically 
sounds off about what he believes to be his virtues: “I’m resourceful … I’m 
creative, I’m young, unscrupulous, highly motivated, highly skilled. In essence 
what I’m saying is that society cannot afford to lose me. I’m an asset.” This 
statement redefines the American dream, as distorted by individualistic 
consumer capitalism. But Price is unaware that he’s sharing a car with a 
monster. Bateman’s greater obsession with living the same dream fuels a 
paranoid, jealous, incandescent anger, and a demented desire for power and 
domination. This compels him to rape, torture, and murder a multitude of 
victims.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420643736140%2F3f214538-ca27-4d38-8309-31fa0a3a261c-1504x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irvine%20Welsh%20%E2%80%93%20American%20Psycho%20is%20a%20modern%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irvine%20Welsh%20%E2%80%93%20American%20Psycho%20is%20a%20modern%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420643736140%2F3f214538-ca27-4d38-8309-31fa0a3a261c-1504x2040.jpeg>
 Matt Smith in the Almeida’s 2013 production ofAmerican Psycho. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
It’s almost impossible to separate American Psycho from the reaction to it, 
and examining those objections helps in discerning the subversive nature of the 
novel. The manipulation of the reader is one of the book’s most arresting 
features. By presenting us with a glamorous, murderous protagonist (inherited 
wealth, elite schooling, gym‑hewn body, expensive clothes, competence in the 
financial world),Bret Easton Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis> rejects the norm. It’s a 
profile light years removed from the stock reality of the serial killer as a 
sullen, inadequate loser. Bateman would probably be held up as an archetypal 
model of American success, were it not for the fact of him being a murdering 
psychopath. The book directly compares the power-longing, money-grubbing 
tendencies of the American WASPish elite to mental dysfunction.

Through mixing Bateman’s mundane daily activities with his brutal homicides, 
American Psycho uncomfortably closes the gap between the psychotic cultural 
aspects of the US – its wealth fixation, gun obsession, overseas militarism, 
increasing military fetishism at home – and that of the morbid, depressive 
preoccupations of the serial killer. The running metaphor is one of a culture 
succumbing to a materialist consumerism that destroys society by eradicating 
its human values in favour of an obsession with image.

I recall, around the time of its publication, having an argument with a female 
friend about the violence towards women in the novel. She said (and I’ve heard 
this argument several times): “If you are yourself subjected to the violence 
and misogyny of the patriarchy, then this text becomes not a criticism of, or 
satire on, late capitalism, with the abuse of women deployed as a metaphor, but 
a rendering of that abuse, a public display of it for entertainment.”

While it is hard not to be sympathetic to this view, and to accept that the 
book will resonate, in the context of a patriarchal society, in a very 
different way with women than men, I argued then, as I will now, that the novel 
opens up a broad discussion on the workings and limits of fiction.

The first important thing to remember about American Psycho is that everything 
within the novel is completely constructed, based on the culture surrounding 
the time during which the book was written. This truism is only worth restating 
as many people still childishly insist on confusing protagonists with their 
authors.

The second thing is that the novel is always as much about the reader as the 
writer. As readers, we filter novels through the lens of our own cultural 
background and respond to them accordingly. The best of them evoke something 
strong in both ourselves, and the world around us. Thus there can be no 
“objective” analysis of the novel.

The book’s detractors were generally polemicists or activists rather than 
artists. Those who came from a different place, such as the writerFay Weldon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fayweldon>, tended to rejoice in it, for the 
very same reason their sisters loathed it: “Feminists – that’s me too – see 
Ellis’s book as anti-women. So it is. So is the world, increasingly.” Had a 
woman writtenAmerican Psycho, it probably would have been perceived as a great, 
visionary feminist work; the tendency to want to shoot the messenger, rather 
than read the message, comes from a place of politics, not art.

But I believe the main source of unease concerning the novel is that, despite 
its portrayal of Bateman as superficial, pompous, lying, misogynistic, racist 
and narcissistic, the narrative style ofAmerican Psycho forces the reader to 
adopt his point of view. As happens in present-tense, first-person narrative, 
the reader generally assumes the protagonist’s concerns: the “How to get rid of 
the body” syndrome. Thus, the reader is implicated in both the violence and the 
objectifying processes of consumer society. But this participation also 
crucially demands that the reader makes some kind of moral judgment on the 
nature of these acts. That could be on a spectrum ranging from total disgust to 
detached indifference, perhaps even to perverse fascination. The point is that 
the reader is forced to confront his or her emotions in the context of the 
values of a society that we are all part of.

The objective of pornography is to produce sexual arousal. While American 
Psycho includes pornographic scenes, they are carefully crafted and placed, and 
juxtaposed with horror and gore. They are not about a twisted writer’s deviant 
projections, engineered to fuel the misogynistic fantasies of a (hopefully 
small) contingent of dysfunctional male readers. In those scenes, I see only a 
technician at work, albeit one operating in tandem with a monstrous character 
he has forged as the (appropriate) tool to guide his story and address his 
themes. “Making a killing” on Wall Street might be a harmless turn of phrase, 
but it only enjoys traction because of the culture it takes place in. When 
Bateman answers “Murders and executions” to the question of what he does for a 
living, his reply is heard as “Mergers and acquisitions”. By reducing his 
victims to material, Bateman is the alienated, urbane Ivy League serial killer 
in the suit. Therefore, Easton Ellis was correct to be as graphic as possible 
in the dismemberment scenes. Without them the novel would have been a 
compromise and a failure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420644091481%2Fe1dc0a13-9ac4-47fa-a8e4-7000bdb496eb-1857x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Irvine%20Welsh%20%E2%80%93%20American%20Psycho%20is%20a%20modern%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Irvine%20Welsh%20%E2%80%93%20American%20Psycho%20is%20a%20modern%20classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Famerican-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420644091481%2Fe1dc0a13-9ac4-47fa-a8e4-7000bdb496eb-1857x2040.jpeg>
 Bret Easton Ellis. Photograph: Graeme Robertson/Guardian 
But there is little to be gained in trying to analyse the violent scenes in 
the book. To do so is far more pathological than the scenes themselves, which 
function solely in order to show the barbaric legacy of the 
consumerist/imperialist world we live in, the true thematic concern of the 
novel, by illustrating their divergence from Bateman’s everyday life. Violent 
scenes will be upsetting to people who are sensitive or lack the ability to 
abstract themselves from them. Yet they are absolutely essential inAmerican 
Psycho. In a more general sense, any attempt to prescribe what is and is not 
acceptable material in a novel must always be inherently censorious and ugly. 
The scenarios are always played out in the imaginative domain of the reader. 
Censorship of the novel is therefore a direct attack on thought and creativity.

Bateman, like Tyler Durden in Fight Club, heralded the epoch of the US 
cable-television antihero. Popular flawed heroes such as Dexter, in whom the 
psychopathic agent of destruction is recast in a cynical and reactionary way 
(as the good guy who aims to serve and protect the decent suburbanites), would 
not have emerged without Bateman. He is the purer version of theGordon Gekkos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/from-the-archive-blog/2012/feb/28/fbi-michael-douglas-wall-street>
, the wolves of Wall Street, and the plethora of movie pantomime dames of 
corporate capitalist villainy.

The negative reviews the novel received now sound a little like the stampeding 
of frightened children. That they came from intelligent people who couldn’t get 
past their own shock and discomfort to ascertain the true nature of it is 
utterly delicious. This spectacular wrong-footing is a testimony to the power 
of the book. But in a deeper sense, the moral panic around its publication 
represented a smokescreen, nothing less than a refusal to engage with the fact 
thatAmerican Psycho, like Fight Club, is essentially a “decline of empire” 
piece.

America, with its traditions of freedom, has generally, both on the left and 
right, been uncomfortable with seeing itself as an empire. There exists a huge 
disconnect between the nation’s self-image and how it is often perceived 
abroad. The violent contradictions of our post-democratic elitist epoch might 
have been displaced to an overseas “theatre of war”, but by resolutely 
associating them with Wall Street privilege and power, Easton Ellis’s novel 
makes a comment on the ugliness of modern capitalism and its relentless 
consuming-towards-extinction programme.

Given that the blandness of modern capitalism (depicted brilliantly in 
American Psycho) involves rendering art into mass entertainment and crass 
escapism, with the novel now dominated by formulaic genre fiction slotting into 
marketing holes and peddling easy resolution, Easton Ellis produced a 
groundbreaking work, with an increasing relevance to the world we live in. He 
forced us (and himself) to engage with intolerable material, and the anger and 
fear this generated only came from a place of being struck by the terrible 
truth of it. We are now a good way into the 21st century, andAmerican Psycho 
remains literature’s most indispensable and savage exegesis of the society we 
have created.

• American Psycho <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/american-psycho-3.html> is 
published as a Picador Classic.
 