
James Harding, born 1969, has resigned from The Times. And John Witherow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnwitherow>, born 1952, is being tipped to 
take over.

It reminds me of Ken Tynan's famously sarcastic remark, when he was fired as 
the London Evening Standard's theatre critic, about making way for the older 
generation.*

When Harding became editor of The Times in December 2007, he became the 
youngest man ever to edit the paper. Witherow has been editor of theSunday Times
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> since 1994. Long before that 
he was a Times reporter, covering the Falklands War in 1982 when Harding was 
still a 13-year-old schoolboy.

There is sure to be gossip about Harding being required to go because he took 
a robust line over phone hacking after belatedly deciding to cover it. That is 
certainly possible and, if so, it reflects well on him.

I have received emails and texts supportive of Harding and none that were 
critical. It's only anecdotal evidence, of course, but it does suggest he was 
appreciated by a goodly portion of his staff.

If Witherow does take over, and the jury is out on that rumour too, he will 
bring a wealth of experience to the job. He has piloted the Sunday Times 
through choppy waters for several years.

I worked alongside him for three years back in the 1980s, when he was 
diplomatic correspondent, and he was both good at the job and a helpful 
colleague. He is an excellent writer who now writes very little.

If you want to get the measure of his talent, re-read his article on Marie 
Colvin after she was killed in Syria. 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/newsreview/article877611.ece> It is a 
first-class piece of work.

When he was promoted to the editorship after the departure of Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>, I didn't think he would prove 
to be as good a successor as he has undoubtedly proved.

So will he become, aged 60, either editor of The Times or editor-in-chief of 
both titles?Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> 
will know that he is not simply a safe pair of hands. He has political nous and 
he likes to break stories.

If there is to be greater co-operation between the two papers, something which 
has been fiercely resisted in the past, then Witherow would be the man to 
oversee it.

Clearly, there is not going to be, at least in the short term, the kind of 
staff mergers pulled off at the Telegraph, Independent and Guardian-Observer 
titles.

But it does make commercial sense for savings to be made at two loss-making 
papers. Even if there is no question of a full seven-day Sun-style operation, 
there is no reason why the production departments should not be merged.

Once News Corp's publishing division is established, there will be greater 
resistance to the millions spent on papers that are losing sales and failing to 
pick up big online audiences due to their paywalls.

It may well strike Robert Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/robert-thomson>, the man tasked with running 
the new publishing arm, that there needs to be refreshment at both Times titles.

Then he will have to ask himself whether Witherow is the man for such a job. 
It's a tough call.

*Tynan was 26. He wrongly imagined his elderly predecessor, Beverely Baxter, 
was set to return. But he was right about his replacement being older: Milton 
Shulman was 39.
 