
Name: Jack Wills.

Age: 17.

Appearance: Offensively sexy.

Jack Wills underwear party ads too 'sexualised' for teens, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/01/jack-wills-underwear-party-ad-catalogue-banned>
Jack Wills the brand? That’s it. Aimed at students. Pheasant with a walking 
stick for a logo. Quite posh.

And that’s sexy? Well, no, the brand isn’t sexy. The brand sells expensive 
hoodies and overpriced polo shirts. It sells a boating blazer so obnoxious that 
it must exist only to help identify people who want to be punched. Jack Wills 
isn’t sexy.

Then what is? A recent Jack Wills mailout catalogue. It was so sexy it ended 
up banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/01/jack-wills-underwear-party-ad-catalogue-banned>
.

What’s so sexy about it? It contains images of several attractive teenagers 
standing around in their pants, having fun.

I hate stupid sexy fun. Me too. Imagine seeing a catalogue like that as a kid 
and realising that you would one day be expected to stand around in your pants 
with your friends in an annoyingly louche manner. It would ruin your life.

Oh God, were these catalogues addressed to children? That’s appalling. Well, 
no. They were actually addressed to adults. But one of the adults was a parent, 
and that parent had kids who might feasibly have seen the catalogue, so they 
complained. Does that count?

I don’t think so. Well, the Advertising Standards Authority said it did 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2016/6/Jack-Wills-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_331708.aspx#.V06jcjYrKhc>
. Its statement read: “The images in question showed [teenagers] relaxing and 
engaging in activities such as dancing, drinking and reading a newspaper 
together.”

Teenagers reading a newspaper? What an obscene fantasy! The ASA goes on: 
“Moreover, we noted that the story of the group of friends depicted them 
dancing and drinking while fully clothed, then dancing and drinking in their 
underwear … and a final scene of all of the characters in their underwear in 
bed together. We considered that this sequence of images … was sexually 
suggestive.”

And so it has been banned? Absolutely. Presumably, all future Jack Wills 
catalogues will feature normal teenage activities, such as being spotty and 
playing Xbox and having bad hair.

But where will kids find pictures of nudity now? Nowhere. The images were only 
available in that one Jack Wills catalogue, and now it has been banned. Our 
kids are safe again! Thanks, ASA!

Do say: “Jack Wills: Fabulously British.”

Don’t say: “Jack Wills: Perverted Newspaper-promoting Fetishists.”
 