
Aldous Huxley wrote Brave New World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/13/100-best-novels-brave-new-world-aldous-huxley>
 in 1931 in the shadow of thefirst world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/firstworldwar>, the Wall Street Crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/oct/04/useconomy> and a devastating 
flu virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/grrlscientist/2014/jul/30/influenza-pandemic-1918-viruses-biology-medicine-history>
 that had claimed millions of lives. The Treaty of Versailles had carved out a 
new Europe, while electricity, the automobile, production lines, new mass media 
and aeroplanes were changing the world. England was in the grip of a 
depression, but science and technology promised a better future: a world where 
disease, drudgery and poverty might no longer exist. Very few writers were bold 
enough to challenge this naive optimism but in Brave New World, Huxley 
certainly did; now his work, adapted by Dawn King for the stage and premiering 
at Royal and Derngate, Northampton, challenges audiences to do the same.

Margaret Atwood on Brave New World
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/17/classics.margaretatwood> 
Huxley was concerned with those who had little say in their society, who were 
at the mercy of an all-powerful elite. His idea of the helpless masses is still 
a common theme in our own popular culture – just think of The Hunger Games, 
Insurgent, Black Mirror, Humans, Utopia.The emergence of an elite who control 
the majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/recession-rich-britains-wealthiest-double-net-worth-since-crisis>
, who invariably are low-income consumers, is a worldwide social phenomenon; 
increasingly we are taught to believe that a peaceful utopian life for all is 
only possible in a world where dissent and real human emotions are crushed.

These are the issues which, for me, made a novel written 84 years ago 
stunningly relevant to our society today, and convinced me that Dawn King’s 
vision for adapting the book would encourage audiences to see their own world 
through Huxley’s eyes.

One challenge for the adaptation would be to underscore how relevant Huxley is 
today and how he foresaw so many of the problems afflicting 21st-century 
society.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442572731205%2F8a5f3691-f3ad-4f6e-a65f-17163021e432-2060x1746.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World's%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World%27s%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442572731205%2F8a5f3691-f3ad-4f6e-a65f-17163021e432-2060x1746.jpeg>
 Aldous Huxley envisaged a regime with genetically engineered test-tube babies 
in Brave New World. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
He predicted, for instance, the ways in which technology, in the control of 
powerful elites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/16/news-outlets-face-losing-control-to-apple-facebook-and-google>
, can control our decision-making with social media, pornography, the 
commercialisation of sex, advertising and reality TV. He foresaw the ubiquitous
prevalence of drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs>, both legal and 
illegal, and how pharmaceuticals such as Ritalin would sedate growing numbers 
of children.Genetic engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/01/editing-embryo-dna-genome-major-research-funders-ethics-debate>
, euthanasia, a national lottery and evencorruption at the top of world sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/17/fifa-reform-campaigners-sfo-follow-money>
 are all a part of his nightmare future.

Our Brave New World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/09/brave-new-world-review-james-dacre>
 eschews the futuristic landscapes, flying machines and technical wizardry that 
much of sci-fi is obsessed with, and focuses instead upon a human story set in 
a ruthless totalitarian regime.

This is a world where people think they are always happy, always get what they 
want, and never want what they can’t have. It is a place in which artifice 
rules, whether in scents, flavourings or fabrics. A world where life is created 
in test tubes and children are conditioned to prioritise consumerism, sexual 
pleasure and unswerving dedication to a World State. Here real emotion and 
ideals are purged, concepts such as family, religion, empathy and honour are 
banned and “history is bunk”.

Dawn has always believed that an adaptation of Brave New World must speak 
powerfully to a 21st-century world in which we have become enslaved by a 
compulsion for easy pleasure without accountability and where a banal popular 
culture opiates the masses. A world where, day by day, big business encourages 
us to sacrifice our privacy and spy on friends and families through social 
media. Huxley’s idea of “feely” interactive films anticipates reality TV,selfies
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/jul/21/worlds-earliest-selfies-in-pictures-buzz-aldrin>
, mass pornography and the internet voyeurism of our own time. His death 
centres foresaw the euthanasia clinics in modern Europe and his concerns about 
genetic engineering have proved terrifyingly prescient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442571129753%2Fa929a7a0-8a80-4802-a265-c13b85f84f37-2060x1366.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World's%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World%27s%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442571129753%2Fa929a7a0-8a80-4802-a265-c13b85f84f37-2060x1366.jpeg>
 John Hurt in the film 1984: Huxley disagreed with former pupil George Orwell’s 
‘Big Brother’ vision of control by force. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/MGM 
Huxley’s view of the future was very different from that of George Orwell, who 
in 1948 wrote the novelNineteen Eighty-Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/100-best-novels-1984-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four-robert-mccrum>
. While Orwell’s dystopia was based on oppression through fear, the earlier 
Brave New World offered a blueprint for a society controlled by enforced 
happiness. Huxley, who had taught Orwell at school, wrote to him on the 
publication of Nineteen Eighty-Four.

The lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting people 
into loving their servitude as by flogging
Aldous Huxley 
 “Whether,” he says, “the policy of the boot-on-the-face can go on 
indefinitely seems doubtful. My own belief is that the ruling oligarchy will 
find less arduous and wasteful ways of governing and satisfying its lust for 
power … the lust for power can be just as completely satisfied by suggesting 
people into loving their servitude as by flogging and kicking them into 
obedience … all conditioning aims at that: making people like their inescapable 
destiny.”

In Brave New World <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brave-new-world-6.html>, 
Huxley presents a picture of a global dictatorship controlling a totalitarian, 
consumerist welfare state. He depicts a world in which there is no war, 
poverty, unemployment or crime and in which threats are rarely used or needed. 
Rule is by “bread and circuses” and citizens are well-off, safe, never ill and 
unafraid of death. They are oblivious to real human emotions and passions. They 
have no mothers or fathers, no wives or children – no bondsor attachments, no 
rejection, jealousy or hurt. Theirs is a world without religion or war, where 
lust and pleasure have replaced love and empathy. Huxley’s sense of infant 
conditioning speaks powerfully to an age in which children as young as four are
addicted to iPads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/08/are-tablet-computers-bad-young-children>
, glued to televisions and nurtured on fast food and artificial snacks laced 
with addictive chemicals. It speaks to an age in which adults interact with a 
tablet, laptop or smartphone rather than other human beings. Huxley describes 
the world he foresees as a sinister, insidious nightmare in which the 
inhabitants live sterile lives, subdued by the drug soma in a numbed utopia.

He considered the future “the Age of Noise. Physical noise, mental noise and 
the noise of desire” arguing that “all the sources of our almost miraculous 
technology” will be thrown together in an “assault against silence”. He talked 
of a technology which “penetrates the mind, filling it with a babel of 
distractions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/18/modern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload>
 … news items, mutually irrelevant bits of information, blasts of corybantic or 
sentimental music, continually repeated doses of drama that bring no catharsis, 
but merely create a craving for daily or even hourly emotional enemies”. He 
viewed music with suspicion but also with great respect, believing that when 
composed meaningfully, “after silence, that which comes nearest to expressing 
the inexpressible is music”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442573014337%2Fba3b878c-02eb-4617-b6b9-75d5a599b261-2060x1194.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World's%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Dacre%3A%20are%20we%20living%20Brave%20New%20World%27s%20nightmare%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjames-dacre-brave-new-world-theatre-dramatisation-aldous-huxley-nightmare-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442573014337%2Fba3b878c-02eb-4617-b6b9-75d5a599b261-2060x1194.jpeg>
 Brave New World: William Postlethwaite and Sophie Ward. Photograph: Manuel 
Harlan 
Brave New World review – a drama of present-day dystopia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/09/brave-new-world-review-james-dacre>
In all our productions at Royal and Derngate this season, music has played an 
important role in drawing an audience into the world of the play. Here we’ve 
collaborated withThese New Puritans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/these-new-puritans>, whose original score 
explores the themes of science and technology in the book. It conveys the 
dizzying scale of Huxley’s World State and adds a powerful new emotional 
dimension to his vision of dystopia. Their challenge has been both to argue for 
ways in which music can both suffocate and inspire, both quash human creativity 
and nourish it.

The book’s potential for the theatre also lies in the fact that – while they 
are rarely able to say so – the majority of its characters do strongly disagree 
with one another. Brave New World is full of incendiary, slippery debates which 
readily adapt to the stage. But the really powerful confrontation is the one 
between the play and the audience.

The challenge that our play presents to its audience concerns the here and 
now, asking how we live our lives today and how we treat one another within the 
conditions of our own Brave New World.Aldous Huxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/aldoushuxley> almost lost his sight as a 
young man following a rare eye disease, and vision became a major theme in his 
work. Here he asks us to look at ourselves and to consider what forces within 
our culture and conditioning stop us from seeing our world as it really is. And 
when we look more closely, will we see that 2015 has become a Brave New World?

 * Brave New World <http://theatrecloud.com/> is at Royal & Derngate, 
Northampton, until 26 September. Then touring until 5 December.
 