
John Griffith, who has died aged 91, was one of the leading public law 
scholars of the 20th century. Central to his work was his association with the 
London School of Economics, lasting almost all his academic life, from his 
arrival as an undergraduate in 1937 till his retirement as professor of public 
law in 1984. He took forward the method in public law developed there during 
the 1920s by Harold Laski, Ivor Jennings and William Robson, to the extent that 
the former director of the LSE,Lord Dahrendorf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/19/ralf-dahrendorf-obituary-lords-lse>
, described him as "the conscience of the school and guardian of its tradition 
in critical times".

However, though Griffith represented the last personal link with the radical 
socialist tradition that shaped the LSE in its founding years and exerted such 
influence over postwar politics, his was a singular, often eloquent, voice. In 
addition to writing many of the leading public law texts of the period, he 
produced occasional press articles, and was a consistent advocate of academic 
freedom.

In his accounts of public law, Griffith subverted the self-satisfied 
liberal-democratic view about the nature and functioning of the constitution, 
replacing it with a more realistic "what actually happens" account. This led to 
Principles of Administrative Law (1952, with Harry Street), the first textbook 
to be written on the subject, and to major studies of the workings of political 
institutions: Central Departments and Local Authorities (1966), Parliamentary 
Scrutiny of Government Bills (1974) and Parliament: Functions, Practice and 
Procedures (1989, with Michael Ryle). This type of cross-disciplinary, 
empirically informed legal study was far ahead of its time. In addition to 
offering new information to political scientists about the functioning of 
political institutions, it demanded that lawyers should question their standard 
accounts of the British constitution.

In common with his friend Ralph Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/feb/28/schools.labour>, Griffith had 
absorbed much of Laski's socialist radicalism, and his more explicitly 
political analyses tended to highlight the authoritarian nature of government 
and in particular the close political, social and class linkages of the elites 
in power. It was therefore hardly surprising that he advanced a radical 
critique of the role of the judiciary, especially when it strayed into the 
field of politics.

Griffith was condemned in certain circles for his criticism that the 
judiciary, drawn from the narrowest of social elites, was incapable of 
responding adequately to the challenge of social justice that underpinned the 
disputes they were being asked to resolve. But such censure often failed to 
recognise the historical and institutional frame of his analysis, which 
included the common law's traditional bias towards property rights protection 
and the fact that access to the courts has been restricted to all but a handful 
of wealthy people.

These views went into The Politics of the Judiciary (1977). Since it contained 
nothing that John had not been arguing over the previous 30 years, reaction to 
the book must have astonished him. It achieved immediate notoriety after the 
TLS review asserted that Griffith's line "ends up aligned with the 
Baader-Meinhof gang in believing that every criminal trial is categorically 
unjust". The review ensured maximum publicity for the book, which became a 
runaway bestseller, going through five editions and becoming standard reading 
for law students. It also caused Lord Denning in one of his public lectures in 
the 1980s to complain about "that man Griffith". John accepted the Denning tag 
as a badge of honour and was delighted when his students in Toronto during the 
1980s rewarded him with a T-shirt emblazoned with the logo.

Griffith's nonconformist strain also came to attention in the troubles at the 
LSE in the late 1960s, when he acted as counsel for students in disciplinary 
proceedings. It was less a matter of being on the students' side, he said, than 
of being against the high-handedness of the administration. His 
anti-authoritarianism was similarly evident in the role he played in founding 
the Council for Academic Freedom and Democracy.

Born in Cardiff into a Baptist family, John moved with his family at an early 
age to London, when his father, the Rev B Grey Griffith, became home secretary 
of the Baptist Missionary Society. He was educated at Taunton school in 
Somerset.

At the wartime LSE, which had been evacuated to Cambridge, Griffith met his 
wife, Barbara Garnet, a student of economic history and disciple of Eileen 
Power. They married after graduation in 1941. Influenced by Aldous Huxley's 
Ends and Means (1937), Griffith registered as a conscientious objector, serving 
as a field ambulanceman in the Middle East. But nagging doubts over the 
seriousness of the fascist threat and of the sacrifices being made by his 
comrades led him to apply for deregistration, after which he obtained a 
commission. He ended the war as a major in the Indian army.

After demobilisation, he was appointed lecturer at the University College of 
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, Aberystwyth, but returned to the 
LSE in 1948 as a lecturer in law. He was appointed to the chair in English law 
in 1959 and then, in 1970, to that of public law.

Shortly after his retirement from the LSE in 1984, Griffith was approached by 
academics at Manchester University to ask whether he would stand in an election 
for chancellor. The incumbent, the Duke of Devonshire, had just stepped down, 
and the authorities proposed to replace him with the Marchioness of Anglesey. 
But the Association of University Teachers noticed that there was provision for 
an election. Reassured that his chances of success were minimal, Griffith 
allowed his name to go forward. To his great surprise, he won and went on to 
serve a seven-year term with great dignity and propriety.

Griffith was a highly charismatic teacher, who genuinely liked the company of 
young adults, and inspired loyalty in many friends and colleagues. Above all, 
he was a ferociously independent character who loathed pomp and took a kind of 
pride in his modesty. Although he was awarded honorary doctorates by Edinburgh, 
York (in Toronto) and Manchester universities, and was elected fellow of the 
British Academy in 1977, he quashed attempts to produce a festschrift in his 
honour on retirement.

He unerringly maintained his political and intellectual stance in the face of 
changes that saw many on the left embrace rights discourse as a remedy to 
political issues. For Griffith, conflict remained at the heart of modern 
society and, since laws could be nothing other than statements of power 
relations, law could never provide a substitute for politics. The struggle for 
rights, he argued, remains political throughout, and legislation such as the 
Human Rights Act is merely "the statement of a political conflict pretending to 
be a resolution of it".

Like the legal scholar and philosopher Jeremy Bentham 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/info/jb.htm>, highly influential in the 
19th century, Griffith was scathing of attempts to refashion law as a 
metaphysical entity. The idea of "the rule of law", when extended beyond the 
need to ensure that government operates in accordance with the laws, is, he 
suggested, "a fantasy invented by Liberals of the old school in the late-19th 
century and patented by the Tories to throw a protective sanctity around 
certain legal and political institutions and principles which they wish to 
preserve at any cost". He despaired of the range of proposals for "radical 
constitutional change being advanced by a number of rather improbable people".

His healthy longevity owed much to the strength of his bond with Barbara, to 
whom he referred as "the centre that holds". She survives him, as do his 
children, Sarah, Adam and Ben, his five grandchildren and three 
great-grandchildren.

â€¢ John Aneurin Grey Griffith, legal scholar, born 14 October 1918; died 8 May 
2010
 