
5.27pm GMT 17:27  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, has fended off calls for government 
intervention to protect civilians in Syria by arguing that the House of 
Commons, and by implication Labour, are partly to blame for the plight of the 
country because of the vote to block military action against Bashar al-Assad in 
2013. (See 4.59pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live?page=with:block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889#block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
 * Jeremy Corbyn has written to Theresa May calling for an urgent effort to 
establish humanitarian corridors in Aleppo and a boost to Foreign Office 
resources to aid efforts for a ceasefire. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/corbyn-may-to-press-for-syria-crisis-aleppo-theresa-may>
 * The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, has called for the UK to keep 
tariff-free access to EU trade along with “reasonable” controls on immigration, 
saying Labour must play a full role in shaping “the battle of our times”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-must-fight-battle-of-our-times-over-hard-brexit-says-keir-starmer>
AsPeter Walker reports, defending the party’s decision to support the 
government in the article 50 vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-calls-for-detailed-brexit-plan-after-mps-vote-to-trigger-article-50>
, Starmer said mimicking the Liberal Democrats’ attempts to frustrate the exit 
from the EU would simply leave Labour unable to represent those who voted for 
Brexit. “Labour needs to be leading that battle,” Starmer said, speaking at 
Bloomberg’s HQ in central London. Standing back was not an option, he argued, 
saying: “This is real opposition in real time. By 2020, we will be living in a 
different world.” 
 * Theresa May is planning a shakeup of social care provision after Downing 
Street acknowledged services were under threat in some areas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/may-plans-social-care-shakeup-to-ease-pressure-on-councils>
 AsRowena Mason and Anushka Asthana report, the prime minister’s official 
spokeswoman said the issue was discussed in a cabinet meeting on Tuesday, with 
an agreement that this week’s local government settlement would contain 
measures to help ease the pressure.At the meeting, May also emphasised the 
“importance of finding a long-term sustainable way of addressing the issue”, 
raising the prospect of a more comprehensive shakeup. 
 * The head of the National Audit Office has declared that the government 
promises made to Nissan to help to persuade it to make a new investment in 
Sunderland do not amount to a “contingent liability”. In a letter to Andrew 
Tyrie, chair of the Commons Treasury committee, the NAO chief Sir Amyas Morse 
said: 
I have reviewed the contents of [the government letter to Nissan]. I have also 
received written assurances from the permanent secretary that there are no 
other letters to Nissan on this matter and that nothing was discussed in the 
relevant meetings that might be understood as an additional commitment by HM 
government. On that basis I am satisfied there is no identifiable contingent 
liability for the purpose of inquiry into whether there was an obligation to 
notify.

The government has refused to publish the letter, which was intended to 
reassure Nissan it would not lose out from Brexit, prompting claims that it 
might contain secret promises that could impose a cost on the taxpayer. Tyrie 
said that, in the light of Morse’s comment, he was asking the government to 
publish the letter.

 * Labour MPs are to express concern to the party leadership about the 
attendance of the chief whip, Nick Brown, at a Momentum conference where a 
motion was passed calling for the mandatory reselection of MPs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-chief-whip-nick-brown-momentum-reselection-meeting>
 * A top Channel 4 executive has warned that fake news could affect the next 
UK election, and urged the UK government to step in if Facebook and other 
internet firms do not do more to tackle the problem. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/13/fake-news-could-affect-next-uk-election-warns-channel-4-executive>
 * Philip Davies, a Conservative MP who faced heavy criticism after claiming 
that the justice system was skewed to discriminate against men, has been 
elected on to a parliamentary committee that scrutinises issues linked to 
women’s rights and equality. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850103ae4b077e98485083b%23block-5850103ae4b077e98485083b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.59pm GMT 16:59  <> 

Emergency debate on Syria and Aleppo - Summary

Here are the key points from the Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> debate.

 * Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, suggested that the House of Commons 
itself was partly to blame for the plight of Syria. In his speech at the end of 
a two-hour emergency debate, in which the government came under sustained and 
emotional criticism, mostly from Labour, for not doing more to help civilians 
in Aleppo, Johnson argued that the Commons vote against military intervention 
against Bashar al-Assad in 2013 led to Britain losing influence and Russia 
getting the chance to become the dominant force in the Syrian civil war. He 
told MPs: 
There is another inescapable reality that I’m afraid members must accept, 
which is on August 29 2013, this House voted by 13 votes not to use force 
against Assad even after he had poisoned hundreds of his people with sarin 
nerve gas.

We as a House of Commons, we as a country, we vacated that space into which 
Russia stepped, beginning its own bombing campaign on behalf of Assad.

Ever since that vote, our ability to influence events in Syria or to protect 
civilians or compel the delivery of aid has been severely limited.

The dictator was left to do his worst, along with his allies Russia and Iran, 
and the bloodiest tragedy of the 21st century has since unfolded.

Cameron lost the vote on a proposal to bomb Assad in 2013 by 285 votes to 272 
after30 Conservatives and nine Lib Dems joined up with Labour and smaller 
opposition parties to vote against the coalition. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/08/mps-who-voted-against-syria-motion-full-list>

 * Johnson effectively ruled out using airdrops to deliver aid to civilians in 
Aleppo, saying it was not safe because transport aircraft would be attacked. He 
said that if circumstances changed he might reconsider, but he put the case 
against airdrops so strongly as to imply that a rethink was most unlikely. He 
told MPs: 
For air drops to be accurate they must be conducted at low level and low speed 
and Russia has deployed its most advanced jet fighters and surface-to-air 
missiles in Syria, which makes it impossible for us to carry out air drops 
without Russian permission.

Even if Russia were to give its consent, our aircraft would still have to fly 
over areas of Syria that are hotly contested by a multitude of armed groups, 
including Daesh and al-Qaida.

They would make every effort to shoot down a British plane and a lumbering, 
low-flying transport aircraft would be a sitting duck.

We came reluctantly to the conclusion that air drops over Syria under those 
conditions would prove too great a risk.

And when it comes to drones and other devices, we still face the problem that 
it is the Syrians and the Russians who control the airspace.

Of course it is possible that circumstances may change, so I will not rule out 
any option for delivering aid today but nor will I give false hope.

As things stand, we’d be risking the lives of our aircrew if we were to try to 
drop supplies into easternAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

 * He urged the Russians to stop supporting Assad. 
We are doing everything we can within the constraints that we face. I hope 
that Russia will see sense and join with us to secure the transition away from 
Assad, that is the only hope for a peaceful Syria. It’s up to them. It’s up to 
the Russians, it’s up to Iran. They have the future of Syria in their hands.

 * He strongly condemned the use of barrel bombs by the Syrian armed forces. 
Giving a graphic description of how they worked, he told MPs: 
Imagine a metal drum, filled with petrol and explosives, laced with nails and 
jagged shards of metal. These objects are loaded on board helicopters that then 
hover over civilian areas. The men on the helicopters simply light the fuses on 
the barrels before rolling them out of the door, leaving them to fall on the 
ground where they shred and incinerate any human being within range. There is 
no guidance system or targeting. Barrel bombs have no military purpose. They 
cannot be dropped near a frontline for fear of striking friendly forces. Their 
sole purpose is to murder civilians. And scores of these dreadful weapons are 
being used against the people of eastern Aleppo by Assad every day.

 * George Osborne used his first speech as a backbencher since being sacked as 
chancellor to say that Western reluctance to intervene was to blame for what 
was happening in Syria. 
I think we are deceiving ourselves in this Parliament if we believe that we 
have no responsibility for what has happened in Syria. The tragedy in Aleppo 
did not come out of a vacuum, it was created by a vacuum, a vacuum of western 
leadership, of American leadership, British leadership.

Osborne said that MPs had learnt from what happened in Iraq and Afghanistan 
the “price of intervention”. He went on:

But I think we have come to a point where it’s impossible to intervene 
anywhere, that we lack the political will as the west to intervene.

But I have some hope out of this terrible tragedy in Syria which is we are 
beginning to learn the price of not intervening.

We did not intervene in Syria. Tens of thousands of people have been killed as 
a result. Millions of refugees have been sent from their homes across the world.

We have allowed a terrorist state to emerge in the form of Isis which we are 
now trying to defeat.

Key allies like Lebanon and Jordan are destabilised. The refugee crisis has 
transformed the politics of Europe, allowed fascism to rise in eastern Europe, 
created extremist parties in western Europe and Russia, for the first time 
since Henry Kissinger kicked them out of the Middle East in the 1970s, is back 
as the decisive player in that region.

That is the price of not intervening.

 * The Labour MP John Woodcock said he felt “sick” at the thought of Ed 
Miliband celebrating his role in defeating the government on the Syria bombing 
vote in 2013. He said: 
I still feel sick at the idea of the then leader of the opposition going from 
that vote into the whips office, and congratulating himself and them on 
stopping a war, when look what is happening today and look what’s happened over 
the last three years. The slaughter shames us all.

 * The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw said it was “highly probable” that Russia 
intervened in the EU referendum.He was making a point about how the west had to 
take the threat from Russia more seriously. Russia’s intervention in Syria was 
partly motivated by a “deliberate” desire to drive refugees into Europe to 
destabilise the west, he said. He went on: 
And when will we admit that what Putin can’t achieve militarily, he is already 
achieving using cyber and propaganda warfare ... I don’t think we have even 
begun to wake up to what Russia is doing when it comes to cyberwar, not only 
their interference, now proven, in the American presidential campaign, probably 
in our own referendum, we don’t have the evidence for that yet, but I think 
it’s highly probable. Certainly the French presidential elections, they will be 
involved, and there are already serious concerns in the German secret service 
that Russia is already interfering in the elections coming up. We’ve got to 
wake up to this.
 Boris Johnson in the Commons. Photograph: BBC News Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501bc6e4b077e984850889%23block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.21pm GMT 16:21  <> 

In a post on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pestonitv/posts/1750549551936449> ITV’s Robert Peston 
says today’s Syria debate was a good illustration of the “abject powerlessness 
of national governments - our government - in the face of international crises”.
Robert Peston (@Peston) 
.@BorisJohnson <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson>: "I hope Russia will see 
sense" and turn against Assad. Hmmm.
 <https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808697862246793216> December 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808697862246793216> Robert Peston (@Peston) 
What chance that @BorisJohnson <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson> & UK can 
shame Russia into doing right thing in#syria 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/syria?src=hash> and #Aleppo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Aleppo?src=hash>? https://t.co/uXevdTnA3l 
<https://t.co/uXevdTnA3l>
 <https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808705571151106048> December 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808705571151106048> 
Updated at 4.21pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1%23block-58501f9ee4b0e02f2b16bbb1&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.56pm GMT 15:56  <> 

Here is Jeremy Corbyn’s letter to Theresa May.
 Jeremy Corbyn’s letter to Theresa May Photograph: Labour  Jeremy Corbyn’s 
letter to Theresa May Photograph: Labour Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c%23block-5850194de4b0e02f2b16bb8c&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.51pm GMT 15:51  <> 

I will post a summary of the debate shortly.

In the meantime, Jeremy Corbyn has written to Theresa May calling for a 
“concerted effort to achieve a UN-led ceasefire”.

A spokesman for Corbyn said:

Jeremy has repeatedly condemned the Russian military intervention and bombing 
campaign in Syria and called for an independent investigation of evidence of 
war crimes.Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has called for 
urgent talks to achieve a negotiated political settlement involving the main 
parties to the conflict, along with the regional and international intervening 
powers - and he has written to the Prime Minister today calling for a concerted 
effort to achieve a UN-led ceasefire and UN-brokered humanitarian corridors.

This statement is intended to address complaints that Corbyn has not been 
particularly willing to condemn Russia for its conduct in Syria. 
<https://leftfootforward.org/2016/10/jeremy-corbyn-must-break-silence-on-assad-and-russian-bombings/>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585017ffe4b077e984850874%23block-585017ffe4b077e984850874&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.40pm GMT 15:40  <> 

Labour’s Alison McGovern says she will live with her vote in 2013 for the rest 
of life. What will the government do to put pressure on Russia, she asks.

Johnson says he hopes Russia will see sense and put pressure on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> for a ceasefire.

The Russians and Iranians should do the right thing, abandon their puppet and 
move forward, he says.

And that’s it.

The motion, which simply says the Commons has “considered international action 
to protect civiliansAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> and more 
widely across Syria”, gets passed by acclamation.

On a point of order Andrew Mitchell asks if the government can come forward to 
give MPs a vote on a substantive motion.

John Bercow, the Speaker, says the government is free to do that if it wants.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850159ee4b077e984850865%23block-5850159ee4b077e984850865&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.36pm GMT 15:36  <> 

Johnson says the Commons voted in 2013, by 13 votes, not to launch air strikes 
against Assad.

He says that created a space for Russia. Ever since then the UK’s influence 
has been extremely limited.

The dictator was left to do his worst.

Johnson says even if Assad regains control of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, two thirds of the country will be 
out of is control. The “tyrant” will still not be in control.

He says the war could go on for much longer.

He asks whether Russia and Iran want to stand behind Assad “as the tyrant 
reduces his country to ashes”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585014fae4b025760cee4716%23block-585014fae4b025760cee4716&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.33pm GMT 15:33  <> 

Labour’s Rosena Allin-Khan says she feels guilty about being able to go home 
tonight and see her children. Britain should not be doing nothing.

She says MPs have called over and over again for humanitarian airdrops. They 
were told that was a last resort. But the time for last resorts has now gone, 
she says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500954e4b025760cee46c9%23block-58500954e4b025760cee46c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.33pm GMT 15:33  <> 

Johnson says many Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs 
spoke in favour of airdrops.

The Foreign Office has looked at this case for them carefully, he says.

But he says it has come up against serious problems.

Labour’s Ben Bradshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ben-bradshaw> says 
Johnson sounds like the Conservative ministers who said nothing could be done 
in Bosnia in the 1990s.

Johnson says it was Bradshaw’s party that whipped its MPs to vote against 
military intervention in 2013.

He says Russia would have to give permission for airdrops. And, even if Russia 
did give permission, the planes would have to fly over areas where they could 
be attacked by extremists. Slow cargo planes would be “sitting ducks”, he says.

He says the same problem applies to drones.

But he says circumstances could change. He is not ruling out airdrops for ever.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585013fae4b025760cee4711%23block-585013fae4b025760cee4711&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.29pm GMT 15:29  <> 

Johnson says today Russia is blocking the evacuation of citizens from areas it 
is attacking.

At the EU the UK has been arguing for sanctions to be tightened, he says.

He says on Saturday he broke off a trip to the Middle East to discuss this 
with the American secretary of state, John Kerry. But Kerry’s efforts have 
failed. President Assad refuses to let the UN deliver food toAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, even though there are warehouses 
with food within easy reach.

He says the Russians should institute an immediate ceasefire.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850134de4b077e984850857%23block-5850134de4b077e984850857&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.26pm GMT 15:26  <> 

Johnson says the UK has tried to get a resolution passed at the UN for the 
ceasefire. That was vetoed by Russia, he says.

A second resolution, for a seven-day ceasefire, was vetoed by Russia and China.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61%23block-585012d6e4b0e02f2b16bb61&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.24pm GMT 15:24  <> 

Johnson recalls how Assad “tightened the noose” around Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

It was sealed off on 7 July. The last food was delivered on 10 November. And 
the last hospital was attacked on 19 November.

He describes what a barrel bomb is like. People light fuses before pushing 
them out of helicopters. They shred the people on the ground. There is no 
targeting. They have no military justification. They are just there to murder 
civilians, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d%23block-5850122fe4b0e02f2b16bb5d&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.21pm GMT 15:21  <> 

Boris Johnson's speech

Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, is speaking now.

He says he agrees with much of what has been said in the debate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585011ece4b077e984850849%23block-585011ece4b077e984850849&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.21pm GMT 15:21  <> 

Patrick Grady, the SNP’s international development spokesman, says the SNP 
have repeatedly called for aid drops. The government said that would be a 
matter of last resort. But what was the penultimate resort?

Updated at 3.25pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-585010dce4b025760cee4700%23block-585010dce4b025760cee4700&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.15pm GMT 15:15  <> 

The SNP’s Tommy Sheppard says that when the Commons voted for air strikes 
against Islamic State inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> last 
year, MPs were told that would help the moderate opposition. That did not 
happen. And MPs were told Britain would have more influence. That did not 
happen either, he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f%23block-58500f98e4b0e02f2b16bb4f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.10pm GMT 15:10  <> 

Labour’s Mary Creagh says the Commons vote against military action in 2013 has 
had significant consequences. It created the space for Russia to intervene, she 
says.

She asks what Theresa May will do when EU leaders discuss Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> at their summit on Thursday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42%23block-58500e1de4b0e02f2b16bb42&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.02pm GMT 15:02  <> 

Plaid Cymru’s Hywel Williams says the BBC is reporting that 82 civilians were 
shot on sight in eastern Aleppo. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-38301629>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johnson%20says%202013%20vote%20means%20MPs%20partly%20to%20blame%20for%20Syria's%20plight%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Flabour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3%23block-58500d05e4b025760cee46e3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, has fended off calls for government 
intervention to protect civilians in Syria by arguing that the House of 
Commons, and by implication Labour, are partly to blame for the plight of the 
country because of the vote to block military action against Bashar al-Assad in 
2013. (See 4.59pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live?page=with:block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889#block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
 * Jeremy Corbyn has written to Theresa May calling for an urgent effort to 
establish humanitarian corridors in Aleppo and a boost to Foreign Office 
resources to aid efforts for a ceasefire. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/corbyn-may-to-press-for-syria-crisis-aleppo-theresa-may>
 * The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, has called for the UK to keep 
tariff-free access to EU trade along with “reasonable” controls on immigration, 
saying Labour must play a full role in shaping “the battle of our times”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-must-fight-battle-of-our-times-over-hard-brexit-says-keir-starmer>
AsPeter Walker reports, defending the party’s decision to support the 
government in the article 50 vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-calls-for-detailed-brexit-plan-after-mps-vote-to-trigger-article-50>
, Starmer said mimicking the Liberal Democrats’ attempts to frustrate the exit 
from the EU would simply leave Labour unable to represent those who voted for 
Brexit. “Labour needs to be leading that battle,” Starmer said, speaking at 
Bloomberg’s HQ in central London. Standing back was not an option, he argued, 
saying: “This is real opposition in real time. By 2020, we will be living in a 
different world.” 
 * Theresa May is planning a shakeup of social care provision after Downing 
Street acknowledged services were under threat in some areas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/may-plans-social-care-shakeup-to-ease-pressure-on-councils>
 AsRowena Mason and Anushka Asthana report, the prime minister’s official 
spokeswoman said the issue was discussed in a cabinet meeting on Tuesday, with 
an agreement that this week’s local government settlement would contain 
measures to help ease the pressure.At the meeting, May also emphasised the 
“importance of finding a long-term sustainable way of addressing the issue”, 
raising the prospect of a more comprehensive shakeup. 
 * The head of the National Audit Office has declared that the government 
promises made to Nissan to help to persuade it to make a new investment in 
Sunderland do not amount to a “contingent liability”. In a letter to Andrew 
Tyrie, chair of the Commons Treasury committee, the NAO chief Sir Amyas Morse 
said: 
I have reviewed the contents of [the government letter to Nissan]. I have also 
received written assurances from the permanent secretary that there are no 
other letters to Nissan on this matter and that nothing was discussed in the 
relevant meetings that might be understood as an additional commitment by HM 
government. On that basis I am satisfied there is no identifiable contingent 
liability for the purpose of inquiry into whether there was an obligation to 
notify.

The government has refused to publish the letter, which was intended to 
reassure Nissan it would not lose out from Brexit, prompting claims that it 
might contain secret promises that could impose a cost on the taxpayer. Tyrie 
said that, in the light of Morse’s comment, he was asking the government to 
publish the letter.

 * Labour MPs are to express concern to the party leadership about the 
attendance of the chief whip, Nick Brown, at a Momentum conference where a 
motion was passed calling for the mandatory reselection of MPs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-chief-whip-nick-brown-momentum-reselection-meeting>
 * A top Channel 4 executive has warned that fake news could affect the next 
UK election, and urged the UK government to step in if Facebook and other 
internet firms do not do more to tackle the problem. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/13/fake-news-could-affect-next-uk-election-warns-channel-4-executive>
 * Philip Davies, a Conservative MP who faced heavy criticism after claiming 
that the justice system was skewed to discriminate against men, has been 
elected on to a parliamentary committee that scrutinises issues linked to 
women’s rights and equality. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 
Here are the key points from the Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> debate.

 * Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, suggested that the House of Commons 
itself was partly to blame for the plight of Syria. In his speech at the end of 
a two-hour emergency debate, in which the government came under sustained and 
emotional criticism, mostly from Labour, for not doing more to help civilians 
in Aleppo, Johnson argued that the Commons vote against military intervention 
against Bashar al-Assad in 2013 led to Britain losing influence and Russia 
getting the chance to become the dominant force in the Syrian civil war. He 
told MPs: 
There is another inescapable reality that I’m afraid members must accept, 
which is on August 29 2013, this House voted by 13 votes not to use force 
against Assad even after he had poisoned hundreds of his people with sarin 
nerve gas.

We as a House of Commons, we as a country, we vacated that space into which 
Russia stepped, beginning its own bombing campaign on behalf of Assad.

Ever since that vote, our ability to influence events in Syria or to protect 
civilians or compel the delivery of aid has been severely limited.

The dictator was left to do his worst, along with his allies Russia and Iran, 
and the bloodiest tragedy of the 21st century has since unfolded.

Cameron lost the vote on a proposal to bomb Assad in 2013 by 285 votes to 272 
after30 Conservatives and nine Lib Dems joined up with Labour and smaller 
opposition parties to vote against the coalition. 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/08/mps-who-voted-against-syria-motion-full-list>

 * Johnson effectively ruled out using airdrops to deliver aid to civilians in 
Aleppo, saying it was not safe because transport aircraft would be attacked. He 
said that if circumstances changed he might reconsider, but he put the case 
against airdrops so strongly as to imply that a rethink was most unlikely. He 
told MPs: 
For air drops to be accurate they must be conducted at low level and low speed 
and Russia has deployed its most advanced jet fighters and surface-to-air 
missiles in Syria, which makes it impossible for us to carry out air drops 
without Russian permission.

Even if Russia were to give its consent, our aircraft would still have to fly 
over areas of Syria that are hotly contested by a multitude of armed groups, 
including Daesh and al-Qaida.

They would make every effort to shoot down a British plane and a lumbering, 
low-flying transport aircraft would be a sitting duck.

We came reluctantly to the conclusion that air drops over Syria under those 
conditions would prove too great a risk.

And when it comes to drones and other devices, we still face the problem that 
it is the Syrians and the Russians who control the airspace.

Of course it is possible that circumstances may change, so I will not rule out 
any option for delivering aid today but nor will I give false hope.

As things stand, we’d be risking the lives of our aircrew if we were to try to 
drop supplies into easternAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

 * He urged the Russians to stop supporting Assad. 
We are doing everything we can within the constraints that we face. I hope 
that Russia will see sense and join with us to secure the transition away from 
Assad, that is the only hope for a peaceful Syria. It’s up to them. It’s up to 
the Russians, it’s up to Iran. They have the future of Syria in their hands.

 * He strongly condemned the use of barrel bombs by the Syrian armed forces. 
Giving a graphic description of how they worked, he told MPs: 
Imagine a metal drum, filled with petrol and explosives, laced with nails and 
jagged shards of metal. These objects are loaded on board helicopters that then 
hover over civilian areas. The men on the helicopters simply light the fuses on 
the barrels before rolling them out of the door, leaving them to fall on the 
ground where they shred and incinerate any human being within range. There is 
no guidance system or targeting. Barrel bombs have no military purpose. They 
cannot be dropped near a frontline for fear of striking friendly forces. Their 
sole purpose is to murder civilians. And scores of these dreadful weapons are 
being used against the people of eastern Aleppo by Assad every day.

 * George Osborne used his first speech as a backbencher since being sacked as 
chancellor to say that Western reluctance to intervene was to blame for what 
was happening in Syria. 
I think we are deceiving ourselves in this Parliament if we believe that we 
have no responsibility for what has happened in Syria. The tragedy in Aleppo 
did not come out of a vacuum, it was created by a vacuum, a vacuum of western 
leadership, of American leadership, British leadership.

Osborne said that MPs had learnt from what happened in Iraq and Afghanistan 
the “price of intervention”. He went on:

But I think we have come to a point where it’s impossible to intervene 
anywhere, that we lack the political will as the west to intervene.

But I have some hope out of this terrible tragedy in Syria which is we are 
beginning to learn the price of not intervening.

We did not intervene in Syria. Tens of thousands of people have been killed as 
a result. Millions of refugees have been sent from their homes across the world.

We have allowed a terrorist state to emerge in the form of Isis which we are 
now trying to defeat.

Key allies like Lebanon and Jordan are destabilised. The refugee crisis has 
transformed the politics of Europe, allowed fascism to rise in eastern Europe, 
created extremist parties in western Europe and Russia, for the first time 
since Henry Kissinger kicked them out of the Middle East in the 1970s, is back 
as the decisive player in that region.

That is the price of not intervening.

 * The Labour MP John Woodcock said he felt “sick” at the thought of Ed 
Miliband celebrating his role in defeating the government on the Syria bombing 
vote in 2013. He said: 
I still feel sick at the idea of the then leader of the opposition going from 
that vote into the whips office, and congratulating himself and them on 
stopping a war, when look what is happening today and look what’s happened over 
the last three years. The slaughter shames us all.

 * The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw said it was “highly probable” that Russia 
intervened in the EU referendum.He was making a point about how the west had to 
take the threat from Russia more seriously. Russia’s intervention in Syria was 
partly motivated by a “deliberate” desire to drive refugees into Europe to 
destabilise the west, he said. He went on: 
And when will we admit that what Putin can’t achieve militarily, he is already 
achieving using cyber and propaganda warfare ... I don’t think we have even 
begun to wake up to what Russia is doing when it comes to cyberwar, not only 
their interference, now proven, in the American presidential campaign, probably 
in our own referendum, we don’t have the evidence for that yet, but I think 
it’s highly probable. Certainly the French presidential elections, they will be 
involved, and there are already serious concerns in the German secret service 
that Russia is already interfering in the elections coming up. We’ve got to 
wake up to this.
 Boris Johnson in the Commons. Photograph: BBC News  
In a post on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pestonitv/posts/1750549551936449> ITV’s Robert Peston 
says today’s Syria debate was a good illustration of the “abject powerlessness 
of national governments - our government - in the face of international crises”.
Robert Peston (@Peston) 
.@BorisJohnson <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson>: "I hope Russia will see 
sense" and turn against Assad. Hmmm.
 <https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808697862246793216> December 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808697862246793216> Robert Peston (@Peston) 
What chance that @BorisJohnson <https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson> & UK can 
shame Russia into doing right thing in#syria 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/syria?src=hash> and #Aleppo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Aleppo?src=hash>? https://t.co/uXevdTnA3l 
<https://t.co/uXevdTnA3l>
 <https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808705571151106048> December 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Peston/status/808705571151106048>  
Here is Jeremy Corbyn’s letter to Theresa May.
 Jeremy Corbyn’s letter to Theresa May Photograph: Labour  Jeremy Corbyn’s 
letter to Theresa May Photograph: Labour  
I will post a summary of the debate shortly.

In the meantime, Jeremy Corbyn has written to Theresa May calling for a 
“concerted effort to achieve a UN-led ceasefire”.

A spokesman for Corbyn said:

Jeremy has repeatedly condemned the Russian military intervention and bombing 
campaign in Syria and called for an independent investigation of evidence of 
war crimes.Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> has called for 
urgent talks to achieve a negotiated political settlement involving the main 
parties to the conflict, along with the regional and international intervening 
powers - and he has written to the Prime Minister today calling for a concerted 
effort to achieve a UN-led ceasefire and UN-brokered humanitarian corridors.

This statement is intended to address complaints that Corbyn has not been 
particularly willing to condemn Russia for its conduct in Syria. 
<https://leftfootforward.org/2016/10/jeremy-corbyn-must-break-silence-on-assad-and-russian-bombings/>
 
Labour’s Alison McGovern says she will live with her vote in 2013 for the rest 
of life. What will the government do to put pressure on Russia, she asks.

Johnson says he hopes Russia will see sense and put pressure on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> for a ceasefire.

The Russians and Iranians should do the right thing, abandon their puppet and 
move forward, he says.

And that’s it.

The motion, which simply says the Commons has “considered international action 
to protect civiliansAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> and more 
widely across Syria”, gets passed by acclamation.

On a point of order Andrew Mitchell asks if the government can come forward to 
give MPs a vote on a substantive motion.

John Bercow, the Speaker, says the government is free to do that if it wants.
 
Johnson says the Commons voted in 2013, by 13 votes, not to launch air strikes 
against Assad.

He says that created a space for Russia. Ever since then the UK’s influence 
has been extremely limited.

The dictator was left to do his worst.

Johnson says even if Assad regains control of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, two thirds of the country will be 
out of is control. The “tyrant” will still not be in control.

He says the war could go on for much longer.

He asks whether Russia and Iran want to stand behind Assad “as the tyrant 
reduces his country to ashes”.
 
Labour’s Rosena Allin-Khan says she feels guilty about being able to go home 
tonight and see her children. Britain should not be doing nothing.

She says MPs have called over and over again for humanitarian airdrops. They 
were told that was a last resort. But the time for last resorts has now gone, 
she says.
 
Johnson says many Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs 
spoke in favour of airdrops.

The Foreign Office has looked at this case for them carefully, he says.

But he says it has come up against serious problems.

Labour’s Ben Bradshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ben-bradshaw> says 
Johnson sounds like the Conservative ministers who said nothing could be done 
in Bosnia in the 1990s.

Johnson says it was Bradshaw’s party that whipped its MPs to vote against 
military intervention in 2013.

He says Russia would have to give permission for airdrops. And, even if Russia 
did give permission, the planes would have to fly over areas where they could 
be attacked by extremists. Slow cargo planes would be “sitting ducks”, he says.

He says the same problem applies to drones.

But he says circumstances could change. He is not ruling out airdrops for ever.
 
Johnson says today Russia is blocking the evacuation of citizens from areas it 
is attacking.

At the EU the UK has been arguing for sanctions to be tightened, he says.

He says on Saturday he broke off a trip to the Middle East to discuss this 
with the American secretary of state, John Kerry. But Kerry’s efforts have 
failed. President Assad refuses to let the UN deliver food toAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, even though there are warehouses 
with food within easy reach.

He says the Russians should institute an immediate ceasefire.
 
Johnson says the UK has tried to get a resolution passed at the UN for the 
ceasefire. That was vetoed by Russia, he says.

A second resolution, for a seven-day ceasefire, was vetoed by Russia and China.
 
Johnson recalls how Assad “tightened the noose” around Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.

It was sealed off on 7 July. The last food was delivered on 10 November. And 
the last hospital was attacked on 19 November.

He describes what a barrel bomb is like. People light fuses before pushing 
them out of helicopters. They shred the people on the ground. There is no 
targeting. They have no military justification. They are just there to murder 
civilians, he says.
 
Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, is speaking now.

He says he agrees with much of what has been said in the debate.
 
Patrick Grady, the SNP’s international development spokesman, says the SNP 
have repeatedly called for aid drops. The government said that would be a 
matter of last resort. But what was the penultimate resort?
 
The SNP’s Tommy Sheppard says that when the Commons voted for air strikes 
against Islamic State inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> last 
year, MPs were told that would help the moderate opposition. That did not 
happen. And MPs were told Britain would have more influence. That did not 
happen either, he says.
 
Labour’s Mary Creagh says the Commons vote against military action in 2013 has 
had significant consequences. It created the space for Russia to intervene, she 
says.

She asks what Theresa May will do when EU leaders discuss Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> at their summit on Thursday.
 
Plaid Cymru’s Hywel Williams says the BBC is reporting that 82 civilians were 
shot on sight in eastern Aleppo. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-38301629>
 