
In the mini series of the Robert Ludlum novel The Hades Factor, actress 
Anjelica Huston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston> plays the 
President of the United States, alongside Stephen Dorff and Mira Sorvino. 'You 
could get very attached to playing a President,' she says in a husky drawl that 
always seems to be on the brink of a dark giggle or a thunderstorm. 'Everyone 
runs around, opens doors for you. Let's just say I had a really good time, I 
got a little too comfortable.' Does Huston think that The Hades Factor, which 
depicts the world crumbling under the onslaught of bio-warfare and terrorism, 
plays on our global paranoia? 'I don't think it's paranoia,' she says. 'I think 
it's very palpable and real. The world is such a dire place right now. I don't 
think I'm alone in thinking that nothing is scarier than reality.'

Huston won an Oscar for 1985's Prizzi's Honour, and was nominated twice more 
for Enemies: A Love Story and The Grifters. Her father was the infamous alpha 
male director John Huston, the Ernest Hemingway of cinema. A past partner for 
many years was Jack Nicholson (she is now married to sculptor Robert Graham Jr, 
with whom she lives in California). All this would seem to make Huston bona 
fide Hollywood royalty. She laughs. 'Hollywood royalty? That seems to be a 
contradiction in terms.' The story goes that Huston spent many years in her 
father's shadow, is that true? 'Not really in his shadow so much as very 
dominated by him,' says Huston. 'He was a very strong man, and that was 
difficult for me. I've always been a bit rebellious.'

Huston has often been cast in 'embodiment of evil' roles, most famously in The 
Addams Family. 'I like it,' she chuckles. 'I command the little ones' respect.' 
Playing the President in The Hades Factor, was she afraid that her 'strong 
woman' might automatically be perceived as a bitch? 'That's the cliche of women 
in the workplace,' says Huston. 'A man is strong, he's tough; a woman is strong 
- she's a bitch. I would hope that given the fact we're in 2006 that kind of 
mythology might be dying.' At 55, Huston doesn't care to be termed an older 
actress. 'I don't even think of myself as an older person - call me an older 
person when I'm in my seventies!' What about the many other Hollywood actresses 
who have remarked on how difficult it becomes to find decent roles, indeed any 
work at all, as they get older? 'That's may be true for a lot of people,' says 
Huston. 'But I think it's up to you to reinvent, and be a little inventive.'

Huston feels that the real problem is that there are barely any decent roles 
for anyone, male, female, young or old, these days. 'All I'm seeing are 
animation films and voiceover work.'

So, what does she make of modern-day celebrity culture? 'It's all hot air,' 
says Huston. 'It's one thing to be famous and have a following, and another not 
to be able to have a baby in your own country, and have to go to Namibia, like 
Angelina Jolie.' Huston sighs. 'I just feel sorry for these kids - poor little 
Britney Spears can't drive around with her baby without getting photographed 
dropping it or something. It's just too much, too much attention, all directed 
at very young people who don't know to deal with it.' How would Huston deal 
with it? 'Oh, I don't know,' she chuckles. 'Run away to Namibia?'

Â· The Hades Factor starts tonight at 9pm on Sky One
 