
The largest African-American theatre company in the US has suspended its 
artistic output and cut its full-time workforce by more than a third on account 
of a cash crisis.

According to the Star Tribune, Penumbra Theatre 
<http://penumbratheatre.org/content/blogcategory/21/43/>, a 250-seater in St 
Paul, Minnesota, has laid off six of its 16 full-time members, including its 
associate artistic director,in a bid to reduce its annual budget by $800,000 
(£502,850) 
<http://www.startribune.com/entertainment/stageandarts/168704686.html>. While 
the company hope to raise the funds for a musical in March – reportedly 
$340,000 – they will not programme any new work in the interim.

Artistic director Lou Bellamy <http://penumbratheatre.org/content/view/49/14/> 
told the paper that the company, which he founded in 1976, was facing "an 
immediate cash-flow challenge", after incurring a shortfall of $500,000 last 
year, despite a 35% increase in ticket revenue.

As a result, Penumbra has already cancelled two productions due this year 
<http://www.startribune.com/entertainment/stageandarts/135139333.html?refer=y>, 
Kara Lee Cothron's Julius By Design and Pearl Clage's Bourbon at the Border, 
saving around $350,000. When the cancellations were announced, managing 
director Chris Widdess said that the remainder of the shortfall would be made 
up "through other cuts".

Penumbra is one of only three professional African-American theatre companies 
in the US to offer a full season of performances, and wasonce the primary 
artistic home of twice Pulitzer prize-winning dramatist August Wilson 
<http://penumbratheatre.org/content/view/48/14/>. Its current output includes 
mainstage offerings, such as theNat King Cole musical I Wish You Love 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/theater-dance/in-i-wish-you-love-race-civil-rights-and-nat-king-cole/2011/06/06/AG078mOH_story.html>
 that the company toured to the Kennedy Center in Washington DC last year, new 
plays and education work, overseen by Bellamy's daughter.

Despite the latest cutbacks, Widdess says the company remains hopeful. "The 
funding environment is tough, especially when projections don't go to plan, but 
based on the response we're getting to date, we think we can do it."

"All of these decisions are painful," Bellamy told the Star Tribune.
 