
‘I will not compare my garden with others on Instagram.” I set myself lines 
and write them out on the blackboard in my study. I have fallen into that 
terrible trap of freaking out at other people’s gorgeous images of perfect 
fruit, veg and flowers. My garden is not full of these, ergo I am a bad 
gardener (albeit one drowning in raspberries).

I feel as if I’m going to have a Dr Winnicott 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Winnicott> moment here in the garden. 
Just as this English psychoanalyst and paediatrician gave us the idea of the 
“good-enough” mother, it’s perfectly fine, good even, to be a “good-enough” 
gardener. The garden shouldn’t rule you and you shouldn’t rule the garden. But 
you need a few rewards; if they have been thin on the ground this summer 
because the slugs ate your seedlings or the heat fried them or the fox rolled 
on top of them or a rat ran off with them (yup, all these and more this year), 
you can have another go. I intend to.

We are now entering the very final throes of sowing. August and early 
September mark the last window for this year. These are not crops to grow 
quickly to eat soon: it’s too late for that. These are crops to germinate 
quickly now, then grow slowly into autumn and winter. Summer crops are 
wonderful, but eating your own salad in winter feels special because it’s 
unexpected.

In August I make several sowings of swiss chard. These like to germinate in 
moist conditions. The seeds will sit and do nothing if the soil is too dry. 
Start them off either in modules where you can keep an eye on them, or 
somewhere there’s a little shade during the heat of the day. You can always 
transplant them to sunnier spots. On the whole, the white forms of swiss chard 
are hardier than the red and orange, and as these crops are going to sit all 
winter long, it’s worth harvesting the coloured varieties first.

Gnats, be gone! | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/13/pinguicula-protect-houseplants-from-gnats-alys-fowler>
From now till mid-September you can sow spicy salad leaves such as rocket, 
mizuna, frilly mustards, fat-leaf mustards such asRed Giant 
<http://www.seedaholic.com/mustard-red-giant.html> (be warned, this can take on 
wasabi-like heat if allowed to grow big), pak choi and choy sum. Often these 
will be sold as “spicy mix” cut-and-come-again. This is a cheap, easy way to 
amass the gang, but every one will do much better if you prick them out and 
give them individual space. They will grow rapidly. If the weather is hot and 
dry, they will need regular watering or else they will either bolt or become 
tough and too hot.

As all of these are in the brassica family, the flea beetle will be delighted. 
It’s always around at this time of year, so once you sow, cover with fleece or 
enviromesh. (Or accept lacy leaves, as they nibble holes into them.) A bad flea 
beetle attack will considerably impair growth.

For milder salad choices, try winter purslane (Claytonia perfoliata 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claytonia_perfoliata>), lamb’s lettuce and land 
cress (thevariegated one 
<http://www.plantsofdistinction.co.uk/salad-crops/salad-leaves/cress-variegated-land>
 from Seeds of Distinction is very pretty). There are also lettuces that can 
withstand the winter, even outside with a little protection from hard 
frosts and snow.Winter Density 
<http://www.organiccatalogue.com/p170/LETTUCE-Winter-Density/product_info.html> 
is a hardy little gem type and perfect for pots; for a larger-headed type,
Merveille de Quatre Saisons 
<https://www.sarahraven.com/veg_fruit/seeds/salad_seeds/lettuce_merveille_de_quatre_saisons.htm>
 is a reliable red-headed version.
 