
John Malone's US cable giant Liberty Global, which acquired Virgin Media in 
February for £15bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/06/virgin-media-takeover-john-malone-liberty-global>
, has sold its international TV content division, ChelloMedia, to AMC Networks 
for $1bn (£617m) in cash.

 The deal marks a major international expansion for AMC Networks, the US cable 
TV businessheaded by chief executive Josh Sapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2013/sep/27/breaking-bad-finale-amc-josh-sapan-advertising-week-new-york-video>
, which is best known for backing a string of hits including The Walking Dead, 
Mad Men and Breaking Bad.

ChelloMedia assets include the UK-headquartered ChelloZone 
<http://www.chellomedia.com/index.php?r=businesses/index>, which runs channels 
across Europe, the Middle East, Africa and Asia such as Extreme Sports Channel 
and preschool brand Jim Jam.

The deal will also see AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> take over 
the joint-venture partnerships ChelloMedia has with A+E Networks, which 
includes channels such as Bio, Military History and Lifetime, and CBS.

The CBS joint venture comprises seven entertainment channels including CBS 
Drama, CBS Action andCBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs> Reality.

Liberty Global <https://www.theguardian.com/media/liberty-global> said it 
expects to receive a full $1bn in cash proceeds from the deal, with the 
ChelloMedia assets making $451m in revenue in the year to 30 June.

"ChelloMedia is one of the largest international channel groups with 
distribution to more than 390 million households in 138 countries and I have no 
doubt that the management team will continue to build tremendous value as part 
of AMC," said Mike Fries, chief executive of Liberty Global. "For Liberty 
Global, this transaction … simplifies our business and allows us to focus on 
our core markets and more strategic programming opportunities."

Morgan Stanley acted as sole financial adviser to Liberty Global on the deal.

The publicly-listed AMC Networks is looking at future growth opportunities as 
two of its big three TV franchises – Mad Men and Breaking Bad – draw to a close.

"As AMC Networks has expanded internationally, we have had a great desire to 
do something we consider fundamentally strategic, which is to take our content 
and put it on channels we own," said Sapan. "This acquisition allows us to 
secure a large, global platform on which to distribute our increasingly 
successful original programming through a collection of strong, 
well-established and well-managed assets worldwide."

The company said that the deal provides "significant long range opportunities 
to distribute its popular original programming from AMC, IFC, Sundance Channel 
and WE tv across an expansive global footprint".

The global success of its franchises – The Walking Dead is the biggest-ever 
cable show in the US and has a massive global following – has led AMC to make 
the $1bn bet on controlling its own content on channels internationally.

Sapan said that running its shows on channels it also owns represents the 
"biggest and best opportunity we have" for growth in the longer term.

"We've been distributing the content we have been making globally with 
partners and we cherish those relations and we think they have been very strong 
and been very effective," said Sapan. "We do think as we examine what we do 
with content over the medium and longterm we will increase the bias we have to 
own which gives us the option to put the content where we choose.. and we 
prefer to own [where AMC shows are aired]".

However, AMC has more than 1,000 agreements with affiliate TV channels to air 
its shows - such as with Rupert Murdoch's Fox which airs the biggest-ever cable 
TV show in US history, AMC's The Walking Dead - some of which will eventually 
be allowed to lapse.

"On the content side the Walking Dead is distributed by Fox, we are very 
pleased with that relationship," he said. "We've found perhaps most 
significantly on the scripted side, but also on the unscripted side, there is 
an international appetite for [our shows]. We're pretty confident that what we 
are making and the material we are producing has an appetite outside the US and 
will continue to do so. An increased amount [of our shows] will go to our 
channels".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 