
Back in 2000 a working chef pushed out a brutally honest behind-the-scenes 
account of the restaurant trade. Part confessional memoir, part industry 
commentary, the work was primarily aimed at the line cooks, waiters and 
bartenders that inhabited the writer's New York working life. The book -Kitchen 
Confidential: Adventures in the Culinary Underbelly 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780747553557>
 - attracted rather more interest than its author, Anthony Bourdain, could have 
envisaged, and propelled him down a very different professional path.

Now, 10 years later, he's back with the long-awaited sequel Medium Raw (not 
withstanding the variousfood and travel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2001/nov/30/features11.g2> books 
published since) which documents his transition from chef to "traveller, writer 
and TV guy <http://blog.travelchannel.com/anthony-bourdain/>", heroin addict to 
doting father,dysfunctional misfit 
<http://splendidtable.publicradio.org/listings/100717/medium-raw-chapter-one.shtml>
 to food celebrity, as much as the term - and the phenomenon - probably still 
irritates him.

We extracted Kitchen Confidential back in 2000. This piece documents 
Bourdain's boyhood eureka food moment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2000/aug/12/features.weekend> - though for a 
fuller flavour of the book, Bourdain's style, and its impact, have a look at 
somereviews <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2000/aug/13/foodanddrink1>, 
features <http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3190/is_11_34/ai_60903538/> and
interviews 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/27/anthony-bourdain-chef-kitchen-confidential>
 with Bourdain at the time of its publicationand since 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2006/apr/30/foodanddrink.features8>.

But back to the present work. Kathryn Hughes reviews Medium Raw here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/jun/19/anthony-bourdain-food-writing>, 
and in this piece from the book, Bourdaindescribes his campaign of 
pyschological warfare against Ronald McDonald 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/12/anthony-bourdain-war-fast-food>
 in his attempts to turn his own daughter against the fast food culture. Not 
that he's got a problem with proper burgers:

"But if you are literally serving shit to children, then I've got no problem 
with a jury of your peers wiring your nuts to a car battery and feeding you the 
accumulated sweepings of the bottom of a monkey cage. In fact, I'll hold the 
spoon."


In case you hadn't noticed, he's not a man to mince his words. Put your 
questions to him (if you dare) and he'll be here at 2.30pm BST today to answer 
them.
 