
The London Press Club has halved its subscription fees in order to boost its 
membership. The club will now charge £40 a year for working journalists and £20 
for students and retired journalists.

Existing members who have paid their fees at the previous rate will have their 
memberships extended to October 2015.

Club chairman Doug Wills, the managing editor of the London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> and Independent 
titles, said: "After a fantastic year with events at venues from the royal 
courts of justice to the Brazilian embassy, I would like even more journalists 
to get involved with the press club in the coming year... It has never been 
easier or more affordable to join."

Under Wills, the club has shown a determination to return to its former 
glories. Founded in 1882, it was once patronised by hundreds of national 
newspaper journalists.

When I arrived in Fleet Street in 1969, it was located in Salisbury Court and 
attracted editors, reporters and sub-editors throughout the day and night - 
especially the night.

By the time it moved to Shoe Lane it was losing members, and with the 
newspapers' flight from Fleet Street it finally lost its home altogether. I 
understand Wills and his committee now have aspirations to re-establish 
permanent premises, licensed of course.

The club's next panel debate - about paying for online news (aka paywalls) - 
will take place on Tuesday (18 March) at theBritish Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library>. The result of a poll on 
the subject, by YouGov, will be revealed during the event.

Taking part will be Katie Vanneck-Smith, News UK's chief marketing officer; 
Zach Leonard, digital MD for the Indy and Standard; Nic Newman, digital 
strategist at the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism; and Kate 
Robertson, co-global president of Havas Worldwide.Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> will chair.

To reserve your place email opinionformers@yougov.com 
<mailto:opinionformers@yougov.com>. More details on subscriptions and events 
here <http://lpc.berkshireweb.org.uk/new-membership-rates-new-events/>
 