
I took an early morning stroll through the Olympic Park in east London with 
the intention of going to hear the dawn chorus, but predictably I got 
distracted by the flora. The wonderful planting done byNigel Dunnett et al 
<http://www.nigeldunnett.info/Londonolympicpark/> four years ago still works, 
and that in part is due to the wildlife that treats it as home. I walked 
through flocks of goldfinches and starlings and watched mistle thrushes warble 
and wrens gobble berries. The bees were just getting going as the sun warmed 
up; it’s a rich landscape for foraging.

One of the beds that worked particularly well was a simple combination of 
Origanum laevigatum ‘Herrenhausen’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1352> and Deschampsia cespitosa 
‘Goldtau’ <https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/5638/Tufted-hair-grass/Details>. The 
deschampsia flowerheads wafted about in the early morning sun and the oregano 
flopped about in all its pink glory. It was a delightful bed, not wide, just 
running alongside the path: simple, wildlife-friendly and arresting. It would 
make a good combination for a front garden bathed in sun with poor soil or 
alongside a gravel drive. Even once the long-flowering ‘Herrenhausen’ is over, 
the seedheads will hold their own. Between now and then the whole thing will be 
crowned in butterflies and bees.

These are nectar-rich flowers that are highly pollinator-friendly, 
particularly for butterflies. An alternative variety is the daintier, decidedly 
pinkerO. laevigatum ‘Hopleys’ 
<http://www.hopleys.co.uk/o/origanum-laevigatum-hopleys.html> . Another 
combination that would work isO. ‘Rosenkuppel’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/54017/Origanum-Rosenkuppel/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fcontext%3Db%25253D450%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526q%25253D%25252523all%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%252526r%25253Df%2525252Fplant_soil_type%2525252Floam%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26form-mode%3Dtrue%26page%3D47%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
, with purple-flushed, wine-coloured flowers, and the tufted fescueFestuca 
amethystina 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/32846/i-Festuca-amethystina-i/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fcontext%3Db%25253D20%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%252526r%25253Df%2525252Fplant_plant_type%2525252Fgrass-like%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26form-mode%3Dfalse%26plant_plant_type%3Df%252fplant_plant_type%252fgrass-like%26page%3D0%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
, which has purple flowerheads in early summer that ripen to summer blond as 
the season progresses.

Want ornamental plants for shady spots? Try these | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/ornamental-plants-for-shady-gardens-alys-fowler>
None of these origanums is edible, sadly. The leaves are aromatic and on a hot 
day you’ll smell them, but they amount to nothing in the kitchen. If you want 
to grow oregano for cooking, get hold of either straightO. vulgare 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/11923/i-Origanum-vulgare-i/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fherbs%3Faliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fherbs>
, aka marjoram or Greek oregano, orO. vulgare subsp hirtum 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/origanum-vulgare-subsp-hirtum>, which 
packs a much more significant punch. The latter is not that easy to find as a 
plant, so you may have to start it from seed. It will need a sheltered position 
over winter and resents terribly sitting in wet soil or shade. Sow from late 
winter to spring in seed compost, perhaps with some extra grit to improve 
drainage, at 10-13C, then keep the seedlings somewhere frost-free. Germination 
should take about two weeks.

If you’re feeling adventurous, try growing Syrian oregano (O. syriacum 
<http://www.kew.org/discover/news/plant-story-helping-conserve-origanum-syriacum>
), the hyssop of the Bible and the key ingredient inza’atar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/06/zaatar-recipes-bread-beans-mushrooms-yotam-ottolenghi>
. Again, you’ll have to start it from seed over winter and keep it somewhere 
frost-free and sunny, as it is tender. It works well in a pot and the leaves 
are deliciously pungent – a mixture of thyme and oregano.
 