
Mad Men returned to US cable channel AMC after a hiatus of nearly two years 
with 3.5 million viewers 
<http://www.amcnetworks.com/release_release_press.jsp?nodeid=6498>, its 
biggest-ever audience, on Sunday night.

The double bill of episodes to launch the hotly anticipated fifth season was 
21% up on the audience for the previous run, which began in July 2010.Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> season four 
averaged 2.3 million, with 2.4 million for the finale.

Mad Men has never been a really big rating show for AMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>. But the critical acclaim, Emmys and 
Golden Globe awards the 1960s period drama garnered opened the door for the 
cable channel to branch out from its traditional fare of movie repeats into 
more scripted series, including Breaking Bad, The Walking Dead and the US 
version of The Killing.

Zombie drama The Walking Dead is by some distance AMC's biggest ratings hit, 
with the season two finale attracting 9 million viewers 
<http://www.amcnetworks.com/release_release_press.jsp?nodeid=6490> earlier this 
month, the channel's best-ever figures. The second season average audience was 
6.9 million.

The Walking Dead's ratings compare respectably with those for shows on the US 
terrestrial networks, which have access to a far bigger potential audience.

On Sunday night CBS's The Good Wife had 9.3 million viewers, for instance.

Mad Men returns to UK TV on Tuesday night on Sky Atlantic from 9pm.

The fourth season launched on BBC4 with overnight figures of 355,000 viewers 
and a 1.9% audience share in September 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/09/tvratings-television?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

BBC4 is available in more than 25m UK homes, while Sky Atlantic can only be 
watched by BSkyB subscribers, who number just more than 10 million.

The ratings for Mad Men's Sky Atlantic debut are therefore likely to be well 
down on its BBC4 figures.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 