
It was billed as one of the star attractions of BSkyB's glitzy new TV channel, 
Sky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/06/sky-atlantic-mad-men-hbo>. But 
the fifth series of the critically acclaimed US drama Mad Men may be delayed 
until next year because of a financial dispute.

Production of the show is likely to be put back after AMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc>, the US cable network which broadcasts 
the show, has so far failed to strike a deal for the new season with producer 
Lionsgate or its creator Matthew Weiner.

Sky last year snatched the rights to the show from the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/30/bskyb-mad-men-bbc>, which 
broadcast its previous four series in the UK, andwhen Sky Atlantic launched 
earlier this year said it would return in August 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/05/sky-atlantic-launch-boardwalk-empire>
.

However, speculation is now mounting in the US that the fifth season will not 
be ready for broadcast until late autumn or January next year.

The show's star Jon Hamm, who plays Don Draper, recently described the series 
as "still in limbo" 
<http://insidetv.ew.com/2011/03/22/amc-likely-delaying-mad-men/>.

"Usually we start shooting in April or May, and it doesn't seem like it's 
happening now because the writers' room is not in place," said Hamm. "I don't 
know if it even exists."

AMC, which currently pays more than $2m an episode for the show, had not yet 
announced a new deal with either Lionsgate or Weiner, although an agreement may 
be imminent,the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/23/arts/television/mad-men-fifth-season-date-is-uncertain.html>
.

Weiner told Entertainment Weekly in January 
<http://insidetv.ew.com/2011/01/23/matthew-weiner-contract-mad-men/>: "They are 
fighting over a very lucrative property, and who is going to pay for it to get 
made; it's one of the biggest perils of success – everyone wants a piece of it 
now, and they are fighting over who is gonna get the biggest chunk."

BSkyB said: "Mad Men is an outstanding show and we look forward to bringing 
its next season to Sky customers soon after it airs in the US."

AMC has the rights to the show until the end of the next season, although 
Weiner's contract expired after season four, according to the New York Times.

Weiner has previously said: "I want the show to go on and on and on until it 
has worn out its welcome with viewers, and we can't think of anything more for 
the characters to do."

Fans of the show – and those rather closer involved – could be forgiven a 
sense of déjà vu.

The triple Emmy-winning drama was held up in 2008 following protracted 
contract negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/02/usa-television-series-mad-men?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in the runup to its third season.

Mad Men <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> usually 
returns for a new series on AMC in July, with the UK broadcast date of its 
fourth – and final – series on BBC4 brought forward to bring it closer to its 
US transmission.

Mad Men is one of the "marquee shows" of Sky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic>, which launched in February 
with other high-profile US imports including Martin Scorsese's Boardwalk Empire 
and David Simon's Treme.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 