
The good news for Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> fans is that US 
broadcaster AMC on Tuesday confirmed after weeks of speculation that the show 
will be returning for a fifth series. The bad news is that it won't be on air 
until 2012.

AMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> was responding to US media reports 
that negotiations with Mad Men creator Matt Weiner about renewing his deal were 
in trouble.

"AMC has officially authorised production of season five of Mad Men, 
triggering our option with [producer] Lionsgate," the US cable channel said in 
a statement. "While we are getting a later start than in years past due to 
ongoing, key non-cast negotiations, Mad Men will be back for a fifth season in 
early 2012."

New series of Mad Men usually premiere on AMC in July and earlier this year 
BSkyB, which snatched the UK rights from the BBC last year,had the fifth series 
pencilled in to run on Sky Atlantic in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/05/sky-atlantic-2011-highlights>.

However, earlier this month the New York Times reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/24/mad-men-season-five-delayed?INTCMP=SRCH>
 that negotiations between AMC, Weiner and Lionsgate were dragging on and that 
first transmission of the next series could slip back into 2012.

On Monday the entertainment industry news website Deadline Hollywood reported 
that talks over a two-year, $30m deal with Weiner were in danger of collapsing 
<http://www.deadline.com/2011/03/matt-weiners-talks-for-mad-men-mega-deal-could-collapse-over-cost-shaving/>
 because AMC and Lionsgate wanted to integrate product placement into the 
series, cut each episode by two minutes to run more ads, and axe two regular 
cast members to save money.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 