
Madonna has repeatedly criticised Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and said she is ashamed to be 
an American, in a performance and auction in Miami that raised more than $7.5m 
(£5.9m) for her Malawi foundation.

Images of the president-elect appeared behind her as she sang the line “You 
know that you’re toxic” from her cover of the Britney Spears hit.

The singer also revealed she had once been in Trump’s bed – for a magazine 
photoshoot when the tycoon was not at home. She took a shot at his “cheap 
sheets”, saying: “They won’t be Egyptian cotton because we all know how he 
feels about Muslims, don’t we?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx7O2JrEcbzg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx7O2JrEcbzg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx7O2JrEcbzg&media=>
 Madonna covers Toxic 
Madonna also spoke about the plight of Native Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans> and asked why their land 
was being destroyed. “It just really makes me feel ashamed – ashamed to be an 
American, ashamed to be a human being, really,” she said before performing her 
2003 hit American Life.

Madonna's art collection and more on sale at starry benefit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/02/madonna-art-collection-benefit-raising-malawi>
The benefit show, billed as “an evening of music, art and mischief”, saw 
Madonna revive her cabaret show, Tears of a Clown,first performed in Australia 
earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/11/madonna-clowns-around-at-melbourne-show-after-three-hour-delay>
.

It was one of the many parties held during Art Basel Miami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/art-basel-miami> Beach, the biggest art 
fair in North America, which attracts super-rich art collectors and celebrities 
from across the world. Guests, who paid at least $5,000 to attend, included 
Leonardo DiCaprio, Chris Rock, Dave Chappelle, former boyfriend Alex Rodriguez, 
Courtney Love and James Corden.

Before her hour-long performance, Madonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> auctioned pieces from her personal 
art collection, including a Tracey Emin print that sold for $550,000 and three 
Herb Ritts photographs from her 1985 wedding to Sean Penn that fetched $230,000.

Other lots included a Damien Hirst painting, a private performance by the 
magician David Blaine, who also attended, and a week-long stay at DiCaprio’s 
home in Palm Springs that went for $140,000.

Penn bid on several items when the auction stalled. At one point, Madonna 
walked into the audience, climbed on tables and gave one man a lap dance. She 
abruptly stood up at another point, grabbed the chair on which she had 
performed and said she also wanted to auction it, noting $600 could send a girl 
in Malawi to secondary school. The chair sold for $10,000.

Madonna adopted her 11-year-old son, David, from an orphanage in Malawi more 
than a decade ago. At the time, she said she didn’t know where Malawi was. 
David had pneumonia and malaria. His mother died in childbirth and his siblings 
were also dead.


He was at the event to introduce the singer, telling the audience: “I realise 
I’m one of the lucky ones.”

Madonna showed videos of Malawi, asking for help to build a paediatric surgery 
and intensive care unit at a hospital there. Half the population are under the 
age of 15, according to her foundation,Raising Malawi 
<http://www.raisingmalawi.org/#home>.

As well as political statements and corny clown jokes, Madonna lamented the 
fact she was “very single” and had not had sex for some time.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.
 