
Phil Smith, the British Horseracing Authority’s senior handicapper, has nearly 
a fortnight to pore over the 126 entries for the Grand National at Aintree on 9 
April before the weights are published on 16 February, but is already clear on 
one point at least.Many Clouds, last year’s winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/many-clouds-grand-national-leighton-aspell>
, will return to Aintree as the most plausible candidate for consecutive 
successes since Red Rum in the 1970s, and even top weight of 11st 10lb might 
not be enough to stop him.

Many Clouds gives Leighton Aspell back-to-back Grand National wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/many-clouds-grand-national-leighton-aspell>
The entry for this year’s National is the largest since 2008 and also includes 
Pineau De Re, the winner in 2014, and two former Gold Cup winners, Long Run and 
Lord Windermere. Silviniaco Conti, a dual winner of the King George VI Chase on 
Boxing Day, and Sir Des Champs, twice a winner at the Cheltenham Festival, are 
other intriguing entries, while in all, five of the first six home last season 
could return in April.

The Aintree <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> event is the one race 
of the year in which Smith is allowed to adjust his standard handicap ratings, 
in order to account for the unique nature of challenge. He is also able to 
compress the handicap, in effect allowing the best horses to line up on better 
terms than usual as an incentive for their owners to send them to Liverpool.

There is no certainty as yet about the horse that will head the handicap, but 
Many Clouds, on 166, currently has the highest official rating among the 
British-trained entries for the race. Oliver Sherwood’s nine-year-old was an 
impressive winner off a mark of 160 at Aintree last April, has been trained 
this season solely with a return to the National in mind and has continued to 
show useful form in three starts so far.

'Plastic' Grand National at risk of becoming a parody, says Timeform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/15/plastic-grand-national-parody-timeform>
The second-season chaser Don Poli, one of the favourites for the Cheltenham 
Gold Cup in March, is another possible top weight, having beaten Many Clouds by 
four lengths over the Mildmay course at Aintree in December, when he was 
getting 5lb from the National winner. Many Clouds was only 1lb below the top 
weight in last year’s race, however, and, given his course form, seems likely 
to be allotted 11st 10lb this time around.

“Many Clouds has run three times this season and none of his runs have been 
duff runs,” Smith said on Wednesday. “He’s been beaten by Smad Place and Don 
Poli, and he was giving Don Poli weight at the time, so there’s no disgrace 
about that. But the great thing about Many Clouds is that he’s still only nine 
and quite a few of the winners in previous years have been a little bit older. 
Pineau De Re, for instance, is 13 now; I’d like to get him into the race and I 
think he deserves to run in it as a previous winner, but on what figure?

“Many Clouds is not only the best winner in recent years but he’s also one of 
the youngest and I don’t think we’ve got to the bottom of him yet. To my eyes 
he was beaten through lack of fitness [behind Smad Place at Cheltenham last 
weekend] as opposed to lack of ability, as his jumping was fantastic most of 
the way. I don’t think he’s as inferior to Smad Place as the final result 
showed, so I think there’s a lot more to come from him.

“The best quality horse that I’ve dealt with who nearly came back and won [the 
National] was Hedgehunter, who was third in a Gold Cup, but with this one being 
only nine and campaigned with only one race in mind, he’s very, very 
interesting.”

Smith expects his most demanding puzzles to be set by two horses with Grade 
One victories to their name in the past but little recent form to pin them down.

“One of the first ones on my list to look at is Sir Des Champs [the runner-up 
in the 2013 Gold Cup],” Smith said, “and he’s probably going to be difficult 
because he was a very good horse, he isn’t as good now but the question is, by 
how much? It’s often horses like that which are most difficult, superstars of 
the past that have lost their way a little and I haven’t needed to give them a 
rating for a quite a while, and Long Run [the 2011 Gold Cup winner] will be 
another. They take the most time because you want to be fair by them but fair 
by all the other horses as well. Those are the two that look most like a bit of 
a googly.”

Few punters will be inclined to take a position on the National before the 
weights are published a week next Tuesday but Many Clouds is currently 
favourite to complete a rare double at a top price of 12-1. The Druids Nephew, 
who fell five out in last year’s race when still travelling strongly, is among 
four horses quoted at 25-1, alongside Don Poli, Silviniaco Conti and 
Shutthefrontdoor, who finished fifth under Tony McCoy last season.

Many Clouds gives Leighton Aspell back-to-back Grand National wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/many-clouds-grand-national-leighton-aspell>
Why Jeremy Kyle’s racing revolution is not just horsing around for ITV | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/03/jeremy-kyle-horse-racing-itv-coverage-rights> 