
William Hill issued a profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/23/william-hill-issues-profit-warning-after-cheltenham-and-online-losses>
 the week after the Cheltenham Festival, where a string of winning favourites 
left punters about £80m ahead on the week. And they may need to issue another 
after next Saturday’s Grand National, when Many Clouds, the 8-1 favourite, will 
have an outstanding chance to become the first horse towin the race for a 
second time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/grand-national-aintree> since 
Red Rum in 1974.

The National has been transformed since Ginger McCain’s exceptional chaser 
finished first, first, second, second and then first again in five renewals 
between 1973 and 1977. The fences are softer and the distance has been cut by 
nearly a quarter of a mile, but above all, the quality of the horses taking 
part, and thus the competitiveness of the race, has improved substantially. 
Few, if any, horses race from out of the handicap and all but a handful of the 
40 runners will go to post as plausible winners.

Many Clouds wins the Grand National for Leighton Aspell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/grand-national-aintree> 
As a result, it is no great surprise the list of multiple winners of the race 
has been stuck on seven for more than four decades. The 42-year gap since a 
dual winner is already the longest in National history and it is now more 
difficult for a horse to win the race once, never mind twice. Yet Many Clouds 
is an excellent bet to buck the trends, because unlike most horses that return 
toAintree <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> after winning a National, 
he needs to find very little improvement on a performance 12 months ago that 
owed very little to chance.

Like Red Rum in 1974, Many Clouds will set off under top weight. Like Red Rum, 
he is also a nine-year-old, who won his first National at the right age to 
arrive back at Aintree at the peak of his powers, and potentially improved.

Unlike Red Rum, who carried 10st 5lb to victory in 1973, Oliver Sherwood’s 
runner has only 1lb more on his back than he did 12 months ago. Many Clouds 
will run off a rating of 166, up six from last year when he was one and a 
quarter lengths ahead of Saint Are at the line, but if anything, he has looked 
like an improved performer this season during a four-race campaign designed 
solely to get him back to Aintree in peak form.

“Just to be mentioned in the same breath as Red Rum is extraordinary,” 
Sherwood says. “But the one thing with him is that he’s been there and done it. 
He’s got round and he’s got copious amounts of stamina.

“I would think the race is almost certainly harder to win nowadays. Red Rum 
was a brilliant horse but it was much more of a lottery in those years than it 
is now. If you look at the quality of the race nowadays, compared to 30 years 
ago, there’s much more quality in it now and it isn’t so trappy. That’s got to 
be a positive.

“The National is the National because of a) the fences and b) the numbers in 
the race.There’s 40 runners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/many-clouds-grand-national-entries-red-rum>
, and you’ve only got to have one fall in front of you and your race is over, 
but it’s less of a lottery now.”

Many Clouds has yet to renew acquaintance with the National course’s unique 
obstacles and some horses simply do not warm to the experience second time 
around. Sherwood’s runner has been back to this course, however, finishing a 
four-length second to Don Poli in a Listed event over Aintree’s standard 
Mildmay course in December when he was giving the winner 5lb. That form was 
franked when Don Poli finished thirdbehind Don Cossack in the Cheltenham Gold 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
.

“I’m worried about 39 others in the race but we’ve been there and done it, 
which is a huge positive with him,” Sherwood says. “Others have got to prove 
it. Many Clouds ticks all the boxes.

“If he has a clear run and gets into the rhythm that he did last year then 
yes, he’s going to be bang there, God willing. You can’t answer that question 
[about returning to the National fences] until he goes there and jumps a few 
but I’d be very surprised and disappointed if he didn’t.

“The whole season has been built up towards this. I was very pleased with his 
last run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/many-clouds-cut-betting-grand-national-impressive-kelso-win>
 [at Kelso]. I’d say it was the first time he was 100% fit this season and his 
whole demeanour was good, his enthusiasm was first class and his jumping was 
exemplary.”

Random disaster can strike at any moment at Aintree and there are also plenty 
of young, improving horses in the field with less weight on their backs. But if 
Many Clouds can avoid the fallers and jump with his usual, flawless accuracy, 
he should be there with every chance at the final fence and has the class and 
stamina to get the job done from there.

He is a decent bet to do so even as the only horse in the field currently at 
single-figure odds. It is also worth bearing in mind many bookmakers are likely 
to push him out to 10-1 or bigger at some stage on Saturday morning, if only 
for 15 minutes, to get punters into their shops or on to their websites.

The biggest danger to Many Clouds could be The Last Samuri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/the-last-samuri-grand-national-doncaster-victory>
, who was switched from Donald McCain, Ginger’s son, to join Kim Bailey, who 
won the race 26 years ago with Mr Frisk, at the start of the season. He has 
improved steadily in three runs since, and warmed up for Aintree with a 
10-length defeat of The Druids Nephew, who was going like a possible winner in 
last year’s National before an unfortunate departure five out.

Gallant Oscar, who has enjoyed the most careful of preparations at the shrewd 
Tony Martin stable, will also be in the running if he takes to the fences, 
while Morning Assembly, who was placed at Grade One level as a novice only five 
runs ago, is a 33-1 chance who deserves serious consideration.

Greg Wood’s Grand National selections

1 Many Clouds

2 The Last Samuri

3 Gallant Oscar

4 The Druids Nephew

Best outsider Morning Assembly
 