
Jason Reitman's Men, Women & Children looks not suitable for anyone who thinks 
they know you.

The trailer for the Juno <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juno> director's 
new film, which will premiere at next month'sToronto international film festival
 <http://www.guprod.gnl/film/toronto-film-festival-2014> (Tiff), has just 
launched. It shows illicit correspondence pinging from smart phones and 
laptops. A whole host of seemingly ordinary characters revealing their darkest 
secrets online and in text. 'What would U do to me if I was tied up?," texts 
one teen to another. 'I've forgotten what it's like to be desired,' types a 
woman into a chat window on her work laptop. Her husband sits at home scrolling 
a dropdown menu on an escorts website for someone Athletic. Or Flabby. Or Very 
Muscular.

Billed by Tiff as a drama that "offers a poignant look at the many ways that 
the internet has changed the relationships between teenagers and their 
parents", Reitman's film features The Fault in Our Stars's Ansel Elgort in an 
ensemble cast includingEmma Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>, Jennifer Garner and Adam 
Sandler. It's based on the book of the same name by Chad Kultgen and looks set 
to explore the different ways in which we reveal ourselves online, whether we 
mean to or not.

Reitman's last film, Labor Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/labor-day>, 
madea real pudding of showing sex on screen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lgzz_byXc8I>. That film, which screened at 
Toronto last year explored the sunny love affair between a housewife and the 
escaped convict who breaks into her house. On very first glance, Men, Women & 
Children looks like a more subtle take on love and lust, with the added twist 
of the contorting influence of the internet.

What do you make of this first look at Reitman's newey? It's a wee bit 
zeitgeisty. Are the text boxes going to swamp the drama? Are the acronyms less 
than GR8? Or is this the take on technology we've been waiting for sinceThe 
Social Network <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-social-network>? Let us 
know in the – very zeitgiesty – comments below.
 