
Metropolitan police officers have defended their decision to secretly obtain 
Sun journalists’ phone records in a bid to identify the police officer who 
leaked details ofthe Plebgate incident. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/24/andrew-mitchell-armed-officers-plebs>

The force has been taken to court by News Group Newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> (NGN) and three of its 
journalists who claim that its decision to use “coercive legal powers” normally 
reserved for criminals and counter-terrorism operations to intercept their 
communications was “incomprehensible”.

On the first day of the investigatory powers tribunal in central London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> on Monday, Gavin Millar QC for the 
complainants suggested DCI Tim Neligan, who led the search for the mole, should 
have asked NGN directly for more information short of naming the source, which 
it had already refused to do.

Failing that, Millar said Neligan should have applied to a judge to obtain the 
phone records under procedures established in thePolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 rather 
than using the Regulation and Investigatory Powers Act (Ripa), which enabled 
the police to obtain records covertly through mobile phone companies.

Neligan replied: “We were concerned that whoever that person was (responsible 
for the leak), we didn’t want them to be alerted to anything we were doing in 
terms of an arrest.”

He said it was his job to “maximise the evidential opportunity”, which 
necessitated moving quickly to ensure any potential searches would not be 
compromised.

“We were not in the business of signposting what our next move would be,” he 
said. “I don’t think that would be helpful.”

He said Ripa was used because it was the appropriate legislation for a 
“serious crime”.

Police studied a week’s worth of the phone records of the Sun’s political 
editor, Tom Newton Dunn, and two other reporters, Anthony France and Craig 
Woodhouse, in its attempts to discover who leaked the claim that then cabinet 
minister Andrew Mitchell called police officers “plebs” when leaving Downing 
Street on 19 September 2012.The incident led to Mitchell’s resignation. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/oct/19/andrew-mitchell-resigns-police-pleb>

The Met used GPRS data to locate the three reporters’ whereabouts over the 
period their communications were scrutinised and also obtained records for two 
newsdesk landlines for an hour and a half.

Another witness, DS Paul Hudson, who was responsible for deciding whether the 
Ripa requests should be granted, told the tribunal he was not aware of a 
journalist’s right to protect his sources. He had written at the time that 
journalistic privilege – the protection of reporters’ sources – “does not 
apply” with respect to the complainants, the tribunal heard.

The complainants are seeking a public judgment by the tribunal on the 
“manifest incompatibility of the actions taken by the police with the 
complainants’ ECHR (European convention of human rights) article 10 rights”.

They argue that the police did not demonstrate that what they did was 
“necessary in a democratic society” in the meaning of article 10, which 
protects journalistic sources.

The case, the first of its kind, is being presided over by a panel of five 
senior legal figures, including two high court judges.
 