
Mitt Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mittromney> has selected 
longtime adviser Beth Myers to head up his search for a vice-presidential 
running mate in the 2012 presidential election, Romney told ABC News.

"I have selected someone who has been a counselor of mine for a number of 
years, Beth Myers," Romney told ABC's Diane Sawyer in an interview to be aired 
on Monday evening. "She's begun that process and is putting together the kinds 
of things you need to do to vet potential candidates."

Myers is at the center of Romney's inner circle. She was his chief of staff as 
Massachusetts governor for four years, and for his first presidential run she 
directed his political action committee. Myers first started working with 
Romney during his 2002 gubernatorial run, when she played his opponent Shannon 
O'Brien in mock debates.

Most recently, Myers took a lead role in accusing Democrats of waging a "war 
on moms," following a comment from Democratic adviser Hilary Rosen thatAnn 
Romney <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ann-romney> has not worked a day in 
her life. Myers distributed a fundraising letter with the subject line: "Don't 
mess with Ann."

"As someone who has worked in partnership with Mitt Romney for years, I am 
honored to lead his search for a VP," Myers wrote in the inaugural tweet of an 
account opened today.

In choosing a member of his core Massachusetts team for the role, Romney 
defied predictions that he would bring in a figure from Washington, as he seeks 
to marry his campaign to the national party. Earlier this month theRomney 
campaign announced the appointment 
<http://www.mittromney.com/news/press/2012/04/mitt-romney-announces-ed-gillespie-senior-adviser>
 of one such figure, Ed Gillespie, as senior adviser.

Romney has repeatedly selected Myers for top staff posts. This time the 
selection means a woman will have the most prominent role in the most closely 
watched move the campaign will make in the coming months.

A North Carolina native, Myers graduated from Tufts University outside Boston 
in 1979. She worked with Karl Rove on Ronald Reagan's presidential campaign and 
worked on state campaigns in Massachusetts and Texas.

Myers is co-founder of the political consulting firm The Shawmut Group, along 
with Eric Fehrnstrom, the Romney aid who entered history by comparing the 
campaign to an Etch-a-Sketch.

In 1993 Myers became chief of staff to Joseph Malone, the Massachusetts state 
treasurer whose tenure was besmirched when it came to light thatassociates had 
embezzled a total of $9.4m from the state treasury 
<http://www.bostonmagazine.com/articles/the_crooks_their_greed_their_mistresses__the_crime/>
 over seven years. Neither Malone nor Myers was ever implicated in the case.
 