
West Ham's attempt to avoid relegation has been boosted by confirmation that 
Lacina Traoré has been granted a work permit, with the club confident of 
completing the Ivory Coast striker's loan move fromMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> before their weekend game against 
Newcastle.

Traoré, a 6ft 8in forward, only moved to the French club from Anzhi Makhachkala
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala> for £8.6m earlier 
this month but was immediately made available for loan with his chances likely 
to be limited in the short-term behind Radamel Falcao at Stade Louis II.

West Ham moved quickly to agree a deal with Monaco but, with the 23-year-old's 
seven caps for his country failing to qualify for a work permit, they were 
forced to lodge an appeal to gain clearance for his move under the "exceptional 
talent" criteria.

Sam Allardyce appeared in front of a panel made up of representatives of the 
Football Association, Premier League and Professional Footballers' Association 
on Monday, with their approval having prompted the green light from the Home 
Office for the move to be finalised.

The player has already been medically assessed in France and, while he may not 
be match fit given that he arrives after the winter break in the Russian 
domestic season, he is expected to complete the formalities of the transfer in 
the next 24 hours.

Traoré will compete with Andy Carroll, who featured for the first time this 
seasonas a substitute at Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/12/west-ham-united-cardiff-city-match-report>
, and Carlton Cole for a forward berth, with the latter having agreed a new 
18-month deal.

Cole had been released at the end of last season only to re-sign a short-term 
agreement under freedom of contract in the autumn. That expired on Monday but, 
having scored four Premier League goals in 11 appearances this term, he has now 
committed his future to the club.
 