
This weekend the Scottish town of Langholm, Dumfries and Galloway, holds a 
series of events to commemorate the life ofNeil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong>. Why, you may wonder, is a 
town of just 2,500 inhabitants celebrating the life of an American astronaut?

The reason is simple: the town claimed Armstrong as one of their own. And he 
accepted.

Langholm is the traditional seat of Clan Armstrong, making it Neil's ancestral 
home town. At the time of the moon landing, the town clerk was Eddie Armstrong, 
who issued the invitation for Neil Armstrong to become the town's first and 
only Freeman.

To the astonishment of all involved <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-19433405>, 
the moon walker accepted.

He visited in 1972 with his wife to accept the honour. Men, women and children 
lined the streets to cheer and wave in welcome. At the ceremony address he told 
the audience, "The most difficult place to be recognised is in one's own home 
town, I consider this, now, my home town. <http://ssa.nls.uk/film.cfm?fid=0536>"

Armstrong died on 25 August 2012, aged 82, as a result of complications 
following bypass surgery to relieve blocked coronary arteries. Within days of 
his death, Langholm representatives began to make requests to the Scottish 
council to commemorate his life.

Now the commemoration is upon us. A special memorial service will be held in 
Langholm Parish Church tonight in front of representatives from the English, 
Scottish and American governments.

There are lectures too. Thursday saw Prof Martin Hendry of Glasgow University 
debunk the conspiracy theories that say man did not land on the moon. On 
Saturday afternoon, it will be my turn to talk about the science that came out 
of the Apollo missions.

The rocks that the astronauts brought back, and the instruments they left on 
the surface, have immeasurably increased our scientific knowledge.

Much of our understanding about how the planets formed comes from the Apollo 
moon rocks, which had laid untouched for billions of years since that time. On 
Earth, restless geological forces have destroyed our planet's oldest rocks.

The Apollo seismometers detected more than 1,700 impacts from meteoroids 
striking the moon. They also showed that although moonquakes do take place, 
they are generally small. The Earth releases 10 million times more energy 
through earthquakes every year.

Perhaps the greatest ongoing experiment is made possible by the mirrors that 
the astronauts left on the moon. For more than 40 years now, astronomers have 
been targeting the reflectors with laser beams to precisely measure the 
movement of the moon.

It is one of the most profound investigations of nature that we have ever made 
because it allows us to test the predictions of Einstein's General Relativity, 
the best theory of gravity that we possess, to levels of accuracy totally 
impossible to achieve in a laboratory on Earth.

The world united as they watched Buzz Aldrin and Armstrong's moon landing in 
July 1969. Four thousand journalists descended onNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> to cover the event, a thousand of 
them were from outside the USA.

By accepting the freedom of Langholm, Armstrong continued to unite the world.

The Clan Armstrong Trust <http://www.armstrongclan.org.uk/>, which is based in 
Langholm, havereported <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/8158762.stm> that 
his commitment to the town kindled pride in Armstrongs all over the world, and 
an interest in learning more about their ancestral hometown.

Even if he hadn't walked on the moon that alone would have made Langholm the 
perfect place to celebrate his life and achievements.

Stuart Clark <http://www.stuartclark.com> is the author of The Sky's Dark 
Labyrinth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846972157>
 trilogy (Polygon). He speaks at the Buccleuch Centre, Langholm,on 15 June at 
2pm <http://www.buccleuchcentre.com/event_detail.asp?PerformanceID=932>.
 