
The Rest Is Noise <http://therestisnoise.southbankcentre.co.uk/#1> season at 
the Southbank Centre in London has been getting going again after a long summer 
break. Last week the investigation of the cultural and political currents of 
the 20th century moved into the 1960s counterculture and revolution, where the 
event programmers set the Beats against the Profumo affair. Like so many others 
I'm sad to say that the 1960s have been and gone – but the coming weekend 
promises some equally interesting juxtapositions.

Now the season is moving into the 1970s and 1980s, looking at Politics and 
Spirituality 
<http://therestisnoise.southbankcentre.co.uk/explore/politics-and-spirituality#1>
, the closing stages of the cold war, and Thatcherite economics. I'm especially 
curious about a talk Alain de Botton will be giving on how spirituality fitted 
into an increasingly consumerist world. Do we see all this fluffy thinking as a 
reaction to the hard-edged politics brought in by Mrs Thatcher? Or might the 
brands of spirituality that began to grow ever stronger in the 1970s and 1980s 
represent a continuation of the me-first politics that so shaped the latter 
years of the 20th century?

A devil's advocate could easily suggest that the introspective, inner-self 
brand of yoghurt-weaving that arose during this period was just another sort of 
consumerism, even if it emerged smelling of patchouli. If the advocate were 
feeling particularly naughty, he might even suggest that Alain de Botton, with 
his gentle eloquence and curious attempt to turnProust into a self-help manual  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/feb/26/reading-group-time-proust-sam-jordison>
 might himself be a symptom of this trend. mind, body And spirit books, 
self-help manuals and management theory guides always seem to me to cater to 
similarly selfish impulses.

Less cynically, I should note the probability that De Botton will talk about 
plenty of other forms of spirituality, and that plenty of them will be far less 
selfish. It could also easily be argued that rather than a reaction to 
Thatcherism and consumerism, the growing interest in spirituality during this 
time was a natural result of a lessening interest in conventional religion. At 
least if we stay on the western side of the Iron Curtain. The writer Karen 
Armstrong (author ofThe Case for God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/04/case-for-god-karen-armstrong>, 
among many others) will be looking at this decline. Just as interestingly, 
she'll also show the reverse side of the coin and the return to more 
traditional religious values in the Communist bloc.

Back on the ground, historians, journalists and social theorists Alwyn Turner 
and Bea Campbell will be discussing the impact of the Iron Lady's politics 
while Robert Winston will discuss the scientific miracle of test-tube babies. 
Peering behind the Iron Curtain, meanwhile, the poets Elaine Feinstein and 
George Szirtes will be discussing a generation of Polish poets active in the 
1970s and 1980s, led byWisława Szymborska 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2012/feb/19/entertainment/la-ca-szymborska-notebook-20120219>
 andZbigniew Herbert <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/zbigniew-herbert>. I 
wish I could tell you more about that, but have to confess near total 
ignorance. This lack of knowledge only makes me more inclined to find out more. 
As does the fact that I've never been to a dull event featuring George Szirtes.

One other point of interest from a literary point of view. The book-based 
strands over the weekend are good - but it seems to me that the film events 
will far outshine them. The curators are showing the entirety of Krzysztof 
Kieślowski's mighty Dekalog series for a start. There's a possibly even greater 
treat in the form of an illustrated talk on Andrei Tarkovsky byLayla 
Alexander-Garrett 
<http://www.glagoslav.com/en/Contributor/601/Layla-Alexander-Garrett.html>, who 
worked with the Russian director on set, during his great last film,The 
Sacrifice <http://www.leftfieldcinema.com/andrei-tarkovsky-the-sacrifice>. I 
wouldn't hesitate to say that both Kieślowski and Tarkovsky were both geniuses. 
The latter one of the greatest, fiercest and emotionally overwhelming artists 
of any age. I'd be hard pressed to name two writers from the era of similar 
stature. I wonder in fact, if film was actually more vital in those days? Did 
literature produce anyone able to go head to head with Tarkovsky when he was at 
the peak of his powers? Or any novel as intense and powerful as Stalker and 
Solaris? If there is one, I want to hear about it! So please do post 
suggestions below.
 