
MPs will use an emergency debate in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> to make final pleas for 
UK action to prevent more civilian deaths in Aleppo, as Assad regime forces 
close in on the final areas of rebel-held territory in the Syrian city.

Andrew Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, a 
Conservative MP who co-chaired the parliamentary Friends of Syria group with 
the late Labour MP Jo Cox, said he hoped the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, 
would tell MPs on Tuesday how the UK could “use its immense diplomatic muscle” 
to protect civilians in the besieged east of the city.

“The house should urgently discuss not ‘something must be done’, but ‘what in 
the name of humanity we, the international community, will do to save those who 
today are in such dreadful jeopardy,’” the former international development 
secretary said.

Reports of Aleppo civilians 'shot on the spot' by pro-regime forces – UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/red-cross-urgent-plea-to-save-civilians-aleppo-syria>
The Red Cross has urgently appealed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/red-cross-urgent-plea-to-save-civilians-aleppo-syria>
for tens of thousands of civilians to be given a few hours for safe passage out 
of the areas being bombarded by forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad and 
Iranian-backed militias, supported by Russian warplanes.

Many civilians and activists tweeted and texted farewell messages overnight, 
saying they faced execution as the regime forces advanced. The UN secretary 
general, Ban Ki-moon, expressed “grave concern” about unverified reports of 
atrocities against a large number of civilians, including children.

Calling for the emergency debate, which was granted by the Speaker on Monday 
and backed by MPs across the house, Mitchell said he hoped Johnson would come 
to demonstrate to MPs how the UK could do more to prevent further massacre.

“I make no apology to the house for raising this vital issue again,” he said. 
“The debate will enable us to explore, with the government, how Britain’s 
immense diplomatic muscle – the finest foreign service in the world – can do 
more to secure a deal that will ensure a ceasefire for at least 24 hours to 
enable innocent civilians to be rescued from the hideous circumstances that now 
prevail in eastAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff254fc534abb9bd5340efa512e6a649e3e5b982c%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20to%20debate%20how%20UK%20can%20help%20civilians%20trapped%20in%20Aleppo%20'hellhole'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20to%20debate%20how%20UK%20can%20help%20civilians%20trapped%20in%20Aleppo%20%27hellhole%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff254fc534abb9bd5340efa512e6a649e3e5b982c%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Syrian civilians flee the Sukkari neighbourhood towards safer rebel-held areas 
in south-eastern Aleppo. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Mitchell said the international community had said “never again” after the 
genocides in Srebrenica, Darfur and Rwanda, but was on the verge of allowing a 
similar atrocity to take place.

“Many of these terrified civilians trapped in this hellhole, which now 
resembles Stalingrad at the end of its destruction, are children,” he said. 
“They have few places to hide. Tomorrow night in Aleppo, the temperature is 
expected to reach -4C.”

Labour MP Alison McGovern, one of a number backing the debate, said: “Despite 
the grim reality we are seeking maximum preservation of life in Aleppo, by 
whatever means.


“We have stood by whilst Assad and the Russians have bombed hospitals and 
butchered civilians. If we don’t do more to confront this, I doubt the killing 
ends here.”


On Saturday, the human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell and activists from 
Syria Solidarity UKdisrupted a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/10/peter-tatchell-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-with-syria-protest>
 by the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, to demand he do more to condemn the 
actions of Russia in the Syrian conflict.

Tatchell, who said the Labour leadership must increase demands for aid air 
drops, said: “What is happening in Aleppo is a modern-dayGuernica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/25/newspapers-national-newspapers>
. We haven’t heard the leader of the Labour party speak out enough to demand UK 
air drops to besieged civilians who are dying in their thousands.”

A Labour spokesman said: “Jeremy has repeatedly condemned the Russian military 
intervention and bombing campaign inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and called for an independent 
investigation of evidence of war crimes.

“Labour has called for urgent talks to achieve a negotiated political 
settlement involving the main parties to the conflict, along with the regional 
and international intervening powers - and he has written to the Prime Minister 
today calling for a concerted effort to achieve a UN-led ceasefire and 
UN-brokered humanitarian corridors.”

The International Committee of the Red Cross’s Marianne Gasser, who is in 
Aleppo, appealed to all sides to “put humanity ahead of military objectives” as 
the forces advanced. “We stand ready to oversee the implementation of any 
mutual agreement that puts civilians first. We cannot urge this strongly 
enough: this must happen now.”
 