
First some disclaimers: despite its classic line, "Hitch: is that a noun or a 
verb?", this film is not a treatise on grammar. Sorry to disappoint you,
@guardianstyle <https://twitter.com/guardianstyle>. And it does not pass the 
Bechdel test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2010/nov/24/2>. 
Doesn't even try. Nor does its central character, Alex Hitchins, the New York 
"date doctor" who helps men woo women they'd have no hope of securing on their 
own, fill my feminist heart with joy. He embodies the principles inNeil 
Strauss's sleazy hook-up manual, The Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/03/digestedread.shopping>, which 
came out the same year.

Yet I still have a genuine fondness for this 2005 Will Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith> vehicle – and not only because it 
saved me from hypothermia and fratricide on a wet and windy trip to Paris with 
my younger teenaged brother. We ducked into a faceless cinema off 
Champs-Élysées, and Hitch was the only thing showing. Honest, gendarme.

Why do I like it? Well, not every film entertains both a surly 14-year-old and 
a sentimental sap like me. Also, Hitch has bromance and romance in equal 
measure. And, refreshingly for a rom-com of the period, the movie's male 
characters are the perpetually lovelorn and useless ones. "I'm a guy," says 
Hitch. "Since when do we get things right the first time?"

As for the women, well, they've got names: Eva Mendes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eva-mendes> plays career girl Sara Melas, a 
tabloid gossip journalist reporting on the love life of heiress Allegra Cole 
(erstwhile supermodel Amber Valletta), while deftly dodging questions about her 
own romantic future from pal Casey Sedgewick (Julie Ann Emery in Hollywood 
best-friend mode).

Key Mendes character quote: "Relationships are for people waiting for 
something better to come along." But who's this approaching her after work with 
a Grey Goose martini in "Manhattan's trendy Meatpacking District"? It's only 
the Fresh Prince!

When Hitch was released, much was made of the interracial casting of an 
African-American man and a Latino woman. Smith hassaid that nervous studio 
bosses thought a black and white coupling might offend US viewers 
<http://www.today.com/id/7019342>, while an all African-American combo would 
limit the film's global audience. In fact, they should have worried about the 
casting for another reason: Smith and Mendes just don't have the chemistry. 
(Smith and Kevin James as Hitch's latest dating client, however, are smoking –
just watch their "last first kiss" <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pMnaIz9XZo>
.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPy5qAH7wELY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPy5qAH7wELY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPy5qAH7wELY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Watch the Hitch dance scene here <> 

Forget about James's "non-comedy" I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/21/comedy>. In Hitch, he plays the 
hugely likeable Albert Brennaman (Bridget Jones with a beer belly) who – 
spoiler alert! – gets his girl by being just the way he is. That, and he has 
someawesome dance moves to Usher's Yeah! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2bH0OXsmsbQ> (I've used his "making the pizza" 
move on several wedding dance floors).

Just as well that the slapstick is sharp and the soundtrack well judged (Sam 
Cooke, Stevie Wonder, NERD, Fine Young Cannibals), because Hitch's script is 
truly execrable. To wit:"Life is not the amount of breaths you take, it's the 
moments that take your breath away." 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIfk4vifl18>

But the film redeems itself, clawing back some New York authenticity with 
solid turns from Adam Arkin as Sara's hard-edged but soft-centred newspaper 
boss and Michael Rapaport as Hitch's brother-in-law, as well as its numerous 
location set pieces: jet-skiing across the Hudson River to Ellis Island, food 
raves at Fulton Fish Market, hot dogs in the front row watching the Mets, a 
Benadryl-fuelled midnight stumble through City Hall Park – dream dates all of 
them.

And finally, there's the cheap but satisfying shot in which Vance Munsen, the 
corporate cad who breaks Casey's heart, gets a deserved knee in the balls 
between the buttocks of the Charging Bull statue on Wall Street. What a banker.
 