
A blustery weekday afternoon in Venice, California, and Anjelica Huston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston> needs somewhere to smoke. 
Outside the lobby of the oceanfront hotel there's a balcony with tables 
overlooking the sunless beach, but none is empty. We decide to look for 
somewhere downstairs, but as we descend, a drilling sound that had been merely 
earsplitting becomes almost nauseatingly loud.

"Oh, I never seem to have much luck at this hotel," Huston yells as we head 
back upstairs. "I took the most incredible fall here once, right in the dining 
room. I fell so violently that everybody blanched in shock. And nobody so much 
as put an arm out to catch me! It was one of those slow-motion falls where 
everything seems suspended, and I came crashing down, clutching a huge bar 
stool that missed me by centimetres." And she lets rip with a big dirty laugh 
at her own expense.

A table is now free on the balcony, so we establish ourselves, calling for 
coffee, iced tea and, most important, an ashtray, as Huston laments the smoking 
laws of the Golden State. "Soon we'll only be able to light up in our 
bedrooms!" Still, I only see her smoke one cigarette.

Huston is a tall, willowy woman of 54, with raven-black hair and that 
splendidly imperious nose. Her height and the nose often get her cast in witchy 
roles, like The Addams Family's Morticia, but face to face she's unambiguously 
beautiful, with lively eyes, that big laugh, and a wraparound smile that feels 
like a gift when she flashes it, which is often. She is friendly and 
approachable in ways that many upper-echelon Hollywood types are not.

Her latest movie is These Foolish Things, a modest drama about a theatre 
company in 1930s London, in which Huston plays an American impresario. She was 
impressed by the determination of the writer-director Julia Taylor-Stanley, who 
struggled for five years to find backing, but was most interested in working 
with Terence Stamp, who plays a slightly menacing valet. "Terence Stamp!" she 
exclaims. "He's imperishably sexy. I once saw him in the mid-60s, when I was at 
school in London, walking along Piccadilly with Jean Shrimpton, and I just 
thought, 'Well, there's the best-looking couple I've ever seen in my life.' And 
those blue, blue eyes are undiminished ... " She sighs theatrically.

I ask if it's true that Camilla Parker Bowles will be at the film's premiere. 
"Apparently so. I totally admire that lady - she gives hope to all us would-be 
scarlet women, and she certainly gives encouragement to all women over 50."

Huston's British and Irish connections go deep. "Long, strong connections," 
she agrees. She grew up mainly in Galway, on an estate her father, the 
legendary director John Huston, bought in the 1950s. A friend had invited him 
to go foxhunting in Ireland, and he finally settled there. McCarthyism had 
encouraged him to get away from Hollywood. "He felt disgust at what was going 
on in his country, so he moved my mother and us kids there - in 1953, I think. 
It was a fantastic place, a big manor house, driveway, lodges, and an old 
Norman castle. We rode our ponies and we fished and caught frogs and ran around 
and dressed up. There was very little else to do. I don't think I saw anyone 
else's movies, apart from Bambi, until I was at least 10."

Was Huston Sr reluctant for her to act?

"He didn't really want me to be a child actress. He imagined a more innocent 
existence for my brother and me, away from America and the excesses, even then, 
of Beverly Hills. Still, when I was 18 he directed me in A Walk With Love and 
Death in 1969, in which I was the star and the male lead was Assi Dayan, the 
son of Moshe Dayan."

For most of the 1970s, after moving back to Los Angeles, Anjelica Huston 
modelled rather than acted, and often she was seen as the partner of Jack 
Nicholson rather than anyone in her own right. She had small parts in One Flew 
Over the Cuckoo's Nest and The Last Tycoon, but mainly she drifted through the 
gossip columns, bearing the brunt of Nicholson's womanising, and conducting a 
second, intermittent relationship with Ryan O'Neal. She also made headlines 
when Roman Polanski was busted at Nicholson's house for raping a 13-year-old 
girl; a "pinch of cocaine" was found in her purse, but no charges were ever 
filed.

In 1981 an eye-catching cameo alongside Nicholson as a lion tamer in The 
Postman Always Rings Twice roused the actor in her again. Three years later she 
had just finished the B-movie Ice Pirates ("I was the best swordswoman in 
space") when the movie's producer, John Foreman, gave her Richard Condon's 
novel Prizzi's Honour and told her to look at the part of Mafia spinster 
Maerose. Although she was reluctant to do a "family movie" - her plus Jack, 
with Huston Sr as director - the project got under way after Nicholson and John 
Huston pored over the script in Huston's compound in Mexico.

"Jack was persuaded once Dad told him that it was a comedy, which wasn't 
initially evident. For research, Jack went to gaming parlours and Brooklyn dive 
bars - and I went to church." And, in her first major role since the age of 18, 
she won a best supporting actress Oscar. Since then she has kept busy in mainly 
character parts, demonstrating that she was here to stay after a run of 
well-reviewed roles in Enemies: A Love Story, Nicholas Roeg's The Witches and 
particularly The Grifters, in which she gave a toothsomely amoral turn in a 
bleach-blonde fright wig. As she eases into her mid-50s she finds herself 
keeping company with all manner of oddball directors, from Terry Zwigoff (the 
forthcoming Art School Confidential), to Woody Allen (Crimes and Misdemeanours) 
and Wes Anderson (The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou).

Huston also became a director for hire, proving herself no slouch behind the 
camera with HBO's gruelling story of white-trash child abuse, Bastard Out of 
Carolina. She did us all a favour by discovering the marvellous 12-year-old 
actress Jena Malone, whom everyone later fell in love with in Donnie Darko.

In 1999 she directed the likable Irish romantic comedy Agnes Browne, but found 
working both sides of the camera very demanding. "It was difficult directing 
myself. For a woman it's extra-hard because you have to spend an hour and a 
half in hair and make-up and you're late to set up shots and you're changing 
clothes in the street and there's no time to recover."

Awesome Dublin accent, though. "Why, thank you, though my really awesome Irish 
accent is my Galway one." At which point she talks for a while about Ireland in 
the 1960s, and the phenomenal degree to which it has changed. "When I was 
growing up there, it was a poor country. Council houses were going up in Galway 
and people were filling up the bathtubs with peat for the fire. Dirt floors and 
thatched cottages - all very scenic, but deeply impoverished. So one misses the 
simplicity of those days, but on the other hand it's better for the rural Irish 
to have central heating."

As we prepare to part, I ask if she has encountered any of the usual problems 
for actresses of, well, a certain age.

"I've never been the kind of actress whose sole interest was sex appeal, so I 
think that earns you some longevity. And I like character parts. It's a lot 
more fun and you don't have to rely on being the taste of the moment. That 
level of fame is probably very difficult to deal with. People screaming your 
name in the streets, quite honestly, isn't an audience I'm desperate to capture.

"I'm lucky," she concludes. "The people who tell me they like my work tend to 
be the kind of people I might be friends with anyway. I have a really nice 
audience."

Â· These Foolish Things opens tomorrow.
 