
So it begins... the formal general election campaign is under way and most 
national newspapers, still the foremost political agenda-setters in the land*, 
know where they will place their bets.

No surprises, of course, about the mountain of blue chips: Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, Daily Mail, Daily Express, 
Daily Star, the Sun, the Times. The small stack of red chips will be played by 
the Daily Mirror.

It’s hard to imagine any paper daring to bother with yellow chips. So, for the 
moment, we must imagine the Guardian, the Independent and i sitting at the 
press election table with a modest pile of white chips. TheFinancial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>? Pink, of course.

An Express editorial, urging readers to beware of “lies, damned lies and 
Labour economics” wasn’t satisfied with just one cliché. Instead it harked back 
to its insistent message of the 1950s by referring to theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party as - wait for it - 
“socialists”. How quaint!

The Sun’s leader writer asked its readers one of those laughably loaded 
questions:

“There are two choices, the PM claims. Stick with his Tories, with the 
economic recovery, job figures on the up and a sense of optimism for the future.

Or go with Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> and 
economic chaos; where hard-working Brits will be clobbered with a massive tax 
bill leap of more than £3,000 over the next five years; where jobs and the 
recovery will be plunged into crisis”.

It praised the the Tories for playing it straight and concluded: “On May 7 
there is really only one choice”.

The Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes>, though unimpressed 
with David Cameron’s strategy to stick solely to economic arguments that stress 
the benefits of his government’s fiscal conservatism, was even more critical of 
“Labour’s pitch”.

It pointed to Andrew Neil’s interview with Labour’s campaign coordinator, Lucy 
Powell, on his Sunday Politics programme in which she struggled, said the 
Times, “to defend a fiscal position which rests entirely on the restoration of 
a 50p rate of income tax”.

Neil’s “forensic questioning” of Powell, said the Mail’s leading article, 
Labour’s black hole, was something of a “car crash”. (My memo to all parties: 
Neil is now TV’s most dangerous political interviewer, so don’t send him 
lightweights because he’ll eat them alive).

The Telegraph indicated its concern about Cameron’s ability “to win back 
disgruntled Conservatives” in the face of an “inbuilt bias towards Labour in 
the electoral system”.

It therefore concentrated its fire on Nick Clegg’s Lib Dems for ratting on the 
deal to institute boundary changes that would have helped the Tories. The 
Telegraph, in Torygraph form, said:

“The boundary review was torpedoed by Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> because the Tories opposed 
House of Lords reform. It was, in other words, done in a fit of pique that 
shattered the Lib Dems’ self-righteous espousal of high principle, and partly 
accounts for their precipitous decline in the polls.

The country may be about to rue the day that the electoral unfairness Mr Clegg 
once declared to be ‘unacceptable’ was left intact”.

So the blue chippers acted in predictable fashion, as did the red chip 
red-top, the Mirror.

It poured scorn on Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, work and pensions 
secretary, for his refusal, when being interviewed on Andrew Marr’s show, to 
detail how he plans to cut £12bn more from the welfare budget should the Tories 
win.

He “personifies the out of touch arrogance of Tories who think they’re above 
accountability”, said the Mirror. His “refusal to explain where his axe would 
fall was utterly disgraceful, suggesting the Conservative coward is frightened 
of the backlash”.

The Indy also thought Duncan Smith was guilty of “squirming” over his “secret” 
plans, which emerged through a leaked document. It backed the call by Labour’s
Rachel Reeves <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rachel-reeves> that the 
Conservatives “need to come clean about their plans for welfare before 7 May”.

Whichever party wins, said the paper, welfare will take a hit. It concluded:

“Beyond the arguments over cash, we should also not forget that the disabled 
are some of the most vulnerable people in society. It would seem grotesque if 
they were made to suffer simply because many of them are in no position 
physically to kick up much of a fuss.

A decent level of provision for their needs is something that we should be 
proud of. If civil servants are seriously advising Mr Duncan Smith to slash 
disability payments, he should send them back to the drawing board”.

That Independent white chip definitely has a pink tinge. As for the Guardian, 
its leading articlewas devoted to extolling the virtues of coalition government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/29/guardian-view-tory-lib-dem-government-pact-endured>
:

“As the five years of the Tory/Lib Dem government draw to an end, it is right 
to recognise one striking achievement... it has not only survived, but also 
functioned...

Five years ago, many doubted that this kind of government was possible. The 
unsustainability of a Tory/Lib Dem deal was confidently forecast even before 
the 2010 election and frequently predicted after it was formed.

‘When will the coalition break up?’ became a political parlour game. Yet the 
much-touted Lib Dem revolt against coalition refused to happen. In the end, 
those who argued that the coalition would survive to the end have been 
vindicated”.

It wasn’t weak government. Few bills were lost. A fixed-term parliament 
“proved a safeguard against opportunist splits”.

The Financial Times also noted that the coalition “endured and even thrived, 
despite the apprehension of the larger partner and the political 
near-immolation of the smaller”.

It carried out “a full programme of government”, as time passed, “each party 
has at times thwarted the other, notably in the arena of political reform”.

But “the worst parliamentary ruptures brewed up within the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> as they waged their 
interminable civil war overEurope”. The FT praised the Lib Dems for their 
conduct and concluded:

“Scaremongering about indecisive election results will never again possess the 
same force. Voters will have become more accustomed to their politicians 
arguing, bickering and horse-trading; a coalition is merely an arrangement for 
this to happen more in the open”.

*But is there another platform setting a different agenda?

I do believe the national press sets the overall agenda but television has a 
big part to play too. It was noticeable thatBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> TV interviews by Andrews Neil and Marr 
provided newspaper headlines.

Then, of course, there is the computer screen and its mobile equivalents, 
which are the preferred reading and viewing platforms for first-time voters.

Vice UK, the innovative news outlet, is gearing up to make films that “will 
examine issues such as the housing crisis, poverty and young people’s 
disillusionment with the political system”,reports Adam Sherwin in the 
Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/the-media-column-can-traditional-broadcasters-capitalise-on-the-first-digital-election-10142345.html?origin=internalSearch>
.

And, note also, these videos will not be bound by Ofcom’s requirements for 
political balance.

Don’t forget BuzzFeed <https://www.theguardian.com/media/buzzfeed>, which 
might try to show it is more than an entertyianment medium.

And the social media platforms, Twitter and Facebook, will play a part too. 
Sherwin quotes Facebook’s Elizabeth Linder as saying: “Politics was the most 
discussed topic onFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> in 
the UK in 2014”.

Really? Can that be true? The figures suggest it has been so. Could this 
therefore be the last election in which the printed press hold sway?
 