
"An old journalist told me that there was a time when people used to know the 
names of national newspaper editors."

That was the opening line to a Spectator blog item by David Blackburn 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2013/10/paul-dacre-teaches-the-guardian-how-to-sell-newspapers-the-old-fashioned-way/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=paul-dacre-teaches-the-guardian-how-to-sell-newspapers-the-old-fashioned-way>
. But he has obviously been speaking to a mistaken old journalist. It just 
wasn't so.

There has never been a time when people (by which I take him to mean the 
majority of the people or, more likely, very many people) knew the names of 
national press editors.

Outside of the media and political elites, the identities of Fleet Street's 
editors have been largely unknown, even to avid newspaper readers.

In the post-second world war era, few editors could be said to have become 
household names during their time in office.

Arthur Christiansen, editor of the Daily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> for 24 years until 1957, had 
to wait until his tenure was over before he had two brushes with fame - as a 
subject on TV's This is your life and playing an editor in the 1961 movie, The 
day the Earth caught fire.

Two of his Express successors - Alastair Burnet (1974-76) and Derek Jameson 
(1977-80) - were famous, but not because of their editorships. Burnet had been 
an ITN reporter and newsreaderbefore he stepped into the chair; Jameson became 
a TV and radio celebrityafter his newspaper days.

Piers Morgan enjoyed a higher profile than most editors while at the News of 
the World <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> and Daily Mirror 
(1994-2004). Even so, his emergence as a celebrity followed his days in the 
editor's chair.

The Sun's Kelvin MacKenzie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie>
 never spoke in public during his editorial years (1981-93) and was hardly 
known outside Fleet Street. He has made up for that since, of course. His 
best-known successor, Rebekah Brooks (2003-09), was similarly reticent.

When Bill Deedes was appointed as editor of the Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> in 1975 he had spent 24 
years as a Conservative MP, with brief periods as a minister. Even so, he could 
not said to have been famous.

It's fair to say he did gain a wide public following years after stepping down 
as editor, not least because of his appearances, as an octogenarian, on Have I 
got news for you.

Deedes's successor, Max Hastings, had a brief moment of fame as the first 
journalist to enter Port Stanley during the 1982 Falklands war. In subsequent 
years, as editor of the Telegraph (1986-95) andLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> (1996-2002), he had 
a lower profile. Since then, as a prolific freelance writer and author, he has 
become a regular broadcaster.

Harry Evans, editor of the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> from 1967 until 1981, may have 
enjoyed a measure of fame during his paper's crusade on behalf of the victims 
of thalidomide. But it's doubtful if he was widely known.

There was considerable publicity when he was fired as editor of The Times in 
1982, but Evans - who will receive a lifetime achievement awardat a Media 
Society event next week 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/the-media-society-annual-dinner/> - is much 
more famous within journalism rather than outside.

It is possible to argue a case for Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> during his Sunday Times years 
(1983-94), mainly because of his high profile during 1986, when the paper was 
besieged at Wapping.

Later, he and the then Observer editor editor, Donald Trelford, were embroiled 
in relationships with the same woman and were subjected to tabloid attention. 
Neil later fought a libel action stemming from the affair, which was also 
widely reported.

But Neil's real celebrity, as a BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
political broadcaster and journalistic pundit, followed his newspaper days.

Simon Jenkins, editor of the Standard (1976-78) and The Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> (1990-92), was not widely known in 
those years. He now has a high public profile as a writer and broadcaster.

And so we come to two current editors - Paul Dacre of the Daily Mail and Alan 
Rusbridger <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> of The Guardian - 
who, according to Blackburn's piece, have helped to make each other famous in 
recent weeks.

Rusbridger's journalistic scoops - phone hacking, Wikileaks and the leaking of 
files by the NSA whistleblowerEdward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> - have propelled him into 
the limelight.

One of those cases, the Wikileaks affair, has led to his being portrayed (by 
Peter Capaldi) in a movie out this week, The Fifth Estate.

Rusbridger, Guardian editor since 1995, has also attracted attention because 
of his paper's opposition to a new form of press regulation devised by the rest 
of the newspaper publishing industry.

That opposition appears to have been the major reason for last week's 
personalised attacks on Rusbridger in the Mail. And it was in reply to those 
attacks thatThe Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> 
highlighted the role of Dacre, editor of the Mail since 1992.

Down the years, Rusbridger has been regularly interviewed on TV and radio news 
and current affairs programmes. He also makes speeches. Dacre does not like 
being interviewed and his public speeches have been rare.

But, I wonder, do either of them really qualify to be described as famous?
 