
The death of Neil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong>, the first man to walk on 
the moon, has prompted a bout of soul-searching about America's national 
destiny as well as mourning for an icon of the 20th century.

As tributes continued to pour in on Sunday for the former astronaut who died 
aged 82 there were also expressions of regret that no human has been back to 
the moon since 1972, just three years after Armstrong set foot on it and gave 
his famous "giant leap for mankind" speech.

Elliot Pulham, chief executive of the Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Foundation, decried today's lack of 
backing for America's space agency Nasa, compared with the vast resources 
devoted to the moon landings programme in the 1960s.

"In this age of timid exploration goals and paltry Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> budgets, Armstrong looms as a 
larger-than-life reminder of what our nation was once capable of," he said. 
Pulham said the real life drama of Armstrong's moon landing – watched by a 
fifth of the world's population – was unlikely to be repeated now except 
fictionally in a summer blockbuster.

He said: "In an age when Hollywood and professional sports manufacture 
so-called 'heroes', Armstrong exemplified the right stuff. He was the real 
deal."

Armstrong died on Saturday following heart problems that ensued after he 
underwent bypass surgery near his Ohio home earlier this month. His recovery 
had been thought to be going well, and his death came as a surprise to many.

A statement released by his family gave few details, but spoke of a "reluctant 
American hero" and said to those who might want to pay tribute to him: "Honour 
his example of service, accomplishment and modesty, and the next time you walk 
outside on a clear night and see the moon smiling down at you, think of Neil 
Armstrong and give him a wink."

Speaking from the White House, Barack Obama said the self-declared "nerdy" 
engineer was "among the greatest of American heroes – not just of his time, but 
of all time". He added: "And when Neil stepped foot on the surface of the moon 
for the first time, he delivered a moment of human achievement that will never 
be forgotten."

Armstrong's crew member on Apollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> and the second man 
to walk on the moon, Buzz Aldrin, said he was "deeply saddened" by the loss of 
his good friend and "space exploration companion" with whom he had hoped to 
mark the 50th anniversary of their mission in 2019.

"Whenever I look at the moon I am reminded of that precious moment, over four 
decades ago, when Neil and I stood on the desolate, barren, yet beautiful, Sea 
of Tranquillity," he said in a statement. "Looking back at our brilliant blue 
planet Earth suspended in the darkness of space, I realised that even though we 
were farther away from Earth than two humans had ever been, we were not alone.

"Virtually the entire world took that memorable journey with us. I know I am 
joined by many millions of others from around the world in mourning the passing 
of a true American hero and the best pilot I ever knew. My friend Neil took the 
small step but giant leap that changed the world and will forever be remembered 
as a historic moment in human history."

Across the US, there was a sense that he represented the achievement of a past 
age of American greatness. Many focused on how the bid for the moon had been 
begun by John F Kennedy who as president audaciously set the target of putting 
a man there in a 1961 speech.

Armstrong – a quiet man who shunned fame – seemed to symbolise that dream 
fulfilment of a national goal, rather than the current situation which has seen 
Nasa cancel or curtail numerous missions in the face of budget squeezes.

Former astronaut Eugene Cernan, the last man on the moon, said: "He [Kennedy] 
challenged us to do something people thought was impossible. What couldn't be 
done. Neil was the focal point of that … He was the epitome of doing something 
that people thought was impossible."

Others too mourned Armstrong by decrying the state of the US. "Today we cannot 
pass a budget through both houses of Congress in as much time as it took to 
send a man into orbit," wrote columnist Andrew Pasternak on the news and 
culture websitePolicymic <http://www.policymic.com/>. "The time it took to 
rebuild lower Manhattan after 9/11 … will be longer than it took to build an 
entire space program and send a man to the moon."

Of course, Nasa does have its modern triumphs. Its engineers have just 
achieved the remarkable feat of landing a nuclear-powered rover on Mars. The 
robotic geologist is designed to spend years on the Martian surface. Another 
Mars mission has also just been announced, this one involving a more simple 
lander designed to drill below the planet's surface.

But these endeavours do not even come close to matching the excitement of 
Armstrong's success: no doubt in part because of the human element.

Nasa administrator Charles Bolden seemed to hint at that in his statement of 
tribute. "As we enter this next era of space exploration, we do so standing on 
the shoulders of Neil Armstrong," he said.

Armstrong is believed to have shared the sense of scepticism and dismay at 
Nasa's diminished ambitions. Eric Berger, who runs theSciGuy science blog 
<http://blog.chron.com/sciguy/>, revealed that earlier this month he had been 
forwarded an email that Armstrong and other space exploration veterans had been 
circulating. It expressed frustration at the current travails of Nasa and 
quoted Yogi Berra, an American baseball legend. According to Berger the quote 
read: "If you don't know where you are going, you might not get there."

It is unclear when and where Armstrong's funeral and burial will be held. 
 