
The online video service Netflix has sealed the rights to stream all seven 
series of the critically acclaimed TV showMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, in a deal said to 
be worth around $90m (£55m).

Netflix will pay close to $1m per episode to show the 91-part series, after 
signing a lucrative deal with producer Lionsgate,according to the Wall Street 
Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703806304576245322457993318.html>
.

Under the deal, Netflix viewers will be able to stream the first four series 
of Mad Men in July. The remaining three series, which are yet to be produced 
but are to be madeunder a deal signed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/01/mad-men-deal-signed?INTCMP=SRCH> 
with Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner, will be available to stream once they have 
aired on US cable channel AMC. Netflix is already streaming the first four 
seasons of Mad Men in Canada.

Netflix, which has more than 20 million subscribers in the US, has stepped up 
its offering of films and TV shows in recent months.

The internet-streaming site last month signed a deal with film studio Miramax 
to stream its library of more than 700 titles, including Pulp Fiction and Kill 
Bill. The site also won the rights to stream its first original TV series, 
Kevin Spacey's A House of Cards, earlier this year.

However, traditional TV companies have grown increasingly wary of Netflix as 
its catalogue expands. CBS recently withdrew shows such as Dexter from 
Netflix's library. The cable channel Starz also implemented a 90-day delay on 
original series being streamed on Netflix. Previously, it had allowed Netflix 
to show programmes the day after their first broadcast.

Shares in Netflix rose 2% on Wednesday on news of the Mad Men deal.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 