
Yesterday, seemingly apropos of nothing, Azealia Banks went on a bit of a 
Twitter tirade <https://twitter.com/AZEALIABANKS/status/286875638990782464> 
about people claiming to be from New York who haven't lived there long. Recent 
New York resident Angel Haze – whose song New York is built around the refrain 
"I run New York" – assumed this was a dig at her, and a fairly unpleasant 
Twitter spat ensued, culminating in Haze eventually deleting her tweets. Banks 
assumed this was because she was running scared, while most of Twitter thought 
she was taking the high ground and getting on with her life. A couple of hours 
later, however, Haze returned with the delirious, synth-melting, Diplo-produced 
On the Edge, a "diss track" she claimed to have knocked out in 20 minutes. 
Amazing, lyrical bon mots come thick and fast: "Bitch I'm in the 313 / With a 
fucking meat cleaver, like who want beef?" and "I want you bitches so scared 
that you mental break / So you'll forever be broke with expensive taste." 
Hitting Banks where it hurts, she then spits: "Bitch put an album out / I think 
my album's more done than yours and I just started a week ago," dragging in 
producer Paul Epworth, who has been working with both artists on their 
respective albums. And there's no let-up in sight, with Bankstweeting this 
morning <https://twitter.com/AZEALIABANKS/status/287104461900500992> that 
"diplo just calls me and tells me she [Haze] wrote that track months ago and he 
had nothing to do with it". Can't we all just get along?

Reading on a mobile? Listen here 
<https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fapi.soundcloud.com%2Ftracks%2F73519248>
 