
The third series premiere of Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, the critically 
lauded drama about the 1960s Madison Avenue advertising industry, has drawn a 
record audience of nearly 3 million viewers on US cable network AMC.

Sunday night's season three premiere of the show attracted 2.8 million 
viewers, a 34% leap compared with the 2.1 million for last year's series two 
launch onAMC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> and Mad Men's largest US 
audience to date. The second series averaged 1.5 million viewers.

AMC also said that its own create-your-own Mad Men avatar has been downloaded 
485,000 times 
<http://www.thrfeed.com/2009/08/mad-men-premiere-sets-ratings-record.html>. Mad 
Men is broadcast in the UK on BBC4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/may/28/bbc.television1>.

The US version of Big Brother is experiencing what the entertainment trade 
magazineVariety called a "summer high" 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007359.html?categoryid=1236&cs=1> with 
8.5 million viewers on Sunday night on CBS.

Sunday also marked the culmination of the US PGA Championship, which saw Tiger 
Woodsuncharacteristically pipped in a cliffhanger finish by the 37-year-old 
Korean YE Yang after leading at the start of the final day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/17/ye-yang-tiger-woods-pga-championship>
.

The Woods effect on TV audiences 
<http://blogs.golf.com/presstent/2009/08/cbs-ratings-pga-championship.html> was 
clear, with viewing up 150% on CBS compared with last year, when the world 
number one did not play, due to a knee injury.

According to Variety, Sunday's final round of the PGA Championship was the 
highest rating since 2002, when Rich Beem beat Woods.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 