
Martin Guptill and Ross Taylor got some valuable time at the wicket as New 
Zealand did what they needed to looking ahead to the World Cup quarter-finals 
with a six-wicket victory over Afghanistan at McLean Park.

Guptill, who had got starts in all four of his previous innings, was run out 
for 57, while Taylor, who had scored just 29 runs in four previous innings, was 
24 not out as New Zealand scored 188-4 in 36.1 overs.

Afghanistan had been dismissed for 186 in 47.4 overs with Daniel Vettori 
becoming the 12th man to take 300 one-day international wickets when he 
produced another impeccable spell of left-arm spin bowling.

Captain Brendon McCullum had given his side a rollicking start with 42 runs 
from 19 balls before Kane Williamson (33) and Guptill took them to 111 for one 
without looking troubled.

Australia seal Cricket World Cup quarter-final spot with victory over Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/08/cricket-world-cup-australia-sri-lanka-report>
Williamson, however, was caught by Samiullah Shenwari at mid-wicket off 
Shapoor Zadran in the 19th over before Guptill was run out with 44 runs needed 
and Grant Elliott dismissed in the same fashion 12 runs short of the target.

Taylor and Corey Anderson (seven not out) saw New Zealand home after Vettori 
had taken 4-18 from 10 overs. The 36-year-old has taken 12 wickets in the 
tournament at an average of 11.33 and economy rate of three runs per over.

Vettori bowled the third over of the match to enable Tim Southee and Trent 
Boult to swap ends and bowled Usman Ghani on his first delivery, then took 
Nawroz Mangal’s (27) wicket in the 16th over for number 300.

He is the ninth player to take more than 300 wickets in both tests and ODIs 
and later took two wickets in successive deliveries in the 20th over but missed 
the hat-trick.

Vettori’s first over had put Afghanistan on the back foot after captain 
Mohammad Nabi had chosen to bat on a wicket considered the best batting surface 
in New Zealand, before Boult struck twice to reduce them 24 for three.

Mangal and Shenwari managed to see off the opening bowlers before Vettori 
struck again and then had Nabi caught by Taylor for six and trapped Asfar Zazai 
lbw on the next delivery to reduce Afghanistan to 59 for six and in danger of 
being bowled out for under 100.

Najibullah Zadran, who survived the hat-trick ball, and Shenwari (54) then 
combined for an 86-run partnership that helped them post a score in excess of 
150
 