
A series of guest presenters including Andrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil> will front Newsnight over the 
summer while the BBC continues to search for a regular host to replace 
Jeremy Paxman.

Paxman, the lead presenter of the daily BBC2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> current affairs programme for more 
than two decades, bowed out on Wednesday night.

Ian Katz, the Newsnight <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsnight> editor, 
is understood to be considering whether to replace Paxman directly with another 
lead presenter or switch to more of an ensemble approach.

If he decides on the former, Channel 4 News presenter Krishnan Guru-Murthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/krishnan-guru-murthy> is the external 
favourite and bookmakers have not been taking any further money on him since 
last month after a flurry of bets were placed. Guru-Murthy has declined to 
comment.

Internally, Newsnight already has three other regular presenters – Kirsty Wark,
Emily Maitlis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/emily-maitlis> and Laura 
Kuenssberg – who will continue to present the show for the time being along 
with guest anchors including Daily Politics host Neil.

One factor that may persuade the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
against raiding another broadcaster is the unrest in the newsroom over the 
number of external appointments at a time when they face up to 500 fresh job 
cuts.

The issue was raised at a meeting of the BBC's National Union of Journalists 
members on Thursday, which one insider described as the "angriest and most 
impassioned" in recent times.

In the past year, Newsnight has recruited extensively from rival news 
organisations, including Katz, a former Guardian deputy editor, Kuenssberg from 
ITV News, Katie Razzall from Channel 4 News and the Financial Times's Chris 
Cook.

However, the programme was left in disarray in the wake of the Jimmy Savile 
and Lord McAlpine scandals and a significant overhaul of personnel was 
inevitable.

Katz and James Harding, the BBC director of news and current affairs, have had 
plenty of time to consider the Paxman succession.

He informed BBC executives last summer that he wanted to leave, but agreed to 
stay on for another year to help the Newsnight team find its feet again under 
new editor Katz.

Paxman made no secret of his contempt for social media and, to some critics, 
appeared increasingly out of step as broadcasting moved into the digital era. 
However, he remained a draw for viewers – Wednesday's swansong attracted 1.1 
million viewers, nearly double Newsnight's 2014 average audience of about 
600,000.

Other names mentioned as possible contenders have included the presenter of 
BBC Radio 4's PM, Eddie Mair, who has been a stand-in Newsnight host in the 
past, and the BBC political editor, Nick Robinson.

Paxman's last show was a relatively low-key affair, apart from an interview 
with London mayor Boris Johnson while the pair wobbled through the streets on a 
tandem and a self-referential exchange with former Tory leader Michael Howard.
 