
The danger in meeting politicians is that they seem all right and then, as a 
comedian, it is much harder to summon up the manufactured anger required to 
despise them for personal commercial gain. I have a mortgage. I can’t afford to 
find myself thinking things like “You know, Ken Clarke isn’t so bad once you 
get to know him.” Hate is money! And I have to pump it out to a deadline!!

In the noughties I had a 25-minute routine about Michael Portillo looking like 
theCuprinol wood stain goblin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGQw7w2B3mc>, 
which was gradually becoming the spine of a new three-hour show. But afterI met 
Portillo on BBC1’sThis Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/12/david-cameron-gillian-welch-gig>
, he seemed belatedly reasonable in that way that ex-Tories often do, and I 
found I could no longer suggest he was a wood stain goblin with any conviction. 
Another revenue stream ran dry.

I don’t like going on TV, but I will make an exception for This Week, of which 
I am a huge fan. People always ask me what Andrew Neil’s dogs are like in real 
life. To answer that question once and for all, Scrubber is nice, but Molly 
stinks and the BBC had to hush it up when she bit Jacob Rees-Mogg in his North 
East Somerset constituency. Though to be fair, Rees-Mogg had subjected the dog 
to a cruel and sustained floccinaucinihilipilification.

It’s time to reassert a fundamental principle, namely that there’s no excuse 
for bigotry

Last Sunday morning, I further compromised my embargo and appeared on Peston’s 
ITV politics niche,Peston’s Weekly Thought Nook™ 
<http://www.itv.com/hub/peston-on-sunday/2a4458>. Peston introduced himself to 
me while reclining in a makeup chair: “Hello, I’m Peston. And today I’ll be 
talking to ballroom-dancing politico Ed Balls, and Ukip’s Suzanne Evans. Stay 
with me.”

I thought Peston’s greeting oddly formal and impersonal, and then realised he 
was being filmed for a trailer, and was addressing the British public en masse, 
not me individually. I felt stupid for not understanding how TV worked, like 
when I was little and I thought Harold Wilson could see me through the 
television.

Next I went to the green room, which is showbiz language for the place where 
the stars wait their turn to go on TV with Peston, or Andrew Neil, or whoever’s 
show it is. In the old days it could have been Russell Harty for example. OrGus 
Honeybun 
<http://www.plymouthherald.co.uk/facts-probably-didn-t-know-gus-honeybun/story-25713810-detail/story.html>
.

The green room doesn’t have to be green, or even a room. There isn’t a green 
room onThis Week on BBC1 in case the Daily Mail says it’s too luxurious. On 
This Week there’s just some chairs in a corridor and a table with old fishing 
magazines on it, like at the proctologist’s. “Andrew Neil will see you now.” 
Peston is much better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fno-more-schmoozing-with-the-enemy-on-tv-shows-stewart-lee-alt-right-ukip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4e35651b88eb1692bd73b7cad003dd29f15d8aa%2F0_0_1884_2736%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20more%20schmoozing%20with%20the%20enemy%20on%20TV%20shows%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fno-more-schmoozing-with-the-enemy-on-tv-shows-stewart-lee-alt-right-ukip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20more%20schmoozing%20with%20the%20enemy%20on%20TV%20shows%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fno-more-schmoozing-with-the-enemy-on-tv-shows-stewart-lee-alt-right-ukip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4e35651b88eb1692bd73b7cad003dd29f15d8aa%2F0_0_1884_2736%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
I’m aware that writing about what happens in the green room is a betrayal of 
an unspoken showbiz-politics rule. Like Vegas, what happens in the green room 
stays in the green room. It’s supposed to be a safe space, in a theatre or at a 
TV studio, where performers and contributors shouldn’t feel they are being 
watched. Journalists went into my dressing room at the Leicester Square theatre 
and reported that I used Lynx deodorant. I felt violated.

Nowadays I find it very difficult being in the green room with younger, newer 
comedians, as I feel my age and supposed status mean I am permanently required 
to be in presidential mode. And I mean this in the old sense of “presidential”, 
meaning magnanimous, patient and generous, rather than in the modern sense of 
presidential, meaning being a corrupt, pussy-grabbing racist. How quickly words 
change their meanings.

In the Peston green room I sat next to Suzanne Evans from the Ukips. I tried 
to make small talk. She agreed that when Nigel Farage, earlier that week, had 
threatened to unleash a pussy-grabbing Trump sex attack robot on Theresa May, 
it had been a bit much.

Suzanne Evans from the Ukips was wearing a giant Remembrance Day poppy made of 
cloth. Jeremy Corbyn came on TV wearing a tiny badge of a poppy. I said, “Your 
poppy’s massive isn’t it Suzanne? Jeremy Corbyn’s is tiny. He’s a traitor, 
isn’t he?”

Suzanne Evans from the Ukips didn’t say much, and I worried that she had my 
card marked for being one of the liberal comedians that dominate all comedy 
now, to little or no effect in real terms. Perhaps she thought I was trying to 
generate material for a funny column. Which I wasn’t. At the time.

Later on, when Marine Le Pen came on the BBC news being really, really racist, 
Suzanne Evans from the Ukips shook her head disapprovingly, as if Le Pen had 
crossed a racist line inthe alt-right sand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/alt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump>
. I started wondering about gradations of tolerance, of how our relationship 
with someone, however minimal, affects our attitude to them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Bannon%20and%20the%20alt-right%20in%20the%20White%20House%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fstephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer&media=>
Stephen Bannon and the alt-right in the White House – video explainer. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/stephen-bannon-and-the-alt-right-in-the-white-house-video-explainer>
On Christmas morning 1995, I came down to our kitchen, hung over, and the 
first sentence that was said to me, on Christmas morning, apropos of nothing, 
was ‘You can say what you like about Hitler, but he had some good ideas. He 
just went about them the wrong way.” It was Auntie Hattie, on seasonal 
secondment from the old people’s home, praising Hitler, on Christmas Day! On 
Christmas Day!! On Christmas Day in the morning!!! Sieg Heil!!!!

But we make allowances for the madness of our relatives, because they are 
little old ladies, and little old men, and are a bit confused probably; but we 
must not allow ourselves to make allowances for far-right politicians and their 
followers. Because the American woman with mixed-race kids I talk to at 
swimming lessons every Tuesday is afraid to go home; and the day after Brexit, 
in our cosy comedy community, an Asian comedian was told to go back where he 
came from by an emboldened heckler at the Comedy Store, historic home of 
politically correctalternative comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/edinburgh-standup-simon-munnery-on-alternative-comedy>
, the sort of incident I haven’t seen since the 80s.

And that’s why, after next week’s This Week, I’m not meeting any more TV 
politicians. These aren’t the times for self-loathing liberals to seek to 
understand the leaders of the global far right, or their supporters. That ship 
sailed when Trump put Breitbart into the White House. We should be in 
crisis-management mode. It’s time to reassert a fundamental principle, namely 
that there’s no excuse for bigotry, whichever alt-right buzzword you get Boris 
orSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/steve-bannon-donald-trump-hire-republican-dont-criticize>
 to rebrand it with. And if that means no more free green-room bacon sandwiches 
on Sunday morning for me, then so be it. We are all going to have to make 
sacrifices.

Stewart Lee’s Content Provider is at Leicester Square theatre 
<https://leicestersquaretheatre.ticketsolve.com/shows/873553621/events> until 
28 January and touring throughout 2017. Seestewartlee.co.uk 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk> for details 
 