
Mailer starts with the news of Hemingway's death; I'll start with Ezra Pound's 
claim, inThe ABC of Reading, that literature "is news that STAYS news". The 
appeal of having one of America's best-known writers cover the biggest news 
story of the decade – probably of the century, conceivably of all time – was 
obvious, and Mailer was a natural fit. Back then a lot of people were quoting 
the opinion that he was the best journalist in America. One of those people was 
Mailer himself who took umbrage at the praise as it tacitly downgraded his 
achievements as a novelist. ImagineLaurence Sterne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/laurencesterne> with a huge subject, a big 
advance and a looming deadline, and you have some sense of the conflicting 
pressures at work onOf a Fire on the Moon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141394961>
 (the original American title).

The deadline needs emphasising. Other writers had plenty to say about the moon 
landing – everyone had something to say about it – but few would have had the 
chops to bang out 115,000 words for publication in three issues of Life 
magazine, the first tranche of which, Mailer groans, was due less than three 
weeks after the astronauts splashed down in the Pacific. That, to put it 
mildly, is a lot of words in a very short time: not quite as challenging a task 
as the one set out by John F Kennedy in 1961 – to land a man on the moon and 
return him safely to earth by the end of the decade – but a serious job of work 
all the same. So the question today, for anyone under the age of 45 who was 
unable to experience the event, let alone read about it as news, is the extent 
to which the result is compromised or enhanced by the circumstances of its 
occasion and composition. Now that the subject matter is the stuff of history – 
when the word astronaut might be used in the context of historical as opposed 
to science fiction – does Mailer's book pass Pound's testing definition? And 
where does it stand within two quite different contexts: that of other books 
about the moon landings, and within the large scope and wildly mixed quality of 
Mailer's work as a whole?

Warm on the heels of The Armies of the Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/25/history.politics> and Miami and 
the Siege of Chicago (both 1968), A Fire on the Moon was Mailer's third book of 
extended reporting. He features as a participating observer in both of the 
earlier works ("Mailer" inArmies, "the reporter" in Miami), as he would again 
(as "Norman") in his masterly account of the Muhammad Ali v George Foreman bout 
in Zaire in 1974.The Fight 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141184142>
's curt titular nod – almost a butt – to a famous1822 essay by Hazlitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/may/15/whichnovelsshouldwinfight>
 makes us wonder if the roots of the New Journalism extend more deeply into the 
past than is sometimes thought. Life magazine proudly announced that the first 
excerpt from Mailer's report on "the moon venture" was the longest non-fiction 
piece they had ever published (forcing into second place an article on "the 
Woodstock Rock festival", and featuring a cover photo not ofNeil Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neil-armstrong> but "Aquarius", as Mailer 
termed himself this time around).

By Martin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis>'s estimation, 
some of the excursions of the New Journalism seem "as long as Middlemarch 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199536757>
", but freedom from restrictive word or page counts could also be extended to 
the old journalism, if the subject matter demanded it. The New Yorker had 
published John Hersey'sHiroshima 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141184371>
 in its entirety in 1946. What's new is the undisguised presence of a generic 
growth hormone whereby the previously self-effacing disposition of the 
journalist gives way to the swagger and confidence of the performance-enhancing 
novelist. As such, it is difficult to think of a work that better exemplifies 
the strengths and shortcomings of what we now think of as New Journalism thanA 
Fire on the Moon. Hunter S Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/huntersthompson>'s Hell's Angels 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241951583>
 (1966) seems, by comparison, a model of calm and dispassionate economy. The 
unfettered deployment of a participating voice, abandonment of the idea of 
disinterested recording in favour of subjectivity so extreme that it threatens 
to displace or usurp the subject appear unprecedented – because the precedent 
is hiding in plain view.

A flickering but frequent presence in Mailer's writing, DH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> operated along similar lines in 
his non-fiction and journalism, albeit on a smaller scale. AsRebecca West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jun/10/rebecca-west-forgotten-vorticist>
 realised after his death, Lawrence only ever wrote "about the state of his own 
soul", using whatever subject was symbolically at hand at any given moment. The 
occasion for Lawrence might have been the death of a porcupine or his first 
encounter with Native Americans; for Mailer it's a Saturn V rocket, the launch 
of which is evoked in stirringly Lawrentian rhythms and images. Other passages 
could almost have been written by Lawrence when at his ranch in New Mexico: 
"In that long-ago of prairie spaces when the wind was the message of America, 
Indians had lived in greater intimacy with the moon than any European."
 The launch of Apollo 11. Photograph: Reuters 
More generally, Mailer shares Lawrence's hieratic belief that he might be able 
to offer some kind of solution to the sickness of his times (of which both men 
are, according to a different series of tests, symptoms). For Mailer, the 
success or failure of theApollo 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing> mission is 
constantly elided with the project of writing his book about it: each, in its 
different way, exhibits signs of pathology and cure. The moon landing hails 
both a new age and the end of an era, while the book about it is shot through 
with a dread of impending obsolescence – of a very recent kind. How can the 
printed word compete with television in an age when events are made for TV, 
when the author is reduced to watching the events he is covering on telly? In 
one respect, the two turn out to be complementary. Those pages evoking the 
launch of the Saturn V might have been helped by watching the filmed footage, 
just as the blow-by-blow account of the Ali/Foreman rumble would have been 
impossible without reviewing playback of the fight. Given that the moon landing 
was a dramatic extension of the possibilities of communication (as President 
Nixon said when he was patched through to the men on the moon, this had to be 
"the most historic phone call ever made"), the fact that it could be broadcast 
live on TV was itself part of the story. If the landing could not be filmed 
there was no point going. At the risk of the tail wagging the dog, they went to 
the moon in order to film it. (To that extent people who claimed that the whole 
thing was a setup were right; it's just that it was filmed on location, not in 
a studio.)

In the age of Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>, of simulated 
cinematic immersion in space, it is more striking than ever that footage of the 
greatest technological feat of all time looked no better "than a print of the 
earliest silent movies … Ghost beckoned to ghosts and the surface of the moon 
looked like a ski slope at night." These blurry images anticipate a brave new 
world of satellite communications, but the era that Mailer foresees, when 
reporters' work involves "rewriting publicity handouts", is close to the 
situation sketched inFlat Earth News 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099512684>
 (2009),Nick Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nickdavies>'s analysis 
of the parlous state of contemporary journalism. Prophecies can come true in 
ways and circumstances very different from how they were originally envisaged. 
And since no one minds whether they turn up exactly as and when predicted, they 
are immune to the kind of fact-checking that might cast retrospective doubt on 
Mailer's extravagancies of style and method. Did the moon adventure really 
"help to disclose the nature of the Lord and the Lucifer who warred for us"? 
Is jaundice the "infectious disease beyond all other that comes to strong 
people when they live too long in an environment alien to their will, work with 
all their power to solve the complexities of that environment, and fail"? Does 
the fact that Frank Borman was so afflicted by motion sickness, diarrhoea and 
vomiting, that Apollo 8 (not 9 as Mailer writes) became, in Andrew Chaikin's 
words, "a flying toilet", mean that he was not "hard as hand-forged nails"?

Such questions miss the point, especially since one of Mailer's many big 
points is that the world of Nasa, of computers and data, is so distinct from 
the world of imaginative thought in which the likes of Aquarius reside.A Fire 
on the Moon is a plea on behalf of the unverifiable, of metaphysics (or a 
novelist's idea of metaphysics, that is to say, "the fiction of unspoken 
evidence") over physics. Since Mailer's book is partly a psychological portrait 
of and reaction to the moon shot, anything in it is accurate ("there is no 
psychological reality like a man's idea of himself") by virtue of the fact that 
it occurred to him. He was, after all, one of the "sensors in the currents of 
the churn".

The suspicion that, in the process of churning out all these words, Mailer 
barely had time to stop and think is assuaged by the way Aquarius constantly 
tells us that he is skulking off to brood, cogitate and mull over. But it is 
perhaps countered by his commitment to the idea that the quality of creative 
thought might be enhanced by forcing the pace of composition.A Fire on the Moon 
incarnates the conviction that the finished work can have something of the feel 
of a work in progress, one that shares the minute-by-minute uncertainty and 
drama of the moon shot (a quality that remains strong even now, when the 
outcome of the mission is no longer in doubt). The lingering traces of 
Kerouac's creed of "First thought best thought" manifest themselves, at worst, 
as a stream of filibustering. The book echoes with repeated rhythmic growls, 
self-reflecting asides and recurring observations: Armstrong's "face within the 
space helmet as lashless in appearance as a newborn cat in a caul", for 
example, gets replayed a few pages later. A work that would seem to have 
benefitted from careful editing is conceptually and rhythmically at odds with 
the idea.

All the more remarkable, then, that in Part II, "Apollo" , we are treated to 
an abrupt increase in the proportion of diligent recording, reporting and 
transcribing, in which the minutiae of the journey to the moon, the landing and 
redocking of the astronauts in space are painstakingly itemised, with 
considerable scientific expertise, no loss of momentum and an escalation of 
tension. The tonal range within the narrative trajectory is striking. Again, 
there is perhaps a parallel with the moon journey itself, with the way the 
command module is constantly rotating in flight so it is nicely toasted 
all-round, rather than scorched by solar rays on one side while the other 
freezes. Mailer, by turns, is analytical, hyperbolic, delirious, homey (the 
wonderful evocation of the moon's surface as "a barnyard trod by countless 
hooves") and lyrical ("the moon was a voice which did not speak"). He may not 
have been a wit but that did not stop him being uproariously funny. One of 
Armstrong's first jobs after the small step/giant leap is to scoop up a sample 
of moon dust so that "if the unmentionable yak or the Abominable Snowman were 
to emerge from the crater", he could leap aboard the lunar module and make his 
escape.Buzz Aldrin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/buzz-aldrin> has to 
remind Armstrong to do this, causing the first man on the moon to snap back – 
understandably, since "nagging was nagging even on the moon".

Having studied aeronautical engineering at Harvard, Mailer had the knack – 
it's something he shares withLen Deighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/lendeighton> – of conveying complex 
technical specifications and design imperatives with an ease that enables 
ignorant readers to feel capable of a level of understanding to which they had 
not hitherto been privy. That "curious creature" the lunar module or LEM, for 
example, "had been designed from the inside, and so was about as ugly as 
a human body that had shaped itself around the excessive development of a few 
special organs. Conceive of a man whose only function in life was to win 
pie-eating contests – what a stomach would he develop, large as a steamer 
trunk."

Clearly, A Fire on the Moon was the first work of literature to be devoted to 
the moon landings.Tom Wolfe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tomwolfe> would 
have the luxury of almost a decade of hindsight and research before publishing 
a kind of prequel,The Right Stuff 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099479376>
, in 1979. Reading the two books in tandem serves, among other things, to 
validate much of Mailer's analysis, including his understanding of the 
psychology of astronauts, of how the reticence of "men with a sense of mission 
so deep it could not be communicated" co-existed with a profound passivity: 
"They were virile, but they were done to."

It is probably not the first book to which a reader interested in the history 
of the space programme will turn. That honour must surely go to Chaikin's 
gripping and comprehensiveA Man on the Moon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141041834>
 (1994). A sceptical, even grudging alternative is provided byGerard DeGroot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gerarddegroot>'s Dark Side of the Moon 
(2006). What Mailer's book manages, uniquely, to do is evoke events from almost 
50 years ago in such a way that they unfold again before our eyes.

Within the mixed and lumpy bag of his own work, A Fire on the Moon is a lesser 
book than the story of the life and death of Gary Gilmore inThe Executioner's 
Song 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099688600>
 (1979). Inevitably, lacking the focus and tight cohesion of The Fight, it 
fully deserves to join the latter among the ranks of modern classics. Its 
belated elevation, in this regard, is part of a continuing extension of the 
kind of book deemed worthy of admittance. If it is difficult to imagine when 
the resources might again be marshalled or the will found to push through 
a venture on the scale of the Apollo programme, it is equally hard to think of 
anyone taking on the task of describing such an undertaking with Mailer's gusto 
and urgency. As an extravagant and immediate response to "the most expensive 
gesture ever made", it is not just a stunning achievement, it is also 
an appropriate one.

• A Fire on the Moon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141394961>
 is published by Penguin Modern Classics.
 