
She has ladled out countless bowls of her pork noodle soup, but the owner of a 
Hanoi streetside restaurant says she was stunned whenBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> strolled in, pulled up a 
plastic stool and slurped down Vietnam’s famed “bun cha” delicacy.


The US president slipped away from his hectic Vietnam visit on Monday night to 
sample the dish withAnthony Bourdain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/anthonybourdain>, a chef and food 
critic who fronts a travel show about hidden culinary gems around the world.

While 54-year-old restaurant owner Nguyen Thi Lien knew a foreign television 
crew was on the way, she had no idea they would be bringing a very special 
guest.

“His presence in our restaurant was a great surprise for my whole family, who 
could never have imagined it, even in our dreams,” she told AFP on Tuesday.

US Secret Service and local police closed down the streets surrounding Bun Cha 
Huong Lien eatery on Monday evening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe1d521ca3b3b9a76a6e7fe2ecdfd193b395cb7a%2F0_177_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20stops%20off%20for%20%246%20dinner%20at%20streetside%20restaurant%20in%20Vietnam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20stops%20off%20for%20%246%20dinner%20at%20streetside%20restaurant%20in%20Vietnam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe1d521ca3b3b9a76a6e7fe2ecdfd193b395cb7a%2F0_177_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 US President Barack Obama waves after eating dinner at Bun cha Huong Lien with 
Anthony Bourdain in Hanoi. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images 
A large crowd gathered outside the restaurant, letting out a cheer as Obama 
exited.

Surrounded by a coterie of bodyguards, he stopped to greet excited locals, 
many capturing the moment on their phones, before being whisked away in his 
limousine.

“Obama was nice, smiling, cheerful and popular with everyone,” the shop’s 
owner told AFP, adding that she regretted not posing for a picture with the 
president.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ab28e291e5a4278cc52f175037c6255a93488e%2F0_214_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20stops%20off%20for%20%246%20dinner%20at%20streetside%20restaurant%20in%20Vietnam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20stops%20off%20for%20%246%20dinner%20at%20streetside%20restaurant%20in%20Vietnam&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Fobama-dinner-streetside-restaurant-vietnam-anthony-bourdain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ab28e291e5a4278cc52f175037c6255a93488e%2F0_214_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Obama has praised ‘strengthening ties’ between the United States and Vietnam 
during his trip. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images 
Bourdain posted a picture of the dinner on his Instagram feed with the caption 
“The President’s chopstick skills are on point”.

It showed the two sitting on tiny plastic stools that are a common feature of 
Vietnamese street restaurants, Obama clasping a bottle of Hanoi Beer in his 
right hand.

US lifts decades-long embargo on arms sales to Vietnam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/us-lifts-decades-long-embargo-on-arms-sales-to-vietnam>
Local diners could be seen sitting at stainless steel tables behind the pair 
tucking in to their own steaming bowls of broth, one wearing an American-style 
black baseball cap.

“Total cost of bun cha dinner with the President: $6.00. I picked up the 
check,” Bourdain, who is renowned for his love of cheap streetside food, later 
tweeted.

Vietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> is known for its fresh 
ingredients and healthy cuisine but Obama’s choice of bun cha, which with its 
fatty pork and sweet broth is at the more gluttonous end of the country’s 
culinary spectrum, might have raised the eyebrows of his wife Michelle who has 
long campaigned for healthy eating.
 