
Four rare artworks believed to have been stolen are being returned to India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> by an Ohio art museum.

Director Brian Kennedy recently announced that the Toledo Museum of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> made arrangements with the 
embassy of India to return the objects, including an 11th-century bronze 
sculpture depicting the deity Ganesh and a carved stone.

The facility had been in discussions with the Justice Department and the 
Republic of India about the pieces, which came from a former art dealer now 
accused of illegal exportation and other crimes, Kennedy said. The other items 
being returned are an 18th-century watercolor and centuries-old decorative box.

“The Indian diplomats with whom we have been dealing have been appreciative of 
our determination to examine the provenance issue and our commitment to return 
the objects if they had been at issue, which they were found to be,” Kennedy 
said.

The museum also announced it is returning more than 110 items that were 
donated by the dealer, Subhash Kapoor, and his gallery, but were not officially 
added to the museum’s collection,The (Toledo) Blade reported 
<http://www.toledoblade.com/Art/2015/09/23/Museum-to-return-tainted-art-objects.html#DTXoQaw6TPljVv7u.99>
.

Kapoor, who owned an art gallery in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, and a gallery manager are 
suspected of selling looted artifacts and giving buyers false histories about 
prior ownership of the items. Kapoor was arrested in Germany in 2011 and later 
extradited to India, where his case is pending.

His charges included forgery and illegal exportation.

It is not the first time the museum has returned ill-gotten items. A mermaid 
figure stolen during the second world war was returned to a German museum in 
2011, and an illegally looted ancient water jug was handed over to Italy in 
2013.
 