
If there is much betting on the Oliviers, then it was a bad night for the 
bookies, because the winners were mainly the favourites. As widely predicted, 
Kenneth Cranham, Imelda Staunton and Denise Gough took the three main acting 
trophies for performances – inThe Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/06/the-father-review-alzheimer-s-kenneth-cranham-claire-skinner-florian-zeller>
,Gypsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/16/gypsy-review-imelda-staunton-momma-rose-stephen-sondheim-jonathan-kent-peter-davison>
 andPeople, Places & Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/02/people-places-and-things-review-acting-addiction-denise-gough>
 – that were notable for their emotionally draining intensity and range.

Dame Judi Dench wins record eighth Olivier award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/judi-dench-wins-record-eighth-olivier-award>
These were the 40th Oliviers, and this year’s prizes nodded to its history. 
The most obvious example was aneighth statuette for Dame Judi Dench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/judi-dench-wins-record-eighth-olivier-award>
, who has become a mascot of this ceremony in the same way that Meryl Streep 
receives an Oscar nomination almost as soon as she turns up on a film set. But, 
though Dench is Olivier aristocracy, this honour was meritocratic. Her double 
turn as Paulina and the embodiment of Time in Kenneth Branagh’sThe Winter’s Tale
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/08/the-winters-tale-review-kenneth-branagh-and-judi-dench-garrick>
 was a lesson for all actors in how to respect the meter of Shakespearean verse 
while finding new narrative and psychological meanings.

Olivier awards 2016 – full list of winners from Kinky Boots to Judi Dench
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/olivier-awards-2016-the-full-list-of-winners>
 Apart from the extension of Dench’s trophy shelf, the quartet of 2016 awards 
for the revival of Stephen Sondheim’sGypsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/16/gypsy-review-imelda-staunton-momma-rose-stephen-sondheim-jonathan-kent-peter-davison>
 was also fitting. The backstage show became the 11th Sondheim show to win 
either best musical or best musical revival, and, if his additional lyrics for 
Leonard Bernstein’s Candide are included, a dozen productions featuring his 
words or music have now won.

 If giving gongs to Sondheim now feels like complimenting Novak Djokovic on 
his volley, the Oliviers deserve credit for having backed the composer even 
when he was considered an expensive luxury by commercial producers. Sweeney 
Todd was honoured in 1980 for a production regarded by many at the time as a 
failure, and the show has since become a classic of the theatrical and even 
opera-house repertoire.

August Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/augustwilson>, who died in 
2005, stands as one of the greatest American dramatists – a status marked by 
the best revival award to the National’s production of hisMa Rainey’s Black 
Bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/07/ma-raineys-black-bottom-lyttelton-review-august-wilson-dominic-cooke>
. But the Olivier judges also recognised Wilson when he was much less revered, 
giving the 2002 best play prize to Jitney.

 However, at time when cultural prizes are rightly under scrutiny for being 
white weddings, it’s upsetting that no actor in Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom – from 
the magnificent lead Sharon D Clarke to supporting performers such as OT 
Fagbenie and Lucian Msamati – was shortlisted. Having judged many drama awards, 
I can see that the play may have suffered for being regarded as an ensemble 
piece – and that the whole cast has effectively been rewarded by its best 
revival selection. But the result is that there is no direct acknowledgement of 
the brilliant talent in that play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36267485b1965b0c5e592c2dd043852af4dd0b2%2F0_380_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20awards%202016%3A%20Judi%20Dench%20and%20Rufus%20Norris%20deserve%20their%20statuettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20awards%202016%3A%20Judi%20Dench%20and%20Rufus%20Norris%20deserve%20their%20statuettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36267485b1965b0c5e592c2dd043852af4dd0b2%2F0_380_5760_3458%2F5760.jpg>
 Best actress winner Denise Gough on the red carpet at the Oliviers. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
 Another aspect that the organisers might like to look at in the 41st year is 
the division (now dropped at the London Evening Standard theatre awards) 
between best play and best comedy. Alan Bennett, once given the comic Standard 
award for a play he had intended as seriously dramatic, commented that it was 
“like entering a marrow for the show and being given the cucumber prize”. The 
oddity of these distinctions continues at the 2016 Oliviers, where Martin 
McDonagh’sHangmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/27/hangmen-martin-mcdonagh-royal-court-review-david-morrissey-reece-shearsmith-tremendous-terrifying>
, winner of best play, is a dark comedy that on a laugh-per-line count is 
arguably funnier than Jessica Swale’sNell Gwynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/12/nell-gwynn-review-gemma-arterton-apollo-london>
, which got best comedy.

 Most good playwrights can trigger both giggles and stings. A good example is 
the French dramatist Florian Zeller, whose The Father (translated by 
Christopher Hampton) was up for best play this year. But Zeller, the most 
exciting new theatre writer of our time, writes comedies, tragedies and 
tragicomedies and, rather than wasting time shuffling him between sections in 
the years to come, it might be time to unify the titles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fd5598bc0bf841954b7f618fa260bc36563e1e4%2F0_321_8688_5215%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20awards%202016%3A%20Judi%20Dench%20and%20Rufus%20Norris%20deserve%20their%20statuettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20awards%202016%3A%20Judi%20Dench%20and%20Rufus%20Norris%20deserve%20their%20statuettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Folivier-awards-2016-judi-dench-rufus-norris-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fd5598bc0bf841954b7f618fa260bc36563e1e4%2F0_321_8688_5215%2F8688.jpg>
 Kenneth Cranham, who won for his performance in The Father. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
 The most thoughtful (and possibly far-sighted) award is the selection of Mark 
Gatiss as best supporting actor for his show-stealing moments inPatrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/24/patrick-marber-interview-turgenev>
’s Turgenev adaptation for the National,Three Days in the Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/29/three-days-in-the-country-lyttelton-national-theatre-london-review-turgenev>
. Gatiss was stage trained but began his career with a long diversion in 
television. He has shone in a succession of productions including Season’s 
Greetings and 55 Days, and stole Three Days in the Country as a doctor who 
attempts to overcome arthritis, shyness and possibly misogyny to propose to a 
woman. Gatiss has probably left it too late to match a Sondheim dozen or Dench 
octet, but he will surely return to the podium at future awards.

 Four awards for National Theatre shows (Ma Rainey, Three Days, and People, 
Places & Things) will give welcome respite to new artistic directorRufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/25/rufus-norris-first-national-theatre-season-interview>
 from media mutterings that his regime is struggling to engage audiences. It 
also looks good for Norris that Robert Icke, who took the director prize for 
his daringOresteia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/oresteia-review-icke-brings-us-aeschylus-for-the-modern-age>
 at the Almeida, makes his National Theatre debut later this year and that 
actors in the thrilling new National production of Lorraine Hansberry’s Les 
Blancs – including Danny Sapani and Gary Beadle – will surely figure on more 
diverse acting shortlists next year.
 