
The number of English and Welsh people over the age of 85 has increased by 
almost a quarter in the course of a decade, according to government figures.

In 2001 the ranks of the "oldest old", according to the term used by the 
Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics>, stood at just 
over one million.

However, the number shown by the 2011 census was 1.25 million, with women in 
the age group outnumbering men by two to one.

The ONS report also reveals that although women are living longer, they are 
more likely to be living alone.

For every 100 women aged 85 or over, 77 were widowed, 13 were married and 10 
were either single, separated or divorced. Meanwhile almost half of men aged 85 
and over were still married, 43% were widowed and 9% were single.

The ONS said that recent increases in life expectancy meant that more people 
were reaching, and passing, their 85th birthday, adding that those just 
entering old age would also live on average to 85 or beyond.

"The oldest old are among the most vulnerable in our society," the report 
says. "For some, but by no means all, advancing years affects physical and 
mental health, increases level of dependency on others and the amount of 
support required from family, private and public institutions."

The report found that one in 10 men and one in five women lived in a communal 
establishment, such as a care home, with the remaining people living in a 
private household.

Tim Pethick, a spokesman for the company Saga, which campaigns for older 
people, said the increase in longevity should be welcomed. "We need to move 
away from the view that people living longer is a bad thing as it creates 
pressure on our systems, and instead start to celebrate the valuable 
contribution that older members of society continue to play in all of our 
lives."
 