
Maybe inheritance inhibits you. If you want to be an actress it looks like 
beneficence to have a legendary film director as a father; and simple to ease 
yourself into the Hollywood echelons when you've played skittles with Brando 
and Scrabble with Mitchum. In fact,Anjelica Huston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anjelica-huston> was 35 when, in 1985, she 
played her first significant screen role - in Prizzi's Honor, directed, of 
course, by her dad, John Huston, and starring her lover, Jack Nicholson.

Everyone who meets her remarks on it, and it is true, that in the flesh 
Anjelica Huston is much gentler than you might expect. She is not the person 
her commanding screen presence suggests. Today, in the natural light of a damp 
Dublin afternoon, any solidity in the angled planes of her face, the big eyes, 
the proud nose, dissolves. She is animated, beautiful, feminine, direct. No 
evasiveness here. She speaks slowly, in a gravelly voice you might assume was 
the hallmark of 30-odd years of chain smoking - were it not that she is John 
Huston's daughter. She is dressed to perfection, no creases, in leather 
trousers, silk shirt. On her fingers are three rings, all cabochon emeralds, 
and one in particular, surrounded by rubies, commands the attention. She has 
slim white hands.

There exudes from her an aura... of what? Call it wealth, money. Jack 
Nicholson once designated it "class", suggesting something innate in her, and 
this is probably right. But still there is no doubt that Ms Huston, in her 
life, has benefited from having every material want supplied. They are 
fascinating, these people, living their cotton-wool lives - stepping out of 
their perfumed bath, into their La Perla lingerie, picking up their Vuitton 
luggage. And how we need them and their fairy-tale existences. Until we 
realise, that is, that the fairy-tale can be picked apart as easily as even the 
best-made coat. And no matter how hard one tries, it can't be put back together 
again, or not in the same shape.

We are talking about her life, 48 years. We'll never get through it, I say, 
not in the allotted time. No matter, she says. "Make it up. But give it a happy 
ending. That's all I've ever wanted... Someone to say, 'And she lived happily 
ever after.' "

This is where it all begins, I think, with a middle-aged man's fantasy. John 
Huston, remember, directed his first film, The Maltese Falcon in 1941, aged 35 
- he had to wait some time for his success. By then he was already three times 
married, no children. Anyway, John Huston, aged 43 in 1949, meets the beautiful 
Balanchine ballet dancer Enrica Soma, known as Ricky, aged 17. One year later, 
now married, they have a son, Anthony. The following year, 1951, while he is 
shooting The African Queen with Bogart and Hepburn, a daughter, Anjelica.

It is two years after Anjelica's birth, while they are still living in 
California, that John Huston is invited "on a hunting trip" in Ireland - he had 
been in France shooting Moulin Rouge. "He fell in love with Ireland," Anjelica 
says, "and he felt that this was where he wanted to raise his children." It 
sounds great, until you realise that Huston intends to continue his life, a 
continent apart, in America. In 1954, after a year's renting in Co Wicklow, 
Huston buys a house, St Clarans, a grand, conspicuously remote Georgian manor 
just outside Co Galway. Ricky, now 21, and the children, retire to the country. 
And in this dreamy landscape, this fairy-tale scene - complete with dogs and 
horses and grooms - and bathed in granular light, because no one really 
believes this is paradise, they grow up. Or maybe "grow up" is a bit lazy here. 
In reality, they all atrophy, awaiting the return of the prodigal patriarch.

"My father would come for three weeks to a month at Christmas from wherever he 
had been on location, with all sorts of hampers of precious stones, or kimonos 
from Japan, or wonderful painted dolls and extraordinary Spanish dancing 
dresses. And he was like a god. He'd call me honey and darling and my little 
girl and the house would light up and really interesting people would come 
bearing gifts from America and we were very spoilt. And then he would leave and 
everything would fall back into shadow." For the kids, he was Santa Claus - he 
came but once a year. But for Ricky, this intimation of "real" life must have 
been torment. "She loved him," Anjelica says. "He was a big presence, and when 
he was around the rest of the world simply stopped. My mother followed him as 
much as she could for a while until it became untenable."

You have to ask what was Huston up to. He had married Ricky, not much more 
than a child herself, and banished her from his reality - Hollywood. And put 
her and their children in a doll's house, filled up with exotic objects. "They 
both had very good taste. It was a great mixture of beautiful things." He 
turned his marriage, his family, into a fantasy he could visit occasionally. "I 
think he tried to hide her away. She was the mother of his children, and that 
was probably her place, at that time, in his estimation." For Ricky, Anjelica 
says, "her life was my father". Sure, they all missed him. "Terribly." But for 
her mother, it was particularly lonely. "She was very young, she was very, very 
beautiful." There was no social life for her in rural Ireland. "I think it must 
have been painful for her."

In 1962, when Anjelica was 11, her mother suddenly left St Clarans for good. 
Just picked up her bags and departed. She took her two children to London, 
lived for one year with her friends, the poet Stephen Spender, his wife Natasha 
and their family, and finally negotiated to buy a house in Little Venice. The 
children were given no explanation. "Just vague things. The education. It's 
time you saw the outside world." I asked Anjelica what she now thought had 
prompted this decision, and she replied that she didn't really know. She didn't 
know who precipitated the break. What she didn't say is that that same year 
Huston's mistress, Zoe Sallis, gave birth to a boy, Danny.

London was a kind of initiation rite. "I was very backward, naive, uncynical. 
One year in London changed all that." She recalls on one occasion crying. 
Asking her mum why they weren't in Ireland any more. Why she wasn't with their 
father any more. "And she explained that people grow apart."

Then follows that odd thing where grown ups are allowed to behave as 
irresponsibly and as ludicrously as their desires dictate. And children aren't. 
Throughout her adolescence Anjelica avoided her father. In truth, he wasn't 
that difficult to avoid. As she explains, he was "a rare visitor" to their 
home, even rarer than before. At this age she was scared of him, he disapproved 
of everything. "My father was an odd dichotomy of adventurous, racy, a hunter 
in every sense - and extremely conservative when it came to his family, and 
particularly to his daughter." She was as she characterises herself, "A wild 
child."

 Smoking dope, wandering the streets of Notting Hill, all in black - "black 
clothes, black make-up, black wellington boots". Shiftless, restless. Moving 
from school to school. At the French Lyc√©e, she was kept down for two years, 
"and they were threatening to keep me back for a third". She was unhappy, began 
to get ill, she broke one of her vertebrae in an accident. Her mother moved her 
to a small crammer in Hampstead called Town & Country, and later on to Holland 
Park Comprehensive. She had dreams of becoming an actress, something her father 
had always frowned upon. Ricky, meanwhile, was having an affair with a married 
man. "She wanted to get remarried. I don't think it made her happy." This 
relationship produced, in 1964, a daughter, Allegra. Anjelica was 13.

And this is the misery of it. There wasn't enough time for the usual rites of 
passage - to resent the child, and then to get used to her. To fight for her 
mother's attention. Something was about to happen that would change everything.

Come 1968, it must have been apparent to her parents that she wasn't going to 
stick it at school. That year she auditioned for the part of Juliet in Franco 
Zeffirelli's Romeo And Juliet and was immediately recalled by the director. 
Then, out of the blue, her father, who had always discouraged her from an 
acting career, offered her a lead part in his film, A Walk With Love And Death, 
a 15th- century romance with Moshe Dyan's son as her co-star, supposed to be 
filming in Paris. Anjelica wasn't allowed to refuse - which effectively blocked 
any chance of her being considered for the Zeffirelli. Years after, in an 
interview with Sofia Coppola, Anjelica recalled how much she resented her 
father's interference at this point. "My father placed me in a film that I 
didn't want to do." How to interpret Huston's action? Protectiveness? Jealousy 
more like. Anjelica recalls going shopping with her mother. "We had to find 
something for me to wear of which my father would approve. I remember we chose 
a yellow wool suit."

The film was a disaster. The May revolution in Paris meant that the location 
had to be swapped to Vienna. Anjelica was still avoiding her father - not so 
easy when he is, as she points out, "the director". She didn't learn her lines. 
"He dressed me down in front of the crew. I was hysterical and embarrassed." 
She was mercilessly panned by the critics. But the experience crystallised one 
thing for her. One day she was going to be an actress. She'd prove that to her 
father. "School, the A-level thing, was water under the bridge." Back in 
London, Ricky got her a part understudying Marianne Faithfull in her friend 
Tony Richardson's production of Hamlet. Anjelica immediately started work.

From the painstaking way she goes over this part of the story, I can only 
imagine how many times she has rehearsed it, looking for that link that was 
missed, that may perhaps have changed the whole picture. How do you make sense 
of your mother's premature death?

You go to sleep one night, innocently imagining, if you think about it at all, 
that she is on her way to Venice with her exciting new young lover. And 
Anjelica slept well that night, she felt happy. The evening before leaving on 
her trip, her mother had come to her, "she wanted to borrow some trashy 
magazines I had in my room". She told her daughter that things would have to 
change between them. "We are two women now living in the same house. We are 
going to have to be more honest with each other. You're going to want to know 
more about what's going on with me." It was a great talk, Anjelica says. "A 
really fantastic talk. We hugged and kissed and cried. Thank God I had it." The 
next morning, her mother left. And the following morning Anjelica was woken by 
Allegra's godfather to be told that her mother had been killed in Strasbourg in 
a car crash. "Are you awake? Your mother is dead." There is no gentle way. As 
she says, "The most brutal thing that ever happened to me." I suppose after 
this degree of shock you become a kind of somnambulist, a sleepwalker. It takes 
a lot to wake you up after something like this.

She didn't want to stay in the house surrounded by her mother's things. "My 
mother's smell, my mother's closet." She didn't want to see her brother, "look 
into his eyes". And she didn't want to see her father. Not that he was there. 
Huston was in Rome shooting The Bible. He sent his assistant "to pack up a lot 
of items" and subsequently met Anjelica and her brother at Victoria Station - 
his emphysema meant he couldn't fly. "We didn't discuss my mother's death. We 
didn't discuss anything." She says she was afraid at this time of what her 
father would do, "That he might put me in a convent or something. I just wanted 
to get as far away as possible." Hamlet was about to open on Broadway and Tony 
Richardson offered to take her with the production. And little Allegra, only 
four when her mother died? She went to live with her godfather, then with her 
grandparents. "Ultimately, my father adopted her." That was noble of him, I 
say, for want of something more adequate. "My father was a Leo, a big lion," 
she says. "It's true, he was a warrior. Very brave, courageous. He was a noble 
man."

Was he, though? Or is this just another bit of the fairy-tale? It is true 
that, in every interview she gives, Anjelica Huston eulogises her father. "I 
have always been proud of my father. He was unusual and special and he had that 
voice and his presence was very big. He lit up a room when he walked into it." 
It is also true that he broke her mother's heart - her words. And his own 
heart? "No," she says flatly. And then: "I can't say that her death didn't 
break his heart on some level. He kept the house. St Clarans was there for 
years, long into the 70s." He only sold it after he remarried, for the fifth 
time. "I don't think his new wife wanted to be there. It was damp and cold." 
Damp and cold and empty.

The next part of the story has an eerie predictability about it. She wanted to 
be her own agent, free now to make decisions about her life. "I wanted to be 
free." She wanted to work, and started modelling. That was easy, she was John 
Huston's daughter - a good provenance - and she has a great face. Andy Warhol's 
Interview magazine, Harper's Bazaar, Vogue - all queued up. Maybe it was a lazy 
decision, but she was entitled to be lazy, she can't have had the energy for 
anything else. And then, she walked straight into the arms of fashion 
photographer Bob Richardson. They were the identical ages that her parents had 
been when they met. Richardson, 42, Huston, 18.

And, of course, her father loathed him. Richardson had a reputation. "He was 
volatile, problematic, manic depressive. My father didn't like the idea of his 
daughter with a man with that history." Unlike her father, he had no money; she 
kept him. They lived in the Chelsea Hotel in New York when it was on its uppers 
- "Got mugged in our room." Four years later, her father invited them on to his 
yacht in Mexico. "It was meant to be a rapprochement." But it was, she says, 
the holiday from hell and ended with her leaving Richardson at Los Angeles 
airport. And Los Angeles is where she remained, because it is at this point she 
went to live with her father. Having never known him or lived with him as a 
child, in a kind of inversion of reality, she now met him as an adult.

It was her father - she called him dad, "never daddy" - who introduced her to 
Jack Nicholson. It would be, wouldn't it? You can see exactly why her father 
would like him - Nicholson so charismatic, powerful, a man like himself who had 
come to success late and entirely through his own talent. It was 1972-73 and 
Nicholson was moving towards the height of his powers. He had made Easy Rider, 
Five Easy Pieces, the sort of independent films that Huston would admire and 
the two men were now working together on Roman Polanski's Chinatown. Huston was 
playing Noah Cross, the demonic father who has an incestuous relationship with 
his daughter; Nicholson, the private eye Jake Gittes. There is a disquieting 
scene, in the film in which the two men lock horns over Cross's daughter - 
played by Faye Dunaway. The dialogue runs something like this.

Cross/Huston: Are you sleeping with my daughter? 

Gittes/Nicholson: If you want an answer to that question I'll put one of my 
men on it.

Cross: You are dealing with a disturbed woman who has just lost her husband . 
. .

Of course the script is Bob Towne's and Polanski's, but it's hard not to feel 
a shiver of distaste at the real-life parallel.

Anjelica moved in with Jack in 1973, when she was 22, and they remained 
together for 17 years. For the first seven years she worked hardly at all - 
just walk-ons - a bit part in Kazan's The Last Tycoon, or tiny cameos in films 
such as The Postman Always Rings Twice, in which Nicholson starred. As she 
approached 30, almost over the hill in terms of a romantic lead, she had no 
reputation of her own. Who was she? She was the daughter of a legend and the 
live-in girlfriend of the most successful actor in Hollywood.

Then, in 1980, she moved out, "ran off" with the actor Ryan O'Neal. The affair 
lasted 18 months - he was a pretty boy, but not much more. As she quaintly puts 
it, "The problem with Ryan was that, although horizontally everything was 
lovely, vertically we didn't get along." Nicholson, "took it very badly". But 
then, as she also says, "Jack isn't the most faithful of people. Fidelity is 
not his strong point. Living with him, I wasn't getting the affection I wanted, 
the attention I needed." Though she and Nicholson got back together, she never 
moved in with him again.

It was now the early 80s, and still she was getting no work. "I felt like an 
appendage and I am not much of an appendage person. When the phone rang, it was 
always for Jack. It was his life I was living. I was not living my own life." 
She was envious of his career. "Extremely." Here she was suspended between 
these two powerful men. She knew it. "I wanted a career and I had this strong 
feeling that I'd never get up and do it unless I was on my own."

Maybe it was trying to hang on to her - for himself and for Jack - that Huston 
directed Prizzi's Honor in 1985, starring them both. It was the film that began 
her career. In it she plays Maerose, the mob moll out for revenge; and, as 
almost everyone observed at the time, it would have been a much better film if 
it had been about Maerose. She was callous, evil even, but equipped with 
courage, and a vampiric sense of fun. There was a lewdness there, that derives 
directly from her unconventional looks and gives a sensuality to everything she 
does. As one reviewer put it, "You resented every scene she wasn't in." She was 
rewarded with an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress. There are pictures of both 
her father and Nicholson tearful as she makes her acceptance speech.

Another family film followed, The Dead, her father's last film, made just 
before his death in 1987 and scripted by her brother, Tony. It showed a softer 
side - lyrical, quiet - and tuned to the ensemble music of the story. It was 
the directness, the clarity in her acting, the lack of sentimentality that was 
beginning to distinguish her work and which makes her so very moving. And 
suddenly directors became more ambitious about using her, suddenly it didn't 
seem to matter that her striking looks made her difficult to cast. Woody Allen 
was the first - he showed her flinty-plain, unequivocal and unafraid as the 
mistress who is murdered in Crimes And Misdemeanours (1989).

She was tough as nails as Lily in Stephen Frears' The Grifters (1990), 
opposite an emotionally plump John Cusack, balancing maternal instincts against 
survival - and allowing survival, tragically, to triumph. The diamond-tough 
exterior, simple self-protection, becomes a form of self-destruction. The 
Witches and The Addams Family, both family films, merely caricatured her dark 
looks and witchy beauty, but did nothing to show her substantialness. And then, 
it was as though her acting career was over as soon as it had begun. She is 
naturally a more serious actress than the Hollywood world in which she moves 
allows her to be. In England, she would have been playing Lady Macbeth, 
Gertrude, Tamora Queen of the Goths from Titus Andronicus, those "middle-aged" 
roles, but there's no obvious place in American movies for an actress of her 
maturity and range. And the few there are go to Meryl Streep. And if you aren't 
in movies in America, as an actress you are nowhere. Last year, Huston was back 
to playing opposite Jack Nicholson in Sean Penn's The Crossing Guard, in which 
they play divorcees.

She left Nicholson in 1990, after his relationship with the waitress Rebecca 
Broussard produced a child. I remember interviewing him about four years after 
this - the wistfulness with which he talked of Anjelica and their relationship. 
"She betrayed me first," he said, and I had the strong impression that he 
regretted the split. She thinks so, too. "I don't think Jack wanted things to 
change. I think he was kidding himself, but he wasn't kidding me. There was no 
possibility that I would stay with him after he got someone pregnant." There 
was a "potent" conversation, she says, in which she asked him: "Are you going 
to be a father to the child?" And he answered Yes, he was going to be a father 
to the child. And that was that. You have to listen to this question and 
remember that it is being asked by someone who, as a child, scarcely had a 
father. A father who was felt by his absence. And, it is being asked by someone 
whose mother left her husband, when he made his mistress pregnant. As Anjelica 
says, "This was the ultimate betrayal. If he thought I would stay after that..."

He didn't think she would stay. He also probably knew that she had to go - as 
she says, she would never achieve anything until she was on her own. All her 
life had been dominated by this fantasy figure, her father. Maybe she had 
thought that Jack would be a way of sorting out the thing with her father, that 
he would stand between her and her father. Whatever, there was clear admiration 
between the two men. Anjelica and Nicholson split up the year after Huston 
died. John Huston adored Jack. "Yes," she says, "and rightly so." And Jack 
adored her father? "Yes."

 Iasked her if the two men were alike. Actually, she said, "Jack is more like 
my mother. Physical in the same way, the same grounded feel - feet on the 
earth. He is emotional, extremely intelligent, has a loony sense of humour. Is 
brilliant, special, beautiful, luminous. Like her. An old soul." It sounds 
soft, but I still think he let her go.

She looks happy. That's because she is happy, she says. She directed her new 
film, Agnes Brown, in which she also plays the lead and which she describes as 
"a lovely fairy-tale". "Sweet-natured and uncynical", just like the remembered 
Ireland of her childhood. In the film, which opens next month, she plays a 
mother of seven, a portrait she modelled on her own nanny. Agnes's husband dies 
suddenly and she works on a stall to support her children while trying to hang 
on to some sense of self. Huston is always sensual, and in this you feel you 
can almost touch her. But it's a hopelessly sentimentalised vision of Irish 
working-class life, full of raven-haired Irish women of flinty resolve. She 
describes it as "sort of Snow White with the children as the seven dwarfs". 
Which is funny because, in that story, natural casting would have her as the 
wicked stepmother. Far more complex, mysterious, full of hidden drives than the 
dreary Snow White.

But this is where this story would have ended - Anjelica happy ever after, 
with her husband, the sculptor Robert Graham, whom she met six months after she 
left Jack and married one year later. "He is fantastic. Deep, kind, 
understanding, a wonderful artist." They have no children, and now, most 
likely, will not have. But that's all right she says. "It's no big regret. I 
can have other people's children."

In the taxi on the way to the airport, the Dublin driver is bemoaning the 
rising house prices. Sure, no one can afford to buy anything any more, he says. 
Not with the big money that's moving in. Why, only the other day he heard that 
that actor Jack Nicholson had put in a ¬£3.5 million bid for a house just 
outside the city. He knows the area. Apparently, he wants somewhere beautiful, 
remote, away from Hollywood, to bring his children.
 