
The Station Master’s Apprentice

When I was about 11 my primary school teacher, Mr Beech, was in an amateur 
dramatics society in south London, at the Old Fire Station in Norwood. Our 
class got taken to see him in a production of The Station Master’s Apprentice 
and he was great. That was just fantastic, to see my teacher in a play – to see 
somebody I knew, but in a different role and in a different guise, and 
completely believing him. I guess that’s when I first really thought about what 
this acting malarkey is all about. It was the first real theatre that I’d been 
to: it was quite sad and smelled funny, but there was something about it that I 
loved; something thrilling.

Tom and Viv

Tom and Viv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/30/michael-hastings-obituary> at 
the Royal Court in 1984, directed byMax Stafford-Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/max-stafford-clark>, blew me away. I 
couldn’t believe that theatre could be that magical and that extraordinary. I 
didn’t think at first that that sort of play [about the relationship between TS 
Eliot and his first wife, Vivienne Haigh-Wood] would be up my street, but it 
completely was. The performances were astonishing. There was a feel of light 
and air that I hadn’t experienced before. The set was stunning. I’d been so 
used to seeing new plays in a very modern setting at the Court, and then 
suddenly there was this period piece, but there was something about it that 
still felt new.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426524418160%2Fdf1f3c88-28f4-4dbf-80bb-895232a187d2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paulette%20Randall%3A%20my%20life%20in%20five%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paulette%20Randall%3A%20my%20life%20in%20five%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426524418160%2Fdf1f3c88-28f4-4dbf-80bb-895232a187d2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Randall was deeply impressed by Max Stafford-Clark’s 1984 production of Tom 
and Viv at the Royal Court, starring Tom Wilkinson and Julie Covington. 
Photograph: Sue Adler/Observer 
Pinchy Kobi and the Seven Duppies

The Posse were a company of eight black actors who wrote and performed their 
own work; Pinchy Kobi and the Seven Duppies was the first full-length piece 
that they had written. They used to do comedy sketches at the Theatre Royal 
Stratford East and tour them. This was the first time they’d actually done a 
full-length story. It was based on A Christmas Carol and wasat the Tricycle in 
London in 1992 
<http://www.blackplaysarchive.org.uk/explore/productions/pinchy-kobi-and-seven-duppies>
. I wasn’t originally going to be directing the show, but I got a phone call 
one day saying: “Would you like to come in and have a look at what we’re 
doing?” I was working in television at the time, so of course I didn’t really 
respond. I thought I’d go and see them at the weekend or something. And then I 
got another call the next day saying: “I don’t think you understand; when we 
said would you like to, we meant come now.”

Play Mas review – funny, informative account of parties and politics in 
Trinidad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/15/play-mas-orange-tree-review> 
So I went and I said: “What you’ll do is you’ll show me act one, take a 
10-minute break, and show me act two.” So we saw bits of act one and they kept 
explaining where a song was going to be, and how that scene wasn’t quite 
finished yet, and then I said: “OK, what about act two?” And they said: “Yeah, 
that’s the problem, we haven’t got act two.” We had 10 days before we were due 
to open. It was insane, but we did it. We were all incredibly proud of what 
we’d managed to achieve. Nobody really went home; we worked around the clock. 
We just said: “We can do this and we can sleep afterwards.”

Gem of the Ocean

I’ve done six out of the cycle of 10 plays that August Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/oct/04/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 wrote – includingFences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/27/fences-duchess-lenny-henry-review>
 [at the Duchess theatre in London in 2013] with Lenny Henry, which was Lenny’s 
first real contemporary part. It was a huge part and he was extraordinary in it.

August once said to the Tricycle: “Whenever you want to do another one of my 
plays you can, as long as it’s Paulette,” which was an amazing honour. If I had 
to choose one of those plays, then it’sGem of the Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jan/15/theatre1> [staged at the 
Tricycle in 2006].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426524694407%2F53ce2165-9931-4403-9338-478e07b462e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paulette%20Randall%3A%20my%20life%20in%20five%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paulette%20Randall%3A%20my%20life%20in%20five%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fpaulette-randall-my-life-in-five-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426524694407%2F53ce2165-9931-4403-9338-478e07b462e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carmen Munroe, Jenny Jules and Joseph Marcellin in August Wilson’s Gem of the 
Ocean at the Tricycle in 2006. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/Guardian 
Gem of the Ocean deals with a contemporary audience’s understanding of the 
slave trade and what that legacy means today. There was a moment in the script 
where one of the characters gets taken on a journey, and it’s a journey of 
history. Working with the designer Libby Watson, she came up with a way of 
changing this room in a house into the belly of a slave ship. It didn’t look 
like it was a ship at all, but when we took them on this journey then you 
realised that the shape of the stage was actually like the bowels of a ship. It 
was very evocative and, to some people, quite disturbing.

Jenna Russell: my life in five shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/25/jenna-russell-my-life-in-five-shows-stephen-sondheim-liza-minnelli>
Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune

As a jobbing director you hope that you climb a ladder in some way. It felt 
like a real achievement to do a production at Chichester. It was one of those 
places that I’d never worked before andFrankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/14/frankie-and-johnny-clair-de-lune-review>
 wasn’t a play that was specifically about my race or class or gender, it was 
just a really good play. That’s a real achievement, because then people look at 
you as a director as opposed to a black director. When white directors direct 
black work, they don’t say: “The white director who directed blah blah blah”, 
they just go, “The director”. It’s really important that people just see me as 
a director.

There was a period back in the 80s where, because we were being politically 
correct, if people were putting on a black play they thought we must have a 
black director, and I thought: “I’m never going to stop working.” Then we got 
really PC and we went: “We can all do everything.” It’s taken me this long to 
just do a play because I’m right for it and I can do it.

 * Play Mas, directed by Paulette Randall, is at the Orange Tree, Richmond, 
until 11 April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/15/play-mas-orange-tree-review>
 