
The Leftovers is, as often 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/30/hbo-the-leftovers-intense-unpredictable>
noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/06/hbo-the-leftovers-apocalyptic-drama-damon-lindelof-lost>
 bycritics <http://grantland.com/features/hbo-the-leftovers-lost-lindelof/>, a 
dark show. The black slapstick of Walter White flailing around a meth lab in 
his skivvies looks downright chipper compared with what passes for humor in 
HBO's newest. In Sunday night's episode two, a couple of teenagers joke that a 
woman who's lost her family must rob convenience stores to feel alive. 
Confronted with tragedy, everybody gets cynical.

But why not appreciate absurdity too? The vanished are a conglomeration of 
decent folk, horrible people and international figures from art, politics and 
entertainment: the show tells us that the lost include Salman Rushdie, Bonnie 
Raitt, Condoleezza Rice, Jennifer Lopez, Anthony Bourdain, Shaquille O'Neal,
Pope Benedict XVI <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-benedict-xvi> and 
Gary Busey. What do they all have in common? How many degrees from Kevin Bacon 
are they, and can we blame him?

*Update: to those unfamiliar with "Six degrees from Kevin Bacon", it's a riff 
off the idea that any two people on the planet arelinked by six or fewer 
acquaintances <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_degrees_of_separation>; it's a 
play on Kevin Bacon'sextremely prolific career. 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000102/> The riff of this piece here is simply 
that The Leftovers, a show about people drawing all sorts of links and 
searching for answers, could do the same thing forever, in any number of absurd 
ways.

Salman Rushdie: Indian-British novelist, 67, two degrees from Kevin Bacon

Fatwa survivor, atheist, knight, serial divorcee, author of third-person 
autobiography. Compared himself to Anton Chekhov in autobiography and F Scott 
Fitzgerald on Facebook. Uses Twitter. Cameo'd in Bridget Jones's Diary and 
River of Fundament, which featured Elaine Stritch, who also acted in 
Monster-In-Law, in which starred …


Jennifer Lopez: entertainer, 44, two degrees from Kevin Bacon

American Idol judge, Selena Quintanila-Pérez impersonator 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selena_(film)>, lead in Anaconda and Antz, World 
Cup opener. "From the block", meaning the Bronx, to which she returned for the 
first time in years in a 2014 concertsponsored by State Farm 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/06/arts/music/review-jennifer-lopez-back-in-the-bronx.html>
. Received award from Amnesty International, the long-time collaborator of …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhbo-leftovers-six-degrees-kevin-bacon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404743168982%2F3a280b24-6969-437c-a2fd-a320a361db61-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playing%20six%20degrees%20of%20Kevin%20Bacon%20with%20HBO's%20The%20Leftovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhbo-leftovers-six-degrees-kevin-bacon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playing%20six%20degrees%20of%20Kevin%20Bacon%20with%20HBO%27s%20The%20Leftovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhbo-leftovers-six-degrees-kevin-bacon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404743168982%2F3a280b24-6969-437c-a2fd-a320a361db61-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jennifer Lopez: two degrees. Photo: AP 
Bonnie Raitt: American singer-songwriter, 64, two degrees from Kevin Bacon

Favors a Fender Stratocaster, environmentalist, credits Stevie Ray Vaughan for 
helping her get sober. Married and divorced actor Michael O'Keefe, of 
Caddyshack. Dedicated an album "to the people of North Vietnam 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=EgIZ84UBiDIC&pg=PA44&lpg=PA44&dq=bonnie+raitt+people+of+north+vietnam&source=bl&ots=E64EaIfPGL&sig=LOAzjWKStBncnKR3l_whzN1QPAI&hl=en&sa=X&ei=-w26U5zSGemhsASnzYDYCA&ved=0CEAQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=bonnie%20raitt%20people%20of%20north%20vietnam&f=false>
" in 1972 and the song Your Good Thing (Is About to End)to George W Bush 
<http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-news/1175842/posts> in 2004, for whom 
served …

Condoleezza Rice: former secretary of state, 59, two degrees from Kevin Bacon. 

Stanford professor, played piano to accompany Yo-Yo Ma 
<http://www.makers.com/condoleezza-rice/moments/%E2%80%9Cplaying-brahms-yo-yo-ma%E2%80%9D>
 and Aretha Franklin. Studied Russian,appeared on 30 Rock 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/04/29/what-was-condoleezza-rice-playing-on-30-rock/>
 (linking her by two degrees to Salman Rushdie) and enjoys Led Zeppelin. 
Namesake of the USS Condoleezza Rice until Chevronchanged the supertanker's 
<http://www.sfgate.com/politics/article/Chevron-redubs-ship-named-for-Bush-aide-2922481.php>
 official title. Graduated from Catholic high school and was snubbed repeatedly 
by <http://harpers.org/blog/2007/09/pope-benedict-snubs-condoleezza-rice/> …

Benedict XVI: née Joseph Ratzinger, 87, four degrees from Kevin Bacon

First pope to resign since 1415, conscripted into Hitler Youth at 14 and 
deserted from the Nazis at 18. Professor of theology and popemobile passenger. 
Presided over mass at Yankee stadium and frequentlyderided consumerism 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-16328318>. Fond of Mozart and cats 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/21/us/nationalspecial2/21cats.html>. Pope 
emeritus of the Catholic church, whose adherents included the ancestors of …

Anthony Bourdain: chef, 59, three degrees from Kevin Bacon

TV host, memoir author, bearer of ouroborus tattoo, guest star on Archer. Has 
consumed: warthog rectum, psilocybin mushrooms, seal eyeball, sheep testicle, 
secobarbital, cocaine, heroin and a chicken McNugget. Enjoys The Ramones and 
disdains Billy Joel. Grew up in Leonia, New Jersey, 16 miles from Newark, where 
was raised …

Shaquille O'Neal: retired basketball player, 42, two degrees from Kevin Bacon

Four-time NBA champion, platinum-selling rap artist of Shaq Diesel. Acted in 
film as a genie who resides in a boombox. Self-described "big Aristotle and 
hobo master". Wrote a doctorate on the "duality of humor and aggression in 
leadership". Miami reserve police officer and honorary US deputy marshal. 
Voiced Smooth Smurf in Smurfs 2, also featuring Cristina Ricci, who was Lucy in 
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, a film starring …

Gary Busey: drummer, 70, two degrees from Kevin Bacon

Academy Award nominee, and star of Lethal Weapon. Cancer survivor in 1998, 
survivor of skull fracture by way of motorcycle accident in 1988, and "proud to 
tell Hollywood [he is] a Christian" in 1996. Appeared on Donald Trump's 
Celebrity Apprentice 4.

What links these people? Everything, nothing, Kevin Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kevin-bacon>, HBO. I've got nothing. Let's 
blame Kevin.
 