
‘It’s all meat’

We open this week with another flashback, this time to the Quincannon family 
taking a photo on a ski lift car at Vail in the 1980s. This tells us a couple 
of important things:Preacher <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/preacher>
 is interested in the characters of its villains (important), and it’s open to 
making jokes about the 80s (extremely important). Treating all of the villains 
like interchangeable cardboard buggery holes is one of the big features 
(flaws?) of the comic, so this is actually a somewhat substantial change. Also, 
the car breaks and the entire family dies.

Back in Annville, a slightly younger Odin goes nuts, cutting the entrails out 
of cows so he can shake them at Jesse’s father and yell about meat. As 
reactions to tragedy go, this makes a lot of sense, and does more to explain 
why Quincannon is the way he is than all of the Jesse flashbacks last week. He 
subscribes to a certain sort of materialist nihilism, a view he confirms when 
Jesse asks him later which god he serves: the god of meat.

Sadly, the god of meat doesn’t do much for Quincannon for most of this 
episode, as his Meat Men make repeated assaults on the church to no avail. 
Jesse keeps beating their asses and, it turns out, is very handy with a rifle, 
scattering the men over and over even though he’s outnumbered. We don’t get the 
big confrontation we were promised at the end of last week’s episode, but 
that’s OK, because Eugene is back! (Sort of.)

‘People want to choose’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa56f9d97ebf25c9f47de2bfdbb04a1baf3cac4f5%2F0_80_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa56f9d97ebf25c9f47de2bfdbb04a1baf3cac4f5%2F0_80_4500_2701%2F4500.jpg>
 Dominic Cooper as Jesse Custer. Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/Sony Pictures 
Telev/AMC 
When Eugene appears to just drag himself up from hell, there are a few 
possible explanations – maybe Jesse successfully bargained with God, maybe his 
Word really is that powerful, maybe the angels had something to do with it 
(more on that later). Having the magically returned Eugene be some kind of 
demon or delusion or whatever he is is much, much better. Ian Coletti is 
rapidly proving himself to be the stealth MVP of the cast, and giving him the 
opportunity to smirk at Jesse is great.

Dominic Cooper, meanwhile, does a less-than-convincing job playing these 
scenes. He tells Eugene that he’s learned the error of his ways, but it doesn’t 
sound like he believes it. This seems like a more deliberate acting decision 
when the angels show up and Jesse once more tries to convince them that his 
possession of Genesis might be God’s plan, but the preacher’s motivations are 
still far too muddled for this point in the season. At the very least, his 
ambivalence does go a long way toward explaining why Jesse might rarely use the 
Word once the main action starts in earnest. (He rarely uses it in the comic.)

Jesse asks the angels what happened to Eugene, what happened to him, why he 
hasn’t exploded – all of the sort of expository questions that it makes sense 
for him to ask, but that really do not matter to the show in the slightest. 
He’s still rationalizing what happened, what God’s plan is – even with Eugene 
in hell, he’s still hanging on to the same position, which is starting to get 
pretty annoying. At least the lullaby this time is more haunting, rather than 
silly, before Genesis goes right back into Jesse. (It’s weird that Jesse 
doesn’t call the angels back and make them get Eugene out of hell though, 
right?)

‘Don’t you have questions?’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f33ac3cbb6be7a31f5208d26f4db17b18a0c694%2F0_143_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f33ac3cbb6be7a31f5208d26f4db17b18a0c694%2F0_143_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Jesse Custer: the weakest part of his own show? Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/Sony 
Pictures Telev/AMC 
Jesse’s ongoing weakness as a character is thrown into stark relief by Tulip’s 
extremely brief plot this episode, in which she buys a dog and then feeds it to 
Cassidy. The whole sequence with Brewski the dog is really well shot and 
wonderfully acted by Ruth Negga, who has also brought the best out of Cooper 
all season. Why is the preacher the weakest part of his own show? Especially 
when pretty much everyone else shows up at the church for the conclusion of the 
standoff.

Miles the try-hard mayor has fully taken up with Quincannon, even after 
watching him murder a bunch of people. (Also, he feeds Emily’s kids spoiled 
milk.) Donnie appears to put his head in the trunk of his car and shoot 
himself, which would be a bizarrely tossed-off death if he didn’t show up 
later, capturing Jesse by blowing his eardrums out. (This is one of the 
smartest pieces of writing the show has done. Why didn’t Jessica Jones just do 
that?) Eventually, there’s a full barbecue going to watch what’s now turned 
into an apparent hostage situation with Eugene.

Preacher doesn’t get as much comic mileage out of the chaos as it could, but 
there are some decent moments of action. (Like Jesse shooting Clive’s dick off, 
the kind of random violence the comic did really well, but suffers from the 
lack of explicit gore.) All of the scenes of the Meat Men are scored with 
uplifting music, as if they were the heroes – which they eventually become when 
Jesse is taken away by Sheriff Root as a criminal, leaving Donnie and Odin 
victorious. The preacher tries to demand one more Sunday from Quincannon, a 
service where he will call God Himself to the church to make Him answer for His 
crimes, which … will be interesting. A mistrust of the divine is important to 
the eventual direction of the character, but Preacher sure has taken a rather 
roundabout way to get there. At least Clive literally got handed his dick in a 
box.

Notes from the nave
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f343a0387f85b25a35fd0540f49c8f6dab66647%2F0_478_3763_2259%2F3763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20El%20Valero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-eight-el-valero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f343a0387f85b25a35fd0540f49c8f6dab66647%2F0_478_3763_2259%2F3763.jpg>
 Preacher: Jessica Jones could learn a few things. Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/AMC 
Jesse, flabbergasted by the possibility that Eugene had just returned: “You 
dug out of hell with your hands?” Not-Eugene responds, succinctly: “It’s not 
that far.”


Not-Eugene disappears after Genesis leaves and re-enters Jesse. Could it be 
that he was a manifestation of Jesse’s power? Or was the preacher just 
hallucinating?

Quincannon somehow doesn’t know what food courts are and invents them on the 
spot, then uses the promise of the food court (chimichangas, pizza, etc.) to 
motivate his men to attack the church.

The angels tell Jesse that they’re done “trying” to get Genesis out of him. 
Assuming that they need to kill him in order to extract the entity, I have some 
thoughts about who they might be going to for help. (He’s mean, he’s good with 
a pistol, and we’ve been seeing him in flashback for a reason.)

Clive, more flabbergasted than hurt or in pain: “Preacher shot my dick off.”

Worst job in Texas

It’s a three-way tie between Clive trying to storm the church and losing his 
dick, the medic who has to treat him, and Brewski, who dies in the service of 
Cassidy’s lunch (RIP).

Most heartfelt moment

Sheriff Root expresses his genuine love and affection for the missing Eugene 
to Quincannon, who responds with total disinterest.

Cassidy kill count

Twelve –10 people (including several angels, killed repeatedly), one cow and 
one poor dog.
 