
‘It’s definitely not paradise’

Preacher recap: season one, episode one – Pilot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/22/preacher-recap-season-one-episode-one-pilot>
The year is 1881 and a man’s child is sick so he must go procure medicine on 
horseback. He looks like he’s seen some things. (The camera holds, briefly, on 
his gun, but he doesn’t take it.) He rides across open plains, taking in the 
barren, creeping beauty of the land. Encountering a family that has escaped the 
city of St Louis to come out to the country. The taciturn traveller speaks for 
the first time to reject the supposed mystical allure of the open sky. No, this 
is most definitely not paradise, confirmed by the presence of a tree full of 
the scalped bodies of Native Americans.

The man sees this tree heading into the town of Ratwater. You know this is 
significant if you’ve read the comics, and if you haven’t, well, suffice to 
say, Ratwater is more pleasant than its name would suggest (it was also the 
name of the whiskey Jesse orders in the first episode). More importantly: is 
this the Saint of Killers, one of the more powerful (and important) characters 
in thePreacher <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/preacher> universe? 
Certainly looks like it.

‘Boring’s not the worst thing a person can be’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd36bac379ebddcc2f58d5d2803403daf04d300d%2F0_14_4918_2951%2F4918.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20See&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20See&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd36bac379ebddcc2f58d5d2803403daf04d300d%2F0_14_4918_2951%2F4918.jpg>
 Derek Wilson as Donnie Schenck. Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/Sony Pictures 
Telev/AMC 
Jesse is having a tough time at the church. There are plenty of attendees for 
his baptism revivals (including a smirking Tulip), but all the dramatic POV 
shots in the world won’t help his flock. Cassidy has stolen the church’s 
communion wine, is rather rude to the disfigured Eugene, and continues to 
comically avoid direct sunlight without anyone really noticing. Linus, a newly 
spotlighted denizen of Annville, who drives the school bus and is an 
unrepentant pedophile, tells Jesse about the fixation he has on one of the 
schoolgirls.

Meanwhile, we get our first look at Odin Quincannon, the man who owns 
everything around Annville. Jackie Earle Haley’s hunched and ruthless 
Quincannon is introduced surrounded by goons (including the injured Donnie), 
talking an elderly couple into allowing him to bulldoze their house. He is 
definitely the villain and a representative of the relentless, onward march of 
“progress”. His employees take similar license to do what they want, beating 
each other up and frequenting the Toadvine Whorehouse, where Tulip almost 
starts a fight after cleaning them all out in a poker game.

Tulip isn’t the only one close to fisticuffs: Cassidy and Jesse get into a 
fight over their obviously divergent values and approaches to life, neatly 
summed up in the preacher telling the vampire, “Boring’s not the worst thing a 
person can be” only to elicit the response, “I think you’re wrong.” After 
insulting The Big Lebowski, Cassidy drugs Jesse and runs off, a decision that 
might be a lot of things, but is certainly not boring.

Cassidy comes through, thankfully, and returns to the church to find the two 
mysterious men (DeBlanc, played by one of cable TV’s most relable actors Anatol 
Yusef and Fiore, played by Tom Brooke) who have been watching the congregation 
and who we saw in Africa at the start of the first episode. They’ve come for 
the shrieking cosmic being that is stuck inside Jesse’s head, which they 
attempt to extract by playing a lullaby on a music box before attempting to 
usher it into a tin can. They don’t get far though, because in another great 
fight scene, Cassidy bashes one of their heads in with a bible, then uses a 
chainsaw to cut the other’s arm off, dismembers them, and (in a neat touch) 
buries them under the same tree the man passed over a century earlier.

‘It’s only a matter of time ’til you’re you all over again’

Jesse spends the rest of this episode waking up in a daze, physically and 
spiritually. First, he’s dragged out of the church from his Cassidy-induced 
stupor to an appointment with a woman whose daughter is in a coma. (Say what 
you will about Cassidy, he’s a pretty great cleaner.) But in an attempt to be 
present in the community, Jesse comes up against a wall: his job as a preacher 
is just to say nice things, but that doesn’t necessarily help anyone. The 
girl’s mother only appreciates the casserole he brought, because she can feed 
it to her dogs.

Later on, Jesse’s knocked out again and wakes up shackled to a bed, observed 
by a creepy figure in a gas mask who turns out to be Tulip. She’s trying to 
convince him to go back to their old life, and it’s hard to blame her – she 
loved a version of Jesse, and she wants that person back. As she puts it, “It’s 
only a matter of time ’til you’re you all over again.” (This refrain will be 
familiar to anyone who has watched a prestige drama where the anti-hero tries 
to quit doing whatever bad thing they like doing.)

Stymied by this confrontation with Tulip and a subsequent encounter with 
Eugene in which Jesse seems to run up against a wall of personal 
responsibility, he takes matters into his own hands (or voice). In the middle 
of the night, Jesse goes to Linus’s house, knocks him around, re-baptises him 
in a bathtub, and tells him to forget the girl he’s been so focused on, with 
evidently immediate results. Fueled by the success of this endeavor, he returns 
to the comatose girl and tells her to open her eyes. As much as Tulip and 
Cassidy have been trying to jolt Jesse out of complacency, it looks like he has 
the power now.

Notes from the nave
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ef05082ea3a34b54068df1ffc2df337afb7261%2F0_172_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20See&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Preacher%20recap%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20See&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpreacher-recap-season-one-episode-two-see%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ef05082ea3a34b54068df1ffc2df337afb7261%2F0_172_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 Preacher Photograph: Lewis Jacobs/AMC 
 * Forgive me for being ignorant about priest/client confidentiality (I plead 
Jewish), but Jesse could probably tell law enforcement about Linus, right? He 
definitely should not be driving a school bus.

 * “We’re from the government.” This is what the two mysterious men tell 
sheriff Root when they show up at his office, after Cassidy has already killed 
them. They must have a nice retirement package. 
 * Eugene asks Jesse to try baptizing him again, because he doesn’t feel any 
different after and doesn’t know how to be a good person. Welcome to the club. 
 * Nothing good can come from the town of Annville being built essentially on 
top of a Native American burial ground, right? That’s horror movie 101. 
Obligatory Johnny Cash song
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEtbuUlSGXzc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEtbuUlSGXzc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEtbuUlSGXzc&media=>
Most ridiculous death

It’s a tough choice between the two we have this episode. The first death by 
chainsaw has a certain Evil Dead quality to it, but I’ve got to go with the 
literal bible-bashing. Good work, Cassidy.

Cassidy’s kill count

Two (maybe?)
 