
Preacher, AMC’s improbable adaptation of the beloved comic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/feb/07/preacher-ultimate-comic-book-tv-adaptation>
 by Seth Rogen, Evan Goldberg and Breaking Bad’s Sam Catlin, is almost here. 
The series is set to debut later this year, including a screening of the pilot 
at SXSW. The latest trailer for the series features all of the things fans 
might expect – Dominic Cooper’s drawling Jesse Custer, the eponymous preacher, 
Joe Gilgun’s leering Irish vampire Cassidy, and a whole lot of foreboding and 
portentous violence. Could this show be … good?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNgI2sRzr8I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNgI2sRzr8I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNgI2sRzr8I&media=>
Reactions from the pilot’s first screening at the Television Critics 
Association winter press tour havebeen 
<http://www.hitfix.com/whats-alan-watching/seth-rogens-preacher-will-be-different-from-the-comics-and-thats-okay>
positive <https://twitter.com/BastardMachine/status/685624368756572163>, 
bolstering a tentative optimism and suggesting that the pilot really does 
capture the madcap, lurid tone of the comic. All of the starring performances 
have been praised, particularlyRuth Negga’s turn as Tulip 
<https://twitter.com/carolineframke/status/685630701224366080>. Nearly all 
viewers, however, agree on one thing: the Preacher TV show will be very, very 
different from the comics.

It is, perhaps, unsurprising to learn that a comic book that plays male rape 
for laughs, has several issues set in an orgy house and features more pointless 
violence than The Walking Dead will require some tweaks during adaptation. The 
creative teamacknowledges this necessity 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/preacher-amc-series-eth-rogen-dominic-cooper-1201675568/>
 – “I don’t know if you could translate the comics directly to television,” 
Rogen said to critics at TCA. “Everyone involved thought we should not do 
that.” Besides, they’re appealing to an audience broader than just fans of the 
book. “We want the show to be fun for regular people with not sick 
sensibilities,” Rogen said. “Put that on a poster.”

With that in mind, the design of fan favorite character Arseface (the nickname 
is literal) has been substantially toned down, in what the producers describe 
as an attempt tomake him palatable to viewers 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/preacher-will-take-departures-comic-853562>
 and sympathetic in more than short bursts. In a slightly bigger spoiler,one 
account suggests 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/herocomplex/la-et-hc-preacher-amc-20160108-story.html>
 that the pilot doesn’t even hint at the overall arc of the comic: Jesse’s 
quest to find God and make him answer for abandoning creation.

Will Preacher be the ultimate comic book TV adaptation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/feb/07/preacher-ultimate-comic-book-tv-adaptation>
But fear not, fans. This is probably for the best. Preacher is beloved for a 
reason – like most standouts of a particular genre,the best things about it are 
impossible to translate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/10/seth-rogen-confirms-cult-comic-preacher-to-be-full-tv-series-on-amc>
. The specific acts of gruesome violence, the hyperstylized sex, the indelible 
images of a zombie Confederate soldier shooting people with magic guns are all 
designed, deliberately, for consumption as a comic book. A truly faithful, 
successful adaptation needs to dig deeper, and understand what makes the 
material sing in its own medium.

The best TV adaptations of the past few years have known this. NBC’s Hannibal 
staked out an entirely new space in the serial killer genre, exploring the 
subtext and tonal richness of Thomas Harris’s novels without feeling beholden 
to either the details of their plot or the public perception of Hannibal Lecter 
created by Anthony Hopkins. The CW’s iZombie throws out most of the comic it’s 
based on, content to explore the concept of the heroic, medical examiner zombie 
with its own characters and creator Rob Thomas’s TV sensibility. All of Jessica 
Jones’s changes to the source material, like Carrie-Anne Moss’s high-powered 
lesbian lawyer Jeri Hogarth or the former child star version of Trish Walker, 
make the original more interesting rather than rendering the adaptation dull.

Weird and wonderful: cult comicbooks invade the TV screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/22/cult-comicbooks-invade-television-screen>
Still, deviation is not in and of itself valuable. There are downsides to 
altering source material, one of which came up as Rogen’s explanation for some 
of the changes to the Preacher comic: he wants fans to“still be surprised” 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/preacher-will-take-departures-comic-853562>
. This motivation for arbitrary change in the name of surprise is a terrible 
justification for messing with the foundation of someone else’s story. Trying 
to sneak something past viewers, Lost-style, is a fool’s game when there are 
hundreds of man-hours spent trying to unravel TV twists. Slavish devotion to 
source material and tossing curveballs for no reason both kill an adaptation – 
the whole process is a balancing act. Just ask the producers of the most 
successful adaptation on TV.

The most faithful moments of Game of Thrones (like The Red Wedding) work on 
their own terms, but audience response often relies on merely fulfilling fan 
expectations, allowing them to bask in the misery of the uninitiated. Some of 
its best characters have emerged from the outlines in the novels (in 
particular, Sansa Stark’s relationship with Littlefinger). Now, the series will 
plow past George RR Martin’s novels, and may actually get the chance to do 
something new with its world. Its producers have learned the lesson that 
Catlin, Rogen and Goldberg have hopefully internalized: work from a blueprint, 
but not a bible.
 