
Postwar public art in England is “disappearing before our eyes”, whether 
through wilful destruction, accidental loss, theft or sale, a heritage body has 
said.

Historic England <https://historicengland.org.uk/> is launching a campaign to 
raise awareness of how much art is being lost, whether metal sculptures being 
stolen and sold for scrap or architectural friezes being deliberately ripped 
down by developers.

While many works have been destroyed, HE hopes some could still be out there 
and is issuing a public call for information.


The organisation’s chief executive, Duncan Wilson, said there was a whole 
category of art that had been unjustly ignored over the years. He said: “We may 
have lost more than we know and we feel now is the time to do something about 
it.


“A lot of these pieces were commissioned against a background of optimism, 
good intentions, civic values and a lot of them were of very fine quality. 
Unfortunately, you lose things you don’t understand or treasure and perhaps, 
because nobody was standing up for this kind of art, the result is some of it 
has been lost. This is a call to arms for all of the public to get involved.”

Historic England has listed nearly 40 works that have been lost, destroyed, 
stolen or sold.

The best and worst of public art in cities – readers' pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/may/22/best-worst-public-art-cities-readers-pictures>
They include famous cases such as the theft 10 years ago of Henry Moore’s 
two-tonne Reclining Figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/dec/18/arttheft.arts> from the 72-acre 
Henry Moore Foundation estate in Hertfordshire. The most likely reason for the 
theft of a work estimated at £3m was that it was melted down for scrap for 
about £1,500.

Other examples include:

 * A Bernard Meadows bronze abstract sculpture of a cockerel commissioned in 
1959 for a fountain in the grounds of Crown Woods school in Eltham, south 
London.It was sold at auction in 2004 for £18,800. 
<https://www.bonhams.com/auctions/11352/lot/86/>

 * The Watchers by Lynn Chadwick, 1960, in the grounds of the University of 
Roehampton, south-west London.One of three figures that make up the piece was 
stolen in 2006, with police estimating it would take at least eight people to 
carry. <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jan/24/arttheft.art> Its 
whereabouts are unknown.

 * Trewin Copplestone 
<http://www.darcyfineart.co.uk/artist/trewin-copplestone/>’s four 2 metre-high 
fibreglass bulls were placed on the side of Birmingham’s Bull Ring shopping 
centre in 1963. When the centre was rebuilt, the bulls disappeared.

 * The Cambridge piece by Barry Flanagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/sep/01/barry-flanagan-obituary>, 
an abstract sculpture installed on Laundress Green in Cambridge in 1972 
<http://barryflanagan.com/exhibitions/view/10617/>. It was badly received, got 
a drubbing in the local press and was heavily vandalised by the public, 
including students. After several attacks it was vandalised beyond repair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpublic-artworks-disappearing-before-our-eyes-says-heritage-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab9e3554c7277100adc8126d77f4b6b8b1e5a45%2F0_240_1935_1160%2F1935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20artworks%20disappearing%20before%20our%20eyes%2C%20says%20heritage%20body&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpublic-artworks-disappearing-before-our-eyes-says-heritage-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20artworks%20disappearing%20before%20our%20eyes%2C%20says%20heritage%20body&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpublic-artworks-disappearing-before-our-eyes-says-heritage-body%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab9e3554c7277100adc8126d77f4b6b8b1e5a45%2F0_240_1935_1160%2F1935.jpg>
 Artist Barry Flanagan at home in Dublin. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the 
Guardian 
Wilson said the new research may only be the tip of the iceberg. “Part of 
England’s national collection of public artworks is disappearing before our 
eyes,” he said.


“We’re making efforts to protect the best examples of postwar public art that 
still exist, and make sure that it continues to enhance the public realm. But 
we also want to raise awareness of just how vulnerable these works can be and 
we want the public to help us track down lost pieces.”

The artist William Mitchell has four works on the list, including one which 
became popularly known inBasildon as the Pineapple. 
<http://www.echo-news.co.uk/news/11174189.Missing__presumed_stolen_____pineapple/>
This was a sculptural fountain commissioned for Ford Motor Company’s premises 
Trafford House in 1977 
<http://3rd-dimensionpmsa.org.uk/fountain-news/2014-05-17-the-pineapple-vanishes>
. It was last seen in 2011 when it was moved into storage as the building was 
converted into flats. It was reported missing in 2012.


Named and shamed: the six worst works of British public art | Jonathan Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/13/six-worst-works-british-public-art>
The other works are an imposing sand-blasted concrete sculpture he made for 
Churchill Square shopping centre in Brighton; and two works from 1964 –a 
sculpted concrete sun terrace for Swiss Cottage swimming baths in London 
<https://www.architecture.com/image-library/ribapix/image-information/poster/Swiss-Cottage-Swimming-Baths,-Hampstead,-London-the-sun-terrace-with-sculptural-reliefs-by-William-Mitchell/posterid/RIBA41642.html>
; and a sculptural relief for the Northern Polytechnic in Islington, London.


Mitchell admits he was sanguine about their loss. “As far as I’m concerned if 
they don’t want it then they don’t have it,” he said. “Some of the things have 
been taken away because the land in London is so expensive; every bit of land 
has to have a block of flats.

“Of course the public wants the art but it doesn’t matter what the public 
want, it is ‘what’s the profit?’ It is all to do with money, nothing else.”

As well as the campaign HE will stage a related exhibition telling the stories 
behind the lost art atSomerset House <https://www.somersethouse.org.uk/> in 
London from 3 February to 10 April.
 