
The verbal skirmishes over working mothers, the more urgent battles over 
women's reproductive rights, the ever-widening gyre between Mitt Romney and 
Barack Obama's appeal to female voters: it's easy to call all of that part of 
the "war on women". But on its journey from policy battle tocable news chyron 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lower_third>, commenters have wrung from the 
phraseits active component 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/apr/17/women-on-women-fights-ann-romney>
.

For millions of people, the "war on women" isn't just a handy catch-all genre 
of political attack, it is a battle they are participating in on a day-to-day 
basis. The media coverage's emphasis on rhetorical hucksterism can make it seem 
like women and the policies that affect them are just the weapons in a battle 
between political camps. But they're neither the bystanders nor the bombs, 
they're often the ones throwing them – and obviously, the ones to whom the most 
damage is done.

This truth is easily lost even when the cameras turn to a one-on-one joust 
like the one that erupted last week betweenHilary Rosen and Ann Romney 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/16/election-fundraising-obama-romney-live#block-28>
. Chatterers focused on the speed with which the Romney campaign used Rosen's 
assertion against the Obama camp (a feat the Obama campaign only highlighted 
with their equally rapid denunciation of Rosen). On the one hand, the fact that 
we could dismiss without discussion the idea that mothers who "work inside the 
home" are, in fact, "working" is a testament to the many triumphs women have 
wrested over the past decades. (There was a time when the idea that the tasks 
women performed at home was a kind of "work", that it might even have monetary 
value, was considered radical – evensocialist!)

On the other hand, narrowing the analysis to which campaign more effectively 
moved their pawns across the electoral board not only insults Rosen (and 
Romney, for that matter), but completely blows past the policy argument Rosen 
was commenting on: whatis the probable impact of Romney's understanding of 
women's needs on his policy-making, if it is – by his admission – filtered 
through the viewpoint of his wife's discussions with other conservative women? 
Ann says they're concerned about the deficit, which is a happy coincidence for 
a candidate who's staked his claim to Paul Ryan's "marvelous" budget proposal 
and its emphasis on deficit reduction over the social programs that 
disproportionately benefit women (because women are disproportionally 
represented in economically disadvantaged groups).

And then, there is the battle over reproductive rights, where social 
conservatives have opened a front on birth control access. Perhaps the only 
reason there isn't more alarm among women on the street about this is that 
modern women have trouble believing that there's anything left to fight over. 
Free access to birth control for adult women is a given in almost every corner 
of the union; just as natural is the idea that control over when and if to have 
a child is inseparable from women's ability to participate fully in society. No 
wonderDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> see GOP 
lawmakers' threats to that access as a political gift.

But let's never confuse a political gift with an actual governmental action. 
We can mock (and should mock) theVirginia legislature's desire for women to get 
a transvaginal ultrasound 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-503544_162-57392796-503544/virginia-gov-bob-mcdonnell-signs-virginia-ultrasound-bill/>
 before undergoing an abortion, but there should be a nervousness to the 
laughter: as long as governments presume the power to exert control over 
women's bodies, the "war on women" isn't over. And women aren't the 
battlefield, they're the soldiers.

• To discuss issues raised by this article, and more, directly with Ana Marie 
Cox, join her here in a live Q&A webchat Thursday at 3-4pm EST (8-9pm UK time)
 