
Compared with other protests in recent years, the republican demonstrations on 
day one of the Queen's historic visit to the Irish Republic were lacklustre.

Five years ago, the centre of Dublin was turned into a battlefield as 
republicans fought with the Garda Siochána in a bid to disrupt the first 
loyalist rally in the capital since partition.

Compared to the Love Ulster riots, the skirmishes north and south of the 
Garden of Remembrance in Dublin's north inner city were inconsequential.

If the security problems posed by the royal visit were, and still are, a major 
challenge to the Irish state's authority, the presence of the Queen is also a 
big test of the republican dissidents' resolve.

On day one of the historic visit, they failed to breach Garda lines or get 
anywhere near the highly symbolic Garden of Remembrance. Indeed, at the Éirígí 
protest (a radical offshoot of Sinn Féin), the organisers even deployed 
marshals to prevent violent clashes with the Gardai.

The dissidents at both the Éirígí rally and the one that, for a time, turned 
violent and was organised by Republican Sinn Féin, were heavily outnumbered and 
boxed off by the Garda Siochána.

Wednesday throws up new security dangers, especially back in Dublin's north 
inner city when the Queen visits Croke Park, the home of the Gaelic Athletic 
Association.

All the main dissident republican organisations are planning protests in the 
working class streets leading up from the city centre to the stadium where, 
back in 1920, the British army shot dead unarmed spectators.

If the Gardai again succeed in suppressing any violent street disorder, it 
will inflict a major blow on dissident republican morale.

In addition, the response of the majority of the Irish public, whose attitude 
veers from a warm welcome to benign indifference, also underlines how isolated 
the republican dissidents are in modernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Yet even if the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh's groundbreaking tour passes off 
relatively peacefully, it will not mark the end of dissidents' armed campaigns.

There is, after all, an enduring ideology within Irish republicanism that a 
virtuous minority, even a tiny one, can be right in the face of the majority's 
will.

The dissident groups believe – rightly or wrongly – that they are no different 
from the armed rebels that tried to carry out an armed putsch against British 
rule in 1916. They will point out that, again and again, the men who seized 
Dublin's GPO on Easter Monday 95 years ago did not represent majority opinion 
in Ireland.

At the time, most nationalists supported the Home Rule party, although John 
Redmond's movement was later eclipsed by Sinn Féin in the 1918 election.

The reality is that there will always be recalcitrant minorities in Ireland 
willing to wage elitist wars "on behalf of the Irish people" even if the 
majority of the Irish people don't want such conflict.
 