
I wonder if you could let me have the recipe for the hot and spicy cider 
served at Greenbury festival?Elizabeth Pargetter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/5S0q4RG3NW9bzRZJM0bFY5Q/elizabeth-pargetter>
, the lady of the manor, fancied some and subsequently tripped over her guy 
ropes, fell into the arms of Roy Tucker 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/2lLg5CSg778nqsjrWVjq8kz/roy-tucker>, 
her manager, and spent the night in his tent. Admittedly, it was midsummer 
night when, according toShakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/shakespeare-and-me>, such 
surprising couplings tend to occur.

It reminded me of another respectable widow, Mrs Wentworth-Brewster, who, in 
one ofNoël Coward <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/noelcoward>'s less 
respectable lyrics, came over all girlish in A Bar at the Piccola Marina. 
Happily for Coward, her name rhymed with both "seduced her" and "goosed her". 
Alcohol, you notice, figures quite largely in both cases. It is very sad – 
although one must say, both Elizabeth and Mrs Wentworth-Brewster seemed in the 
highest spirits afterwards.

Personally, I don't believe a word of it. I think it was a bad dream. There is 
a lot going on inThe Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> at the moment that I 
don't believe, and hope will vanish with the dawn. Ambridge has been invaded by 
Daleks. The sinister and virtually invisible Justin ("The Man with his Finger 
on the Pulse") and Charlie, his mad-eyed acolyte, ("Disruptive change can be 
beneficial!"), intend to drive a road through Brookfield Farm, in spite of 
David Archer standing like an ox in the furrow, his horns lowered. Then, 
to maximise profit, they will cover every inch of earth with solar panels, 
biomass boilers, anaerobic digesters and other stuff you can't spell.

But Ambridge is not like that at all. Ambridge is Helen worrying because she 
has run low on oatmeal or Peggy bursting into a torrent of tears at the death 
of an old cat. Ambridge is trivia you can hardly see with spectacles ("How are 
the sheep?" "Pretty listless.") Ambridge is likeAdlestrop 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/adlestrop/>, where nothing seems to happen at 
all, unless you count all the birds of Oxfordshire and Borsetshire.

Dr Beeching, as I recollect, closed Adlestrop because it was unprofitable.
 