
As vice-chairman of his local branch of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, 
Alan Lindsey has a lot of meetings to attend. His dilemma, as carer for his 
wife, Joan, has in the past been leaving her on her own. Now, though, he can do 
so with the confidence that she can call help at any time of day or night, and 
that it will be there within as little as 15 minutes.

The Lindseys are among the growing number of users of social care services who 
are satisfied customers of telecare - the use of IT to monitor vulnerable 
people in their own homes. The care and support green paper, expected next 
week, is likely to say that these systems offer an important part of the 
solution to how we will be able to look after our ageing population.

Great claims have been made about telecare. Until now, however, it has lacked 
a solid evidence base and premature talking-up of its potential has bred 
cynicism. What has earned it its place in the green paper is an increasingly 
convincing series of reports from local authorities that have invested in 
systems and, crucially, an independent evaluation by health economists at York 
University.

According to the York study, telecare use in Scotland is yielding a fivefold 
return on the initial investment. Between 2007 and 2010, the research 
estimates, there will be savings of £43m in care costs north of the border. 
Extrapolated, this could mean annual savings of £5.3bn in the care of 1 million 
people.

David Hinchliffe, the former Labour MP and social worker who chaired the 
Commons health select committee, is an enthusiastic advocate and is frustrated 
at the slowness of telecare take-up. "At the moment in the UK," he says, "our 
approach is costing us significant sums of public money which could otherwise 
be spent better elsewhere and, more importantly, is denying very many service 
users and carers the chance of much greater independence and freedom."

The Lindseys would certainly endorse that. Joan Lindsey, 69, has multiple 
sclerosis and uses either a wheelchair or a special relaxation chair at the 
couple's bungalow in High Barnes, Sunderland. She needs help to move from one 
to the other and a hoist to get in and out of bed. Her husband, 73, is a 
willing carer - assisted by a visiting care assistant - but he can't always be 
around and, 18 months ago, was out of action for a few days after a knee 
operation. "I couldn't even close the curtains or carry the tea tray in," he 
recalls. "But I could call for help if I needed it and they always came. It's 
there for us 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. You know it's there and you don't 
have to worry. That's the thing."

At the moment, the Lindseys have a fairly basic call system that they can 
activate through either the call unit or pendants they can wear. They know that 
if their needs increase, however, the system can be enhanced to include sensors 
that monitor things such as movement, door opening, bed occupancy, bathwater 
running, and the use of electrical appliances. Unusual patterns of activity, or 
inactivity, trigger an alert.

Sunderland council provides telecare as a mainstream service to 16,500 
households across the city. Emergency response is promised within 15 minutes. 
The basic package is free with home care commissioned by the council and to 
those on housing benefit or living in social housing; other users pay £3.20 a 
week. The city has achieved a sharp fall in the number of people entering 
residential care, from well above the England average in 2002 to below average 
now, and it is striking that the authority is one of only two in England that 
still provide means-tested social care to people whose needs are assessed as 
low.

"Investing in more frontline prevention puts us in a position to meet 
tomorrow's health and social care challenges head on," says Neil Revely, the 
council's director of health, housing and adult services. "Over the next 15 
years, the number of older people in Sunderland over 65 will rise by 30% to 
59,500 and the number of older people with functional dependencies will rise 
from 22,400 to 27,000, including 4,100 with dementia. With an increasingly 
ageing population comes an increasing demand on health and social care 
resources, and our preventative approach means that we are well-placed to cope 
with future challenges."

In view of its apparent success, why haven't more authorities followed 
Sunderland's lead? In 2006, the government made £80m available in grants for 
English councils to pilot telecare and other forms of assistive technology. 
Some rose enthusiastically to the challenge and there is emerging evidence of 
the benefits: in Stockton-on-Tees, an evaluation estimated net savings of 
£221,000 a year in respect of social and healthcare costs for a sample of 150 
people; in Gloucestershire, the county council put potential savings as high as 
£405,000 over two years for just 55 people.

But there is uncertainty about how much of the £80m, which was not 
ring-fenced, was spent on telecare, as opposed to other uses. Hinchliffe say 
ministers will need to give a far firmer lead if widespread progress is to be 
made.

Scotland and Wales have taken more assertive approaches. A national telecare 
development programme was launched in Scotland in 2006, investing £8m in 32 
local partnerships, and some £10m has been made available in capital grants and 
revenue funding to install systems in 10,000 homes in Wales. The York 
evaluation, commissioned by the Scottish government, found that telecare had 
prevented hospital admissions, hastened discharge from hospital and reduced 
numbers of people entering residential care. More than 60% of telecare users 
said their quality of life had improved and 74% of carers reported feeling less 
stressed.

Personal experience

Hinchliffe has become an adviser to Tunstall Healthcare, a leading provider of 
telecare systems, but says his belief in the technology stems from personal 
experience when his wife, Julia, was caring for a close family member with 
dementia. "It was only after her needs could no longer be managed in sheltered 
accommodation and she had entered permanent care that we learned what might 
have been available through telecare to enable her to retain some degree of 
independence in her home."

Stephen Burke, chief executive of older people's charity Counsel and Care, 
says: "Helping older people live longer in their own home and improving safety 
and security are key aims. If by using telecare we can make this happen, and 
make better use of public funding, then it's a win-win for everyone."

Perhaps it's not quite a win-win for home care workers, who face being 
displaced by technology. Lucianne Sawyer, president of the UK Homecare 
Association, believes telecare has a role to play in the developing landscape 
of care and support. But she cautions that the balance of services must be 
appropriate.

"I do think that relationships and contact with people are very important," 
Sawyer says. "We should not be thinking we can replace the critical personal 
involvement that good home care services do offer. You can't substitute that, 
no matter how good your machinery and equipment."
 