
I have a huge hole in my garden. It’s my fault it’s there. I decided there 
were too many raspberries and, after what I thought was a judicious edit, 
I found I’d left a gap. Having pressed everyone to grow raspberries in their 
borders, I fear you may have the same problem.

Raspberries like to run about the place and constantly have to be tamed into 
one spot. They are also shallow-rooting for a perennial, so you need something 
that can take that sort of competition.

If you find raspberries are trying to take over your garden, one solution is 
to dig a small trench about 30cm deep around them. Then, when the runners do 
their thing, you can slice them off. This trick works well for bamboo, too (and 
anything else that spreads in such a manner).

If a trench proves unsightly, line it with thick plastic sheeting or lawn 
edging. If your patch is such that you can hoe or even mow between rows, this 
is another solution. Hoeing only really works on very young spring growth; 
otherwise, you’ll have to pull them up.

There is one big issue with keeping raspberries tightly bound for too long. 
Raspberries are woodland edge plants that head towards the sun; they sucker, 
sending up new canes as part of the natural succession of the forest edge. If 
you keep them in one spot permanently, they tend to exhaust the soil of 
micronutrients. This causes them stress and they tend to become diseased. If 
you want to keep them in one spot, you must replenish the soil by topdressing 
with leaf mould and homemade compost in autumn and spring.

Alternatively, if you have space, let them move around. You don’t have to let 
them take over, but you can let them wander to new spots. They will stay 
healthy and productive for longer.

If you find they are taking over, resort to hoeing or mowing off new canes in 
spring. If you want to move them to an entirely new spot, rather than letting 
them wander, do this from November to March, when all the leaves have dropped 
and they are dormant.

Raspberries do best in soils that are fertile, moisture-retentive and slightly 
acidic; they particularly dislike waterlogged or chalky soils. If your soil is 
likely to get very wet, plant your raspberries on a ridge, so that the water 
can drain away from their roots.

Alys Fowler: the wonders of leaf mould
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/alys-fowler-compost> 
I’ve grown a number of raspberries over the years, but I keep coming back to 
Malling Jewel 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/59126/Rubus-idaeus-Malling-Jewel-(F)/Details> 
as a compact, mid-season summer variety. For those with a bit more space,Glen 
Ample 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/115173/Rubus-idaeus-Glen-Ample-(PBR)-(F)/Details>
 is lovely: good flavour (great for jam), very heavy-cropping and spineless. I 
likeTulameen <https://www.victoriananursery.co.uk/Raspberry_Cane_Tulameen/> for 
late-season berry delight, although it’s not very heavy-cropping. Finally, 
there’sAll Gold 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/226554/Rubus-idaeus-All-Gold-(F)/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fcontext%3Db%25253D230%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526q%25253Drosa%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26query%3Drosa%26page%3D27%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
, a delicious, yellow autumn variety that melts as you pick it. There’s a lot 
of hype aroundRubus occidentalis ‘Black Jewel’ 
<http://www.blackmoor.co.uk/products/16274#.V8beMDaU160> , which is a North 
American species that has delicious black fruit in midsummer and behaves more 
like a blackberry than a raspberry – be aware that it likes to take over.

As for the hole: the urge to run to the garden centre to find anything in 
flower to put in the space is strong, but I will resist. Autumn soils are damp 
enough that rhubarb will transplant easily, and it’s an excuse to divide my 
mammoth plant. I think it will look handsome in front of the canes, the red of 
the stems complementing the summer berries. This should also force the 
raspberries to explore along the fence, rather than reach out into the bed.
 