Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtI_5ksaL5U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtI_5ksaL5U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtI_5ksaL5U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
All of the January suggestions have been mixed together in a leopard-spotted 
hat, and it has delivered its choice:The Doors Of Perception 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9780006547310/the-doors-of-perception>
 by Aldous Huxley. It's arrived slightly later than usual, thanks tothe 
post-Christmas lull 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/03/pass-notes-the-lull>, but 
happily, it's very short and widely available so we should be able to catch up 
pretty easily.

I couldn't have planned things better – although the choice of The Doors Of 
Perception is a victory for democracy as well as fate, since it was the most 
popular choice in the quiet Twixtmas nominations stage. It's worth noting, mind 
you, that the book did also registera negative comment from everythingsperfect, 
who said <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/13916966>:

"Not keen on Huxley… I haven't read Doors of Perception, but I find his style 
irritating. But who knows, maybe he is better on acid."

S/he then added: "I mean Huxley on acid, not me."

In truth, I'd be interested to hear opinions either way. If anyone has read 
Huxley while on acid, do let us know how he stacks up. In the meantime, his 
thoughts on acid (or, to be strictly accurate,mescalin 
<http://www.drugs.com/mescaline.html>) definitely seem worth perusing to me. 
Skimming through the book I've already spotted two wonderful quotes:

"The mescalin taker sees no reason for doing anything in particular and finds 
most of the causes for which, at ordinary times, he was prepared to act and 
suffer, profoundly uninteresting. He can't be bothered with them, for the good 
reason that he has better things to think about."

And:

"We walked out into the street. A large pale blue automobile was standing at 
the curb. At the sight of it, I was suddenly overcome by enormous merriment. 
What complacency, what an absurd self-satisfaction beamed from those bulging 
surfaces of glossiest enamel! Man had created the thing in his own image – or 
rather in the image of his favoUrite character in fiction. I laughed till the 
tears ran down my cheeks."

Who knew that the book which had such an influence on bores like Jim Morrison 
could be so funny? I'm very much looking forward to reading the rest – and 
investigating the book's wider cultural influence over the next few weeks. And, 
good news! The delightful folk at Vintage have offered us 10 copies of the book 
to give away, to the first 10 people who ask for one in the comments.

Further good news: those who miss out can buy it for a tasty discount from the 
Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099458203>
. Let's turn on and tune in ...
 