

A diamond and emerald necklace allegedly given to Margaret Thatcher by a 
Middle Easternoil minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/03/margaret-thatcher-oily-to-kings-foreign-office-file>
 but never declared as a gift caused consternation inside No 10, newly released 
documents reveal.

Downing Street press officers were alerted when a Guardian journalist called 
about the supposed clandestine donation in October 1985, according to documents 
released by theNational Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> in Kew on Wednesday.

Oliver Letwin blocked help for black youth after 1985 riots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/oliver-letwin-blocked-help-for-black-youth-after-1985-riots>
The jewels, said to have included earrings and a bracelet, were allegedly 
given by the then president of Opec, Mana Saeed al-Otaiba from the United Arab 
Emirates. A No 10 press officer wrote in a detailed note: “David Pallister of 
the Guardian has been enquiring about certain gifts allegedly made to the prime 
minister in March 1982 by Dr Otaiba.

Thatcher’s old clothes being peddled as investments? She would love it | Gaby 
Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/margaret-thatcher-old-clothes-investment-auction-belongings-market-forces>
“The gifts were allegedly presented … in Flood Street [Thatcher’s house in 
Chelsea] when Dr Otaiba was on a private visit to London at a time when the oil 
market was very sensitive.

“The gifts allegedly comprised a necklace, earrings and bracelet, all in 
diamonds and emeralds; and were allegedly purchased from the jewellers 
Kuchinsky [Kutchinsky in Knightsbridge].”

Downing Street had no record of the meeting but noted that Thatcher had 
received gifts from Otaiba at official meetings in 1981. At the time, civil 
service rules said gifts worth more than £100 had to be bought by the recipient.

No 10 was told the jewels had been spotted in a car on their way with Otaiba 
to Flood Street. Charles Powell, Thatcher’s private secretary, and Bernard 
Ingham, her press secretary, were alerted to the dangers.

'Pampered Scots' should face deep cuts, David Willetts told Thatcher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/30/pampered-scots-deep-cuts-david-willetts-margaret-thatcher-david-cameron>
Another Downing Street memo said: “I’ve passed this info on to [the press 
officer] but asked him not to say what gifts have actually been received. It 
could be difficult if the PM did receive the gifts personally without our 
knowledge and Dr Otaiba was to see a denial in the Guardian.”

Downing Street’s file does not state whether Thatcher received the necklace. 
However, a diamond and emerald necklace featured in aChristie’s sale of her 
personal possessions in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/margaret-thatchers-wedding-dress-auctioned-for-25000>
 and fetched £158,000. The sale catalogue did not explain how it came into her 
possession.

Thatcher tried to block 'bad taste' public health warnings about Aids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/thatcher-tried-to-block-bad-taste-public-health-warnings-about-aids>
A Christie’s spokesperson told the Guardian: “We had understood that this was 
not such an object [ie a gift]. However, any gifts which were given toMargaret 
Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> whilst serving 
as prime minister and deemed by the Cabinet Office to be of significant value 
were purchased … after Margaret Thatcher’s tenure as prime minister.”


The jewellers Moussaeiff, which now owns Kutchinsky, said it did not recognise 
the Christie’s sale jewellery and added that Kutchinsky files could not be 
accessed easily.

Reagan told Thatcher to read thriller to prepare for arms summit

Ronald Reagan urged Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/10/margaret-thatcher-ronald-reagan-love-affair-churchill-roosevelt>
 to read a blockbuster thriller to understand the Soviet Union’s cold war 
thinking in the run-up to a failed arms control summit in Reykjavik.


The then US president suggested the prime minister should read Red Storm 
Rising, the second novel by the thriller writer Tom Clancy, during a phone call 
in preparation for the 1986 meeting withMikhail Gorbachev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-gorbachev> in the Icelandic capital. 
Reagan and the former Soviet leader failed to reach an agreement on nuclear 
disarmament, but their talks paved the way to end the cold war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f1b23979b78bf1e0da456cc80a32fecda6cfe13%2F373_223_2009_1205%2F2009.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher's%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan's%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan%27s%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f1b23979b78bf1e0da456cc80a32fecda6cfe13%2F373_223_2009_1205%2F2009.jpg>
 Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. Photograph: PA 
Before the summit, Thatcher talked to Reagan about what might be achieved. She 
repeatedly stressed the importance of nuclear deterrence while Reagan batted 
away her concerns, saying: ‘The Russians don’t want war, they want victory by 
using the threat of nuclear war … I think we could have a strategy to meet 
that.’

The Thatcher-Reagan love affair wasn’t all plain sailing | Geoffrey Wheatcroft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/10/margaret-thatcher-ronald-reagan-love-affair-churchill-roosevelt>
Charles Powell later sent a summary of the discussion to the Foreign Office. 
In a note released by the National Archives on Wednesday, Thatcher’s private 
secretary wrote: “The president strongly recommended to the prime minister a 
new book by the author of Red October called (I think) Red Storm Rising. It 
gave an excellent picture of the Soviet Union’s intentions and strategy. He had 
clearly been much impressed by the book.”

Red Storm Rising imagines a third world war fought with conventional weapons, 
including an amphibious assault by US marines on Iceland.

Calm down, dear: Michael Winner feared No 10 didn’t know him

A classic “Don’t you know who I am?” moment seems to have happened when 
Michael Winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jan/21/michael-winner-pioneer-of-sorts>
 invited Thatcher to unveil a memorial to Yvonne Fletcher, the police officer 
shot dead outside the Libyan embassy in London in 1984.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcce34b73e1ea859a79de1d0b335b217feb954426%2F1217_726_1093_1637%2F1093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher's%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan's%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan%27s%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcce34b73e1ea859a79de1d0b335b217feb954426%2F1217_726_1093_1637%2F1093.jpg>
 Michael Winner. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
Winner, the late film director who founded the Police Memorial Trust, feared 
the invitation would be turned down. Another trustee of the charity then wrote 
to Thatcher’s private secretary David Barclay, saying: “It occurs to me you may 
not know ofMr Winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/filmblog/2013/jan/21/michael-winner-career-in-clips>
” before listing his film fame, newspaper columns and support of the Tories on 
the Any Questions radio programme and at a number of rallies.

Newly released Downing Street files show No 10 was well aware of who Winner 
was. But the then home secretary,Leon Brittan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/leon-brittan>, was delaying a reply at 
the time, over concerns that the unveiling was a local rather than a national 
matter.

Thatcher disagreed and said: “I should not refuse to unveil it, therefore I 
will do it.” But she insisted it should be an all-party affair to emphasise the 
impartiality of the police. The unveiling eventually went ahead on 1 February 
1985.

How Apollo moon dust went from top to flop at Downing Street

A Thatcher aide found four specks of moon dust discarded in a Downing Street 
cupboard years after they were donated by Nasa’s Apollo mission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/dec/16/apollo-legacy-moon-space-riley>
 in 1970, documents detailing the lunar particles’ changing fates reveal.


The US president, Richard Nixon, gave them to the prime minister, Harold 
Wilson, initially triggering a battle between museums over who would display 
them. The specks were described as “disappointing” by the Science Museum in 
London, which said it would display other items to spice up any exhibition. 
They eventually returned to No 10 in 1973, kicking off further debate about 
where to display them.

When Thatcher gained power, an aide found the particles in a cupboard where 
they had “languished for several years”. Thatcher suggested the dust could be 
put in a display cabinet at Downing Street – but by 1985 their status had 
slipped. An internal memo said the four fragments, described as “scarcely more 
than 1mm across, encapsulated in a clear plastic hemisphere about the size of a 
golf ball and mounted on a not very attractive wooden plinth along with a silk 
union jack [which had been taken to the moon and back] had “curiosity, rather 
than scientific, value”. And while the Science Museum once again offered to 
house them, its director, Dame Margaret Weston, told No 10 “she did not wish to 
press [the] claims particularly strongly” as she could get better samples from 
Nasa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6f9a0db9c9ec51d0bae080656561b76afa3bb8%2F189_443_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher's%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan's%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20Thatcher%27s%20mystery%20gems%2C%20Reagan%27s%20reading%20and%20moon%20dust&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-national-archives-necklace-gift-michael-winner-snub-ronald-reagan-moon-dust%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e6f9a0db9c9ec51d0bae080656561b76afa3bb8%2F189_443_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Buzz Aldrin walks on the moon during the Apollo 11 mission. Photograph: Neil 
Armstrong/Getty  