
With so many channels and websites hungry for original work and so many comic 
actors making a dozen or more projects a year, it was probably inevitable that 
Rob Huebel would have a multiple-personality moment like the one he’s having 
today.

This Friday afternoon, Huebel and writing partner Paul Scheer will premiere 
Interrogation 
<http://www.sundance.org/projects/funny-or-die-the-future-of-comedy-in-vr-panel>
, their virtual reality comedy short, at theSundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundance-2016> in Utah. In the short, which 
is Funny or Die’s first VR project, the viewer sees the point of view of 
someone accused of a horrible crime, and Huebel and Scheer play the extremely 
bad police detectives.

Then tonight Huebel stars in two TV projects that will air at the same time – 
11pm ET on competing comedy networks. Comedy Central will airCrash Test with 
Rob Huebel and Paul Scheer <http://www.cc.com/shows/crash-test>, a roving 
comedy special where the audience travels around Los Angeles on a tour bus to 
see impromptu skits likeRob Corddry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/21/rob-corddry-on-ballers-this-is-the-closest-ive-gotten-to-my-childhood-version-of-making-it>
 having a late-night yard sale,Natasha Leggero <http://www.natashaleggero.com/> 
walking her dogs andAziz Ansari  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/06/aziz-ansari-master-of-none-netflix>
pretending not to be Aziz Ansari.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0GdE3PFAdLw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0GdE3PFAdLw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0GdE3PFAdLw&media=>
At the same time, Adult Swim will air the season premiere of medical farce 
Childrens Hospital <http://www.adultswim.com/videos/childrens-hospital/>, on 
which Huebel co-stars as Dr Owen Maestro. (There is no apostrophe in 
“Childrens” because the children’s hospital where the show takes place is named 
after Dr Arthur Childrens. It’s that kind of show.)

Huebel isn’t fazed by the clash, saying that he doesn’t see projects – or even 
actors – competing with each other today like they did in years past. “For my 
thing to succeed, your thing doesn’t have to fail. There’s enough business out 
there for all of us. There’s a lot more cooperation and cross-pollination, and 
that coincides with the explosion across all of these platforms. There’s 
Amazon, there’s Hulu, there’s all these other platforms that are looking for 
content now.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxC6gPGe7Wo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxC6gPGe7Wo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxC6gPGe7Wo&media=>
Once, many actors spent nine months a year on a single TV series and then made 
a movie during the three-month hiatus. Over the last decade, the TV landscape 
has shifted from network shows that make 22 episodes a season, to shows on 
cable and streaming that have shorter seasons, indie films for outlets like 
iTunes and Netflix, alternative programming like comedy specials and digital 
shorts for streaming-video sites YouTube,Funny or Die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/15/jimmy-kimmel-denies-involvement-dennis-quaid-rant-video>
, andNerdist <http://nerdist.com/>. For in-demand actors like Huebel, that 
means a dizzying and overlapping blur of projects.

Over the last year, Huebel has made four films, been a regular on Childrens 
Hospital (now in its seventh season), worked as a recurring character on FX’s
The League <http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/the-league/episodes>, made many TV 
guest appearances, appeared in numerous comedy shorts and developed a pilot for 
Comedy Central that will tape in the next few months.

For all his comedic output over the last year, it is Huebel’s dramatic work on 
the first two seasons of Amazon’sTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent> that has raised his 
profile. On the Golden Globe-winning series about a retired college professor’s 
transition to a woman and the lives of her three adult children, Huebel plays 
Len, a nice guy in an unhappy marriage to one of them, Sarah– played by Amy 
Landecker – who leaves him for a woman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frob-huebel-transparent-comedy-central-virtual-interrogation-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35a17036edfdc70be1e53bab2b38e282a603fc1e%2F76_0_1198_720%2F1198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rob%20Huebel%20goes%20from%20Transparent%20to%20comedy%20to%20virtual%20reality%20in%20no%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frob-huebel-transparent-comedy-central-virtual-interrogation-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rob%20Huebel%20goes%20from%20Transparent%20to%20comedy%20to%20virtual%20reality%20in%20no%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frob-huebel-transparent-comedy-central-virtual-interrogation-sundance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35a17036edfdc70be1e53bab2b38e282a603fc1e%2F76_0_1198_720%2F1198.jpg>
 Interrogation, a virtual reality show launching at Sundance. Photograph: Funny 
or Die 
“Huebel is someone who’s now starting to get more dramatic opportunities – as 
he should,” said Jon Stern, a producer on Childrens Hospital who is also 
producing Huebel’s upcomingComedy Central 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/comedy-central> pilot. “He can be very 
vulnerable as an actor where that’s called for, and we often write him full of 
attitude and bluster on Childrens Hospital because it’s fun to watch him do 
that too.”

Midway through the first season of Transparent, there is a scene in which 
Huebel’s character picks up his kids from dinner and sees Maura – played by
Jeffrey Tambor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/26/jeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview>
– for the first time as a woman. He mocks Maura, he shows irritation, then 
anger, then visible pain that his world has changed, and he apologizes for 
lashing out. It’s a complex performance, and Huebel is convincing both as 
someone deeply altered by the changes around him and as a disinterested 
stand-in for viewers who aren’t quite sure what to make of what they’re seeing.

“When Mort transitions to Maura, that shakes the whole family and shakes all 
of these secrets out of everybody,” Huebel said. “My character is one of those 
people who has never had any interaction with a trans person and is really 
thrown off by it. A lot of people fall into that category, and that was me 
during the first season.”

Amazon picked up Transparent for a third season that will begin taping 
mid-year. Until then, Huebel will get back to being funny. He’s getting ready 
to shoot his Comedy Central pilot, which is based on a series of sketches he 
made several years ago for Funny or Die with celebrities likeBen Stiller 
<https://vimeo.com/77661556> and Deepak Chopra <https://vimeo.com/77656050>.

“Every week, I take a celebrity on a quest to go find a dead body that I know 
about,” Huebel said. “It’s like Stand By Me without the stupid kidslike Jerry 
O’Connell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SRlA536rPOI>.” (He’s kidding; Huebel 
and O’Connell are longtime friends.) “It’s never explained how I know about the 
dead body. It’s kind of an Easter egg hunt.”
 