
In Tuesday's presidential debate, Mitt Romney and Barack Obama will claim they 
have opposing visions for America's future. But for all the differences they 
will put forward, both presidential campaigns have something in common: they 
are long on pro-family rhetoric, but short on pro-family policies. If the 
campaigns are serious aboutgetting more women voters in their corner 
<http://www.suntimes.com/news/sweet/15721901-452/election-could-come-down-to-what-women-want.html>
, it's time to step it up.

Case in point: neither Romney nor Obama has offered a single policy idea on 
the campaign trail that would ease the burden of working families who are 
juggling demanding work schedules with care for children and elderly parents. 
And neither the presidential nor vice-presidential debates even mentioned the 
economic stresses that women, in particular, are facing today.

Instead, in August, both party conventions shone the spotlight on candidates' 
wives, who made emotional appeals about family life.Ann Romney spoke 
<http://www.npr.org/2012/08/28/160216442/transcript-ann-romneys-convention-speech>
 of "the working moms who love their jobs but would like to work just a little 
less to spend more time with the kids."Michelle Obama recalled 
<http://www.npr.org/2012/09/04/160578836/transcript-michelle-obamas-convention-speech>
 her husband's mother turning to her own parents for help in raising her 
children.

Yet, neither mentioned the value of public support for the services that 
millions of families need, but cannot afford: high-quality, out-of-home care 
for young children, after-school programs for older children and long-term care 
services for family members coping with disability, or with the frailties that 
come with aging. Neither mentioned the need for laws that would enable millions 
of workers to reconcile the responsibilities of working for pay and caregiving 
at home: paid parental leave, paid sick leave, tax credits that could help 
support family care, or anti-discrimination protections for working women and 
men with caregiving responsibilities at home. Neither mentioned the many paid 
care workers who earn inadequate wages and lack their own workplace rights and 
benefits.

Women voters respond to messages about economic security, experts say 
<http://www.suntimes.com/news/sweet/15721901-452/election-could-come-down-to-what-women-want.html>
. And with Romneybeginning to close in on Obama's lead among women 
<http://www.businessweek.com/news/2012-10-07/romney-trounced-obama-in-presidential-debate-newt-gingrich-says>
, the competition to secure their support is getting fierce. It's a perfect 
opening for serious policy proposals around caregiving, work-life balance and 
family policy.

In principle, differences between Democrats and Republicans are stark. The 
2012 Democratic party platform emphasizes the importance of walking the walk 
when it comes to family values – and underscores the value of caregiving at 
home, as well as in the marketplace. The platform calls for passing theHealthy 
Families Act <http://www.democrats.org/democratic-national-platform>, which 
would provide paid sick leave, and broadening the Family and Medical Leave Act 
to grant more unpaid leave for caregiving. By contrast, theRepublican party 
platform <http://www.gop.com/2012-republican-platform_we/> calls for cuts in 
public spending and fails to specify any particular tax cuts aimed at helping 
parents or other caregivers.

But in practice, these political differences have been rendered almost 
irrelevant by a stalemate over deficit reduction.

One way to break that stalemate is to make a stronger case for caring about 
care. Much of the money and time devoted to young children and adults who need 
long-term assistance represents a family necessity. As a result, cuts in 
programs aimed to help families may reduce public debt, but they increase 
private debt. In many cases, short-run savings come at the cost of lower 
long-run productivity.

Further complicating the picture, the quality of care that Americans are able 
to provide their families varies dramatically depending on household income. 
The affluent enjoy more workplace flexibility and are able to purchase 
high-quality childcare and elder care services, while low-income families often 
linger on waiting lists or rely on public programs such as Medicaid. 
Middle-income families frequently face the most limited options because they 
lack the resources to buy private care, yet earn too much to qualify for public 
programs.

And while both parties have repeatedly reminded us of America's 
exceptionalism, when it comes to care, our country is exceptional for all the 
wrong reasons. Out of 20 high-income countries:

• Only the US has no national policy 
<http://www.workingmother.com/best-companies/everyone-us-state-maternity-leave> 
of paid maternity leave in the wake of birth or adoption. As a result, millions 
of American women are forced choose between returning to paid work before it is 
feasible, or taking a leave and absorbing an income loss when they need that 
income most.

• Only the US has no national policy 
<http://dissentmagazine.org/online.php?id=634> giving workers a right to paid 
sick days. As a result, many employees routinely go to work when they or their 
children are ill.

• The US invests the smallest share 
<http://dissentmagazine.org/online.php?id=634> of public spending in early 
childhood education and care, constraining parents' employment options and 
leaving countless children with inadequate childcare.

• Only the US has no national policy 
<http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/labor/news/2012/08/16/12031/fact-sheet-paid-sick-days/>
 guaranteeing workers a minimum number of paid days off each year, resulting in 
our nation having among the longest annual employment hours in the world.

Those skeptical of European examples point to the debt crisis in Greece and 
Spain. But most of the countries in northern and western Europe that provide 
generous support for caregiving are doing as well, or better, than the US in 
economic terms. Countries like Denmark, Sweden and Norway all havemuch lower 
debt-to-GDP ratios 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/21d103cc-e6c3-11e1-af33-00144feab49a.html> than the 
US does.

Our country needs a national care policy that would help support families 
wherever they live, and whatever their income. Americans nationwide are 
standing up and demanding an audience from political leaders and policy-makers. 
And theCaring Economy Campaign 
<http://www.caringeconomy.org/content/questions-for-candidates> has crafted a 
set of questions for the presidential candidates that directly asks them what 
policies they propose to help support both paid and unpaid care.

We need to ask the candidates again and again until we get clear answers. If 
we don't, we will never know how much they really care. And many women's votes 
will remain up for grabs.
 