
On paper, Iceland in January might not be everybody's first choice of holiday. 
There are some obvious things to put you off. Freezing temperatures, very 
limited daylight hours and the occasional smell of egg wafting up from the many 
sulphurous pools that dot the island. The reason I was keen to visit was to try 
snowmobiling. And as a keen off-road motorcycle rider, I also wanted to have a 
go at frozen lake riding, where you skid around on the ice, James Bond-style.

As the plane descended, the view out of the window could have been the opening 
scene of The Thing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=25_MNd-RDa8> – mile upon 
mile of snow, rugged volcanic rock and steaming thermal pools. Those pools, I 
soon discover, are a big thing for the locals, who offer you the chance to lie 
in the hot water/mud with the same regularity we offer someone a cup of tea. 
Let me take your bags, Sir. Oh, and by the way, would you like to sit in this 
pit of hot sludge? It took a lot to convince the taxi driver who picked me up 
from the airport that I didn't want to stop off for a quick hot dip. He was so 
insistent, I thought he might drive into the mud, just so I'd feel the 
beneficial effects before the medics pulled me out.

I was dropped off at the hotel Borg <http://en.hotelborg.is/>, which opened in 
1930 as Iceland's first luxury hotel, and is renowned for its art deco style and
posh restaurant, Silfur <http://www.silver.is/>. That evening I stuffed myself 
with garlic-roasted langoustine, cured goose, lobster hollandaise and lamb with 
a herb crust and mustard glaze. Everything was served on small planks of wood. 
The hotel is in the centre of Reykjavik, perfect for nipping round the corner 
to do a bit of shopping for winter clothes. As every other shop sells 
mountaineering stuff, I was soon kitted out, and slowly started to look less 
like an extra fromAvatar <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1_JBMrrYw8>. As well 
as the cold, it is also worth remembering to get an alarm call if you need one. 
As the sun comes up at nearly lunch time (around 11am in January), it can 
play havoc with your body clock.

Somewhat bleary-eyed, I was picked up early the next morning by Alexander 
"Lexi" Kárason <http://www.lexi.is/>, who, along with being Iceland's top 
snowmobile racer, was also Pierce Brosnan's stunt double inDie Another Day 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P0VyXWDrv_Y>. I was actually going to do things 
Bond-style. We set off in the dark in a giant pick-up truck that had a screen 
in the back, allowing me to watch DVDs of my guide kicking the arse of the poor 
fools who had tried to outrace him. The lack of sunlight made for one of the 
most surreal guided tours I have ever had – "If you look to your right, you 
would have been able to see... But it's dark, so, moving on."
 Ross Noble in Iceland: 'I politely declined every invitation to a hot pool 
dip – I understand how it could be deemed relaxing, but what I can’t get my 
head around is getting out of a hot bath in -20C. It takes the edge off 
somehow.' Photograph: Ian Yates/Eye Ubiquitous/Corbis 
We arrived at Hrauneyjar (translation: Lava Islands) Highland Centre 
<http://www.hrauneyjar.is/>, which is in the highlands of Iceland, an area of 
volcanic mountains covered in deep snow. This year it's had its heaviest fall 
for 30 years. We were soon flying along through open snowfields, slowing only 
for rocks. Once I'd worked up a sweat, it was easy to forget it was -20C. That 
is until I took off my helmet and the sweat in my hair froze into a block, 
making it almost impossible to get the helmet back on my head. We stopped for a 
break at a cabin in Landmannalaugar, where I tried to eat a sandwich that 
hardened with cold faster than I could get it into my mouth, and yet again 
politely declined a hot pool dip – I understand how it could be deemed 
relaxing, but what I can't get my head around is getting out of a hot bath in 
-20C. It takes the edge off somehow.

The afternoon was spent venturing a little farther into Jökulgil (Glacier 
Canyon) and across the running river Jökulgilskvísl (Glacier Canyon Creek). 
Lexi advised me that the trick to crossing is to stand up and give your 
snowmobile full power, so that the front lifts up, then hit it flat out and you 
should skip across the top. If you get it wrong and fall in, you will be an 
instant lump of ice. I hit the river perhaps a little too fast, clearing it but 
sending water over my head – which froze my jacket in the position I was 
standing in.

By 4pm it was pitch black, which meant doing the whole thing in reverse but 
with big lights on. Strangely, it's easier to ride like that because you aren't 
distracted by obstacles. You just power up and hope for the best. That night we 
had dinner atGrillmarkaðurinn <http://www.grillmarkadurinn.is/>, a fancy new 
restaurant – its walls are decorated with fish skins and dinner was served on 
lumps of volcanic rock. I opted for local fish as a starter and the meat 
platter for my main. Despite my curiosity, I couldn't bring myself to try the
minke whale 
<http://www.mammal.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=240&Itemid=273>
.

After dinner, we were met by photographer Ragnar Sigurdsson 
<http://www.arctic-images.com/>. The plan was to head out to a mountain about 
an hour's drive away and photograph the northern lights. I'm not really into 
taking pictures and had to borrow my wife's camera because I didn't think a top 
snapper would be too impressed with my camera phone. But when the lights 
appeared, I was blown away – they were like the most expensive laser show I'd 
ever seen, and I didn't have to stand next to a hot-dog stall while watching 
them. With Ragnar's guidance, I was able to take some beautiful pictures, which 
I may show my friends and family, though I know for a fact they will just think 
I snapped a postcard. After a couple of hours under the stars and another offer 
of a hot pool declined, I headed back to the hotel with my portfolio.

The next day, after a not entirely planned lie-in, I met with Keile, my guide 
for a final day of riding, only this time on motorbikes. I noticed that the 
bikes had a kill switch, so that if you came off, the spikes on the tyres 
wouldn't rip through your leg like a chainsaw – a nice little welcome to the 
world of ice riding. To make things a bit more interesting, we were joined 
by Einar S Sigurðarson, a former Icelandic Enduro and MX champion rider, who 
decided to take us on a cross-country adventure in the afternoon dark. 
Everything about riding in deep snow is bizarre. You can be powering through 
nicely when something hidden sends you flying, or your front wheel suddenly 
digs in and fires you over the handlebars, which is what happened to me. A very 
mangled snow angel marked the spot.

I have a love of more extreme pastimes, so will definitely return to Iceland, 
but if tyres with metal spikes aren't your thing, there is still plenty else to 
do. You can't fail to be bowled over by the northern lights, and there is no 
shortage of people who are more than happy to point you in the direction of a 
hot pool.

• Arctic Adventures <http://www.adventures.is> offers a glacier cruising trip 
for £230pp – this includes pick-up in a super truck from the guest's hotel in 
Reykjavik for a two-hour guided snowmobiling trip at the Langjökull Glacier. 
The trip is available from September-May.

Biking Viking <http://www.bikingviking.is> offers a Volcanic, Scenic or Viking 
motorbike day tour with a guide costing £297pp. Self-guided tours with a GPS 
cost £197pp; prices include fuel. Guided seven-day tours are also available.

Iceland Express <http://www.icelandexpress.com/> is Iceland's low-fare 
airline, with prices starting from £79 one-way including taxes. Flights are 
daily from London Gatwick to Reykjavik and from June 2012 will run a weekly 
service from London Stansted to Reykjavik.

• WIN: Quad biking, or glacier hiking and ice climbing in Iceland. For full 
details of the holiday on offer, plus how to enter the competition and full 
terms and conditions, go toweekend travel competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2012/jan/27/weekend-travel-competition>
 