
The XFM DJ and performance poet Scroobius Pip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/scroobius-pip> started growing his beard 
some years ago, when he quit his job as team leader at HMV Beckton. "I thought 
I'd give myself a year to attempt a music career," says Pip, real name David 
Mead. "Travel around and sleep in a Toyota Space Cruiser, perform outside other 
people's gigs… I figured shaving wouldn't be so easy."

The 31-year-old's career took off at the end of that itinerant year. A single 
made with Dan Le Sac,Thou Shalt Always Kill 
<http://www.muzu.tv/danlesacvsscroobiuspipyhbcyh8w5w/thou-shalt-always-kill-music-video/562564/>
, a droll rap about modern dos and don'ts, hit the top 40. Another 
collaboration,Stake a Claim <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYlVe-3P-8E>, 
became an unofficial anthem of the student protests in 2010. And as Pip has 
continued to prosper since, the beard has stayed. "I feel attached to it now," 
he says, wincing apologetically for the gag – too obvious.


Reading on mobile? Watch Dan Le Sac vs Scroobius Pip - Thou Shalt Always Kill 
here. 
<http://www.muzu.tv/danlesacvsscroobiuspipyhbcyh8w5w/thou-shalt-always-kill-music-video/562564/>

Pip's XFM slot, the Beatdown 
<http://www.xfm.co.uk/onair/shows/the-beatdown-with-scroobius-pip>, a 
Saturday-night show that focuses on hip-hop and spoken word, has developed a 
reputation for shunning the obvious. Recently, Pip spent a good 15 minutes of 
air time forensically analysing the links between Motown and hip-hop (with 
audio snippets), to defy those who felt that rap was unmusical, "just people 
talking". Not long before he became the first commercial UK broadcaster to play 
Angel Haze'sCleaning Out My Closet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7bZ08RNUyM>
, a disturbing account of the American rapper's experiences of rape.

"It's a harsh and harrowing story and it's hard to listen to. But does that 
mean it should be hidden away and ignored? I personally don't think so. I think
that sends out a message that if you've been through hard times, you probably 
shouldn't talk about it."

Pip grew up in Stanford-le-Hope, Essex, a hip-hop fan with a stutter. "There 
weren't many people to be in a band with where I lived," so he turned to 
writing poetry as something he could pursue on his own. He borrowed his stage 
name from Edward Lear. "Nothing I wrote ever felt complete until I performed it 
in front of people."

He has long felt spoken word doesn't get enough play on the radio, so when XFM 
suggested a show, it was the opportunity to broadcast such work, as well as 
hip-hop more esoteric than Kanye and Jay-Z, that appealed – despite the fact 
that he's never particularly wanted to be a broadcaster. "I've never been one 
for talking just to fill gaps. I love silence. It's awesome."

Like all radio DJs, he wants his listeners to be intrigued and tickled; to sit 
up and take note of the tracks he's playing. But if his audience aren't so 
inclined, he's happy with that too. "We've got comfortable with the fact that 
radio has become something that's on in the background. And that's fine. I like 
the idea that if it's on in the background and no one's really paying 
attention… let's have some fun. Let's see what we can do."

Hot Scroobius Pip Cloudcasts 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/tag/scroobius-pip/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=resource_link>
 on Mixcloud 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/?utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=homepage_link>

The Beatdown <http://www.xfm.co.uk/onair/shows/the-beatdown-with-scroobius-pip>
 with Scroobius Pip is on Saturday nights from 12-1am on 104.9 FM in London, 
97.7 in Manchester and across the UK on digital, mobile and online at Xfm.co.uk
 