
Starter's orders

After more than a few false dawns, the Cultural Olympiad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/apr/26/jeremy-hunt-london-2012-festival?newsfeed=true>
 finally spluttered into life this week, with the unveiling ofthe full lineup 
for the London 2012 festival 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-17839185>, which will take place 
from 21 June to 9 September. Many of the events have already been announced and 
some of them (rather confusingly) have already begun (such as theWorld 
Shakespeare festival <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-17811233>, 
which kicked off last Monday). But new acts include comedians Tim Minchin and 
Stephen Fry, who will both perform as part of the event.

Awards season in full swing

In the US, meanwhile, theatre awards season kicked off, with the Drama League 
announcing the nominations for its awards 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118053054?refCatId=15>. They often serve as 
a fairly good indicator for what might fare well at the all-important Tonys 
(the nominations for which are announced next Tuesday) and there are a few 
UK-originated shows in the running: specifically One Man, Two Guvnors and Ghost.

Back in Blighty, there was a new awards ceremony on the block – the 
Mousetraps. Voted for by youngsters who had visited the theatre thanks to the 
charity Mousetrap Theatre Projects, the inaugural event sawWicked walk away 
with three awards 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/35946/wicked-wins-at-mousetrap-awards>
, while Chicago picked up the (supposedly) coveted "sexiest cast" gong

Sussudio theatre

You might imagine that those youngsters will not be getting an outing to 
Rupert Goold's latest project 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/35932/headlong-2012-season-features-american-psycho>
: a stage musical version of Brett Easton Ellis's ultra-violent novel American 
Psycho. It was one of a number of projects announced by Goold – via online 
trailer – for his touring company Headlong's 2012 season. Meanwhile, the 
director will also be making his return to English National Opera, directing a 
new production of Wozzeck in 2013, as part of a season which includes anew work 
by Philip Glass about Walt Disney 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/35949/opera-about-disney-forms-part-of-new-eno>
.

Dirty protest

In Stratford-upon-Avon, the World Shakespeare festival has got under way, but 
not everyone is in celebratory mood.Protestors took to the stage of the Royal 
Shakespeare 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/35944/protestors-ask-audience-to-rip-bp-logos-out>
 theatre to object to BP's sponsorship of the event, encouraging audiences to 
rip the company's logo out of their programmes. But artistic directorMichael 
Boyd seemed sanguine about the protests 
<http://www.stratford-herald.com/local-news/5581-rsc-and-bp-happy-for-onstage-protest-to-continue.html>
: "We respect people's right to protest peacefully," he said.

Demolition Derby?

More happily in the Midlands, a report has been released that investigates a 
futureuse for the Derby Hippodrome 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/35954/derby-hippodrome-restoration-cost-estimated>
, which has been in a state of disrepair following a series of fires on site 
since 2008. The report recommends a £15.4 million restoration package that 
would see the venue transformed into a home for major touring musicals.

Stage death

Tragic and bizarre scenes in Brazil, meanwhile, where an actor accidentally 
hanged himself 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2012/04/24/world/americas/brazil-actor-hanging/?hpt=wo_c2>
 while performing as Judas in a stage production of The Passion of the Christ. 
After two weeks in a coma, Tiago Kilmeck died and police are now investigating 
just what went wrong with his stage equipment; he was apparently wearing a 
harness to prevent just such an accident.

And finally...

Comedian Phil Kay's on-stage antics have been shocking audiences in a rather 
less sombre fashion. According toindustry website Chortle 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2012/04/23/15264/phil_kays_onstage_meltdown>, 
Kay has sparked a flurry of complaints and walkouts after stripping naked and 
hurling abuse at his audience. According to reports, "At one stage, he was 
crying on stage, grabbing the leg of gig organiser Steph Renshaw and begging 
her to pay him as the bewildered punters looked on." An attempt at character 
comedy, perhaps?

Follow Friday – my theatrical twitter tips

@ramingray <https://twitter.com/#!/ramingray> – Ramin Gray, artistic director 
of Actors Touring Company, currently directing a revival of Sarah Kane's Crave 
in a double bill with new Russian play Illusions. Recently to be found tweeting 
quotes from Nietzsche and Chekhov and asking big questions: "Must true love be 
requited love? If only one person loves and that love is unrequited then what 
value does it have? More or less?"

@lucyprebblish <https://twitter.com/#!/lucyprebblish> – playwright Lucy 
Prebble – best known for Enron. Tweets about all kinds of things, from writing 
to politics, and has a funky Space Invaders-themed background. "If I write 
something I think is good I allow myself to go stand by the window," she 
tweeted recently. "This happens about once a month."

@calmccrystal <https://twitter.com/#!/CalMcCrystal> – Cal McCrystal, comedy 
director on the National theatre's latest hit One Man, Two Guvnors. Has 
recently run away to join @giffordscircus and is now tweeting about his 
experiences in the big top.

And you can follow me @smithalistair <https://twitter.com/#!/smithalistair>
 