
A TV campaign for a Sky-branded casino has been banned for using a “roulette 
rock star” character that glamorises gambling.

The TV ad for Sky Vegas, part of a group of companies including Sky Bet and 
Sky Poker in whichRupert Murdoch’s pay-TV group holds a minority stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/04/sky-sells-gambing-cvc-capital-partners-bet>
, featured an everyman character called Michael who transforms into a betting 
legend when he gambles.


“This morning he was doing his recycling,” runs the voiceover, “but right now 
he’s in Sky Vegas. And here, he’s the roulette rock star riding an electric 
riff of red and black.”


The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
received a complaint that the TV ad glamorised gambling.


Bonne Terre, which trades as Sky Vegas, said that Michael only felt like a 
rock star because of the excitement of playing on the casino site.


“There was no reference or inference that he was, indeed, a musician whose 
abilities were enhanced and became a better musician or ‘rock star’ because of 
his gambling,” said the company. “‘Michael’ remained the same person with the 
same everyday qualities … he only felt like a ‘rock star’ because of the 
excitement of playing at Sky Vegas.”


The ASA disagreed and said that when Michael – who is introduced as having 
just put out his recycling – gambles, he is depicted as “exuding the 
confidence, personality and qualities of a rock star and improved his 
self-image”.


“Although no physical transformation was depicted, we considered the ad 
implied a distinct change in Michael because he was playing roulette on Sky 
Vegas – taking the character from ‘everyday Michael’ to ‘rock star Michael’,” 
said the ASA, which banned the TV campaign. “Therefore, we concluded that the 
ad suggested that gambling would enhance the personal qualities of those 
gambling.”

 