
People have long called for a British HBO – but Sky's new channel might not be 
quite what they had in mind 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/oct/01/bskyb-sky-atlantic-mad-men>. From 
early 2011 new HBO content, along with future seasons of AMC's Mad Men, will 
air exclusively on the newly announced Sky Atlantic, available along with other 
channels for a monthy Sky subscription.

In some ways this is good news: it looks like British viewers will be able to 
watch television such asDavid Simon's Treme 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/apr/10/treme-david-simon-new-orleans>
,Martin Scorsese's Boardwalk Empire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/sep/20/boardwalk-empire-martin-scorsese>
 and fantasy drama Game of Thrones sooner. Other shows on their way include 
Luck, starring Dustin Hoffman, and Mildred Pierce, starring Kate Winslet. If 
great US TV is your thing – and whose thing isn't it really? – the could be 
less ofthat long, frustrating wait to find out when UK viewers will see shows 
from across the Atlantic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/aug/18/mad-men-series-four-uk>
.

Even better, for those who already have Sky subscriptions, Sky Atlantic will 
be part of the basic package. Many presumed the channel would be a premium 
offering, like Sky Movies, Sky Sports and HBO in the US, for which you would 
have to pay an extra monthly fee. Not least becauseHBO's latest Steven 
Spielberg epic The Pacific 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/series/deep-in-the-pacific>, broadcast 
earlier this year, went out on Sky Movies, rather than on Sky1.

But the downside of Sky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic> being basic rather than 
premium is that programmes will also be shown with ads. And while Mad Men is 
shown on AMC in the US with breaks, after revelling in the show's uninterrupted 
broadcast on BBC4, that's going to take some getting used to. HBO content, of 
course, doesn't have ads in the US. (Time to make some room on your Sky+ box to 
get round them, I suspect.)

If, however, you don't have a Sky subscription, or were hoping that Sky might 
instead invest more in British TV, things look altogether less jolly.By 
outbidding the BBC for Mad Men 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/sep/30/bskyb-mad-men-bbc>, Sky pushed up 
the amount of UK television cash being spent on US content, rather than 
invested in British shows. And while Sky Atlantic will contain exclusive 
British content, the clue to the channel's focus is in the name.

Things don't look a great deal less gloomy for fans of high end US comedy and 
drama without a Sky subscription. Today Sky said it could not confirm any deals 
to carry Sky Atlantic with other pay-TV operators – which could leave Virgin 
Media subscribers, for instance, rather stuffed, although the expectation is 
that a carriage agreement is likely to be reached.

HBO shows currently on other UK channels – such as FX's Eastbound & Down, and 
More4's Hung – will stay put for the duration of existing rights deals, but 
then move to Sky Atlantic. True Blood fans, however, will need to stick with 
FX, which has a deal for the life of the series. Sky is also thought to be 
talking to other US cable channels including Mad Men'sAMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amc> (Breaking Bad) and Showtime (Dexter, 
Nurse Jackie) about HBO-style output deals, so the supply of the best US 
scripted programming to other UK broadcasters could all but dry up.

I am also not sure that Sky Atlantic will stop people downloading shows. Sky 
has been savvy in broadcasting US shows closer to their US broadcast date in an 
effort to combat piracy – theLost finale simulcast at 5am 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/may/25/lost-finale-tv-ratings> being a 
good example. But if viewers have to both have a Sky subscription and put up 
with ad breaks, will that definitely seem preferable to immediately downloading 
their favourite HBO shows? And if you currently don't have pay-TV and aren't 
interested in anything but the HBO content, would you rather spend £19 a month 
on Sky's basic channels or on buying box sets? I'm not sure.

Sky Atlantic is undoubtedly good news for Sky subscribers – and for fans of US 
TV who want to see things quickly without resorting to downloading. For 
everyone else? I'm not entirely convinced – although given I have a Virgin 
subscription, that's hardly surprising. So what do you make of it? Will you be 
signing up?
 