
The head of Sky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> has 
dismissed author Alain de Botton’s criticism of news media as part of a staunch 
defence of rolling news channels, arguing that they play a critical role in the 
digital era.

John Ryley said de Botton’s critique in his book, The News: A User’s Manual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/29/news-users-manual-alain-de-botton-review>
, that news has replaced religion as the prime influencer of society is “simply 
wrong”.

Ryley also hit back at critics who have recently argued that TV news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tvnews> channels have had their day and will 
be superseded by online video news, saying Sky News is “live and on demand 
24/7”.

“De Botton is fairly disdainful about the news media in general, though his 
research seems not to have reached much beyond the BBC,” said Ryley, in a 
speech the RSA in London on Wednesday. “He suggests that this quasi-religious 
aspect of news in the 21st century has a very specific consequence. It means 
that we – me, you, the public – must treat it deferentially and comply with its 
rules without question or hesitation.”

Ryley said that news organisations do not “shape” people’s views.

“We are simply giving them the most accurate information impartially,” he 
said. “So that they can shape their own views. We are not doing what de Botton 
accuses us of - trying to ‘craft a new planet’ in the minds of the audience.”

Ryley also turned his sights on Richard Sambrook, the former director of BBC 
News, who recentlyquestioned the continuing relevance of 24 hour TV news 
channels in the digital era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/03/tv-24-hour-news-channels-bbc-rolling>
.

Ryley said that Sambrook’s argument – that expensive rolling TV news channels 
could be shut freeing more resource for online delivery – was “too narrow and 
out-of-date”.

“It considers and old world where it’s possible to pigeon hole organisations 
and what they do,” he said. “Sky’s news is not just a rolling news channel. 
Just as the Guardian, or the Times is not only a newspaper. Sky News is live 
and on-demand 24/7. Digital may be impacting traditional platforms, but it is 
not yet replacing them”.

He said that even in a digital world the main channel remains the “backbone 
and beating heart” of a news service.

“The growth of technology has opened previously undreamed of frontiers in the 
way news is distributed and delivered - smartphones, tablets. The key to 
exploiting these multiplatform opportunities remains with being a 24-hour 
service with the live stream at its core. It is the spine ... [the] main source 
of strength.”

Ryley acknowledged that mainstream media is losing young audiences to sources 
such as Buzzfeed, with a populist style of news and stories as lists, but with 
a rapid expansion in consumption driven by technology there is room for 
everyone.

“This collapse in the barriers to entry has caused a democratisation of news 
that has allowed in new services, like Vice Media,” he said. Traditional news 
organisations would be foolish to ignore them. We should learn from them”.

He said that the vibrancy of the news sector was proven by the launch of 
services such as Huffpost Live and WSJ Live, which have “much of the look and 
feel of a rolling news channel”.

“They have paid us the highest possible compliment - imitation,” he said. 
“Hence my unshakeable belief that if Sky did not have rolling news channel, we 
would have had to invent it.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 