
Sports Direct has been warned to clarify its advertising after the regulator 
banned “misleading” and “unsubstantiated” savings claims.

The retail giant’s website advertised a Puma Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> home shirt for £42 in February, 
claiming the price represented a saving of £17.99.

But a reader said the product had never been sold on Sportsdirect.com at 
£59.99, and challenged whether the price and savings claim were misleading and 
could be substantiated.

Newspapers attack rogue capitalists but bridle at regulating them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/09/newspapers-attack-rogue-capitalists-but-bridle-at-regulating-them>
Sports Direct said the £59.99 claim was based on the recommended retail price 
of the shirt, and provided a list from manufacturer Puma which showed an RRP 
for the kit of £60.

It also submitted a schedule of prices for other clubs, arguing that the 
evidence demonstrated consistent prices of between £55 and £65 for these types 
of shirts.

The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
said consumers were likely to understand that £59.99 was the price at which the 
kit was usually sold on Sportsdirect.com.

The ASA said: “Because the evidence provided by Sportsdirect.com related to 
the prices of the featured kit, and other similar products, offered on other 
websites, we did not consider that it was adequate in demonstrating that the 
kit advertised was usually sold at £59.99 on their own website and that the 
savings claim represented genuine savings against that usual selling price.

“We therefore concluded that the price claim ‘£59.99’ and the savings claim 
were misleading.”

It ruled that the ad must not appear again in its current form again, adding: 
“We told Sportsdirect.com to ensure that they did not make savings claims that 
were likely to be understood as being based on the prices at which the products 
were usually sold, unless they held adequate evidence to substantiate those 
claims.”
 