
Tillakaratne Dilshan led Sri Lanka to a six-wicket win over Afghanistan in 
their first game of theWorld Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> Super 10 stage.

Asghar Stanikzai made a career-best 62 and Samiullah Shenwari smashed 31 from 
14 balls as Afghanistan, whoqualified ahead of Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/afghanistan-zimbabwe-world-twenty20-match-report-england-cricket>
 from Group B, made 153 for seven.

But Dilshan batted through for an unbeaten 83, from 56 balls with eight fours 
and three sixes, to stave off any threat of an upset.

No respite for callow England as South Africa and AB de Villiers await
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/17/england-south-africa-world-t20-ab-de-villiers-jos-buttler-preview>
Afghanistan had been 51 for four at the end of the 11th over after Rangana 
Herath, who finished with figures of two for 24, removed Noor Ali Zadran, for 
20, and Mohammad Nabi.

But Shenwari joined Stanikzai in a quickfire partnership of 61, the former 
hitting two sixes and three fours, including a reverse slap in which he 
overbalanced completely at the crease.

He eventually holed out to long-off, giving Nuwan Kulasekara his only wicket 
of an expensive four overs (one for 43), but Stanikzai advanced to a 42-ball 
half-century. He continued to swing hard, on more than one occasion lifting 
himself off his feet, as he advanced to 62 from 47 before a misjudged ramp shot 
off Thisara Perera (three for 33) offered the wicketkeeper Dinesh Chandimal a 
simple catch.

Najibullah Zadran blasted 12 off the last three balls of the innings but the 
total never looked anything more than par – as Dilshan quickly proved. He put 
on 41 for the first wicket with Chandimal and 27 for the third with Perera and 
showcased his full range of shots, including a signature “Dilscoop” for six off 
the fast bowler Dawlat Zadran.

The run-outs of Perera and Chamara Kapugedera – the latter backing up as Nabi 
deliberately and brilliantly diverted Dilshan’s drive on to the stumps – sapped 
some momentum from the innings and put the result back in the balance.

But the captain, Angelo Mathews, hit 21 not out off 10 balls as he and Dilshan 
finished the job with more than an over to spare.
 