
While it is slightly startling to hear that Wuthering Heights is to receive a 
Bollywood treatment 
<http://www.sundayherald.com/news/heraldnews/display.var.2453814.0.bronte_goes_to_bollywood.php>
 in a theatre production byTamasha 
<http://www.tamasha.org.uk/wuthering-heights/>, it is a genuine eye-popper to 
hear from artistic directorKristine Landon-Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2002/jul/06/whoswhoinbritishtheatre.features18>
 that it's going to have a "moody, Chekhovian feel".

Landon-Smith says that "there are points where the emotions get so high that 
they have to sing instead of speak", which seems true to the pitch of Brontë's 
drama. And though it's quite hard to imagine where the big dance numbers are 
going to drop in it's a great deal more appealing a prospect than seeingCliff 
as Heathcliff 
<http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51ZD61AD8ZL._SL500_AA280_.jpg>. 

Wuthering Heights has, of course, withstood transposition into any number of 
different forms before - including ballet, film and theatre. I suppose Kate 
Bush got a few people reading Brontë, but God knows what the effect of hearing 
Genesis's concept album,Wind and Wuthering 
<http://www.progreviews.com/reviews/display.php?rev=gen-waw>, was.

Indeed, a Bollywood Brontë would be far from the strangest reinterpretation of 
a book we've ever seen. I can remember watching a production of Hamlet - which 
I admit to quite liking - in which the gravedigger scene kicked off with a 
dance to Russ Abbott's Atmosphere. Recently a consortium of Broadway bigwigs 
clubbed together to purchase themusical rights to Bret Easton Ellis's American 
Psycho 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/news/e3ic8b26fc03438b0b7de534491a4a7606d>
, which might seem stranger if Sondheim hadn't already tackled theDemon Barber 
of Fleet Street <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122346/sweeney.todd> and 
a whole company ofAssassins <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassins_(musical)>. 
Adaptation <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94517/adaptation>'s 
interpretation of Susan Orlean's Orchid Thief is my nomination for the oddest 
film version; and, until I looked on YouTube, it was a source of enduring 
regret that I'd never seenthe musical version of Moby Dick 
<http://mobydickthemusical.com/moby_dick!.htm>, a maritime romp set in a 
swimming pool at a girls' boarding school. I think of that one as the ne plus 
ultra - but perhaps there are even odder reincarnations out there?
 