
Astronomers confessed last night that they were puzzled by mysterious dark 
bands of shadow across the sky during Wednesday's eclipse.

They were faint - many people missed them altogether - and unexpected, and 
barely mentioned in the immediate post-mortems of the spectacle of the last 
total eclipse of the millennium.

They were seen as much as 20 minutes before totality, running parallel with 
the horizon, both below and above the sun, and even 20 minutes after totality. 
"It was then still there: a band only two-thirds of the way across the sky," 
said Donald Lynden-Bell, a Cambridge astronomer who witnessed the eclipse with 
more than 200 colleagues on the Channel island of Alderney. "Then it 
disappeared."

Eclipse experts had for days been promising strange atmospheric effects. 
Nobody had mentioned a banded sky. Puzzled callers to Radio Guernsey yesterday 
claimed to have seen the same thing. One explanation was that they could have 
been shadows of condensation trails from high flying jets: two Concordes were 
known to have flown in the eclipse path and observers on Alderney were startled 
by a sonic boom after "first contact" - the start of the moon's path across the 
disc of the sun.

Phil Charles of Oxford was watching through a wide-angle camera. "I saw this 
dark band that really did go across a large fraction of the sky and I was quite 
puzzled as to why it had become visible then. I had no idea what it was, but 
chatting to people afterwards, the general consensus was that it might have 
been a contrail [condensation trail]. Having heard the Concorde sonic boom 
earlier on in the eclipse, if you think about the timescale over which a 
contrail will plump out, perhaps that made some sense."

The bands wouldn't have been visible to people watching through recommended 
filters. Many of the astronomers used the naked eye to observe and relied on 
the high, thick clouds to act as natural filter. Mark Bailey, director of the
Armagh Observatory <https://www.theguardian.com/education/armagh-observatory> 
said. "To me, the bands looked like shadows of condensation trails on the 
clouds. But the clouds were quite low so I couldn't see why there should be 
such clear-cut shadows."

Helen Walker, of the Rutherford Appleton laboratory in Oxfordshire, had been 
looking away from the sun when she saw the bands from horizon to horizon 
opposite to the eclipse but almost overhead. "Before totality we were seeing 
three or four bands and there was one very low down on the horizon, bands of 
shadow on the cloud overhead."

She did not favour the jet plane theory. "There was no wind shear or anything. 
It seemed unlikely that it was airplane contrails. They were just bands of 
shadow, uniform size, uniform width all the way across and each one looked the 
same as the preceding ones."

She thought that the sudden drops in temperature as the sun's light was masked 
by the moon's shadow moving at supersonic speeds might have triggered shock 
waves in the upper atmosphere which would then precipitate ice crystals. "That 
would then give you a very uniform contrail across the sky literally associated 
with the totality shadow that comes across."

But the answer may have been on the bookshelves for years. According to Simon 
Mitton, astronomy specialist for Cambridge University Press, the author David 
Lynch had already provided an explanation in a book called Colour And Light In 
Nature: it was a condensation trail after all.

"Normally there is not sufficient contrast for you to see the shadow of a high 
cloud - say, a condensation trail - being cast on a lower cloud deck," said Dr 
Mitton. "The sun's brightness was greatly turned down because of the eclipse 
and that makes the contrast easier. And the sun being almost completely 
eclipsed meant that we had a source of illumination which was more like a point 
source than a big, diffuse source. And a point source will anyway cast a 
sharper shadow. The cloud desk itself was very low, and the lower the cloud 
deck, the larger the shadow will appear to be to an observer underneath it. 
That explains why it looked so dramatic."

Â• Dr Jacqueline Mitton of the Royal Astronomical Society said last night she 
was bracing herself for callers who might have been alarmed by unusual activity 
in the sky early this morning. "They were flashing lights," she said. "They 
weren't UFOs. It was the Perseid meteor shower. It comes round at this time 
every year, and on a dark night with clear skies you could have seen one every 
three or four minutes."

The Perseids are one of the strongest and most reliable annual meteor showers 
known. They are tiny grains of debris shed long ago by the comet Swift-Tuttle, 
which is slowly disintegrating as it orbits the Sun. The particles travel at 37 
miles a second, vaporising in a white hot streak when they hit the Earth's 
atmosphere.

Some astronomers expected this year's Perseids to be merely a warm-up for a 
much more powerful meteor shower in November, when the Earth is due to pass 
through the Leonid meteor shower.
 