
This summer, I’ve spent rather a lot of time in Morrisons’ car park. At times, 
I’ve made daily trips, just to look at the strange things unfurling there.

The place is full of all the predictable car-park planting – cotoneaster 
(which I may start guerrilla cloud-pruning), privet and box – plus lots of 
litter and undesirabledesire lines <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desire_path>. 
There’s a hell of a lot of bark mulch, too, which must be from the 
Mediterranean, for otherwise I have no idea how the dragon arum (Dracunculus 
vulgaris 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/6115/Dracunculus-vulgaris/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fquery%3Ddracunculus%2Bvulgaris%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
), a native to the Balkans, mainland Greece, Crete and the Aegean Islands, 
appeared.

As its name suggests, the dragon arum is something that roars and spits. It 
looks very much like a dragon may be hiding inside: a huge, red, arum-type 
flower, deep velvet-red with a huge, blackish-red spadix, rises out and then 
flops over. It is quite something, particularly when found in a car park in 
Stratford. I thought about stealing it, but I was reminded quite how stinky it 
gets in flower. As with all arums, the blood-red mouth is a pollination trick, 
there to convince flies there is something rotting inside in which they can lay 
their eggs. It does this very well, because there are always flies buzzing 
around, although the best arum for this has to be the pig butt arum (
Helicodiceros muscivorus 
<https://www.avonbulbs.co.uk/late-summer-planted-bulbs/helicodiceros/helicodiceros-muscivorus>
), which looks just like a pig’s bum and smells far worse than you can imagine. 
It is permanently dotted with flies when in flower.

Anyway, the dragon arum is better admired in the car park than in my small 
back garden. But if you wanted to plant one (or, indeed, a pig butt arum), now 
is the time to do it. This perennial goes dormant after flowering, some time 
between June and July. The large tubers are best planted now until early 
autumn, somewhere warm and sheltered from the worst of the coming winter rain. 
(If you miss this window, try for spring instead.) Plant the tubers 15cm deep 
in humus-rich, well-drained soil. They are used to a dry period after 
flowering, but they won’t do well if they dry out completely over winter and 
spring; you must find the balance between drying out and rotting off. Leaf 
mould, lots of grit and a good layer of bark mulch is the way to go, but, if 
Morrisons’ car park teaches us anything, it is that, when happy, they will take 
care of themselves and look magnificent for it.

It is practical as a container plant: once dormant, you can hide it away. Make 
sure you choose a big, deep pot: the flower can grow 1.5m tall and, although 
robust, it will snap in strong winds.

Arums do best in full sun but will thrive in part shade, which makes them 
useful under deciduous trees or against walls. And, despite the smell, the 
flowers are well worth it for their weirdness alone. It is a botanical 
curiosity that everyone should experience once. If nothing else, as Guardian 
country diarist Dr Phil Gatessuggests 
<http://digitalbotanicgarden.blogspot.co.uk/2010/02/voodoo-lily-dracunculus-vulgaris.html>
, it would make a great practical joke. Send the unlabelled tuber to someone 
and tell them it is a great house plant.

The best plants to flavour gin | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/06/the-best-plants-to-flavour-gin-alys-fowler> 