

Halt and Catch Fire


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441206657557%2F36c95966-7107-4efc-ae14-349899178b21-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441206657557%2F36c95966-7107-4efc-ae14-349899178b21-2060x1236.jpeg>
 PC Music: Mackenzie Davis in Halt and Catch Fire. Photograph: AMC 
If you just looked at the originally hard-wired components of the show, Halt 
and Catch Fire would, rightly, be a prematurely obsolete object of mockery, 
sitting in a drawer, gathering dust. Originally presented as yet another period 
piece (this time, Texas in the 1980s) about yet another handsome white man with 
a dark past (this time, Lee Pace as con man Joe McMillan) trying to make his 
“singular vision” a reality (this time in the early computing industry), the 
first season of the show is largely a snooze, hitting the mostly expected beats 
with mostly basic competency. But the last couple of episodes of the season 
suggested there might be hidden depths, and the recently concluded second 
season proved that showrunners Christopher Cantwell and Christopher C Rogers 
had secretly been overseeing the sort of slow burn we associate with denser, 
slower streaming series.

Lee Pace interview: 'Halt and Catch Fire is about people, not computers'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/24/lee-pace-interview-halt-catch-fire-people-not-computers>
The first 10 episodes were spent crafting characters without much plot 
pressure, and the second 10 rely on that foundation to produce a series of 
explosive, surprising moments. Now, the most important relationship on the show 
isn’t romantic in nature – it’s a professional bond between two women who also 
happen to be played by the most dynamic members of the cast. Mackenzie Davis is 
a raw nerve as the brilliant, idealistic programmer Cameron Howe, while Kerry 
Bishé provides a grounded, weary counterweight as veteran Donna Clark. The 
story of the show’s second season is about the pair building game company 
Mutiny into a smart, inventive threat, constantly on the verge of truly 
remarkable computing innovations while fending off external enemies, including 
McMillan’s accidental death touch and Donna’s husband, twitchy tinkerer Gordon 
(Scoot McNairy, playing a caustic, frayed wire). The male characters always 
vaguely threaten to swallow the show, but Halt and Catch Fire never lets you 
forget who the real masters are.ET

Mr Robot
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67498ed4e73d7dc1c7854c8060ecf3bb2654548%2F0_54_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67498ed4e73d7dc1c7854c8060ecf3bb2654548%2F0_54_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Christian Slater and Rami Malek star in critically acclaimed show, Mr Robot. 
Photograph: Jamie McCarthy/Getty Images 
The most fascinating new show of the year is also one that seems, on paper, 
like it should be a disaster. Mr Robot airs on the unheralded USA network (home 
to lightweight fare like Suits), has no recognisable stars (bar poor, forgotten 
Christian Slater), features thatTV kryptonite, the voiceover 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/why-fall-tv-is-choking-on-its-own-voice-over-20141104>
, and is about hacking, subject matter that rarely works well in film or TV.

Season finale of Mr Robot delayed over similar scenes to Virginia shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/26/season-finale-mr-robot-delayed-similar-scenes-virginia-shooting>
And yet, it’s for all these reasons and more that Mr Robot is a success. The 
show rarely does the expected and is wonderfully disorientating as a result. 
Rami Malek is utterly convincing as Elliot, a socially awkward data security 
expert who spends his free time snorting morphine and hacking into the online 
lives of those around him, helping the good ones, destroying the lives of the 
bad ones. This small-time hacking soon gives way to something grander when 
Elliot is recruited by Mr Robot (Slater), leader of a hacking collective called 
Fsociety, to take down a monolithic corporation.

Then things get … complicated. It would be remiss to reveal too much of what 
goes on Mr Robot’s first season, as so much of its appeal lies in its woozy, 
discombobulating quality, which the show manages to convey through everything 
from Elliot’s monotone narration, addressing the audience as if we’re his 
imaginary friend, to the strange angles of its establishing shots. Mr Robot 
looks to be pushing Steven Soderbergh claret-spilling hospital drama The Knick 
for the title of television’s most stylised drama; every shot of its first 
season seems meticulously staged, right down to the placement of 
self-consciously retro title card. That attention to detail attends the 
technological aspects of Mr Robot: this is that rare on-screen depiction of 
hacking that actually looks authentic, and its depiction of hackers – 
anticapitalist, angry but also idealistic – chimes with the likes of Anonymous. 
Oh, and poor, forgotten Christian Slater gives his best performance since True 
Romance. Watch it (the finale airs Wednesday at 10pm on USA).GM

Deutschland 83
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441207985798%2Fdf157766-6521-447c-945d-1de49c3d1ac8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441207985798%2Fdf157766-6521-447c-945d-1de49c3d1ac8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Deutschland 83: Instagram was a tougher proposition in the 80s. Photograph: 
Sundance 
Sundance TV’s sleeper hit of the summer came in the form of a cold war 
espionage drama that followed in the footsteps of Florian Henckel von 
Donnersmarck’s the Lives of Others, and managed to achieve that film’s thematic 
mix of personal risk and anguish, systemic failings and debilitating attrition. 
If that all sounds a little glum, it (somehow) isn’t, mostly because alongside 
the political machinations and culture wars there’s Martin Rauch (played by 
Jonas Nay), who is the reluctant East German spy recruited in order to help his 
mother secure a much-needed transplant. Again, that hardly sounds like a laugh, 
but the lighter moments come when Rauch crosses into the West and discovers 
things such as 80s pop music and Walkmans in between bugging diplomats’ hotel 
suites and seducing their secretaries.

Clicker-bait: our guide to summer's best television
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ng-interactive/2015/jun/02/summer-television-guide-2015>
Sitting somewhere between the constant paranoia of The Americans and the 
slapstick piss-taking of the cold war found in Chuck Palahniuk’s Pygmy, it 
works because behind the heavy foreboding threat of nuclear war is Rauch’s at 
times brazenly ordinary coming-of-age story, which prevents it all from 
becoming a slog. Tense, will-he-won’t-he moments mean every episode puts 
something on the line, without the larger picture (the ever-present cold war 
and protests against the Pershing missiles) suffering for it.LB

7 Days in Hell
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441206369164%2F07f4f6bb-9e58-4933-9f0f-9562d8d8bf42-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20TV%20catch-up%3A%20Mr%20Robot%2C%20Halt%20and%20Catch%20Fire%20and%20more%20hits%20you%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fsummer-tv-shows-mr-robot-halt-catch-fire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441206369164%2F07f4f6bb-9e58-4933-9f0f-9562d8d8bf42-1020x612.jpeg>
 7 Days in Hell on HBO: eat your heart out, Isner v Mahut. Photograph: HBO 
What if I told you that there was a short project this summer that involved 
Andy Samberg, Kit Harington (Game of Thrones’ Jon Snow), John McEnroe, Michael 
Sheen and Serena Williams? And that it was very funny? And that you probably 
missed it when it aired earlier this summer? That’d be HBO’s unassuming, 
spot-on tennis mockumentary 7 Days in Hell. Samberg (also executive producer) 
plays Aaron Williams, adopted brother of Serena and “bad boy” of professional 
tennis, while Harington takes on the role of Charles Poole, a prodigy bullied 
into brilliance by his mother (Mary Steenburgen) and an entire nation. These 
two find themselves on a convoluted collision course involving murder, Swedish 
prison and Queen Elizabeth II, then engaging in a week-long tennis match that 
devolves into several rounds of public sex, sex tapes and paternal revelations. 
Truly, it is the greatest, most exhausting match of all time.

7 Days in Hell: HBO's tennis mockumentary is a grand slam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/11/7-days-in-hell-hbo-andy-samberg-kit-harrington>
The action itself, with its duelling beyond-stereotypical sports narratives, 
breathless gameplay, and running gags, is padded out with delightful talking 
head cameos from the likes of Will Forte, Lena Dunham, David Copperfield and 
more, each of whom play distinct, absurd, more-or-less believable characters. 
(Copperfield, McEnroe and several others play themselves.) There are two 
refreshingly fun things about 7 Days in Hell that set it apart from the rest of 
the summer TV landscape. First, it pretends to take itself deadly seriously – 
there are no winks to the camera, no nods to the fact that we’re actually 
seeing Andy Samberg, sitcom and movie star, and Kit Harington, Game of Thrones 
heartthrob, engage in a ridiculous fake tennis match. Second, it’s a scant 45 
minutes, funny in a dramatic dose without locking a viewer into hours and hours 
of additional committed time. Oh, and did I mention that Jon Hamm narrates?ET

 