
No-fly zones and safe havens in areas in the north and south of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> must be considered if Russia and the 
Syrian government refuse to lift sieges of starving towns and cities, two 
former British international development secretaries have said.

Clare Short, Labour international development secretary until 2003, and Andrew 
Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, aid secretary 
in David Cameron’s first government, made their appeal as the Syrian peace 
talks in Geneva heard calls for the sieges to be lifted and for aid convoys to 
be given unfettered access.

The top United Nations human rights official, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, speaking 
at a briefing in Geneva, said the starvation of Syrian civilians was a 
potential war crime and crime against humanity that should be prosecuted and 
not covered by any amnesty linked to ending the conflict.

Ai Weiwei poses as drowned Syrian infant refugee in 'haunting' photo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/01/ai-weiwei-poses-as-drowned-syrian-infant-refugee-in-haunting-photo>
Starvation as a tactic of war is likely to be a central discussion T 
Thursday’s Syria aid conference in London, jointly hosted by David Cameron and 
Germany’s Angela Merkel.

Short and Mitchell said the introduction of safe havens, notably around Idlib 
in the north and Derra in the south, must urgently return to the agenda. “We 
must insist the that Syrians, driven from their homes and terrified, are 
protected,” they said in a joint statement.

“The international community is guilty of a grotesque lack of action. The 
authority of the United Nations is being flouted and grossly undermined by this 
paralysis and failure,” they added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d964afbfaf56a74b43bb79bdd43692c07ff80d%2F416_332_2535_1519%2F2535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syria%3A%20former%20UK%20development%20secretaries%20appeal%20for%20safe%20havens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syria%3A%20former%20UK%20development%20secretaries%20appeal%20for%20safe%20havens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d964afbfaf56a74b43bb79bdd43692c07ff80d%2F416_332_2535_1519%2F2535.jpg>
 Clare Short was international development secretary from 1997-2003. 
Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 
Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Mitchell said there had been a lull 
in the discussion about safe havens due to the Russian intervention. “The 
political track is taking a very long time and safe havens run and policed by 
the United Nations are required,” he said.

Short and Mitchell have just returned from a visit to refugee camps on the 
Turkish border of Syria, where they saw British charities drive into Syria with 
flour for bakeries.

Mitchell said Europe was likely to face more refugees seeking asylum in the 
near future unless a solution was found. “Fifty families are being displaced 
every hour, often bombed and gunned out of their homes,” he said. “We have seen 
just 4% of those displaced coming to Europe and obviously the European press 
has reacted to that.”

He said as many as 14 areas were under siege, cutting off 3 million Syrians. 
All those areas are running out of food and risk becoming like Madaya, the town 
close to Damascus where residents’descriptions of starvation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/residents-besieged-syrian-town-madaya-starved-to-death>
 attracted global attention.

Mitchell said the London conference must ensure the refugee camps on the 
border were fully funded so that the World Food Programme did not have to cut 
its supplies, as it did last year. Short and Mitchell have claimed these cuts 
are intolerable since they have reduced rations in camps to meet 50 of their 
basic needs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71537bb02c6fae8f906d210b5933be2017e318c9%2F0_58_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syria%3A%20former%20UK%20development%20secretaries%20appeal%20for%20safe%20havens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syria%3A%20former%20UK%20development%20secretaries%20appeal%20for%20safe%20havens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fsyria-former-uk-development-secretaries-appeal-safe-havens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71537bb02c6fae8f906d210b5933be2017e318c9%2F0_58_1429_858%2F1429.jpg>
 Andrew Mitchell was international development secretary from 2010-12. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Madeleine Moon, the Labour MP who is a member of the defence select committee, 
said safe havens were a wonderful idea in principle, but in practice there was 
no point establishing them unless they were actually going to be safe.


She said such safety was unobtainable because President Bashar al-Assad and 
the Russians controlled the air and the ground, and had surface-to-air missiles 
that could take down any coalition forces seeking to enforce a safe zone. “We 
cannot create something because we want it to exist when we don’t have the 
capability to enforce it,” Moon said.

She said Russia, and not the coalition, was responsible for the majority of 
civilian deaths inside Syria, and that the coalition was not involved in carpet 
bombing.

Short claimed this was backwards, rigid thinking, and pointed out the UK had 
voted for UN security council resolutions backing the lifting of sieges and 
unfettered humanitarian access. She said that would require the UK to adopt a 
more flexible approach to the conflict. “The military have got to reconsider 
their tactics and not just bomb and bomb,” she said.

Jo Cox, the Labour MP with whom Mitchell has worked on Syria, wrote to Cameron 
on Sunday night saying she was saddened that he “has lost focus on the 
political dimensions of the crisis and that the EU referendum has diverted both 
officials and ministers who could otherwise have been focused on addressing one 
of the worst humanitarian crises of our time”.


She urged him not to subcontract UK diplomacy to America. She said: “The US 
view of the crisis is not one and the same as either the UK’s or the EU’s. We 
cannot therefore contract out our foreign policy.

“Specifically, while the US is focused on nothing beyond a ceasefire, we could 
be playing a critical role in pushing for early confidence-building measures, 
such as an end to the brutal sieges, the use of barrel bombs and cluster 
munitions.

“Broad coalitions of Syrian groups insist that the peace talks will not be 
credible in their eyes – and so will not last – if they don’t see progress on 
these measures, all of which have been previously agreed unanimously at the UN 
security council, including by Russia. The UK should be strongly insisting that 
these not be up for renegotiation.”
 