
Today’s best bets, by Chris Cook

Kerry Lee has had an amazing first season as a trainer, hitting a new peak on 
Sunday when her first runner at Grade One level, Kylemore Lough,landed the 
Ryanair Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/kerry-lee-fairyhouse-grade-one-kylemore-lough>
 at Fairyhouse. Lee has the likely favourite for a Grade Two at the Irish track 
today when Top Gamble lines up in the Normans Grove.

Horse racing tips: Tuesday 29 March
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/28/horse-racing-tips-tuesday> 
I like the horse, a convincing winner of the Game Spirit last month, but I’d 
rather take odds of 5-1 or better about one of the home runners,Sizing Granite 
(3.55). This season hasn’t really happened for him yet and I imagine quite a 
few punters have forgotten that he won a Grade One as a novice atAintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aintree> last spring.

His second-place finish on his reappearance run in November was perfectly 
acceptable but he didn’t seem to cope with the heavy going over Christmas. His 
Champion Chase was effectively ended with a shocking mistake at the first. This 
race represents his best chance since November. However, he really would prefer 
the forecast thunderstorms to miss the area at least until 4pm or so.

On this side of the Irish Sea, Chicago School (2.40) is of interest at 
Wolverhampton, despite failing to take any of his many chances to break his 
duck as a juvenile. There was hope in his final outing that a step up to this 
kind of distance would help, while he has since been gelded. He comes from the 
Mark Johnston yard and is likely to be more fit and professional in his 
approach than most of these. You can get 7-2.

In a similar vein, Desktop (5.00) was a surprise winner earlier this month 
after a gelding operation. Antony Brittain’s runner has only been raised 3lb 
for beating a dozen rivals over this course and distance, so it’s easy to like 
his chance of a repeat at 7-4.

Crabbies Ginger Beer tipping competition - a new week

Congratulations to sandiuk, who held on to win last week’s competition on a 
final score of +22.83, despite a winner-less Friday. A few of you managed to 
find Captain Joy (11-1) or Sea Of Flames (10-1) but no one had both, leaving 
sandi to win handily.

Crabbie’s Alcoholic Ginger Beer, sponsors of the Grand National, have provided 
this week’s very generous prize; two prizes, in fact. The top two tipsters in 
this week’s competition will each get a pair of tickets for all three days of 
next week’sGrand National <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/grandnational> 
meeting at Aintree! How about it?

To kick things off, we’d like your selections, please, for these races: 3.40 
Hexham, 4.15 Hexham, 5.30 Wolverhampton.

As ever, our champion will be the tipster who returns the best profit to 
notional level stakes of £1 at starting price on our nominated races, of which 
there will be three each day up until Friday. Non-runners count as losers.

In the event of a tie at the end of the week, the winner will be the tipster 
who, from among those tied on the highest score, posted their tips earliest on 
the final day.

For terms and conditions click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/07/talking-horses-tipping-competition-terms-and-conditions>
. Good luck!

And post your tips or racing-related comments below.
 