
Gavin James Bower was a model and now is a writer. He is tanned, thin and has 
short hair. We are sitting atthe Free Word Centre 
<http://www.freewordonline.com/events/?event_id=51> in London. He is reading 
from his debut novelDazed and Aroused 
<http://www.fluxmagazine.com/showscreen.php?site_id=49&screentype=folder&screenid=6140>
 and I know what people are thinking. They are thinking "This sounds a bit like 
Bret Easton Ellis." I go home and I read Bower's book. It reminds me of Less 
Than Zero. I feel nothing.

Actually, Dazed and Aroused isn't nearly as bad as that. In fact, while it 
wears Ellis's influence as proudly as an Armani suit, there are more than 
enough moments to suggest Bower is talented in his own right. Furthermore, he's 
far from alone in being influenced by and compared to Ellis. More polished, but 
almost astonishing in its deliberate vapidity, isShoplifting in American Apparel
 
<http://www.hipsterrunoff.com/2009/09/shoplifting-from-american-apparel-by-tao-lin-exclusive-excerpt.html>
 by Tao Lin. Aatish Taseer – whose debut novelThe Temple-goers 
<http://www.outlookindia.com/article.aspx?263788> is published next month – has 
already been dubbed the Indian Bret Easton Ellis. Ryan David Jahn's recentActs 
of Violence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/nov/08/acts-of-violence-ryan-david-jahn> 
also employs the same blank, strung-out prose. Suddenly, like the 80s, Bret 
Easton Ellis is back in fashion.  

Less than Zero 
<http://modern-american-fiction.suite101.com/article.cfm/materialism_in_brett_easton_ellis_white_noise>
, Ellis's debut, is 25 years old this year; and give or take a few references 
to Betamax and the occasional tendency for gnomic stupidity, has worn its years 
incredibly well. It's no wonder, I think, that it's influencing a new 
generation of writers. The simplicity of the prose, the precision of his 
imagery, and the atmosphere of menace and cultural oblivion are invigorating 
even at this remove. The scene where Clay leaves a party at which they're 
showing a snuff movie is a masterful evocation of true horror; the erection 
visible in the pants of his friend as they walk to the car an image it is hard 
ever to shake. 

When I came to work in a bookshop in the late 90s, the only book of his I'd 
read wasThe Informers 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/book-review--american-psychodrama-the-informers--bret-easton-ellis-picador-pounds-999-1445814.html>
. I was underwhelmed: its dull prose, rich-kid ennui and thin bloodless 
characters didn't point towards a writer I was ever going to admire. Yet in the 
bookshop, his third novel,American Psycho 
<http://musingsforamodernworld.blogspot.com/2009/06/book-review-american-psycho-by-bret.html>
, remained a constant top-20 seller almost a decade after its publication. Most 
of these copies, in my experience, were sold to young white men who would often 
ask for it as though it were hardcore pornography – something of which it was 
accused onits American publication 
<http://www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,313573,00.html>. 

If you've read American Psycho, you probably have a very strong opinion either 
way. If there's a more divisive novel out there, I've yet to read it. Even 
love-it-or-loathe it classics such as Amis's Money, Lawrence's Sons and Lovers 
or Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles don't come close to engendering the levels 
of admiration or utter revulsion reserved forAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho>. Personally I think it's 
one of the key novels of the last century, though I've spent hours arguing with 
people who believe it's nothing more than cheap exploitation, misogynistic 
violence and some pointless – if funny – asides about rubbish music. Whichever 
side you stand on, though, it's impossible to ignore the book's huge cultural 
impact.  

So long is its shadow, in fact, that it's often hard to weigh up Ellis's 
literary importance. After that,Glamorama 
<http://www.bookpage.com/9901bp/bret_easton_ellis.html>, was a long, tedious 
indulgence that I struggled to finish. I seem to recall someone on The Late 
Review – Germaine Greer possibly – summing it up with the words "boredom is not 
a literary device", which was a perfect description of the experience.  

The shallowness of Glamorama, coupled with the narrow social groups he 
describes and belongs to, mean that it's easy to ignore Ellis – and by 
extension the writers influenced by him – as sensationalists grubbing around in 
the problems of the idle rich. But this is to deprive yourself of one of the 
most telling and striking chroniclers of the void beneath our consumerist 
society. It's no wonder that he's become such an important voice for another 
generation of writers.   
 