
Fictionalised biographies – novels based on the life of a famous person – are 
ten-a-penny. And why not? They're easy enough to turn out. Other people – the 
actual biographers – have done the hard work. All the novelist has to do is to 
twist the "facts" to suit their own interpretation of the life in question, and 
away they go.

In writing a novel based on the Young British Artists, I decided I wanted to 
do something different: write the biography of a made-up person as if they were 
real. The trick would not be to fool the reader into thinking they had actually 
existed (see William Boyd's Nat Tate, below) but to access that special kind of 
reading we slip into when reading something we assume is factual – by which I 
mean, basically: gullibility. Where a reader might ask, of character in a 
novel, "Now, would they really do that?" of a character in a biography the 
question would be, "Wow, why on earth did they do that?"

Here then are 10 "fictitious biographies" (Nabokov's term) that I've found 
particularly inspiring.

1. Doctor Faustus by Thomas Mann 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1975/aug/07/the-doctor-faustus-case/>

This slow, stodgy, quite wonderful novel gave me the template for my own fake 
memoir. Mann's book is the story of the modernist composer Adrian Leverkühn, as 
told by his childhood friend Serenus Zeitblom. The pathos of the book comes 
from dull, plodding Zeitblom's realisation that he can never hope to catch the 
mercurial personality of his genius friend, but that he must try nonetheless.

2. Orlando by Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/05/winter-reads-orlando-virginia-woolf>

Woolf's light-hearted "escapade" is a satirical romp through the very idea of 
a biography, with its portrait of a nobleman who lives from the Elizabethan era 
right through to the 1920s, somehow changing gender along the way. Its 
sentence-by-sentence delight in evoking past times offers a model that few 
"proper" historical accounts can hope to follow – not least because it's 
skipped on a decade before they've tied their bootlaces.

3. The Real Life of Sebastian Knight by Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>

It's no surprise that many "fictitious biographies" include a fair bit of the 
biographer in their narrative. The model for this is surelyAJA Symons's The 
Quest for Corvo 
<http://www.newcriterion.com/articles.cfm/questforcorvo-downing-3302>, with its 
detective story premise, which came out shortly before Nabokov started writing 
this, his first English language book. It is the tale of celebrated writer 
Sebastian Knight, told by his half-brother, V, though as you'd expect with this 
author the elusive quarry retreats even as the befuddled hunter advances, and 
by the end we're as uncertain about the one as we are about the other.

4. Sartor Resartus by Thomas Carlyle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199540372>

This almost uncategorisable book takes the form of a critical biography of the 
fictional German Romantic philosopher Diogenes Teufelsdröckh, who saw clothing 
as the governing metaphor of human existence. If that makes him sound rather 
like Roland Barthes avant la lettre, then the comparison ends there. It's a 
tough read, not least for the difficulty in getting a handle on the tone. 
Carlyle's style is a heavy-handed parody of academic prose, yet he's using the 
figure of Teufelsdröckh to give us a disguised autobiography.

5. Nat Tate by William Boyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/14/nat-tate-artist-hoax-william-boyd>

Boyd's benign art-world hoax presented itself on publication as a serious 
monograph on a real but little-known American abstract expressionist painter, 
who supposedly threw himself off the Staten Island Ferry at the age of 31, 
after destroying nearly all his paintings. The book is far more than a prank, 
however – it's a melancholy treatise on the limits of biography. We know 
scarcely more about Tate at the end than at the beginning. The gaps and 
absences are all.

6. Kiss and Tell by Alain de Botton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/22/alain-de-botton-interview>

This early novel by the pop philosopher turns the central idea of biography on 
its head by taking as its subject not just a non-celebrity but someone wholly 
unremarkable: one Isabel Jane Rogers. De Botton has great fun with the 
paraphernalia of the genre, including an index, and various photographs of 
quite staggering banality: you could swap about the shots of Rogers' 
boyfriends, and the book would be changed not one jot.

7. An Equal Stillness by Francesca Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/22/equal-stillness-francesca-kay>

Fictitious biographies, left to their own devices, will tend to drift towards 
the novelistic (fictitious autobiographies, from Robinson Crusoe onwards, are 
too common to be of use here). That's something that happens with Kay's book, 
though at least she covers her back by having the biography of abstract painter 
Jennet Mallow written by a poet (and family member) who is quite open about 
imagining his subject's thoughts and feelings "when I could not have known 
them".

8. The Big Music by Kirsty Gunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/27/big-music-kirsty-gunn-review>

This is more "fictitious memoir" than "fictitious biography", but is far too 
interesting to omit. Gunn plays the Carlyle trick of acting as supposed editor 
for a set of "found papers", detailing the history of Scottish bagpipe player 
and composer John Sutherland. The "papers" read like fiction, yet come with 
notes and appendices. Gunn is not playing the parody game, though: it's the 
music she's after, and it's the music she gets. A seriously good book.

9. DooDaaa: The Balletic Art of Gavin Twinge by Ralph Steadman 
<http://neniacampbell.blogspot.co.uk/2014/05/doodaaa-balletic-art-of-gavin-twinge-by.html>

Authors, composers, artists: it's no surprise that writers like picking other 
creators for their fictitious biographies – no politicians, footballers or 
royals here. As you'd expect, Ralph Steadman's biography ("by" Ralphael Steed) 
of Doodaaaist Gavin Twinge is a full-throttle, rambunctious satire that writes 
an alternative history of British and international art, with plenty of 
original art and illustration to liven up its pages.

10. Summertime by JM Coetzee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/06/jm-coetzee-summertime>

Another anomaly: after two volumes of semi-fictional autobiography (Boyhood, 
and Youth) Coetzee's third entry in the genre produced this, which could 
perhaps be best described as: a memoir in the form of a novel in the form of 
notes towards a fictitious biography of an invented character modelled on the 
author. It is largely made up of transcripts of interviews conducted by 
Coetzee's surrogate author with people who knew "John Coetzee", though they 
repeatedly fail to give the biographer what he is after. Point taken, John.
 