
A newspaper doesn't come with instructions. At school, we are more likely to 
be taught the significance of Monet's use of colour than how to decode the 
Daily Mail website. Well, some of us are. And yet we consume news more avidly 
than ever. Why so? In the immediate vicinity of our north London cottage 
garden, all may be tranquil, yet the lure of background chaos is irresistible. 
Perhaps the answer is to be found in schadenfreude. We see a photograph ofSally 
Bercow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/feb/06/louise-mensch-sally-bercow-duchess-cambridge>
 kissing someone and rejoice in the knowledge that the mystery man isn't us.

It is early morning. Outside, commuters are struggling to get to work when the 
tube is on strike. I languidly put on a silk dressing gown and eat a breakfast 
of yogurt and granola. The newsfeed on my iPad tells me rent arrears are on the 
increase. Why should I care?Would we read Tolstoy if he had made Anna Karenina 
working class? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/rereading-anna-karenina-james-meek>
 The maid makes me another pot of coffee.

News organisations are coy about admitting that what they present us with are 
selective fragmented narratives. They claim to be objective, when none are. The 
problem isn't bias, it's the nature of bias. The politics of right wing and 
left wing are a meaningless cul-de-sac. We need a bias towards the beautiful 
and the majestic. More stories of the sublime, written by cultural 
commentators. How do we mostly interpret the world? Through the Hegelian 
dialectic of architecture. Where are most news organisations located? In 
buildings of staggering ugliness. Were News International to be relocated to 
the Rococo Basilica at Ottobeuren in Bavaria, then their news agenda would be 
infinitely improved.Here is a photo of the Rococo Basilica. 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ottobeuren_Basilika_Fassade.jpg>

The two emotions on which the news plays are fear and anger. In so doing, it 
toys with our weak hold on perspective. Here we need to be mindful of Euclidean 
geometry. The recent news bulletins have been dominated by stories of flooding. 
And yet the damage is limited to a few villages in Somerset and Cornwall. The 
majority of us in London have been completely unaffected and are free to keep 
our lunch appointments, so what's the big deal? (Unless you are one of my 
friends with a second home in the west country, in which case your distress is 
perfectly understandable.) Here's a photograph of a hideous 1950sbungalow under 
water 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?start=354&client=firefox-a&hs=CuC&rls=org.mozilla%3Aen-GB%3Aofficial&biw=1491&bih=778&tbm=isch&tbnid=h_Pk9zBIWgIITM%3A&imgrefurl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.express.co.uk%2Fnews%2Fnature%2F454247%2FWeather-forecast-More-heavy-rain-to-cause-deluge-of-floods-across-UK-this-weekend&docid=G3oPtjcLnQa_wM&imgurl=http%3A%2F%2Fcdn.images.express.co.uk%2Fimg%2Fdynamic%2F128%2F590x%2Ffloods_rain_weather_forec-454247.jpg&w=590&h=350&ei=LSz1Us3sNJGM7AbOuoH4Ag&zoom=1&ved=0CKoBEIQcMDc4rAI&iact=rc&dur=2228&page=18&ndsp=22>
. Isn't it better if it falls down?

One of the main claims all newspapers make is that they enable people to make 
up their own minds. YetGustave Flaubert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gustaveflaubert> hated newspapers because he 
believed they prevented people from thinking for themselves. I feel the same 
way. From this, we can easily deduce that I might have writtenMadame Bovary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/21/translating-madame-bovary-adam-thorpe>
 had I been living in 19th-century France. Yet how often does this important 
fact make headlines?

Foreign news is so often reported as a series of wars, famines and 
earthquakes. I drop in for an hour to visit the Uganda desk at the BBC. The 
reporters are busying themselves with stories of petty corruption, while 
ignoring a new exhibition of a minor artist opening in Kampala. Thus the value 
of wide-ranging Ugandan discussions is lost.

What are we to make of economics? Not much. So let's move on to celebrity. 
It's become fashionable among my dinner companions to dismiss celebrity 
culture, but in so doing they let the illiterate determine the celebrity 
agenda. The broadsheet newspapers should be doing more to promote celebrities 
from whom we can learn and improve ourselves. Men such as St Gengulphus of 
Burgundy, the patron saint of difficult marriages.

It is easy to be overwhelmed by the news. The ancient Greeks set aside a week 
each year to watch the tragedies ofEuripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/euripides>. We should adopt a similar 
policy. We should save all the year's bad-news stories for bumper editions 
spread over seven days. That way, we might be instructed by them rather than 
defeated. For the other 51 weeks, there should be more stories about the wars 
that aren't taking place and the earthquakes that didn't happen. Therein lies 
happiness.

Digested read, digested: Bad news.
 