
Disconcertingly, given the detailed discussions of art and the visual world in 
The Doors Of Perception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2012/jan/19/art-doors-of-perception-aldous-huxley>
, Aldous Huxley was almost blind. Or, at least, some people said he was. Like 
much else in Huxley's life, the state of his vision was a source of 
considerable controversy and speculation.

The known facts are these: in 1911, while this scion of one of the UK's 
foremost intellectual families was studying at Eton, he suffered from a very 
unpleasant illness calledkeratatis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keratitis>, 
which left him blind for several years. Huxley's vision recovered enough for 
him to study at Oxford, with the aid of thick glasses and a magnifying glass, 
but further deteriorated over the next 20 or so years.

It's in 1939 that things become murky. Desperate for help, Huxley was 
persuaded to pursue theBates Method <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bates_method>
, a controversial theory (now largely debunked) suggesting, among other things, 
that glasses shouldn't be worn, natural sunlight could be beneficial and a 
series of exercises and techniques could help improve vision. He claimed 
impressive results: "Within a couple of months I was reading without spectacles 
and, what was better still, without strain and fatigue … At the present time, 
my vision, though very far from normal, is about twice as good as it used to be 
when I wore spectacles."

That quote comes from The Art Of Seeing 
<http://thecounterpunch.hubpages.com/hub/The-Art-of-Seeing-by-Aldous-Huxley>, 
the book he published about his experiences with The Bates Method in 1942. 
Reviews, were mixed at best. The British Medical Journal review declared: "For 
the simple neurotic who has abundance of time to play with, Huxley's antics of 
palming, shifting, flashing, and the rest are probably as good treatment as any 
other system of Yogi orCouéism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89mile_Cou%C3%A9>. To these the book may be 
of value. It is hardly possible that it will impress anyone endowed with common 
sense and a critical faculty."

In the same article the author suggested that Huxley's vision may actually 
have improved naturally with time as some conditions move in cycles. Others, 
meanwhile, doubted that he could see much at all.Wikipedia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldous_Huxley#cite_note-Gardner-19> cites a 
Saturday Review column fromBennett Cerf  <http:>published in 1952, just two 
years before The Doors Of Perception, describes Huxley speaking at a Hollywood 
banquet, wearing no glasses and seemingly reading from his notes with ease: 
"Then suddenly he faltered — and the disturbing truth became obvious. He wasn't 
reading his address at all. He had learned it by heart. To refresh his memory 
he brought the paper closer and closer to his eyes. When it was only an inch or 
so away he still couldn't read it, and had to fish for a magnifying glass in 
his pocket to make the typing visible to him. It was an agonising moment."

In Huxley's defence, he always admitted he still needed a magnifying glass, 
but whichever way you look at all these arguments, they add an edge to the 
writer's enthusiastic artistic criticism in The Doors Of Perception. Was he 
protesting too much? Alternatively, was his delight and concern for the visual 
world all the more heightened because he had fought so hard to retain his sight 
– and knew what it means to lose it. Given that The Art Of Seeing had aroused 
such anger and doubt, was he perhaps using the Doors Of Perception as a way to 
answer his critics? Is it possible that Huxley's subconscious was operating in 
ways he didn't care to acknowledge?

Well, maybe. But now I'm in the realm of speculation. Just before I leave, one 
more conjecture: Huxley wouldn't be entirely delighted at the suggestion the 
book is somehow about his eye trouble. For him, it was all about mescaline. The 
message was the drug and its astonishing potential. It marked (forgive me) the 
high point in a lifelong obsession.

As anyone familiar with Brave New World will know, Huxley's most famous novel 
also shows the influence of drugs. The citizens of the future are nearly all 
hopped up on Soma, a powerful hallucinogen that allows "a holiday" from 
reality, imparts a tremendous feeling of well-being, softens up the mind and 
poisons the body. In the climactic scene in the book, when John the Savage 
rebels againstFordist 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brave_New_World#Fordism_and_society> society, his 
anger is concentrated on Soma, which has come to symbolise all that is rotten 
in this future-state.

It's fascinating to re-read this earlier book in the light of The Doors Of 
Perception – especially since, in it, Huxley frequently suggests that Soma is 
very similar to mescaline in its effects. Back in the 1930s, he even described 
mescaline as a worse poison than Soma, rendering poorLinda 
<http://www.huxley.net/whoswho.htm> vomitous and even dumber than usual.

Clearly, in the 22 years between the publication of the two books Huxley 
revised his opinions about the drug. By the time he finally sampled mescaline 
he was convinced it would offer him insight rather than the distraction from 
reality offered by Soma. As The Doors Of Perception demonstrates the drug 
exceeded his expectations. Huxley was to remain a dedicated psychonaut for the 
rest of his life.

On Christmas Eve 1955, he took his first dose of LSD, an experience he was to 
repeat often and he claimed allowed him to plumb even greater depths than 
mescaline. The literary culmination of this self-medication can be seen inIsland
 <http://www.huxley.net/island/>, the 1962 novel, which can be viewed as an 
answer toBrave New World <http://www.huxley.net/>. It describes a utopia rather 
than a dystopia, and this time around drugs perform an entirely beneficial 
function, providing serenity and understanding. They are as the book puts it, 
"medicine".

Ironically, Pala, Huxley's utopia sounds even worse than the alternative 
future Huxley describes in Brave New World. The Palanese are crashing bores. 
They are the kind of people who (in one of the most inadvertently hilarious 
passages I've read) think it's OK to rewrite the climax ofOedipus Rex  
<http://classics.mit.edu/Sophocles/oedipus.html>with a lecture from some 
Palanese children, who inform the luckless mother-lover that he is being 
"silly" and ought to follow their philosophy rather than tear his eyes out … 
But never mind that. Although it is awful in many regards, Island still holds 
the charm of Huxley's cultured prose and fertile mind. The knowledge that he 
wrote the book shortly after his first wife died from cancer and he himself had 
received a terminal diagnosis also adds real poignancy to the book's many 
passages about coping with disease. One of his ideas is that tripping may ease 
the passage into that good night – advice he famously took on 22 November 1963 
when he asked his wife second wife Laura Huxley to give him LSD. "Light and 
free you let go, darling; forward and up," she whispered to him as he drifted 
away. "You are going forward and up; you are going toward the light."

We'll never know how Huxley's final trip went, but we do know that his 
psychedelic experiments had a remarkable afterlife. (Psychedelic, incidentally, 
was a word Huxley helped coin along withHumphry Osmond 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humphry_Osmond)>. Huxley can lay considerable 
claim to kick-starting the 1960s revolution in the head. It wasn't just the 
fact that The Doors Of Perception was so influential. He was also personally 
instrumental in introducing luminaries likeAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg> and Timothy Leary 
<http://leary.com/> to the possibilities of psychedelic experimentation (as 
described in the early pages ofMartin Lee and Bruce Shlain's Acid Dreams 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/8123021/Martin-A-Lee-Bruce-Shlain-Acid-Dreams-The-Complete-Social-History-of-LSD>
, the definitive story of the way LSD swept through America in the 1960s – 
thanks to the many contributors Reading group who recommended that).

It's safe to say that Huxley changed the world. Without him there might have 
been noturn on, tune in, drop out 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turn_on,_tune_in,_drop_out,>, no Merry 
Pranksters, no Sergeant Pepper, no Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, noFocus 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NGaVUApDVuY>.

I scoffed when I read JG Ballard's <http://www.jgballard.ca/> introduction to 
my edition of The Doors Of Perception and he said that the book was "even more 
prophetic" than Brave New World (and also, incidentally, that Brave New World 
is more prophetic than Orwell's 1984). As this Reading group month draws to a 
close, I can see that – as usual – Ballard was quite right. The book didn't 
just point the way to the future (or one potential version of it), it changed 
it. The big question now is whether it has opened any doors for you? Has Huxley 
changed your view of mescaline and/or reality? And are you tempted to follow in 
his footsteps?
 