
I have a friend, a Hollywood producer, who calls me up every week or so and 
leaves the following message in a conspiratorial, Deep-Throatish voice: "I am 
now in a position to tell you the winner of this year's best-picture Oscar."

It's a joke. Each week I call back and he tells me a different film. Except 
that unlike that last film we decided on as this year's best picture – what 
were we thinking? – this new one is absolutely, positively going to win. No 
doubt. Sweep the board. A winner through and through. At least until next week.

Frankly, it's the only way to deal with an Oscar race that seems to consist, 
at times, entirely of frontrunners. It's the most competitive race in years – a 
"barn-burner 
<http://www-deadline-com.vimg.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/Deadline-Awards-Watch-Ep-4__121213233302.mp3>
", according to Deadline Hollywood – thanks to a muscular showing from the 
studios (Les Misérables, Lincoln, Zero Dark Thirty, Argo) and an equally feisty 
set of indies (The Master, Moonrise Kingdom, Django Unchained, Beasts of the 
Southern Wild).

As the Oscar ballots went out to Academy members this week, however, we saw 
the first signs that the field is beginning, just, to tighten.

The big winner from the Golden Globe nominations last Thursday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/dec/13/golden-globes-2013-nominations-list>
 was Quentin Tarantino's Django Unchained, which came away with five 
nominations – two for best supporting actor, one for director, one for 
screenplay and one for film – which many took as a forecast of it's prospective 
Oscar yield.

For nominations, with luck. The film's prospects of winning are blocked by one 
of the few immutable laws in a sea of uncertainty: no Quentin Tarantino film is 
ever going to take home a best-picture Oscar. The cast of Django are doing 
their damnedest, talking up the film as if it were something noble-browed about 
slavery, rather than a po-mo-ironic blaxploitation-western mash-up. But 
Leonardo Di Caprio and Christoph Waltz's performances overlap too much – a 
loquacious bounty hunter and a loquacious sadist – to be competitive in the 
supporting actor category and after the Newtown shooting the Academy may be 
less in the mood for ludic gunplay and Peckinpah-era gouts of plasma.

Hope is dimming, too, for Silver Linings Playbook and Les Misérables, neither 
of which garnered nominations from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for 
directors David O Russell and Tom Hooper.In Contention's Kris Tapley 
<http://www.hitfix.com/in-contention> crunched the numbers: only Crash, Driving 
Miss Daisy, The Sting and Chariots of Fire have won best picture without a 
Globe nod for director. Les Misérables is further damned by acritic Metascore 
of just 55 
<http://www.awardsdaily.com/blog/2012/12/13/the-globes-sags-whos-up-whos-down-oscar-ballots-go-out-in-4-days/>
 (to Chicago's 82). As of now the Oscar race for best picture comes down, I 
believe, to just three films: Lincoln, Argo and Zero Dark Thirty.

In which case, the question really becomes: how do the academy like their 
recreations of American history? Monumental and mahogany-hued? Quick and 
caperish? Or tough as tungsten steel?

The one with the film-making wow factor, the film that has other directors 
taking notes, is Kathryn Bigelow's Zero Dark Thirty, which after its run on the 
critics' awards – winning best film from the New York Film Critics Circle, the 
National Board of Review, the New York Film Critics Online, the Boston Society 
of Film Critics and the Washington DC Area Film Critics Association – now rests 
at No2 in theGurus of Gold best picture chart 
<http://moviecitynews.com/2012/12/gurus-o-gold-post-nyfccpre-globes-nominations/>
, just behind Lincoln.

The Academy's relationship to critics' praise, however, is a little like my 
relation to receiving sweaters at Christmas: it's nice to get them but that 
doesn't mean I'm going to wear them. Remember the bait and switch executed in 
2010, when The Social Network cruised to pole position, seemingly unbeatable 
after winning NYFCC, NBR and BSFC.There was much talk 
<http://scottfeinberg.com/oped> of a "younger, hipper" Oscars. The Academy had 
waived it's three screen credits qualification. The days of Henry Fonda and 
James Garner admitting that their wives filled out their ballots seemed to be 
over. Cut to the whoosh of collective whiplash when The King's Speech sneaked 
in and stamped all over it.

Zero Dark Thirty's disadvantages are a troubling morality, an absence of 
air-punch moments and an unconventional structure without backstory or love 
interest for its female heroine. "I'm not the girl who fucks," declares Jessica 
Chastain. "It's unbecoming." But the acting wing of the Academy prefer 
show-offs to minimalists, and the older generation spend their entire year 
putting into movies the very clichésZero Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zero-dark-thirty> so thrillingly jettisons.

Spielberg has the critics on his side and the public, who have turned Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lincoln> into a surprise hit, but the last 
thing his film wants is frontrunner status because it's right about now that 
people start muttering about that slow, talky first hour and wondering whether 
it would have hurt Spielberg that much to have thrown in a battle or two.

It's easy to foresee a scenario where the Academy feels a little hemmed in by 
movies they feel guilty for not liking more – in which case Argo becomes the 
way out, the gut vote, the hit with both critics and public that comes weighted 
with a bit of history but not too much, the whole thing slipping down like a 
caper flick. Plus it hasAlan Arkin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-arkin>
.

'That Alan Arkin, what was it he said?'
 John Goodman, Alan Arkin and Ben Affleck toast Argo's Oscar success. 
Possibly. Photograph: Claire Folger/AP 
Casting Arkin may turn out to be the smartest thing Ben Affleck ever did, 
because he is the "pet of the old geezers", as one ofHollywood Elsewhere's 
commenters <http://hollywood-elsewhere.com/2012/12/sag_nom_hugs_bl.php> put it. 
That is, Arkin is the living, breathing incarnation of the typical academy 
voter: a producer in his sixties, a hit or two under his belt, been bashed 
around a bit but figures you haven't really arrived in this town until someone 
tries to screw you.

Picture the scene. A modernist condo in Beverly Hills. Early evening. A 
sixtysomething movie producer, let's call him Sammie, stares at the pile of 
unwatched DVDs next to his TV while his wife loads the dishwasher in the 
kitchen. Next to the DVDs, his Oscar nomination ballot. He's left it to the 
last minute, just like he always does.

He tries Lincoln first. Spielberg. A master. Daniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis>. Also a master. But Jesus. 
All this yakking in dark, smoke-filled rooms. Could someone please open a 
window? They didn't have air conditioners back then? Guess not.

When Sammie wakes up, Tommy Lee Jones is in bed with some black woman. 
Whodjahowthathappen? He resolves to vote for Daniel Day-Lewis while fetching a 
cigar from his secret stash behind his Emmy. He knows he shouldn't, but still. 
It's the film's fault. All that smoke.

He tries Zero Dark Thirty, watches 20 minutes of some Arab getting tortured, 
takes it out again. Holy crap. No way.

"Are you smoking a cigar?" comes his wife's voice from the kitchen.

"No, honey."

"If I come in there and find you smoking again…"

Muttering under his breath, Sammie wraps his bathrobe around him, collects his 
ashtray, rolls open the windows and steps out onto the pool. His wife has left 
her magazines on the table. On the cover of all of them isBen Affleck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/benaffleck> making goo-goo eyes at Jennifer 
Garner: "Why They Click: 10 Tips to a Successful Hollywood Marriage."

He knows it's bullshit, but he tears up anyway. Kid took his knocks but he 
picked himself up, came back and turned out to be quite a director. Just like 
they used to make. Thrills. Laughs. That Alan Arkin, he was funny, what was it 
he said?Argofuckyourself. 

Heh.

His mind returns to the others: Lincoln sequestered in his dark rooms. The 
hunt for Bin Laden.

Tap-tap from the window. His wife. Sammie makes his puppy dog face. She swats 
him out of sight, returns to the kitchen.

Argofuckyourself. That's what it's all about. The secret of life right there.

He takes a big long puff.

Lincoln. Bin Laden. Lincoln. Bin Laden.

Argofuckyourself.

He's going with the kid.
 