
On the BBC program Sunday Politics, Andrew Neil hosted UK Energy and Climate 
Change Secretary Ed Davey 
<http://skepticalscience.com/rebutting-new-tcp-myths-andrew-neil-richard-tol.html>
 for a discussion about climate science and policy. In the process, Neil made a 
variety of errors in discussing climate science thatI subsequently detailed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jul/17/climate-change-scepticism-andrew-neil-ed-davey>
.Neil responded in turn on his blog 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-23405202>, admitting one mistake but 
standing behind the rest of the errors, and making some new ones.

But before examining the scientific accuracy of Neil's latest comments, given 
that his show is a political one, let's first talk about climate policy. On 
that subject, Neil explained why he focused on the so-called 'pause' in global 
surface warming during his show:

"it is legitimate to ask if the government takes the pause seriously and if it 
has any implications for policy ie, if there is a pause in warming, is there a 
case for the government to pause or slowdown its expensive efforts to 
decarbonise the economy until the picture becomes clearer?"

That certainly is a legitimate question. In fact, it's a question that a 
number of climate scientists have answered.

The question is based on the fact that a few recent studies have concluded 
that the sensitivity of the Earth's climate to the increased greenhouse effect 
may be slightly less than previous best estimates, based on the recent slowed 
surface warming (for a basic primer on climate sensitivity,see my previous 
entry here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/10/climate-change-warming-sensitivity>
). There arereasons to be skeptical of this conclusion 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/10/climate-change-warming-sensitivity>
, but it's certainly a possibility. If true, would that mean governments should 
pause or slow down their efforts to decarbonize the economy, as Neil asks?

The authors of these studies (e.g. Myles Allen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2013/may/21/matt-ridley-joined-real-climate-debate?CMP=twt_gu>
,Piers Forster <http://news.uk.msn.com/warming-pause-not-unexpected>, and 
Alexander Otto 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/05/20/2034261/we-would-all-like-climate-sensitivity-to-be-lower-but-it-isnt-says-lead-scientist-of-new-study/>
) all seem to agree, the answer is no.

In short, if these studies are right, it might take us an extra decade or so 
to reach global warming levels considered unacceptably dangerous. If true, that 
would certainly be welcome news. The problem is that from a policy perspective 
today, these sorts of details don't matter.

In order to avoid what's internationally considered dangerous levels of global 
warming, we need to achieve tremendous levels of greenhouse gas emissions 
reductions. Developed nations like the UK and USA will need to reduce their 
emissions by about80 percent by the year 2050 
<http://www.climatecommunication.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/presidentialaction.pdf>
 to give us a good shot to avoid committing the planet to 2°C average surface 
warming, and even that isconsidered too risky by many climate scientists 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2008/03/17/202450/hansen-et-al-must-read-back-to-350-ppm-or-risk-an-ice-free-planet/>
.

So if these studies are right, maybe we have until 2060 rather than 2050 to 
reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 80 percent. If we were on track to meet 
that target by 2050, it would be valid to ask whether we should slow down our 
efforts a bit, but we're not on track. In fact it's going to take everything 
we've got to get close –see here for a discussion of the level of effort it 
will take to meet these emissions targets 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-too-hard-advanced.htm>.

We should certainly fashion a climate policy that will maximize the economic 
benefit associated with reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and what that policy 
should look like is a valid debate in which all who would like to participate 
are more than welcome. However, there is no question as to whether we can 'slow 
down' our efforts – we simply cannot afford to,even in the best-case scenario 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=88>.
 This graph shows that even at the lowest range of climate sensitivity, future 
global warming will take us well beyond any temperature experienced during 
civilized human history. The blue line represents reconstructed temperature. 
The red line represents measured and projected global surface temperature. The 
red dots show the projected warming in the year 2100 for three different 
climate sensitivities (high sensitivity 4.5°C, most likely sensitivity 3°C, low 
sensitivity 1.5°C). 
Now, on to the science.

The "Pause"

Neil explained that he focused on the surface warming 'pause' because he was 
trying to challenge Davey to defend the government's climate policy in the face 
of this seemingly contradictory global warming evidence. The problem is that 
when Davey correctly pointed out that surface temperatures are only one small 
piece of overall global warming (about 2 percent), and melting ice and warming 
oceans must also be considered (over 90 percent of the overall heating of the 
planet), Neil remained focused exclusively on surface temperatures.

In science, and in informed policy making, you can't just ignore 98 percent of 
the evidence and focus on the 2 percent that seems to support the argument 
you're trying to make. Perhaps Neil was just doing his job "challenging" Davey, 
but in terms of a science and policy debate, Davey won the day by considering 
the full body of evidence.

The Faulty Temperature Graphic

In defending his use of an overly smoothed surface temperature graphic, Neil 
explained,

"The graph we presented illustrating the temperature plateau was not 
constructed by the Sunday Politics but taken from a website, produced by Phil 
Jones, a leading figure at the Climate Research Unit, University of East Anglia"

That is true - you can view the graphic in question here 
<http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/documents/421974/1295957/Info+sheet+%231.pdf/c612fc7e-babb-463c-b5e3-124ac76680c5>
. Phil Jones should have explained on that page exactly what the black line 
represents, and that the smoothed data are not accurate after 2007 (or 2002, 
depending on whether it's a 10- or 20-year smoothing),as I explained in my last 
entry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jul/17/climate-change-scepticism-andrew-neil-ed-davey>
. Whoever is at fault, the temperature graph presented on BBC Sunday Politics 
was not accurate, and exaggerated the surface warming slowdown.

Frequent Plateaus

Neil responded to my point that there have been many similar 'plateaus' in the 
surface temperature record as follows.

"Mr Nuccitelli points out that temperatures have plateaued in the past, which 
is true. But since that was before, according to the IPCC, global warming 
became the dominant factor in temperature rises, it is not clear past plateaux 
[sic] are relevant to this debate"

This is incorrect. As Neil notes, the IPCC says that greenhouse gases became 
the dominant factor in global temperature changes in the 1970s. My graphic 
begins in 1970 and shows four similar 'plateaus' since then, prior to the 
current one.
 Average of NASA GISS, NOAA NCDC, and HadCRUT4 monthly global surface 
temperature anomalies from January 1970 through November 2012 (green) with 
linear trends applied to the timeframes Jan '70 - Oct '77, Apr '77 - Dec '86, 
Sep '87 - Nov '96, Jun '97 - Dec '02, and Nov '02 - Nov '12. 
Ocean Warming

On the rapid warming of the oceans, Neil claimed,

"There is a huge debate in climate science over the relationship between 
global warming and ocean temperatures. As pointed out above some scientists 
(and Mr Nuccitelli) believe that global warming is causing the depths of the 
oceans to heat up and that one day this heat will be released.

This is widely contested and even, by some, dismissed. The data is short-lived 
and contentious"

The transfer of heat to the deep oceans has indeed accelerated over the past 
decade, but research indicates that this is a temporary change. I summarized 
the recent research on this subjecthere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/24/global-warming-pause-button>
, and is also the conclusion in ongoing research by the Met Office,as their 
scientists discussed in a press briefing yesterday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/24/global-warming-pause-button>
.

The ocean measurements quite clearly show that global warming continues at a 
rapid rate, equivalent to 4 Hiroshima atomic bomb detonations per second.
 Global heat accumulation from Nuccitelli et al. (2012) 
While ocean heating research is ongoing, the evidence points strongly in the 
direction that the oceans are absorbing more heat, contributing to the slowed 
surface warming, but that this is only a temporary effect.

Human-Caused Arctic Sea Ice Death Spiral

Neil also downplayed the human role in the rapid Arctic sea ice decline, which 
has seen a loss of three quarters of its ice mass over the past three decades.


"Others point out that satellite observations began in 1979 and caught a 
decline in Arctic ice already in progress. So the origin of the decline could 
be many decades ago, and might not have been started by man (though global 
warming could now be exacerbating a previous "natural" melting trend)."

One of the most widely used long-term estimates of Arctic sea ice extent comes 
fromthe University of Illinois 
<http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/igsoc/agl/2001/00000033/00000001/art00071>
. A description of the vast array of measurements used to create this estimate 
is availablehere 
<http://tamino.wordpress.com/2011/09/17/more-cherry-ice-from-joe-daleo/>, and 
the data <http://arctic.atmos.uiuc.edu/SEAICE/timeseries.1870-2008> are plotted 
below. As you can see, the vast majority of the Arctic sea ice decline has 
happened since 1970.
 Average July through September Arctic sea ice extent 1870–2008 from the 
University of Illinois and observational data from the National Snow and Ice 
Data Center for 2009–2012 
I have also summarized the research about the causes of that decline 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/Arctic-sea-ice-melt-natural-or-man-made-intermediate.htm>
, which shows that humans played a dominant role. For example,a 2012 study 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/7/3/034011> published in Environmental 
Research Letters estimated that only 5 to 30 percent of the Arctic sea ice 
decline from 1979 to 2010 could be attributed to natural cycles, and even more 
is human-caused if we extend the analysis as far back as the 1950s, because the 
influences of natural cycles tend to average out to zero over time.

The bottom line is that Arctic sea ice is declining exceptionally rapidly, and 
humans are the dominant cause.

Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) Report

Neil cited a DMI report to argue otherwise.


"A new paper by the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI) suggest that 
Greenland ice sheet melting is related to solar activity and "a considerable 
fraction of the current withdrawal could be a natural occurrence"."

First of all, this isn't a paper published in a peer-reviewed journal, it's a 
report issued by the DMI Ministry of Transport 
<http://cms.guprod.gnltools/article/413407793/edit>. Second, it's not new - it 
was published in 2005. However, for unknown reasons, some climate contrarian 
blogs recently decided to report on this study, which is undoubtedly why Neil 
thought this report was new. This reminds me of a comment I madein my previous 
article 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jul/17/climate-change-scepticism-andrew-neil-ed-davey>
,


"If Neil relies on contrarian blogs for his climate information, that may 
explain why he is woefully misinformed on the subject."

The DMI report itself is simply based on correlations, and the comment about 
the current ice withdrawal highly speculative. I don't find it convincing for 
reasons discussedhere <> and here 
<http://wottsupwiththatblog.wordpress.com/2013/07/19/watt-about-the-remarkable-correllation-arctic-sea-ice/>
, for those who are interested. In any case, if 5 to 30 percent of the current 
decline is considered "a considerable fraction," then it is consistent with the 
findings of Environmental Research Letters paper discussed above.

The 97 Percent Human-Caused Global Warming Consensus

Finally, Neil again discussed the paper I co-authored finding a 97 percent 
consensus in the peer-reviewed literature 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/16/climate-change-scienceofclimatechange>
 that humans are causing global warming. Neil backtracked from his previous 
(false) claim that our paper had been "substantially discredited" to now say it 
"is not uncontested." This is a rather meaningless statement - I would 
challenge Neil to find any scientific paper that is uncontested.

Neil cited recent congressional testimony by Roy Spencer (one of the few 
climate scientist "skeptics"), who said,

"Well, it turns out that the 97% consensus that they found, I am indeed part 
of ... What do all those people agree to? Well, they agree to something fairly 
innocuous and it's something most of us agree to. That humans must have some 
influence on climate."

This statement is wrong because it misses the nuance in our study. The 
"skeptic" papers included those that rejected human-caused global warmingand 
those that minimized the human influence. Since we made all of our data 
available to the public,you can see our ratings of Spencer's abstracts here 
<http://skepticalscience.com/tcp.php?t=search&s=&a=spencer%2C+rw&c=&e=&yf=&yt>. 
Five of his papers were captured in our literature search; we categorized four 
as 'no opinion' on the cause of global warming, and one as implicitly 
minimizing the human influence.

Thus, contrary to his testimony, Spencer was not included in the 97 percent 
consensus. In fact his research was included in the fewer than 3 percent of 
papers that either rejected or minimized the human contribution to global 
warming.

Our survey also included categories for papers that quantified the human 
contribution to global warming. In the author self-ratings phase of our study, 
237 papers fell into these categories.96 percent of these said that humans are 
the primary cause 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/28/global-warming-consensus-climate-denialism-characteristics>
 of the observed global warming since 1950. The consensus on human-caused 
global warming is robust.

A Policy Discussion Worth Having

To sum up, there's nothing wrong with having a discussion about what the best 
climate policy would entail. In fact, this sort of discussion would be 
constructive and welcome. But it must consider all the available evidence, and 
it must get the science right, or the policy discussion will be misinformed.

The scientific evidence indicates that the climate is warming rapidly due to 
human greenhouse gas emissions. If we want to avoid dangerous and potentially 
catastrophic climate change, we need to take major steps to reduce our 
greenhouse gas emissions. The question is not whether we should slow down our 
efforts; it's how we can speed them up in the most economically beneficial way. 
Now that is a policy discussion worth having.
 