
They have built a romanesque church out of sparkly blue sequins 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2005/11/sitooterie.html>, a school 
that looks like a gothic wedding cake 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2006/11/sint_lucas_1.html>and turned 
the head of Hercules into asquishy seat 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2010/10/soft_hercules.html>. Now, in 
an unexpected twist, the mischievous London architecture practiceFAT 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/> has announced it will be no more. 
Architects usually die, divorce, or go bust – so why the boyband-style break-up?

“We all feel we've completed what we set out to do,” says Sam Jacob 
<http://strangeharvest.com/>, who has worked with fellow partners Sean Griffiths
 <http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/people.html> and Charles Holland 
<http://fantasticjournal.blogspot.co.uk/> for the last 23 years on everything 
from art installations to social housing, alongside a prolific volume of 
writing and teaching.

“FAT was only ever intended to be a project, a way of taking a set of ideas 
out into the world,” he says. “We still can't believe we've had so many 
opportunities to make buildings.”

Next summer will see the completion of their final built project, a 
ceramic-clad gingerbread temple in a field in Essex 
<http://www.living-architecture.co.uk/the-houses/a-house-for-essex/overview/>, 
designed with artist Grayson Perry as part of Alain de Botton's series of 
rentable holiday homes. A cross between a Thai wat and an Essex barn, it 
promises to be one of the most intricately layered concoctions the practice has 
produced.

“When I spoke to Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry> he said, 'You know 
that what I hate above all are those sleek cool white glass and steel 
modernists. They make me feel ill,'” recalls de Botton. “I therefore knew right 
away that we had to move in a very particular direction – and that there was 
possibly only player in town who could respond adequately.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289157590%2Ff7955ab9-6c26-4bec-8861-2fe48073125f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture's%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture%27s%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289157590%2Ff7955ab9-6c26-4bec-8861-2fe48073125f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A House for Essex … the Living Architecture holiday home, designed with 
Grayson Perry Image: FAT 
Unlike countless other radical architectural collectives that went before 
them, such as the hallowed Archigram, FAT's work has not been confined to the 
safe, hermetic haven of galleries and books. Over the last two decades they 
have built housing and offices, community buildings and a public library, an 
art college and a gargantuan TV studio – complete with a 260m-long facade of 
sci-fi-baroque mouldings.

“It was all a bit of an accident,” says Jacob. “We never imagined we would be 
a conventional architecture office. It wasn't really a career choice.”

The practice, whose name stands for Fashion Architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> Taste, began as a loose 
artistic collective in the early 90s, when 20 recent graduates coalesced around 
provocative tutor Kevin Rowbotham. Coming from backgrounds in architecture, 
graphic design, film-making and photography, the group began with temporary 
public art projects that engaged with sites in the city, from bus stops to 
carrier bags.

“It was born out of a utopian idea that architecture is much bigger than the 
way architects define it,” says Jacob. “We were looking at the limits of 
architecture, trying to find moments that you could appropriate, or subvert how 
the city works.”

Following the common pattern of a young practice, FAT designed a number of 
exhibitions and nightclub interiors, until their big break came with theoffice 
of Dutch advertising agency, Kessels Kramer 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2005/12/kesselskramer.html>. Conceived 
as a whimsical hill-town squeezed into a 19th-century church in Amsterdam, it 
was more outlandish than anyGoogleplex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/01/google-new-london-headquarters>
 orFacebookworld <http://www.archdaily.com/355258/> could ever hope to be, and 
it included a wooden fort, a lifeguard's tower, fragments of astroturf pitches 
and a meeting room decked out like a fairytale forest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289275328%2F1720c9ad-366b-4b6e-9b93-e056a45eb020-1020x1009.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture's%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture%27s%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289275328%2F1720c9ad-366b-4b6e-9b93-e056a45eb020-1020x1009.jpeg>
 The Blue House … Sean Griffiths' house in Hackney, completed 2002 Photograph: 
Morley von Sternberg/FAT 
It was the first iteration of what would become the trio's trademark approach 
of surreal sampling and cartoonish collage, taking a rich plethora of 
references and mashing them together with playful abandon.

“It was all because of Photoshop and Illustrator,” says Jacob. “These tools 
allowed us to bring all kinds of things together in a very sophisticated 
collage machine.”

While other offices were exploring the potential of digital technology to 
conjure fantastical forms from the ether, FAT's approach was refreshingly 
luddite, using the natural flatness of vector graphics as a way of layering up 
dense 3D stage-sets, or what they would come to call “figural sections”.

They were egged on by finds from bookshops' bargain basements, amassing tomes 
onRobert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown <http://www.vsba.com/> and Charles Moore 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/12/17/obituaries/charles-moore-innovative-post-modern-architect-is-dead-at-68.html>
, the unfashionable giants of postmodernism who had been erased from 90s 
curricular by the prevailing passion for beige.

Venturi's definition of the “decorated shed,” of warehouses smothered in 
signage that he observed in Las Vegas, became one of FAT's key tenets, as they 
began to use the depth of the facade as an expressive device. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289679270%2F4ac2d10b-0d60-46a9-8c27-e11d225129ef-1753x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture's%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture%27s%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289679270%2F4ac2d10b-0d60-46a9-8c27-e11d225129ef-1753x2040.jpeg>
 Islington Square … an exuberant brick wall surrounds clever family housing in 
Manchester Photograph: Tim Soar/FAT 
Sean Griffiths' Blue House 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2006/07/blue_house_1.html> in Hackney, 
built in 2002, stands as a powerful distillation of these early ideas. From the 
street, it depicts the cut-out form of a diminutive pitched-roof house, stuck 
on to a cartoon office block. It is the ultimate expression of a live-work 
unit, presented with cookie-cutter clarity. But the flimsy flatness of the 
facade belies the complexity within, where theatrical stairs, overscaled 
architraves and ambiguous thresholds produce a finely crafted sequence. It is 
“Adolf Loos on the inside, South Park on the outside," as Griffiths puts it.

The same tactic was tested on a bigger scale four years later, with a series of
terraced houses for Urban Splash in Manchester's New Islington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/feb/24/architecture>. Here, a 
great brick wall marches around the development, sporting a loud argyle 
pattern, its profile swelling and swooping to define each individual house 
while tying them together, citadel-like with a fortified skin. But again, it is 
no mere surface whimsy: the compact internal planning behind the garish garb is 
some of the cleverest of any family housing of the last decade.

Elsewhere, FAT's preoccupation with external exuberance hasn't always led to 
happy endings. In Middlesbrough's Middlehaven docks, theirCommunity in a Cube 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/community-in-a-cube-middlehaven-by-fat-architects/5035535.article>
, developed for the now-defunct BioRegional Quintain, stands as a surreal 
domestic triptych. It is a modernist apartment block, resting on a Swiss 
mountain chalet, with a street of suburban American clapboard homes on the 
roof. It is a brilliant conceit, with a theatrical entrance up a baroque series 
of stairs and terraces. But it's hard to stomach the fact that its form means 
that four rooms per floor look out on a blank wall 3 metres away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289748176%2F0e470c13-3692-4081-b3ef-fdd3f044b503-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture's%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture%27s%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289748176%2F0e470c13-3692-4081-b3ef-fdd3f044b503-1020x612.jpeg>
 Community in a Cube … the surreal domestic triptych towers over 
Middlesbrough's Middlehaven docks. Photograph: Rob Parrish/FAT 
Like their street at New Islington, which still looks on to overgrown plots, 
the Middlehaven cube stands alone in a post-industrial wasteland of early 
Noughties ambition, seeming all the more lonely for its jollity. Just as the 
riotous frieze of theirBBC TV studios in Cardiff Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/25/roath-lock-cardiff-bbc-studios-review>
 faces a bleak prospect of empty plots, it seems the fate of their biggest 
projects was to stand in empty isolation, shouting jokes out into the void. But 
what of the practice's lasting influence?

“Keep up the bad work,” Robert Venturi once told FAT, in an utterance of high 
praise, and it is perhaps their obstinate approach to being determinedly 
unfashionable that has limited any further success.

“They were too clever by half,” says critic Charles Jencks 
<http://www.charlesjencks.com/>, the American godfather of postmodernism who 
has been a champion of their work. “They made a tactical manoeuvre of going 
explicitly against the tide, which certainly works in the art world, but not so 
much with buildings. They were always given the B-movie commissions, which is a 
great shame.”

He compares their trajectory with the rise of Grayson Perry, arguing that 
while the latter has become “the Hogarth of our times”, FAT haven't had the 
chance to express their ideas at the scale they deserve.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289888904%2F300fb514-2128-4575-a090-3766e9fad465-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture's%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20FAT%3A%20architecture%27s%20biggest%20pranksters%20call%20it%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20boyband%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2013%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffat-architecture-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F12%2F17%2F1387289888904%2F300fb514-2128-4575-a090-3766e9fad465-2060x1236.jpeg>
 BBC Roath Basin Studios, Cardiff … A 260m-long facade of gothic, baroque and 
sci-fi mouldings. Photograph: Tim Soar/FAT 
“They've stirred up a little bit of trouble, but don't think they had a great 
effect on the British scene,” he says. “It's because the British don't like 
explicit taste, fashion and style in architecture any more. In all the other 
arts they go crazy for it. If FAT had been around withLord Burlington 
<http://www.architecture.com/LibraryDrawingsAndPhotographs/Palladio/PalladianBritain/Architects/LordBurlington.aspx>
, everyone would have listened to them.”

Alain de Botton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> agrees 
that their outlook represents a sadly rare approach in contemporary 
architectural culture. “FAT look beyond technological minimalism,” he says. 
“They are interested in beauty, which makes them extremely strange. It 
shouldn't, but such is the spurious orthodoxy around 'function' that what 
should be common sense has come to seem peculiar and whimsical.”

The three partners have yet to announce their future plans, but will end their 
collaboration at the Venice Architecture Biennale next summer, where they are 
curating the British Pavilion with Dutch practiceCrimson 
<http://www.crimsonweb.org/> and writer Owen Hatherley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/owen-hatherley>.

“They remain open to offers for a lucrative reunion in 20 years’ time,” 
concludes theofficial press release 
<http://www.fashionarchitecturetaste.com/2013/12/fat_announces_the_end_of_its_p.html>
.

“We've got to go on a victory tour,” grins Jacob. “Bands used to take 30 years 
to reunite, but nowadays they're back together in a couple of months, so who 
knows ...”
 