
Most former international development secretaries will admit privately that 
there are times when NGOs can be frustrating. But I developed a great respect 
for people who are willing to go out on a wet Thursday and campaign for what 
they believe in. I developed a great respect and affection for NGOs everywhere, 
but above all in Britain where our NGOs are world leaders.

The missing development trillions: welcome to the debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/09/missing-development-trillions-welcome-debate>
When I first came to the Department for International Development (DfID), 
there was certainly a resistance from NGOs to working more with the private 
sector. But it was very clear that this relationship needed to function 
properly if we were going to achieve what we wanted to achieve. I think that 
they were resistant, but there was also an intellectual curiosity about what we 
Tories were banging on about. Actually, in the end, I think we learned from 
each other.

In the years since then, as we’ve moved from the millennium development goals 
(MDGs) to the sustainable development goals (SDGs), there has been a huge shift 
in the relationship; there is far more trust. The private sector better 
understands the sensitivities of NGOs, and NGOs increasingly realise that the 
private sector is not necessarily the enemy of development. Obviously we want 
the private sector to be at its best. Where it is exploitative or where it is 
transferring profits to lesser taxed areas away from the areas in poor 
countries where those profits are earned, then it’s quite right that NGOs 
should speak out. But this must take place in a framework where the private 
sector is seen as the engine of development, and not the enemy of it.

After all, we are now working towards the SDGs. We live in a world where there 
are colossal and obscene discrepancies of opportunity and wealth. The fact that 
so many of our fellow citizens live lives that are beset by danger in 
conflicts, and are dirt poor, these are things that should not only strike at 
our moral conscience, they are also things that make us unsafe. The world is 
unsafe because of the dysfunctionality and conflict that these gales of 
conflict and misery create. And so pursuing the SDGs is incredibly important in 
our national self-interest, as well as on moral grounds because it is the right 
thing to do.

NGOs, the public sector and the private sector all have crucial roles to play 
in making the SDGs work. The greatest requirement when it comes to these is to 
show funders – whether they be taxpayers, philanthropists or charities – that 
the development work being done is effective, that it’s delivering results, 
that when taxpayers deliver a dollar they’re getting a hundred cents in return, 
and that should be right at the top of the list of priorities. Monitoring the 
SDGs, making sure the work is effective, is a critical part of the role NGOs 
will have to play.


When you look at how people lift themselves out of poverty it’s by being 
economically active, and having a job, by giving women opportunities to work, 
by giving women the opportunity to decide for themselves about having children, 
and by educating children, particularly girls. For example, the world has had a 
pretty lackadaisical response to themillions of refugees 
<http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php> who are on the move from 
Syria, but one thing we could do is try to make sure that they get an 
education. The reality is thattwo million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/syria-refugee-children-lebanon-double-shift-schools>
 of them are not getting an education, they are either in camps or they are in 
communities that are just overrun. But promoting economic activity and trying 
to help people get a job and train them and educate – these are all things on 
which the private sector and the state sector should be working hand in glove.


The missing development trillions: where will they come from?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/04/the-missing-development-trillions-where-will-they-come-from>
The role of the private sector must not only be putting its shoulder behind 
the SDGs. It is also crucial that it work hand-in-hand with the state sector, 
multilateral investment and philanthropists to promote economic development, 
employment and wellbeing. A real partnership between all these different groups 
has the capacity to really drive forward the aspirations of the SDGs.


If you would like to contribute to our Missing Development Trillions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/the-missing-development-trillions>
 series get in touch on globaldevpros@guardian.co.uk or tweet us on the hashtag 
#globaldevtrillions.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 