
What is American fiction? Actually, what is America? The answer to that is 
probably very different within the United States and outside. Asking yourself 
how others see you is a healthy exercise for any culture, and US books site
Literary Hub <http://lithub.com/> did just that to mark the Fourth of July 
weekend, inviting non-American authors to suggest the quintessential American 
fiction titles.


They contacted almost 50 writers, editors, publishers, critics and translators 
from 30 countries and asked each to choose three books. The selection of 96 
titles they came up with is fascinating, so do take a look at their site forthe 
full list 
<http://lithub.com/quintessential-american-fiction-according-to-the-rest-of-the-world/>
. Among the results of this “deeply unscientific survey”: 19 of the chosen 
titles are by women; the least popular decade is the 1940s; and the most cited 
writers are William Faulkner, Herman Melville, JD Salinger and Mark Twain.

The subjects range from the Great Depression to the Vietnam war and the great 
American road trip, but the most popular decade is the 2000s. Here are some of 
the most interesting picks.

Miss Lonelyhearts <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/miss-lonelyhearts.html> by 
Nathanael West (1933)


A dark comedy about disillusionment after the Great Depression in the form of 
a troubled journalist who failed to give the proper advice to his lonely 
readers.–Andrés Felipe Solano (Colombia), author, selected by Granta 
<http://granta.com/> as one of the Best of Young Spanish-Language Novelists

Moby-Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/13/100-best-novels-observer-moby-dick>
 by Herman Melville (1851)


The American hunger to comprehend all, and the impossibility of it, permeated 
half by cheerful melancholy and half by demonic rage.–Motoyuki Shibata (Japan), 
translator and editor ofMonkey Business <http://monkeybusinessmag.tumblr.com/>

Infinite Jest <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/infinite-jest-2.html> by David 
Foster Wallace (1996)

Impractical ramblingness + audiovisual media + drugs + characters full of 
trepidatious braggadocio created by a confidently unsure author + competitive 
sports + dystopian LOLs + addictiveness in and of itself + maths = U. S. of A 
–Sam Cooney (Australia), publisher and editorial director atThe Lifted Brow 
<http://theliftedbrow.com/>

The Heart is a Lonely Hunter 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-is-a-lonely-hunter.html> by Carson 
McCullers (1940)

If I see my emotional suitcase as a reader and think of American fiction, this 
book is the first thing I pack. The choice of a European reader looking for 
non-quintessential American fiction and finding it in the Big South, yes or yes.
–Elena Ramírez (Spain), editorial director at Seix Barral and director of 
fiction at Internacional Grupo Planeta

The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/24/100-best-novels-huckleberry-finn-twain>
 byMark Twain (1884/5)

This is where it all starts, the new world called America, no other work of 
fiction before had created characters like Huck and Jim, or the landscape with 
Mississippi running through its veins like blood, and no one had ever used 
language the way Huck and Jim did. Along with this, Huck Finn also set the 
stage for great works of American fiction becoming moral guardians of America, 
reminding us that it is preferable to go to hell but do the right thing.–Azar 
Nafisi (Iran), author

Lolita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/23/100-best-novels-lolita-vladimir-nabokov-nymphet>
 by Vladimir Nabokov (1955)

The landscapes of honest colours, fata morganas and melting mirages have 
become over time an America more real than America itself, a reimagined America 
which in the end is, must be, the most enduring (and beautiful) country of all.
–Lila Azam Zanganeh (France), author

The Collected Stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/07/collected-stories-lydia-davis-review>
 byLydia Davis (2009)


No one has responded more brilliantly than Davis to the garrulous silence of 
contemporary America, the depths at which its banality twists inside. –Rana 
Dasgupta (England), author

American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> by Bret 
Easton Ellis (1991)

Part social comedy, part Dostoevskian study of the male gaze and America’s top 
export, wild capitalism. –Pola Oloixorac (Argentina), author and founding 
editor ofThe Buenos Aires Review <http://www.buenosairesreview.org/>

Light in August <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/light-in-august.html> by 
William Faulkner (1932)

For explaining the social and psychological fabric of the American South, 
which casts a shadow over the whole US. –Hamid Ismailov (Uzbekistan), writer 
and journalist

Do you agree? Whether you’re American or not, share your three titles of 
choice in the comments below.
 