
Has Huxley busted open the doors for you? Here's a few more portals to step 
through:

The obvious place to start is with the source of the phrase "The Doors Of 
Perception" – Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell. If you're feeling skint
there's a pretty nice online version with a few pictures 
<http://www.levity.com/alchemy/blake_ma.html> – but, of course, you can't beat 
the book 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781851243662>
.

Meanwhile, if you haven't already, you must also read Brave New World 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099518471>
 – JG Ballard says it's more prophetic than 1984 and few would argue that its 
influence is huge. Huxley's anti-utopia also displays plenty of the obsessions 
that would lead him to The Doors Of Perception – particularly in the form of 
the drug Soma.

It's also well worth looking at Island 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099477778>
 – a late novel marking the culmination of Huxley's philosophical and 
psychotropic investigations.

Acid Dreams by Martin A Lee 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Acid-Dreams-Complete-Social-History/dp/0802130623/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1326730702&sr=8-1>
 gives a good idea of the influence of Huxley's ideas. It's a social history of 
LSD, the 1960s counterculture and the CIA's strange foray into psychedelic 
experimentation.

There's also Storming Heaven: LSD And The American Dream 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Storming-Heaven-LSD-American-Dream/dp/0586087966/ref=sr_1_4?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1326730740&sr=1-4>
 by Jay Stevens, another history of LSD following the drug from Albert Hofman's 
laboratory to Timothy Leary's college to Ken Kesey's bus and then across the 
world.

Meanwhile, the key contemporary account of the 1960s acid explosion must be 
Thomas Wolfe's The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552993661>
, where the man in the white suit follows Ken Kesey and his Merry Pranksters on 
a very unusual bus trip … althoughHunter S Thompson's Fear And Loathing In Las 
Vegas 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007204496>
 is far more fun.

For a more sober account, try LSD – My Problem Child by Albert Hofmann 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199639410>
, in which the great bicycling chemist discusses his difficult legacy. Then 
there's alsoPiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story, by Alexander Shulgin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780963009609>
. Shulgin takes Huxley's willingness to dose himself on experimental chemicals 
to new heights in a moving, fascinating, scientifically rigorous and frequently 
terrifying guide to all things Phenethylamine.

Moving back to the man himself, This Timeless Moment – A Personal View of 
Aldous Huxley by Laura Huxley 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/This-Timeless-Moment-Personal-Aldous/dp/0890879680> is 
fascinating. Here, Huxley's second wife details her marriage to the writer from 
1948 to 1963, explaining and defending his experiments with drugs and his 
belief that psychology could help his failing eyesight.

You can also get a flavour of Laura Huxley's relationship with her husband in 
this touching account of Huxley's final moments, and his famous last LSD trip, 
minutes after JFK was shot 
<http://www.lettersofnote.com/2010/03/most-beautiful-death.html>. "He had taken 
this moksha medicine in which he believed. He was doing what he had written in 
Island and I had the feeling that he was interested and relieved and quiet."

Huxley, had a lovely, very posh voice, as evidenced by this BBC interview from 
1958 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/archive/writers/12233.shtml> – which is also notable 
for, among other things, Huxley's claim to be an essayist who happens to write 
novels and a discussion of Brave New World and LSD.

And here's an interesting essay on Huxley and mescalin in The Reader 
<http://therevealer.org/archives/10192>.

Finally, I find it impossible to to resist posting this amusing video of 
soldiers taking LSD <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n-rWnQphPdQ> ("One hour and 
10 minutes after taking the drug, with one man climbing a tree to feed the 
birds, the troop commander gave up … ")

Anything else we should be looking at? Or any books we should hunt out? Please 
post suggestions in the comments below …o
 