
Fraser Nelson has stood by a pledge he made in November last year 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/coffeehouse/2012/11/leader-why-the-spectator-wont-join-any-statuatory-backed-press-regulation-body/>
 by saying unequivocally that the magazine he edits, The Spectator, will not 
join the new press regulator.

And he will give his considered reasons in this week's issue of the magazine, 
which has this front cover, a giant NO with the underline "Why we aren't 
signing."He told BBC Radio 4's PM programme last night: 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01r9crf> 

"Press regulation is too important an issue to be answered by some tawdry deal 
cooked up at two in the morning in Ed Miliband's office.

The result is unacceptable, state licensing of the media, something we haven't 
had in this country for 300 years. We've had a free press. Luckily for us, it's 
optional. Cameron is creating this new club… It's not somethingThe Spectator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-spectator> feels like signing up to."

Nelson's decision is hardly surprising. He signalled it in an editorial 
following the publication of Lord Justice Leveson's report that recommended 
statutory underpinning for the new regulator. He wrote then:

"If the press agrees a new form of self-regulation, perhaps contractually 
binding this time, we will happily take part. But we would not sign up to 
anything enforced by government.

If such a group is constituted we will not attend its meetings, pay its fines 
nor heed its menaces. We would still obey the (other) laws of the land. But to 
join any scheme which subordinates press to parliament would be a betrayal of 
what this paper has stood for since its inception in 1828."

That leading article predicted that it might be "politically difficult" for 
the prime minister "to err on the side of liberty" but thought him "a 
pragmatist" who "will realise that statutory regulation of the press would 
achieve very little."

So it has come to pass. We must wait a day or so to read Nelson's article, but 
the essence of his argument has been well rehearsed.

The Spectator is owned by the Barclay brothers, who also own the Telegraph 
titles, but the magazine is run separately, through a company called Press 
Holdings. Its chief executive isAndrew Neil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>.

Nelson is unlikely to be alone in defying the parliamentary decision. Private 
Eye <https://www.theguardian.com/media/private-eye>, which has never opted in 
to the current form of regulation, administered through the Press Complaints 
Commission, is also unlikely to join the new regulator.

As The Guardian reported, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/mar/19/spectator-private-eye-press-regulator>
 its editor, Ian Hislop, also told PM he was confused about the deal and was 
uncertain whether the regulator would be statutorily underpinned. He said:

"You can't really say this is a considered and thoughtful process when, in the 
middle of the night, two bits are added to other bills… This doesn't really 
look like thoughtful considered legislation which has been worked through."

On the same programme, Seamus Dooley, the Irish secretary of the National 
Union of Journalists, pointed out that two UK-based newspaper groups - 
Associated Newspapers (the Mail group) and News International - take an active 
part in the regulatory regime in Ireland, which has a form of statutory 
underpinning.

He said that there has not been any sign of state interference in Ireland's 
newspaper since the system was instituted in January 2008.
 