
My Egyptian taxi driver gave me a pitied, concerned look as I handed my cash 
over at Sharjah Airport. I was on my way to his homeland, to Cairo, and the 
conversation, as it always tends to do in the Middle East with taxi drivers, 
turned to football.

"I am Al Ahly, of course," he told me, betraying his allegiance to Egypt's 
most successful football club. I was flying to Egypt to watch Al Ahly take on
Zamalek <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zamalek> in the Cairo derby, in 
the biggest match in Africa, in one of the most violent football fixtures in 
the history of the game, in front of a 100,000 strong, perfectly partisan 
crowd. The previously happy taxi driver's demeanour turned dark as he handed me 
my change. "Do not go," he intoned gravely. "You will be killed."

He was right to be concerned. For the best part of a century Ahly and Zamalek 
have been fighting out vicious derbies on and off the pitch, causing death, 
destruction and in at least one case in the early 70s, the entire league to be 
cancelled. The violence forced the Egyptian government to ban derby games at 
each club's home ground. Now all games take place at a neutral venue. Such is 
the reverence and division that even Egypt's referees aren't beyond suspicion â€“ 
foreign officials are now flown in to ensure impartiality.

But it is far more than just locality that rubs each set of supporters up the 
wrong way, and far more than pride. It is about nationalism, class and 
escapism. This Sunday the barely concealed latent enmity that lays dormant 
between fixtures will once again be brought to the fore, this time in the 
African Champions League, which kicks back into action. The last eight teams in 
arguably the world's third toughest club competition have been split in to two 
groups of four, with Group A throwing up the one fixture that the authorities 
wanted to avoid.

The roots of the rivalry can be traced back to when the British army walked 
the streets of Cairo. Football was almost universally regarded as Britain's 
only popular cultural import but it wasn't until 1907 that Egypt's first 
locally run club,Al Ahly <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alahly>, came 
into existence. The name translates as 'The National' and Ahly, wearing the old 
red colours of the pre-colonial flag, were seen as a team for the nation, a 
bulwark against occupation and a chance for the average man on the street to 
come together for a common nationalistic cause.

Zamalek, wearing white, were considered the team of the foreigner (read the 
British) and the outsider. It was also the club of the hated King Farouk. The 
team was even named in his honour before being changed to Zamalek after his 
abdication. The team traditionally attracted the British, their allies and the 
awkward squad: the authors, poets and intellectuals who were uneasy with 
Egypt's newfound nationalistic confidence. In the red corner you had the 
devout, the poor and the proud; in the white corner the liberal, bourgeois 
middle class. Today the divisions still remain.

"If I go to the stadium I have to go without my car as they [Ahly fans] break 
everything," explained the former Zamalek great and international Ayman Younis, 
who is now the Alan Shearer of Egyptian television, only with more personality 
and hair. Younis knows a thing or two about the tensions between the two sides. 
His knack for scoring against Ahly in the Cairo derby in the 80s and 90s made 
him a marked man, even to this day.

"When I was playing I had a lot of problems with Ahly fans. In 1990 I found my 
BMW car on its side and they signed it 'Ahly fans'. And that was when we lost, 
2-0, but they remembered that I scored in the first game earlier in the 
season." That, however, wasn't the worst of it. "Then there was the time they 
attacked me in my home. I had to phone the police. 5,000 Ahly fans came to my 
street and shouted against me, my wife and kids, throwing things at us."

Not that the incident prompted him to re-evaluate his allegiance. For Ayman 
his love of Zamalek, along with its fans, transcended nearly every other 
impulse in his life, even religion. "Ask a Zamelek fan, 'Can you change 
religion?' He wouldn't answer. But you ask them can you change Zamalek, they'd 
say 'No!' And if you see a policeman, they won't ask you whether you are Muslim 
or a Christian, they'll ask you whether you are Ahly or Zamalek. It's true."

Today's player's are no different, as Mahmoud "Shikabala" Abdel Razeq, 
Zamalek's best player who is currently in his second spell at the club after 
playing briefly in Greece, explained. "I came back [to the team] because I 
played with Zamalek since I was very young and Zamalek is my home," he said. 
"The derby is like a championship in itself: if you win it you win the biggest 
trophy since football started inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt>."

When I arrived at the Cairo International Stadium, it was clear the 
authorities weren't taking any risks. The concourse leading to the stadium was 
swamped with black-clad riot police and plain-clothes officers, randomly 
hauling out supporters and taking them away to be searched. It felt more like 
temporary, localised martial law than a football match. Inside, Ahly's Ultra 
group was already in fine voice, hours before the kick off.

"Ahly was the first ever [football club] to be 100% Egyptian so it is very 
nationalistic but Zamalek has changed their name so many times we sing: 'You 
used to be half British, you guys are the rejects'. In Arabic it's the plural 
of 'Small dirty houses,'" explained Asad, the organisation's leader. "The two 
biggest political parties in Egypt are Ahly and Zamalek. It's bigger than 
politics. It's more about escapism. The average Ahly fan is a guy who lives in 
a one bedroom flat with his wife, mother-in-law and five kids. And he is 
getting paid minimum wage and his life sucks. The only good thing about his 
life is that for two hours on a Friday he goes to the stadium and watches Ahly. 
That's why it is such an obligation to win every game. It makes people's lives 
happy. We are probably the only club in the world where we [the fans] expect to 
win every single game."

Which is something Ahly have had a good stab at. They've won the last four 
league titles (33 in all), two of the last three African Champions Leagues, 
enjoyed a record-breaking 55 match unbeaten run and exerted near total 
dominance over Zamalek in recent years. The architect of their success is 
Portuguese crackpot Manuel Jose, a manager who claims to be a better than his 
countryman Jose Morinho, and was incensed when he wasn't considered for the 
Portuguese national job. He was asked to step down for a few weeks last season 
after infuriating Egypt's religious conservatives bystripping off on the 
touchline <http://youtube.com/watch?v=6paXKQFQeGU> during a league game in 
protest at a poor refereeing decision.

Yet I was lucky enough to experience that rarest of things: an Ahly defeat. 
Zamalek ran out 2-0 winners, causing the Ahly fans to pelt the riot police with 
bottles and fight amongst themselves. The shear numbers of riot police meant 
that it was virtually impossible for the two sets of fans to meet and fight 
like they used to. Instead, the violence has found a new home.

Youth team matches have been known to be a thinly veiled disguise for a 
resumption of hostilities ("There's always horrible fights there," admitted 
Asad), whilst the far less security-heavy basketball derby between Ahly and 
Zamalek has seen an explosion of violence courtesy of those who can't get their 
kick from the terraces any more. Last February saw the high water mark: a 
Zamalek fan was set on fire and severely burnt when Ahly's fans, distraught 
after their team narrowly lost 68-67, invaded the court and showered their 
rival's supporters, players and management with homemade Molotov cocktails.

Yet whilst the authorities struggle off the pitch, Egyptian football is 
currently enjoying something of a boom on it. Both Zamalek and Ahly share the 
record for the most African Champions League titles (five apiece), their 
players are coveted by some of the best leagues in the world and the national 
team has just won a second successive African Cup of Nations.

That moment last February, when the exceptionally talented Mohamed Aboutreika 
scored the only goal in the final against Cameroon, was one of the rare moments 
that even Zamalek fans cheered the exploits of a die hard Ahly player. But by 
7.30pm on Sunday, Cairo will have forgotten that. Once again the city will 
part, one half painted red, the other painted white.
 