
Today’s Queen’s Speech “will not include controversial legislation to replace 
the human rights act with a British bill of rights”,reports the Daily Telegraph.
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/queens-speech/11631597/Queens-Speech-David-Cameron-pledges-tax-cuts-but-delays-scrapping-Human-Rights-Act.html>

It says the decision to announce a consultation on the issue instead follows 
criticism for senior Tories over the plans, which the Sun reminds us were a 
Tory manifesto pledge.

Indeed, the paper that urged its readers just 20 days ago to vote for David 
Cameron’s Conservative party has turned on the prime minister with a scathing 
front page leading article 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/6474890/The-Sun-Says-Why-is-Cameron-dithering-over-OUR-RIGHTS.html>
.

Under photographs of four offenders said to have used the human rights act 
(HRA) to avoid deportation and four people opposed to the act, the Sun 
registers its “bitter disappointment” about it not being part of planned 
legislation in this parliament.

“The Tories rightly pledged to repeal the HRA, which makes the European 
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) part of our national law”, says the paper. It 
continues:

“The Tories have all the evidence they need. It’s here, on these pages. 
They’ve had years to prepare. Only the Lib Dems were holding them back...

The bill of rights would adopt almost everything noble in the ECHR, which 
Britain helped design after world war two. But it would stop us being slaves to 
every cockeyed interpretation of it.

Sections would be skilfully reworded to ensure they can no longer be abused by 
crooks, lawyers and liberal judges.

Article 8 of the ECHR, for example, securing the right to privacy and a family 
life, was intended to limit state surveillance. It has ended up being used to 
let illegal immigrants stay in Britain”.

The Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, rather than 
attack Cameron for the delay, launches a front page attack on actors (aka “the 
massed ranks of luvviedom”) for opposing plans to scrap the HRA.

In its article, Folly of human rights luvvies 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3098327/Folly-human-rights-luvvies-actors-fight-plans-axe-Human-Rights-Act-thousands-foreign-convicts-use-stay-Britain.html>
, it appears that the Mail was either out of the political loop, and therefore 
unaware that Cameron had shelved his HRA replacement plans, or was relatively 
relaxed about the prime minister’s decision to delay legislation.

The former seems most likely since there are clear disparities between the 
online and print versions of the story itself and the leading article, 
suggesting last-minute amendments to take account of the Tories’ change of 
mind. (The Daily Expressgot it wrong too 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/580167/Human-Rights-Act-Conservatives-Queens-Speech-Tories-David-Cameron>
).

It is also obvious that the premise of the Mail’s assault on the actors is 
based on the likelihood of the HRA forming part of this session’s business.

The article is based on the fact that a number of actors, evidently including 
Benedict Cumberbatch, Simon Callow and Vanessa Redgrave, are to feature in 
films as part ofLiberty’s campaign to save the HRA 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/campaigning/save-our-human-rights-act>.

In a leading article, Pipe down, Sherlock 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3098459/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-Nicola-Sturgeon-crowns-empress-La-la-land.html>
 (geddit?), the Mail took a similar line to the Sun in arguing that “5,000 
foreign criminals are at large on Britain’s streets awaiting deportation” 
because of the HRA’s existence.

Its first edition leader stated: “In their election manifesto, the 
Conservatives pledged to ‘restore common sense’ to the law. The sooner they do 
so, the safer we’ll all be”.

By the final edition, that had changed to read: “In their election manifesto, 
the Conservatives pledged to ‘restore common sense’ to the law. As signs of 
dither emerge, we urge them not to delay”. Signs of dither? Could that herald a 
Mail attack on Cameron very similar to the Sun’s?

Both leaders conclude with the same sentence:


“As for the posturing peacocks of Tinseltown, if we want their advice on 
jurisprudence, we’ll ask for it”.

Clearly, the Times was in the know because its splash, in all editions, is 
headlined “Cameron blinks first in human rights row”.

It reported that Cameron “has stepped back from an early confrontation with 
his own MPs over a controversial move to scrap European human rights laws”. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4452374.ece>

 The plan to replace the HRA with a British bill of rights “has faced a 
backlash from Conservative backbenchers and the judiciary”, said the Times’s 
article.

It names three senior Tories who oppose the idea: Dominic Grieve, the former 
attorney-general; David Davis, the former shadow home secretary; andAndrew 
Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, the former 
chief whip.

Nick Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nickrobinson>, the BBC’s 
political editor, speaking on Radio 4’s Today programme this morning, pointed 
out that the Tory press is “very angry” at the delay. But Cameron, “in the real 
world”, would be defeated in the Commons should he attempt to scrap the HRA.

On the same programme, junior Tory minister Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss> ducked questions about the 
delay to the introduction of a British bill of rights. But it would definitely 
happen, she said, because it was a manifesto commitment.
 