
Theo Walcott <https://www.theguardian.com/football/theo-walcott> has set 
himself the target of 10 goals before Christmas, and the bonus of a coffee 
machine from his wife, if he can net one more before 25 December following his 
against Bournemouth at the Emirates on Sunday.

Speaking after the Gunners’ latest Premier League victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
, Walcott explained: “I want to get 10 [goals] so I can get a coffee machine 
for Christmas from my wife. She said ‘if you get 10 goals before Christmas I’ll 
buy you this coffee machine’. So I can’t wait for that and hopefully it will 
happen. Coming from the wing as well, I’m obviously delighted with my goals so 
far. But I’m more delighted where the team is, progressing from the first 
disappointing game [the 4-3 loss to Liverpool on the opening day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, since when Arsenal are unbeaten in 19 games]. There’s been a lot of ups and 
downs but hopefully this game can just make sure we’re back to the level we 
want to be at.”

Dangerous Alexis Sánchez the driving force of Arsenal’s attack | Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/dangerous-alexis-sanchez-driving-force-arsenal>
“I sat down with the manager at the start of the season and said where I want 
to play so now I don’t have to think about anything else,” added Walcott. “And 
with that experience in the central position, if I find myself there hopefully 
I can tuck away the goals, which I have. I’m still working hard in training, in 
the gym and on the mental side of it. And making sure I have time at home as 
well. Everything seems to be clicking. I just want to make sure I’m the best I 
can be every day going into training. If I can stay fit hopefully it can be a 
good season, not just for me but for everyone else.”

Walcott celebrated the goal - only the second with his head in over 10 years 
in the Premier League - by cradling and rocking his arms, a reference to the 
fact that his wife, Mel, had given birth to their second child on Friday.

“I tried to see if I could meet up on the morning of the game but the boss was 
adamant that he wants his players to come to the hotel. But we compromised and 
I managed to come a lot later. I was very pleased he allowed that so I had a 
lot more time because this was only the second night [for the new baby],” said 
the delighted player.

Alexis Sánchez double helps Arsenal fend off tenacious Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
Walcott expanded on the inspiration Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis>, who scored the other 
two goals in the team’s 3-1 win, brings to him. “Obviously me and Alexis are 
having a very good relationship at this moment in time,” he said. “At the start 
of the season we created a lot of goals for each other and everything was 
happening. Now we’re starting to see signs that a little bit was happening 
again today.

“We can’t dwell on the past. We need to make sure we’re ready for Wednesday 
[against Walcott’s old club Southampton in the EFL Cup]. It may be a completely 
different team, who knows. But Alexis has definitely stepped up to making this 
position. I think he’s enjoying it. I can see the smile he’s playing with.

“He even did an interview today in English, which he never does. I’ve been 
saying him ‘try and talk to the guys when you can, try and give them a bit of 
time’. Because his English is better than you think. I’m very pleased for him 
and I’m really enjoying playing football with him.”
 