
Audience members fainting at scenes of rape, mutilation and murder at 
Shakespeare's Globe during its current production of Titus Andronicus offer a 
reassuring reminder of the power of physical aggression in the theatre. Though 
it's worth remembering that, in hot weather, they faint a lot anyway at that 
Bankside open air cockpit; I've seen people pass out at Love's Labour's Lost, 
for heaven's sake. But spilt blood and guts are what the Greek and Jacobean 
theatre were all about, with offstage violence and neutralising masks in the 
former and buckets of red stuff splashing all over the groundlings in the 
latter. And how refreshing it is to see such stomach-churning atrocity in the 
theatre, where it rightly belongs, rather than on depressing newsreels from 
around the world. Here are five more on-stage bloodbaths capable of sending 
the audience rushing for the exit.

Sarah Kane's Blasted
 Gouging reaction … Danny Webb and Lydia Wilson in Sarah Kane's Blasted. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Sarah Kane's Blasted picked up the challenge of bringing the horrors of a war 
zone into a domestic setting, though most critics were initially squeamish and 
dismissive of Titus-like scenes of incestuous rape, eye-gouging and baby-burial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/24/sarah-kane-blasted> under the 
floorboards. The play is now acclaimed as a modern classic, though that doesn't 
make it any easier to sit through.

Almost anything by Edward Bond

An Edward Bond season at the tiny Cock Tavern in Kilburn High Road in 2010 
restored the author of the baby-stoning play,Saved (1965) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/09/edward-bond-saved-original-cast>
, to critical and public scrutiny. Bond advocated a return to the lucid frenzy 
and forensic violence of the Greeks in Olly's Prison (a 1993 teleplay), in 
which a father kills an obstinately silent daughter for refusing to drink a cup 
of tea; and in There Will Be More, when a modern, child-killing Medea becomes a 
refugee from the asylum bombed by her own military husband.

American Psycho
 Matt Smith as Patrick Bateman in American Psycho. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
American Psycho at the Almeida Theatre last year, with Matt Smith as Brett 
Easton Ellis's psychotic Wall Street trader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review>, 
was a nerve-shredding, almost nauseatingly chic musical version of a brilliant, 
hard-to-read novel. Blood was splattered all right, but with nice lighting and 
choreography: this was murder with designer labels and hatchets with handbags. 
No need to cancel dinner.

A View from the Bridge

The Arthur Miller classic is on at the Young Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/13/a-view-from-the-bridge-review-miller-mark-strong>
, so there's still time to gasp at an unexpected and really rather beautiful 
climactic bloodbath, a consequence of misguided passion in the lowliest of 
Brooklyn households.

Peter O'Toole's Macdeath

Peter O'Toole was generally derided for trying to restore Jacobean blood and 
thunder to his 1980 performance of Macbeth, which had people fainting with 
laughter rather than horror and revulsion. Variously dubbed "Macdeath", 
"Macflop" and an irresponsible waste of Kensington Gore, the show at least 
reminded us of how great an actor O'Toole could be even when awful, and how 
much we'd lost in Shakespearean production by throwing the baby out with the 
bloodbath water.
 