
Miranda
8.30pm, BBC2

When Miranda first appeared last year, its old-school comedy aesthetic puzzled 
critics, who took a few episodes to realise that just because it felt like it 
was from a different decade it still had some good gags to offer.Miranda Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/apr/11/miranda-hart-interview> 
is back in her joke shop for a second series, with Miranda making moves to get 
fit and struggling with etiquette at a sushi restaurant.WD

Accused
9pm, BBC1

Taking a similar approach to The Street in offering up linked dramas that tell 
distinct stories,Jimmy McGovern's Accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/nov/07/jimmy-mcgovern-tv-drama-irony>
 follows half a dozen ordinary people who land up in court. First is plumber 
Willy, whose life implodes when he hits money problems just as he needs to pay 
for his daughter's lavish wedding. Playing unfaithful Willy with a barely 
repressed anger, Christopher Eccleston is mesmerising throughout, helped by a 
script that returns repeatedly to his character's inability to see his own part 
in his problems. "I've done nothing wrong . . ."JW

Greek Myths: Tales Of Travelling Heroes
9pm, BBC4

Historian Robin Lane Fox <http://www.librarything.com/author/foxrobinlane> is 
off on a mission to uncover the origins of the Greek myths – stories, he 
argues, that "lie at the root of western culture". It's one of those 
documentaries that's as much a travel show as a history lesson, as we follow 
him from the ancient lost city of Hattusas in modern Turkey to the summit of 
Mount Etna to hear about "sex, giant monsters and baby eating". It's followed 
by a repeat of Aristotle's Lagoon, in which professor Armand Leroi heads to 
Lesvos, the island teeming with wildlife that inspired Aristotle's first 
thoughts about biology.RV

Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations
10pm, Good Food 


After stunning the foodie world with Kitchen Confidential, his excellent 
narcotic-fuelled memoir of life as a chef in 2000, Tony Bourdain has spent the 
past decade travelling the world eating weird food. His experiences have been 
documented in two books and in this long-running travel-food doc which follows 
the chef as he continues his foodie odyssey. This time he's looking for a 
chivito (beef butty) in Uruguay, offbeat Egyptian food and delving into the 
habits of one of the strangest food nations … the UK. Continues nightly to 
Thursday.WD

How Not To Live Your Life
10.30pm, BBC3

The third series of Dan Clark's sitcom continues. Tonight's plotline has the 
reliably offensive Don partake in a double date with Jason and two "posh 
birds", Harriet and Felicity, and wind up at Felicity's parents' country manor, 
where her dad takes an instant dislike to Don. Things aren't helped by some 
bedroom hi jinx. Typical BBC3 fare; whether that's a good thing or not depends 
on your tastes. AJC

When Playboys Ruled The World
10.35pm, ITV1

"Instead," says Stirling Moss <http://formula1history.com/moss_bio.htm>, 
considering the difference between the racing drivers of his age and ours, "of 
finishing a race and going off chasing girls, they now say thanks to Vodafone." 
This entertaining documentary fondly laments formula one world championJames 
Hunt <http://www.formula1.com/teams_and_drivers/hall_of_fame/326/>, and 
motorcycling legendBarry Sheene <http://www.barrysheene.nl/> – 1970s racetrack 
gods who lived like there was no tomorrow for the reason that, back then, there 
was every chance there wouldn't be. Comparisons between the adoration they 
enjoyed, and the opprobrium heaped upon Tiger Woods and

Wayne Rooney for not dissimilar behaviour, are telling. AM
 