
The chair of a rightwing thinktank due to give evidence to the Tory bullying 
inquiry has claimed theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> was 
complicit in an attempt by the Conservative party to assassinate his character.

In a formal letter of complaint to the BBC Trust and the corporation’s 
director general, Tony Hall, Ben Harris-Quinney explains he was invited to 
appear on the Daily Politics programme to discuss vote-swapping between Tory 
and Ukip voters.

But he claims he was instead placed in a cubicle and subjected to a series of 
questions about his character, ultimately being accused by the presenter,Andrew 
Neil <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-neil>, of being a “Walter Mitty 
figure”.

Harris-Quinney, who is chairman of the Bow Group, the UK’s oldest conservative 
thinktank, alleges the Daily Politics took part in an attempted “political 
assassination” led by figures from Conservative campaign headquarters (CCHQ) 
including Paul Abbott, former of chief of staff toex-party chairman Grant Shapps
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/28/inside-the-investigation-that-forced-grant-shapps-to-resign>
, andMark Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/18/mark-clarke-expelled-from-conservative-party-for-life-over-bullying-cliams>
, the former election aide at the heart of the bullying scandal.

In his letter of complaint, Harris-Quinney writes: “I am dealing with the 
Conservative party separately, my case is subject to several pending 
investigations into their practices and behaviour, much of which has now been 
exposed in the press.

“I believe, however, that there are very serious questions for the BBC to 
answer as to the complicity of the Daily Politics show in a politically 
motivated attempt to silence my voice and publicly defame my character.”

The BBC denied that the interview or questions were biased. Clarke declined to 
comment. Abbott was approached by the Guardian for comment but has not 
responded.

Harris-Quinney claims that before his appearance on the Daily Politics on 4 
May last year Abbott, who no longer works for Shapps, sent a text message to 
friends and colleagues telling them to “watch this drive-by shooting”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftory-bullying-inquiry-bbc-ben-harris-quinney-daily-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15ae8985c4b11e54221b3d2647856084a045637%2F0_105_1686_1010%2F1686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tory%20bullying%20inquiry%20witness%3A%20'BBC%20complicit%20in%20bid%20to%20defame%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftory-bullying-inquiry-bbc-ben-harris-quinney-daily-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tory%20bullying%20inquiry%20witness%3A%20%27BBC%20complicit%20in%20bid%20to%20defame%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Ftory-bullying-inquiry-bbc-ben-harris-quinney-daily-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15ae8985c4b11e54221b3d2647856084a045637%2F0_105_1686_1010%2F1686.jpg>
 Mark Clarke, the former Tory election aide at the centre of the Elliott 
Johnson bullying claims. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
He also claims in the letter that Clarke, whom Tory activist Elliott Johnson 
accused of being a bully before he apparently killed himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/23/former-tory-parliamentary-hopeful-at-centre-of-elliott-johnson-bullying-claims>
, was circulating messages about Harris-Quinney’s membership of the 
Conservative party before the interview was aired. Clarke then went on to 
attack Harris-Quinney on Twitter before, during and after the programme.

For the past nine months, Harris-Quinney, a critic of Tory centralisation, has 
been making enquiries into allegations of bullying and corruption within CCHQ, 
which came to the fore in September whenthe Guardian revealed Johnson, 21, had 
been found dead after claiming he was being bullied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/22/tory-activist-possibly-committed-suicide-party-bullying>
.

In the Daily Politics interview, Neil began by questioning Harris-Quinney on 
the vote-swapping issue, which he defended by explaining he supported 
conservative principles and voting Ukip would help bolster the Tories’ chances 
of forming a government.

But Neil, the former editor of the Sunday Times and current chairman of the 
Press Holdings group, which owns the conservative magazine the Spectator, then 
accused Harris-Quinney of not representing the Bow Group and just speaking for 
himself.

Neil questioned his guest’s credentials, challenging his position with the 
Madrid branch ofConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> Abroad, which 
Harris-Quinney founded, at which point the interview became heated. 
Harris-Quinney asked: “What on earth has this got to do with the general 
election coming up? No one is interested in this.”

Neil replied: “I’m trying to find out who you represent other than Ben 
Harris-Quinney? Isn’t it true you’re a bit of a Walter Mitty character?”

When Harris-Quinney challenged Neil’s motivation, the presenter said: “That’s 
how it works, I ask the questions and you’re meant to answer them.”

Michael Heseltine, a patron of the Bow Group who appeared on the same episode 
of the Daily Politics, issued a statement rejecting Harris-Quinney’s suggestion 
that Tory supporters should vote Ukip. The Tory peer is not accused of being 
complicit in the alleged character assassination.

Turning to Lord Heseltine, whom Harris-Quinney understood was on the show to 
take part in the vote-swapping debate, Neil asked him for his view of the 
interview. “Well I think you destroyed him,” Heseltine said. “Who the hell is 
this?” He added: “This guy is of no account.”

The interview was covered by other media, including the Spectator, in which 
Harris-Quinney was characterised negatively. The Bow Group chairman said the 
experience caused him stress.

In his letter of complaint, he says: “This sort of politically motivated, 
personal, smear-based journalism does great damage to people’s lives and 
reputations, it is designed to cause maximum distress and harass the victims, 
and it has no place at the BBC.”

A BBC spokeswoman said: “We received this complaint yesterday, nine months 
after the broadcast in question. We will respond in due course, but 
categorically refute the suggestion that the interview or questions were based 
on anything other than the programme’s own editorial decisions.

“The credibility of Mr Harris-Quinney and his Conservative party credentials 
was key in assessing how significant the Bow Group’s report was. The BBC is 
impartial and all our journalists adhere to our editorial standards.”

BBC Daily Politics was accused of political bias last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/08/bbc-stephen-doughty-daily-politics-laura-kuenssberg>
 when the shadow foreign affairs minister Stephen Doughty resigned live on the 
programme, leading to claims the broadcaster had orchestrated the move.

The BBC came under fire after it emerged that the corporation had deleted a 
blogpost from its website saying that the political editor of BBC News, Laura 
Kuenssberg, had “sealed the deal” for Doughty to resign live on air.

The timing of Doughty’s announcement was a blow to the Labour leader, Jeremy 
Corbyn, who was caught off guard during prime minister’s questions less than an 
hour later.

The Conservative party has appointed the law firm Clifford Chance to run an 
inquiry into bullying allegations that engulfed the party, but this has been
rejected by Johnson’s parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/13/elliott-johnson-parents-dead-tory-conservative-activist-boycott-bullying-inquiry>
 and a number of other alleged victims.

Clarke was appointed by Shapps as director of RoadTrip2015, which bussed 
hundreds of young people into marginal constituencies in the run-up to the 
general election.Shapps has since resigned from a junior ministerial position 
over his role in the affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/28/grant-shapps-resigns-over-bullying-scandal>
. Clarke has previously denied all allegations of bullying and other wrongdoing.
 