
Two weeks can be a long time in football, especially where Andr√© Villas-Boas 
is concerned. This result made it four wins from five for Tottenham, who 
advance to the knockout stages of this competition having secured a victory in 
every European match this season. Slowly, they are banishing the memories of 
that dismal defeat at Manchester City.

Spurs top the group but in the last 32 could face Juventus, Ajax or 
Villas-Boas's former club Porto, who all dropped out of the Champions League 
this week. Sunday's game with Liverpool is a more pressing matter, yet a fine 
hat-trick from Roberto Soldado ensures that Tottenham go into that crucial 
match with a striker oozing confidence.

Soldado, who had scored only three goals from open play this season before 
this match, was deadly. The Spaniard opened the scoring in the first half with 
a deft header before clinically slotting in a second after a precise ball from 
Erik Lamela, who Villas-Boas insisted would not be allowed to leave on loan 
this winter.

Ewerton scored from a corner for Anzhi before Soldado added his third from the 
penalty spot after the young full-back Ryan Fredericks was felled in the area, 
with Villas-Boas claiming the display would be a "major boost" for the striker.

"It was extremely important for him to get back to scoring," said Villas-Boas. 
"I'm extremely happy for him. He's been waiting for a moment like this and it 
finally happened tonight. It will be major boost for a player who has been very 
professional and deserves respect.

"I don't think he lost his confidence but, as a striker, you have to persist 
and persist; finishing off the situations you are given and that final touch 
hasn't been there for him recently. It will be a great boost of confidence for 
him."

Anzhi, despite having already secured qualification from Group K before this 
game, are bottom of the Russian Premier League and without a win in 19 matches. 
Europe has provided Gadzhi Gadzhiev's side with some welcome relief this season 
after their billionaire owner, Suleyman Kerimov, drastically cut the club's 
spending in August.

But it has been a miserable domestic campaign for the Russians ever since. 
Spurs, who made seven changes to the team that won at Sunderland on Saturday, 
did not wait long to punish their opponents.

After seven minutes Soldado got the faintest of touches with his head to guide 
Gylfi Sigurdsson's fine, curling cross on to Evgeni Pomazan's left-hand post 
and in following a free-kick won by Andros Townsend on the left edge of the 
penalty area.

Less than 10 minutes had passed before Villas-Boas's side had doubled their 
lead. Lamela, on the right flank, received the ball 30 yards from goal and 
slipped in Soldado with a precisely-weighted pass. The striker needed just one 
touch before firing low across the goalkeeper.

Anzhi reduced the lead one minute before the interval, Ewerton prodding in 
from a Nikita Burmistrov corner, yet there was to be no comeback. Danny Rose, 
making his first appearance at left-back after a three-month absence, was 
replaced for the second half by the youngster Fredericks, who provided a fresh 
impetus.

He played a key role in Tottenham's third, yet it was Lewis Holtby who put the 
gloss on the move, controlling expertly inside the area after a deft chip from 
Townsend and steering the ball with remarkable poise into the far corner.

Soldado got his hat-trick when Fredericks was brought down in the area by 
Jucilei, firing his penalty low into the side netting. Villas-Boas added: "It 
was difficult conditions for both teams, [already] qualified first and second, 
so that's what pleased me most: the professionalism and dedication of the 
players."
 