
André Villas-Boas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andre-villas-boas> is 
hopeful that Tottenham Hotspur will not have to attempt to subdue Luis Suárez 
with a makeshift defence when Liverpool visit White Hart Lane on Sunday as the 
centre-back Vlad Chiriches is recovering from knee damage more quickly than 
expected.

The Romanian missed last weekend's 2-1 win at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/07/sunderland-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
 after suffering "a heavy knock" to the same knee on which he was operated 
beforejoining Spurs last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/25/vlad-chiriches-tottenham-hotspur>
 and, with Younès Kaboul and Jan Vertonghen already sidelined, the club were 
forced to deploy Etienne Capoue alongside Michael Dawson in central defence on 
Wearside.

Spurs are not overly concerned about Chiriches missing Thursday's Europa 
League tie againstAnzhi Makhachkala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anzhi-makhachkala>, since they have 
already secured first place in their group, but the prospect of confronting the 
Premier League's top scorer on Sunday without a pair of specialist centre-backs 
is not one Villas-Boas relishes.

In an effort to ensure Chiriches is ready in time, the club have used the same 
platelet-rich plasma (PRP) technique – also known as 'blood-spinning' – that 
they have previously used on Gareth Bale and Jermain Defoe – and plan to use on 
Vertonghen – and the manager says the results are encouraging. "There's a good 
possibility Vlad will be available for the game againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>," said Villas-Boas.

"He took a heavy knock to the knee, so it's swollen up quite lot. We've 
drained some blood from his knee, which was quite scary because there could 
have been some damage to the knee that was operated on before. We've used some 
PRP treatment and it has gone down."

Tottenham currently lie three points behind Liverpool in the league and 
Villas-Boas believes that victory on Sunday would banish any lingering gloom 
around White Hart Lane and prove that his revamped side is making good 
progress, despite the criticism he has endured.

"We have this wonderful situation against Liverpool where, if we win, we go 
level on points with a team that started so brilliantly in the league. You have 
a comparison there: from everything we've gone through to be level on points 
with a team who have been so magnificent shows we are not far off. It was this 
fixture we lost against Everton last season, so to be four points better off 
than last season would be a good start for us."

The match against Anzhi is expected to be relatively low key, with neither 
team needing any points from the game and the Russians fulfilling their last 
competitive fixture before a two-month winter break. Villas-Boas will rest the 
majority of the players he intends to start against Liverpool while 
reintroducing the left-back Danny Rose after more than three months out 
injured. The midfielder Christian Eriksen is also set to return after a 
month-long absence, while youngsters Ryan Fredericks, Shaquile Coulthirst and 
Laste Dombaxe are also in the squad.

Spurs (probable): Friedel; Naughton, Dawson, Capoué, Rose; Sandro, Fredericks; 
Sigurdsson, Eriksen, Lamela; Soldado.
 