
What defines a woman? Over the past few weeks the defining feature has been 
the new celebrity in town, a source of fascination todeluded politicians 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-19319240> and soi-disant feminists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/02/naomi-wolf-women-orgasm-neural-wiring>
 alike: the vagina, a magical creature that can distinguish between consensual 
sex and rape and, according to Naomi Wolf's nowmuch- 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2012/09/10/120910crbo_books_levy>
mocked 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2012/sep/27/pride-and-prejudice/?pagination=false 
book> book 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/laurie-penny/2012/09/problem-naomi-wolfs-vagina>
, can hear when it is being insulted and will rebel in kind, turning the 
carrier person into "a bitch". This is the problem with essentialism: no matter 
how varied its uses, the ultimate point is always the same and always reductive.

But femaleness doesn't stop at the vagina. No, no, no! Many things happen via 
the magical vagina and it is one of these in particular that certain US 
politicians see as defining a woman. No, not cystitis, or vajazzling, although 
I'd love to hear Mitt Romney's thoughts on those pressing issues. No, it is 
motherhood.

This was most obvious at the Republican and Democrat national conventions, in 
which the current and aspiring first ladies did the traditional schtick of 
attempting to appeal to women voters by telling Americans what great husbands 
they have. Whether being even a halfway decent president is in any way 
connected with being a great husband is a question I reckon Hillary Clinton and 
the late Jackie Kennedy Onassis could answer with more authority than me but 
that was not the point these women were hammering home. Rather, it was their 
role as mothers.

Ann Romney announced at the beginning of her sappy speech 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0NraMG2zImE> that she would be talking "not 
about politics, not about party" – which raised the question why she was 
talking at the RNC at all – "but love … that love so deep only a mother can 
fathom it". It is mothers, according to Romney, "who really hold this country 
together" and while she was open-minded enough to include "single, married, 
widowed" in the varieties, the ultimate flavour was still the same: Mom. "It's 
the moms who always have to work a little harder to make it right."

Michelle Obama also played the mom card in her otherwise perfectly judged 
speech <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZTPdKUA9Ipg>, saying "at the end of the 
day, my most important role is still 'mom-in-chief'". Writer Tami Winfrey Harris
wrote 
<http://www.clutchmagonline.com/2012/09/a-black-mom-in-chief-is-revolutionary-what-white-feminist-get-wrong-about-michelle-obama/>
 recently in response to the disapproval Obama received for this, saying that 
critics are missing the point here: Obama is overturning old stereotypes about 
black women by presenting herself as "nurturing, beautiful and stylish as well 
as whip smart, athletic and strong". But in this instance, the line between 
"overturning racial stereotypes" and "kowtowing to a gender status quo" seems 
an awfully fine one.

The Republicans have a problem with women, on various levels. They have a 
problem with getting women votes; Obama currently has a12-point advantage 
<http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/09/14/poll-obama-holds-narrow-edge-over-romney/>
 over Romney among women anda poll 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-11/obama-tops-romney-in-poll-with-2-1-backing-from-single-women.html>
 in July said twice as many single women favour Obama over Romney. The 
Democrats, encouraged by this and by the Republican's move to the intractable 
right in regards to birth control, have beentalking  
<http://www.salon.com/2012/09/05/dems_to_ladies_you_are_important/>about 
abortion and contraception with increasing boldness.

The Republicans, by contrast, have become hysterically conservative and 
retrograde about birth control and abortion. Simultaneously, they venerate the 
concept of motherhood yet don't want to deal with the messy realities of it, 
which is why they canclaim 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2012/09/07/1129098/-Mitt-Romney-s-women-s-ambassador-says-birth-control-is-off-message>
 that birth control is not an economic issue when it clearly is precisely that.

Paul Ryan can wax sentimental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/18/paul-ryan-mother-medicare-florida>
 about his dear mother while simultaneously proposingcuts 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/08/13/how-would-a-vice-president-paul-ryan-affect-women.html>
 to women's healthcare,cuts <http://www.cbpp.org/cms/index.cfm?fa=view&id=3717> 
to what was once known as the food stamp programme by $133.5bn (£82bn) and 
removing exemptions in abortions, even for rape and incest victims. This is 
because the mothers they want to think about are rich mothers. (They also like 
thin ones: when Romney wasasked 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/compost/post/romney-hearts-snooki-among-other-interview-highlights/2012/09/14/ed11e80c-fe8e-11e1-8adc-499661afe377_blog.html>
 recently who his favourite reality TV star was he replied that it is Snooki 
from Jersey Shore, who recently had a baby: "Look how thin she's gotten! She's 
lost weight," he replied, like a magazine that applauds women who lose the 
"baby weight".) Thus, when Ann Romney wasaccused 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/election-2012/post/ann-romney-responds-to-democratic-pundit-saying-she-never-worked-a-day-in-her-life/2012/04/12/gIQApstpBT_blog.html>
 back in April of not being representative of most American women due to her 
$250m bank account, the Romney campaign insisted that her status as a mother 
somehow outweighed her financial situation, meaning she really is an 
everywoman, such is the mythical power of motherhood.

Now, I'd like to state for the record that I love mothers. Hell, I even have 
one myself. But it should surely go without saying that, just as not all 
parents are women, not all women are mothers. This somewhat undermines the idea 
that emphasising Obama and Romney's maternal roles makes them – and by 
extension, their husbands – universally relatable. A woman's role as a mother 
is of undoubtedly central importance within her home but, at the risk of 
undermining this Norman Rockwell mentality inUS politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics>, it's not really all that 
relevant to those outside it.

Moreover, this conflation of women and mothers and valuing motherhood itself 
over women plays into the mentality of anti-choice advocates who believe that 
the woman herself doesn't matter: it's the baby who is important here, who 
defines her – she's just the carrier pod. Contrary to what too many politicians 
think, not all mothers are the same and not all women are mothers. Just as the 
vagina doth not make the woman, nor does the uterus.
 