
It’s time to talk of shadowy things and dark secrets, of hidden corners and 
basement courtyards; the sun may be out on the rest of the world, but down here 
it’s all cast in shade.

I like more and more to garden in these places. I like the challenges that 
come with those that thrive in such adverse conditions, and there are plenty: 
woodland species that make the most of what little sunlight hits the leaf 
litter; ferns that like dripping cave mouths and cliff faces cast in gloom; and 
small shrubs that eke out a living under bigger things, such as butcher’s broom 
(Ruscus aculeatus <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1734>) and 
fragrant sweet box (sarcoccoca <https://www.rhs.org.uk/Search?query=sweet+box>).

But what will grow in the tiniest of spaces, the thinnest of planting strips 
and the smallest of shaded balconies? As you are working largely with various 
greens, texture becomes very important in deep shade. For instance, you want to 
contrast the glossy with something feathery and soft, and don’t be afraid of 
going really dark. Black mondo (Ophiopogon planiscapus ‘Nigrescens’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/93120/Ophiopogon-planiscapus-Nigrescens/Details>
) has deep purple grass-like blades that work wonders withAthyrium filix-femina 
‘Frizelliae’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/92298/Athyrium-filix-femina-Frizelliae/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dtrue%26context%3Dl%253den%2526q%253d%252523all%2526sl%253dplantForm%26query%3DAthyrium%2Bfilix-femina%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
, a textured, mid-green lady fern that has thin fronds, eachpinna 
<http://education.seattlepi.com/pinna-botany-4628.html> (the divisions of the 
frond) shaped like a pearl, so that the whole leaf resembles a green necklace.

If you have crevices, crumbling walls or fractured concrete, try maidenhair 
spleenwort (Asplenium trichomanes 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/1731/Asplenium-trichomanes/Details>), with its 
glossy bright green oval pinnae and purplish black stems. It grows to 30cm high 
and about the same wide, but will thrive as a small plant in cracks half that 
size.

Ferns look best when you replicate their natural habitat, where they tend to 
pop out of places, so use them dotted about among other things. Add white 
bleeding heart (Lamprocapnos spectabilis ‘Alba’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=653>), mayflower (Anemonella 
thalictroides 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/1271/Anemonella-thalictroides/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fcontext%3Db%25253D60%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26form-mode%3Dfalse%26page%3D7%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
), with its clusters of anemone-like white flowers in early summer, or 
low-growing wild gingers (Asarum canadense 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asarum_canadense> or Asarum europaeum 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/1680/Asarum-europaeum/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dtrue%26context%3Dl%253den%2526q%253d%252523all%2526sl%253dplantForm%26query%3DAsarum%2Beuropaeum%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
), with round, shiny leaves that create a carpet in rich, moist soil.

Don’t go potty: follow these rules at the nursery | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/alys-fowler-dont-go-potty-rules-to-follow-at-nursery-garden-centre>
If you have more space, the mossy soft shield fern (Polystichum setiferum 
‘Plumosum Densum’ 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/polystichum-setiferum-plumosum-densum>) 
has wonderful, feathery, finely divided, light green fronds. Its unfurled ends 
as they emerge are brilliant silver and look good against glossy greens. I also 
like the maidenhair fernAdiantum aleuticum ‘Imbricatum’ 
<http://www.shadyplants.net/photo_6790576.html>; its wiry black stems have 
fronds that radiate out like spreading fingers.

Underplant these with dark-leaved violas – Viola riviniana Purpurea Group 
<http://www.bethchatto.co.uk/s-z/viola/viola-riviniana-purpurea-group.htm> or V.
 ‘Queen Charlotte’ 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/viola-odorata-queen-charlotte> – or set 
against the base of ivy, such asHedera helix ‘Green Ripple’ 
<https://www.burncoose.co.uk/site/plants.cfm?pl_id=2120>, or the self-clinging 
climbing hydgrangeaPileostegia viburnoides 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/13019/Pileostegia-viburnoides/Details>.

For these plants to thrive, they need to be well cared for. Organic matter is 
the answer: well-rotted compost, composted bark, spent mushroom compost or leaf 
mould – the more the merrier. Organic matter has great water-holding capacity; 
like a natural sponge, it can soak up masses and release it as the plant 
requires. There’s no need to dig it in, just mulch as often as you can.
 