
Some 13 years have passed since the New York chef Anthony Bourdain laid bare 
his sweaty, savage, drug-addled life in the brilliant memoir,Kitchen 
Confidential <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2000/aug/13/foodanddrink1>
. All manner of unsettling practices were divulged, from serving nasty old fish 
on Mondays, to staff ritually spraying blood from their war wounds all 
over each other. In one brigade, they marked the start of evening service 
by pouring brandy on the stove to recreate the napalm blast from the 
film Apocalypse Now. Bourdain wrote about cooking as though he were reporting 
from the front line.

A new book by Imogen Edwards-Jones, called Restaurant Babylon 
<http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/editions/restaurant-babylon/9781448111374>, 
sets out to reveal a similarly seedy underbelly of London's current fine dining 
scene. For this, the eighth of her Babylon series (Hotel and Fashion were both 
adapted for television), she has interviewed a number of anonymous industry 
insiders. The high point, she tells me, was when six chefs chewed the fat 
around her kitchen table one evening. As the wine flowed, the chefs grew 
increasingly competitive and their anecdotes got juicier and juicier. The many 
lurid stories in her book are true, says Edwards-Jones, but they are 
shoe-horned into 24 hours in the life of one fictional restaurateur, giving a 
"hyperbolic view of everything".

The gist of the book is that, other than improved working hours, little has 
changed since the Kitchen Confidential days. Bad-boy chefs: tick. Bullying: 
tick. Sex in cupboards: tick. Drink and drugs: tick and tick. Our narrator 
awakes, still dressed after passing out the night before, with a strange blonde 
in his bed. The coke-head chef of his one-Michelin-starred restaurant is 
grotesque in every way, from his appalling personal hygiene to his penchant for 
brief, hassle-free extramarital flings with drunken women. A young commis chef 
arrives at work off his face. In the telling, Edwards-Jones reveals such 
unsavoury kitchen practices such as "lick and stick", where chefs use saliva 
to adhere delicate ingredients to the plate.

But doesn't this all sound like the stuff of reminiscence rather than current 
reality? Surely the lives of the earnest, post-Gordon Ramsay generation would 
make far less salacious copy; heads down, focusing on upping their games, 
building their brands and getting some beauty sleep before their appearance on 
Saturday Kitchen? Even the book's narrator says the "metro chefs" coming 
through now are softer and gentler.

Take Jackson Boxer, the director of Brunswick House 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/14/brunswick-house-cafe-london-review>
 andRita's Bar and Dining 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/16/jay-rayner-ritas-dalston-london>
, a twentysomething hipster with a English Lit degree from Cambridge and 
cooking written into his DNA (his grandmother is the acclaimed food writer
Arabella Boxer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/aug/10/arabella-boxer-english-food-review>
). "Restaurant work at all levels is hard," he says. "However, everywhere I've 
worked, there's always been a strong sense that the proprietors take seriously 
their duty of care towards their employees." He reckons the mythology of 
restaurant excess is an external perception, although one, it would appear from 
Restaurant Babylon, that some chefs are happy to perpetuate.

Chef-to-watch Isaac McHale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/mar/17/why-were-watching-isaac-mchale>, 
33, whose new eatery theClove Club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/06/clove-club-london-restaurant-review>
 in Shoreditch Town Hall was one of London's most anticipated openings this 
year, takes a similar tone. It's his day off and he sounds knackered. 
"In restaurants I've worked," he yawns, "like the Ledbury and Tom Aikens, 
people would just finish their shift and go home, because they were back in six 
hours. Everyone has a professional attitude." Wait: wasn't Aikensalleged to 
have once "branded" a teenage junior chef with a hot palette knife 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/1999/dec/16/audreygillan>? "There's high 
tension," allows McHale.

He and his partners threw an after-after party for the World's 50 Best 
Restaurant awards this year. The international gastronomic creme de la creme in 
one room? In high spirits? Surely there was gossip? "People drank, danced, ate 
some buns and wood-pigeon sausages," he sighs. "There were no stories of 
intrigue or drug taking that I'm not telling you." Either McHale is the soul of 
discretion or this truly was an innocuous gaggle of hard-workers letting 
their hair down.

The cooking arena has in recent years been elevated from a service job to a 
revered (fetishised, even) vocation – so while there is greater competition and 
pressure, kitchens also tend to be more serious workplaces. One restaurant 
publicist tells me that when she was doing service shifts in the early 90s, 
"everybody was on drugs". Many legendary tales of candle burning hail from that 
era: chefs curling up on piles of bin bags at work after a heavy night, and sex 
all over the shop. Allegra McEvedy, whosewild early cheffing years 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2006/oct/22/foodanddrink.features1> saw 
her fired from the Groucho Club and the River Cafe, says that when she 
originally told her school friends that she wanted to train as a cook, "in 
their eyes I may as well have been taking up plumbing". It was just the dawn of 
the UK's culinary awakening, withMarco Pierre White 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/dec/10/marco-pierre-white-questions>
 as its precocious poster boy, and the stakes have been continuously upped ever 
since.
 The new school (oven gloves optional): Isaac McHale of the Clove Club. 
Photograph: Katherine Rose 
But despite today's more studious culture, the fact remains that it is easy to 
pick up a drink problem working in a restaurant. Temptation is everywhere and 
there is little chance of drifting straight off to sleep after a frenetic 
evening's performance. With so many young, outgoing, transient staff around, 
too, that unwinding beverage can easily escalate. One maître d' told me that 
when he worked at one of those extremely swanky West End establishments that 
ooze old money and timeless sophistication, the staff partied like crazy, and 
were frequently caught on the restaurant's CCTV getting up to no good.

A decade since Ramsay's head chef David Dempsey fell to his death after taking 
alcohol and cocaine <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/3132338.stm>, 
the benevolent charityHospitality Action <http://www.hospitalityaction.org.uk/> 
still sees a healthy take up of workers seeking advice on dealing with 
alcoholism, drugs, bullying, stress and debt. The charity sends recovering 
alcoholics, such as Michael Quinn, whowent from head chef at the Ritz to a 
Salvation Army hostel 
<http://tvnz.co.nz/national-news/chef-tackles-hospitality-alcoholism-3696947>, 
to colleges to warn 11,000 students a year of the risks. "It's a society issue, 
not just this industry," chief executive Penny Moore points out, "but the 
message from us is positive. The issues are being addressed and things have 
changed dramatically."

When Thomas Blythe, who was general manager at St John 
<https://www.stjohngroup.uk.com/> for 12 years and will shortly launch the 
Merchant's Tavern 
<http://www.catererandhotelkeeper.co.uk/articles/21/6/2013/348944/angela-hartnett-and-neil-borthwick-set-to-open-merchant-s-tavern-in-shoreditch.htm>
 in Shoreditch with Angela Hartnett, arrived in London as a 17-year-old chef, 
80-hour weeks were the norm. Today, he says, 48-hour contracts prevail, with a 
clause that managers can ask staff to work longer when required, but that staff 
can, in theory, refuse. He also says that the industry is now much more 
enlightened regarding sexism and bullying. The fact that most restaurants have 
to fight to retain good staff these days helps. However, horror stories still 
surface.

One manager told me about her time at what is known as the worst London 
fine-dining restaurant to work in. The famous chef patron there believes that 
the only way to get the staff to perform is to put the fear of God into them. 
He exhausts his front-of-house staff by drinking late with customers, and then 
charges in the next morning, hungover with duvet folds imprinted on his face, 
and insults them for minor matters such as leaving water in an ice bucket 
overnight. If front-of-house staff request the lunch menu before 11.45am, he'll 
tell them to "fuck off" out of his kitchen. They see nothing of the service 
charge.

Thankfully, reigns of terror such as this are now considered rather old 
school, and are less common than in the past, when sometimes not even 
the customers were safe. In the 1980s,Nico Ladenis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nico_Ladenis> famously decreed that no customer 
was allowed to ask for salt, different lighting or a second gin and tonic in 
his restaurants. And in 1998, Ramsay made headlines ejecting the critic AA Gill 
and his dining companion, Joan Collins, from his restaurant after Gill had 
belittled him in print. But what chance of level-headedness did Ramsay stand 
when one of his early bollockings from mentor Marco Pierre Whitereduced him to 
tears 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1525100/How-I-reduced-Ramsay-to-a-blubbering-wreck.html>
? (When I dined with Ramsay and White in the late 90s, shortly after the Gill 
incident, Ramsay was a pussycat in his former mentor's presence.)

These days, of course, ugly displays of temper are most likely to become 
public on the internet. Take theshocking spat that erupted late last year after 
a food blogger gave Hibiscus three out of five in an online review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/nov/08/top-chefs-unite-against-blogger-s-review>
. Claude Bosi, the two-starred restaurant's chef, bizarrely tracked him down on 
Twitter to call him "a cunt". Then two more top chefs – Tom Kerridge and 
Sat Bains – rounded on the blogger, encouraging Bosi to "smash him in" and 
calling him a c#nt and c**t respectively, along with so many other vile things 
that the blogger closed his Twitter account. Critics may still have the power 
to make or break, but web reviews can't half stir up a chef's bile.

Running a great restaurant will always be stressful, but these unpleasant 
tales call to mind an amusing quote from one of Edwards-Jones's sources, which 
appears in her book: "It's ridiculous. All the shouting and screaming and 
slapping and hauling around great sides of beef and all we are really doing is 
making people's tea. It's just a bit of tea."

Restaurant Babylon by Imogen Edwards-Jones and Anonymous is published by 
Bantam Press at £14.99
 