
Western air forces must be willing to confront Russian military jets over the 
skies ofSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> to enforce a no-fly 
zone and protect the citizens of eastern Aleppo from a bombardment akin to the 
attack on Guernica during the Spanish civil war, UK MPs will be told by a 
former cabinet minister in an emergency three-hour Commons debate on Tuesday.

The intervention by Andrew Mitchell, the former international development 
secretary, and the granting of the debate itself, will force the UK’s Foreign 
Office to set out how it intends to respond afterRussia’s veto of a UN 
resolution calling for a ceasefire in eastern Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/russia-vetoes-un-resolution-syria-bombing-aleppo>
. The west has been criticised for lacking any leverage over Russia in Syria.


Britain has criticised Russia but set out no clear plan on how to respond to 
the growing threat posed by Moscow not just in the Middle East, but across 
easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Mitchell argues 
the whole post-cold war international diplomatic architecture is being torn 
down by Russian actions.

Russian jets resumed heavy bombing of rebel-held eastern Aleppo on Tuesday 
after several days of relative calm. Rebel officials and the Syrian Observatory 
for Human Rights monitoring group reported casualties from the airstrikes but 
gave no immediate toll.

Mitchell, advised by former British military officials and supported by the 
former CIA director David Petraeus,has been arguing for a no-fly zone for many 
months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/12/uk-should-be-prepared-enforce-syria-no-fly-zone-russian-veto-un-isis-assad>
. In recent weeks some of Mitchell’s advisers have developed this proposal into 
a call to track Russian jets from UK warships off the coast of Syria, and for a 
complete no-fly zone for Syrian helicopters over civilian areas. It has been 
argued that Syrian helicopters are doing all the damage with chemical, napalm 
and high explosive barrel bombs. One proposal has been to bomb air runways.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Mitchell said: “What we are saying 
is very clear. No one wants to see a firefight withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, no one wants to shoot down a 
Russian plane.

“But what we do say is that the international community has an avowed 
responsibility to protect and that protection must be exerted. If that means 
confronting Russian air power defensively, on behalf of the innocent people on 
the ground who we are trying to protect, then we should do that.”

Mitchell added that “you would certainly use Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> aircraft” to enforce the no-fly zone. 
“It’s not a declaration of war against Russia but it is an absolute declaration 
that we will seek to protect the innocent victims of these war crimes.”

Vladimir Putin’s support for the Syrian leader, Bashar al-Assad, has led to 
mounting tension between the west and Moscow. In the latest deterioration,the 
Kremlin on Tuesday said Putin will not visit Paris next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/vladimir-putin-declines-french-offer-of-syria-only-talks-in-paris>
 after declining to meet François Hollande solely for talks on Syria.

Vladimir Putin postpones Paris talks on Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/vladimir-putin-declines-french-offer-of-syria-only-talks-in-paris>
Asked whether British aircraft would be involved in his plan for a no-fly 
zone, Mitchell said: “I think that Britain should explore with its allies how 
it would enforce a no-fly zone. It is clearly not something we can do on our 
own, but as part of a coalition of the willing to confront this appalling 
catastrophe we should certainly be willing to explore that and implement it if 
we are able to do so. We are witnessing events which match the behaviour of the 
Nazi regime in Guernica in Spain.”


The Commons Speaker granted Tuesday’s unusual three-hour emergency debate to 
give MPs their first chance to discuss the case for a no-fly zone and for fresh 
punitive measures against Russia, including tougher economic sanctions and 
action in the international criminal courts.


The White House, accused of allowing a vacuum to develop in Syria, held 
internal talks on the crisis last week, but emerged with no clear fresh 
proposals after the breakdown of the bilateral diplomatic track between the US 
and Russia largely caused by theRussian attack on a UN humanitarian convoy 
outside Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
 and the sheer scale of the aerial bombardment of the city.

France responded to the vacuum by pressing a UN security council resolution at 
the weekend calling for a ceasefire, but the initiative only led toa Russian 
veto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/russia-vetoes-un-resolution-syria-bombing-aleppo>
 and further condemnation of Russia by the west.

Last week the UN special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, pleaded with 
Russia to relent and said eastern Aleppo was on track to be destroyed by the 
end of the year. He offered personally to accompany al-Nusra rebels – linked to 
al-Qaida – from the city to a place of safety. He said their presence provided 
Russia with an alibi to destroy the city.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, has called for Russia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/syria-russia-war-crimes-inquiry-john-kerry>
to face war crimes charges, but neither Russia nor Syria are signatories to the 
international criminal court.

The outgoing UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, admitted to UN failings in 
Syria, saying on Monday: “Of course we should have started much earlier; we 
should have prevented Srebrenica, we should have prevented the Rwandan 
genocide. In Aleppo, we’re doing our utmost efforts. The future of one person, 
like President Assad, should not block this process.”

In the US presidential debate on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
, the Republican candidate, Donald Trump, said Aleppo had in effect already 
fallen to Assad, and the US should make common cause with Russia and Assad to 
defeat Islamic State. He rejected a no-fly zone.

Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate, said she supported a no-fly zone 
and sending extra arms to the Kurdish rebels fighting to defeat Isis in its 
Syrian stronghold of Raqqa.

Some western analysts argue that the bulk of the Syrian rebellion is now led 
by jihadis, and the west no longer has a clear ally in the civil war, requiring 
the west to focus on the defeat of Isis in Syria and in Mosul, Iraq’s second 
largest city.
 