
Music is so much a part of almost all our lives that it seems peculiar to stop 
and ask what it might be for. It just appears straightforwardly to benefit us 
in ways that are too diverse and ineffable to start to take apart; this might 
be one arena where we keep the dread hand of the theorists away. Musicians 
themselves have tended to reinforce such an approach, rarely venturing to 
supply an additional prose commentary around what their chords are already 
communicating.

Music opens up channels of feeling dammed by habit, excessive individualism or 
the demands of daily life

 Yet a clearer handle on the theoretical role of music may at times enhance 
rather than impoverish our capacity to appreciate music. Knowing what music 
does for us can give us a sharper sense of which of its varieties we might be 
in particular need of, why and when.

 One musician who stands out in the cultural landscape for his profound 
engagement with the theory as well as practice of music isPeter Gabriel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/22/peter-gabriel-review> – and what 
seems especially striking are his repeated pronouncements that music should, to 
quote his distinctive formulation, provide us with “an emotional toolbox” to 
which we can turn at different moments of our lives, locating songs to recover, 
guide and sublimate our feelings.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfQ3wpjdYMqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfQ3wpjdYMqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfQ3wpjdYMqk&media=>
 Listen to I Grieve by Peter Gabriel. 
 For example, in explaining the origins of I Grieve (a song which appears on 
his albumUp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/sep/20/popandrock.artsfeatures>), 
Gabriel remarked that he had been driven by a wish to create a song that would 
help people with the mourning process. The song has gone on to become a 
standard at many funeral services, a part of our informal collective secular 
liturgy. The reason is that the song both knows how to release our sadness and 
yet also channels and contains it. It creates perfect conditions for a 
catharsis. As psychologists will explain, the grieving process tends to be 
beset by two dangers: that it cannot begin, or that it will not stop. In this 
context, I Grieve performs a double manoeuvre for us. It starts with what 
sounds pure lamentation. The tone is utterly dejected. The loved one has only 
just breathed their last:

There’s nothing yet has really sunk in 

Looks like it always did 

This flesh and bone

But after several of these tragic verses, there is a shift, subtle and then 
ever more insistent, towards a note of cautious redemption. Gabriel begins an 
incantatory repetition of the lines:

Life carries on and on and on and on 

Life carries on and on and on

We are urged to accept the constant dispersal and redistribution of energy 
across the planet.

In all the dogs and cats 

In the flies and rats 

In the rot and the rust 

In the ashes and the dust

We know all this, of course, at a theoretical level. But it is quite a 
different thing for music to remind us of these lessons in its distinctive 
emotional idiom. The philosopher Hegel argued that music is so necessary 
because it rehearses in the language of the body concepts and truths we are in 
danger of losing touch with when they reach us only through our rational 
faculties. Music is, he said, “the sensuous presentation of the crucial ideas”. 
We may – for example – know in theory that keeping going is important, but it 
can take a song like Don’t Give Up (fromGabriel’s So 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/22/peter-gabriel-review>) to turn a 
cliche into an effective call for redemption.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuiCRZLr9oRw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuiCRZLr9oRw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuiCRZLr9oRw&media=>
 Listen to Don’t Give Up by Peter Gabriel and Kate Bush. 
 At another point, when speaking of his intentions behind Sledgehammer, Peter 
Gabriel approvingly quotesNietzsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/05/my-hero-nietzsche-geoff-dyer>’s 
line that art is a mechanism which takes “an icepick to the heart”. In other 
words, there is a role for music in opening up channels of feeling that have 
become dammed by habit, caution, excessive individualism, or the demands of 
daily life.

Without music, life would be a mistake
Nietzsche 
In his book The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music (1872), Nietzsche 
described two opposing forces at work in our lives. The first is the pull of 
the Apollonian ideal, named after Apollo, the god of the sun, order, light, and 
knowledge. The other, opposing force he termed the Dionysian, after the Greek 
god of wine, chaos, irrationality and freedom, Dionysus. Nietzsche believed 
that both forces were highly necessary in individual and collective life: we 
need to be thoughtful and sober, yet open to the instinctive and the irrational 
– and it is by combining these two ideals that we stumble towards maturity. 
This is why music and dance have such importance for Nietzsche (“Without music, 
life would be a mistake”); they provide us with a setting in which the 
neglected parts of our personalities can be rediscovered and reconciled. The 
‘shiver down the spine’ we feel at points in music are encounters with our 
suppressed longings for forgiveness, reconciliation and harmony – returning to 
us with an alienated majesty.


 The great musicians – and Gabriel is among the very best – stock our 
emotional toolboxes with what we most need to endure life’s journey. Though 
they don’t always say it themselves, they are in the very best sense the 
therapists of our souls.

 * Alain de Botton is in conversation with Peter Gabriel on 1 March at The 
School of Life at the Emmanuel Centre, London <http://theschooloflife.com>.
 