Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Q849MaUPU8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Q849MaUPU8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9Q849MaUPU8&media=>
 Queen isn't usually the first port of call when it comes to debating bankers' 
bonuses 
Not even BBC Political Editor Nick Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nickrobinson> is immune from 
ringtone-induced embarrassment.

Robinson was left somewhat redfaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/16/bbc-nick-robinson-daily-politics-queen-fat-bottomed-girls>
 on BBC2's Daily Politics as his iPad began playing Queen's Fat Bottomed Girls 
midway through a heated debate about bankers' bonuses.

The untimely ringtone is a social embarrassment we've all encountered at one 
time or another - especially if you're forgetful when it comes to putting your 
phone on silent. Has your phone gone off at a really awkward moment? Or were 
you one of those people who hadCrazy Frog 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k85mRPqvMbE> as a ringtone?

Here are some of the best stories we've received so far:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3816777> silvernose  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3816777> 16 January 2014 1:22pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/30872567>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Many, many years ago I went to the Beltane in Edinburgh, which is a pagan 
festival that back in those days wasn't the organised affair it is now and 
attracted lots of crusties, pagans, hippies and just a few curious "normals" 
like us.

It was very noisy and busy. 

I was with my friend, who worked in IT and was the only person in the world I 
knew who had a mobile phone. It was a little smaller than a house brick and you 
had to pull up the antenna when you answered it. Back then, only yuppies on 
television had mobile phones. It was the ultimate symbol of capitalism and 
materialism.

My friend and I were standing on a rock in the middle of a large crowd to 
watch the Green Man symbolically kill Winter, or something like that. All of a 
sudden the drums fell silent. It seemed like a sacred moment in the ritual.

And of course that's when his phone rang, and as he, elevated on this rock in 
the middle of the crowd, sheepishly pulled it out of his jacket pocket, 
hundreds of bearded, painted, pierced faces - including the Green Man - all 
turned round to look at us with this outraged you're-going-in-the-wicker-man 
expression on their faces.

I edged away from him and melted into the crowd.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11893584> Chris Harrison  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11893584> 16 January 2014 1:51pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/30873940>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I was at a funeral and the speaker was my cousin (it was his Fathers funeral). 
I had just recently used the 'Text to Voice' facility to read out texts.....

In the middle of his oration a girlfriend sent me a text (it was not rude but 
was utterly inappropriate for a funeral)....and I had forgotten to turn the 
phone off.

The problem was made worse because I could not turn the phone off once it 
started reading out the bloody text......the whole congregation heard 
everything and my cousin actually had to stop speaking.....I was amazed at how 
flipping loud it was...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1401118> angelene  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1401118> 16 January 2014 4:00pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/30879000>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Totally silent dentist's waiting room. The only other guy in the room's phone 
goes off:

I'M SEXY AND I KNOW IT

Leaving me to judge on whether he actually was (he wasn't).

Also, the James Bond theme in the middle of Mass was very very funny, 
especially when it happened more than once...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3138331> WayneFarry  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3138331> 16 January 2014 4:02pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/30879045>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Was in the middle of a massively important group presentation in college. 

My phone was at the back of the lecture hall in my bag and I thought, on 
silent. Sadly not. Halfway through the presentation, which was going 
exceptionally, even unusually well, my phone rang, and rang and rang. Not only 
was it not on silent, it seemed louder than usual as Kid Cudi's stoner anthem 
Cudderisback echoed through the surprised and full lecture hall.

Knowing little better, I ran to the back of the room, picked up the bag, ran 
further and threw it out of the lecture room door to the amusement of my fellow 
students and those sitting in the hallway outside.

Full marks were not received.

Share your thoughts in the thread below.Â  
<http://www.guprod.gnl/media/2014/jan/16/what-are-your-awkward-ringtone-moments-nick-robinson-queen#start-of-comments>
 