
The latest unlikely but strangely heartwarming new friendship is that between 
Alain de Botton and Harry Styles, AKA him off of One Direction. This week Alain
tweeted <https://twitter.com/alaindebotton/status/296868580564295681> a picture 
of the pair grinning happily with Jemima Khan hanging from their necks. "We 
talk Plato, Aristotle, love and beauty," he reported.

The reaction of most of us to this news will have been surprise and, probably, 
a certain unattractive sniggering. We are accustomed to thinking of him as an 
intellectual lightweight, a Twitter-addicted, sex-obsessed celebrity socialite 
quite incapable of holding his end up in a conversation about philosophy with 
Harry Styles. We must revise those prejudices.

The two men do have contrasting philosophical styles. Here's Alain on beauty: 
"A dominant impulse on encountering beauty is to wish to hold on to it, to 
possess it and give it weight in one's life. There is an urge to say, 'I was 
here, I saw this and it mattered to me.'"

Harry's take is more riddling and paradoxical: "The way that you flip your 
hair gets me overwhelmed, [...] You don't know,/ Oh oh,/ You don't know you're 
beautiful,/ Oh oh,/ That's what makes you beautiful."

I suspect Styles is the Aristotelean 
<http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/history/aristotle.html> and De Botton the 
Platonist <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato/> in this pairing. Plato 
believed that our perceptions of the phenomenal world are but imperfect 
impressions of unattainable ideal forms. Aristotle was a practical man: he was 
interested in the world as it is. Plato hated demagoguery and mistrusted 
rhetoric; Aristotle rejoiced in the human power to persuade.
 Plato (left) and Aristotle: which is your favourite member of One Direction, 
that is, ancient Greek philosopher? Photograph: Alamy/Composite 
One Direction working a big crowd is definitely on the Aristotelian end of 
things. Could we call Harry's pop-star strut "peripatetic"? We could. Alain, 
like Plato, is more sitty-and-thinky. If you had to nominate one of the two to 
make likeAristotle and dissect an octopus 
<http://about-anatomy.net/aristotle.html>, Styles would definitely be your man.

But other questions arise. Is Harry's refulgent hairdo the Platonic ideal form 
of which Alain's is but a flickering shadow on a cave wall? And does all this 
make Jemima KhanHypatia 
<http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/history/Biographies/Hypatia.html> â€“ 
the fourth-century mathematician and philosopher so memorably essayed byRachel 
Weisz in 2009's Agora <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/129991/agora>? Stay 
tuned to find out.

A final thought, for now. "The more dignity is widely and freely available in 
a society," Alain was to be found reflecting on Twitter at one in the morning 
after their symposium, "the less people want to be famous."
 