
There is a piece of Kazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/08/kazakhstan-wild-apples-endangered-alys-fowler>
 that is seared into my memory. In 2014, I turned a corner there to a bit of 
the world that is perfectly gardened. We were looking for old stands of 
protected wild apples and as the hills became mountains, the landscape turned 
into a giant perennial border. Fat peonies with seed heads splitting forth, 
wild roses, echinops bobbing, foxtail lilies waving tall seedheads and a sea of
thalictrum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thalictrum> running from the sun into 
the shade of the forest. After a long hot summer the smell of fermenting apples 
gave everything a nostalgic air. Oh, to see this in full flower.

I’d sort of forgotten about thalictrum, or meadow rue, as they are commonly 
known, until that moment. Thalictrum are lovely: tall or short but always 
decidedly airy. They produce a fine spray of tiny flowers that often resemble 
pompoms, because the petals are either absent or fall off leaving a numerous 
showy stamens. Despite being commonly called a rue, thalictrum are in the 
buttercup family and so are pretty much bombproof when it comes to pests; slugs 
don’t touch them, making them useful in this year of the slug apocalypse. And 
they are good in shade. There are tall ones for the back of a border and much 
smaller ones for pockets of shade under trees and bushes. They are a useful, 
easy-going bunch.

Thalictrum fall broadly into two categories: those that flower now, and those 
that flower later on in summer. If grown happily, thalictrum will keep their 
flowers for about a month and have lovely sprays of seedhead afterwards. They 
do best in rich, slightly acidic soils. Mulch well with compost – and to keep 
powdery mildews at bay, make sure they don’t dry out or sit in areas with poor 
air circulation.

French meadow rue (Thalictrum aquilegifolium 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/gardening/plants/plant_finder/plant_pages/11323.shtml>) 
flowers in May and June and grows to 1m tall.T. aquilegifolium ‘Album’ is a 
refined pale form that almost glows in shady corners,‘Thundercloud’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/117489/Thalictrum-aquilegiifolium-Thundercloud/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Fsearch-results%3Fform-mode%3Dfalse%26query%3DThalictrum%2Bdelavayi%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252fsearch-results>
 has deep purple flowers, and‘Black Stockings’ 
<http://www.bluebellcottage.co.uk/plants/THA351-Thalictrum-Black-Stockings-Meadow-rue-Black-Stockings>
 is purple with dark purple stems. All these look good underplanted with 
spotted cranesbill (Geranium maculatum 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/7895/i-Geranium-maculatum-i/Details>). If they 
look messy later in the season, they can be shorn back for a new flush of 
leaves. Water them well after the cut. They are widely available from 
independent nurseries.

How to grow vegetables on a balcony | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/11/how-to-grow-vegetables-on-a-balcony-alys-fowler>
Not so readily available is Thalictrum tuberosum 
<http://www.gardenersworld.com/plants/thalictrum-tuberosum/5013.html>, an 
alpine variety growing to 40cm that can take sun as well as shade, making them 
good for spots that spend the morning basking and the afternoon in shade. It’s 
frothy, white and delightful. Buy it fromBluebell Cottage Gardens 
<http://www.bluebellcottage.co.uk>. For pots, try Kyushu meadow rue (T. 
kiusianum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thalictrum_kiusianum>), a slow-growing 
dwarf species with fine, almost fern-like foliage and purple-pink flowers from 
June to August. It grows to 30cm tall and is happiest in partial shade.

• Alys Fowler and gardening editor Jane Perrone talk about houseplants 
<http://growlondon.com/london/at-the-fair/talks-2016/> at Grow London 
<http://growlondon.com> from 2-3pm on 24 June.
 