
Who could forget the beginning of Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>’s sixth season, 
with Don and Megan Draper lying on a Hawaiian beach, far from the smokey, heavy 
atmosphere of their New York lives – andDon’s focused reading of Dante’s Inferno
 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2012/10/25/mad_men_s_don_draper_reading_the_inferno_why.html>
?

Literature has been an integral part of the AMC show since its inception. Its 
creator,Matthew Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/24/mad-men-matthew-weiner>, 
recentlyadmitted that he based many characters’ last names on the authors of 
books he had in his office 
<http://www.esquire.com/entertainment/tv/a33775/matthew-weiner-hearst-mad-men/>
. But books are present in the show in many ways; very often as subtle winks 
and nudges that explain a lot about the characters.

Billy Parrott has spotted more than a few. As a librarian at the New York 
Public Library <http://www.nypl.org/>, he can’t help but watch the show with 
his professional glasses on: “This is what librarians do on a daily basis. 
Every morning, on the subway on the way to work, I look to see what others are 
reading, and I think about what else I might suggest for them if they came up 
to me in the library and asked for a recommendation.” In 2010, he went back to 
season one and started compiling a list every book that appeared on Mad Men – 
first, on Twitter (hashtag:#MadMenReading 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=madmenreading>), and then on a blog, The Mad Men 
Reading List <http://www.nypl.org/blog/2012/02/27/mad-men-reading-list>, which 
later led to spin-offs such asSally Draper’s 
<http://www.nypl.org/blog/2011/02/14/sally-draper-reading-list> or Glen 
Bishop’s would-be reading lists 
<http://www.nypl.org/blog/2012/06/11/glen-bishop-reading-list>. Recently, he 
teamed up with AMC to createan official 25-book reading list for fans of the 
show 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0BxnQbyG8nvQYVE5hQlJXNXRPYW8/view?usp=sharing>.

Mad Men fans hit US museums to commemorate the show’s finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/04/mad-men-fans-hit-us-museums-to-commemorate-the-shows-finale>
“I really like it when they incorporate the text of the book into show,” 
Parrott says.In the season two opening, Draper appears reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/feb/11/mad-men-don-draper>
, and then proceeds to recite, Frank O’Hara’s Mayakovsky, from Meditations in 
an Emergency. It isperfect to illustrate both his identity crisis and the heady 
1960s era 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20140626-the-poet-of-the-mad-men-era>. The 
same was true of Dante’s journey to hell. The featured opening lines – about a 
man utterly lost and alone “midway in our life’s journey” – speak to the 
character, Parrott adds, even though at first “you would never expect Don to be 
reading it”.

The most discussed book in the show recently was Rosemary’s Baby, after Sally 
Draper was seen reading it.Dozens of conspiracy theories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/06/mad-men-season-six-theories>
 appeared online making connections to more than a few disturbing Megan/Sharon 
Tate similarities. Thankfully, it was just a book – perfect for Sally – “a 
child in a very grown-up world with grown-up situations”, says Parrott.

But the more subtle references are the librarian’s personal favourites. He was 
fascinated by the connection between Betty Draper reading F Scott Fitzgerald’s
The Diamond as Big as the Ritz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/mar/04/mad-men-three-sundays>
 in season two, and Sally readingThe Twenty-One Balloons by William Pene du Bois
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Twenty-One_Balloons> two seasons later – a 
children’s book with similar themes. And, even thoughJohn Cheever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-cheever>’s books do not feature even 
once, “his work is embedded in the fabric of the show – surely, the season-two 
episode in which Don constantly swims resembles the short storyThe Swimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/16/short-story-john-cheever>,” 
Parrott points out. Matthew Weiner – known for his extreme attention to detail 
– did say,in a Paris Review interview 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/tag/matthew-weiner/>, that he begins every 
season by rereading Cheever’s preface to his Collected Stories.

Behind the scenes of Mad Men – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2015/apr/05/behind-the-scenes-of-mad-men-momi-new-york-exhibition>
As the show enters the 1970s, what literary surprises can we expect? Surely 
the best-sellers of the time (“there are always givens: of course Roger is 
aware of books byOgilvy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/06/david-ogilvy-unpublished-review>
”, says the librarian). They might readThe Godfather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mario-puzo>, or The Andromeda Strain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1993/jul/03/fiction.michaelcrichton> by 
Michael Crichton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michaelcrichton>. “But I’d 
like to assume that there will be some literature featured that speaks directly 
to the time period. The end of the 1960s was the end of something in America. 
It was also the beginning of something.” Parrott will be hoping for those 
hidden gems: “I can’t wait to be surprised.”

The most genius Mad Men literary moments

1. Don reading Dante’s The Inferno [Season 6, episode 1: The Doorway 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/11/mad-men-season-six-episode-one-two>
]:This scene had everyone talking 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CDEQFjAF&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.slate.com%2Fblogs%2Fbrowbeat%2F2012%2F10%2F25%2Fmad_men_s_don_draper_reading_the_inferno_why.html&ei=rEUeVZygGMHTUcLpgbgB&usg=AFQjCNHGO8rkEI5mT3pbvyc1l465Zni16w&sig2=hMvNR5g_h6gfYzATXEUzEg&bvm=bv.89947451,d.d24>
. “I would never had guessed Don would be reading Dante’s Inferno on a beach, 
but those first few lines – read on a voice over – are so spot on. It was a 
wonderful surprise, and that’s one of the reasons the show is so great,” said 
Parrott. Dante’s journey through Hell and its nine circles was the perfect 
allegoric read for the character – and the contrast of the Hawaiian beach 
backdrop made it even more striking.
 Don Draper reads Frank O’Hara. Photograph: AMC 
2. Don reciting Frank O’Hara [Season 2, episode 1: For Those Who Think Young 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/feb/11/mad-men-don-draper>
]: “Now I am quietly waiting for the catastrophe of my personality to seem 
beautiful again” ... The voice-over of Don reading from Frank O’Hara’s 1957 
poetry collection Meditations in an Emergency was beautiful and insightful. He 
put the book in the mail – and the recipient Anna Draper, as we would later 
discover.
 Sally reads Rosemary’s Baby. Photograph: AMC 
3. Sally reading Rosemary’s Baby [Season 6, episode 8: The Crash 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/22/mad-men-recap-season-six-episode-eight-the-crash>
]: Sally reading Ira Levin’s horror novel Rosemary’s Baby – when she was 
clearly too young for it – was revelatory. Not because any of theconspiracy 
theories 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/11/fashion/does-sharon-tate-hold-a-clue-to-the-mad-men-finale.html?_r=0>
 about it came true, but because it perfectly reflected the fact that she “was 
a child in a very grown up world with grown up situations. We watched Sally 
grow up on the show, from reading Nancy Drew and The Horse that Liked 
Sandwiches to Rosemary’s Baby,” says Parrott.
 Betty reads Fitzgerald. Photograph: AMC 
 4. The subtle connections: The link between A Diamond as Big as the Ritz, 
read by Betty inseason two 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/mar/04/mad-men-three-sundays>
, and The Twenty-One Balloons, read by Sallytwo seasons later 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/oct/06/mad-men-season-four-episode-five>
, is something that the majority of viewers might not have picked up on, butit 
adds a level of complexity to the characters 
<http://www.nypl.org/blog/2012/01/19/mad-men-mystery-solved>. The latter, a 
kids’ book, was so similar to Fitzgerald’s that upon publication, its author 
William Pene du Bois had to acknowledge, on the preface, the striking 
similarities – which were a complete and happy accident.
 Pete Campbell reads The Crying of Lot 49. Photograph: AMC 
5. All the surprises – like Pete Campbell reading Pynchon [season 5, episode 
8:Lady Lazarus 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/may/08/mad-men-season-five-episode-eight>
]: as the internet wisely asked, why? 
<http://mikedellaquila.blogspot.co.uk/2012/05/why-hell-is-peter-campbell-reading.html>
 There could be a million reasons for Weiner to put The Crying of Lot 49 on 
Pete’s hands in the episode in which he goes all the way with Beth (remember 
Pete on all those train rides?): corporate rivalries, a hero dead before the 
novel starts ... but we simply cannot imagine Pete as a Thomas Pynchon fan. It 
makes one wonder what he thought of it.

 *  Mad Men’s official reading list, from the NYPL and AMC: you can find the 
complete list here 
<https://drive.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/file/d/0BxnQbyG8nvQYVE5hQlJXNXRPYW8/view>
. 
 * The New York Public library blog 
<http://www.nypl.org/blog/2012/02/27/mad-men-reading-list>, to be updated 
through season 7, is where you will find all the books featured on the show. 
 * You can follow the conversation on Twitter on #MadMenReading 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/madmenreading?f=realtime>. 
Is your favourite Mad Men 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> literary moment 
or book not on this piece? Let us know in the comments.
 