
Memory has many colours. A work of art that survives the centuries is an 
embodiment of history, marked invisibly by all the hands that have held it. Who 
owned it? Where did it hang? These are not just arcane questions for scholars 
but the network of human experience that haunts works of art in museums and 
makes them richly alive.

The hunt for works of art looted by the Nazis matters. Researchers who 
discover the true owners of a painting stolen in wartime Europe and later 
acquired innocently or knowingly by a museum or gallery arepiecing together 
shadowy stories <http://plundered-art.blogspot.co.uk/> of oppression, 
injustice, murder and destruction. Why did the Nazis loot art from Jewish 
owners? It was not only greedbut an ideological belief that Jews contributed 
nothing to European civilisation and did not deserve to share in it.

The Black Years: how Nazi art came back to Berlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/27/nazi-art-berlin-hamburger-bahnhof>
Nazi loot carries a legacy of hate. And that is why a Swiss art museum is 
wrong to refuse to returna painting by John Constable 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/01/25/jewish-heirs-sue-swiss-museum-to-recover-constable-painting/?_r=1>
 to the despoiled owner’s rightful heirs. When Anna Jaffe died in France in 
1942, she left the art collection of her late husband John Jaffe to her nieces 
and nephews. Mr Jaffe, whose brother Otto was a former lord mayor of Belfast 
and whose family were noted linen exporters, had settled in France – hence his 
ownership of a painting by one of England’s great artists. The stories of 
looted works of art reveal these hidden details of modern history: here was a 
work owned by an eminent British businessman, who moved to France and whose art 
collection ended up in the hands of the pro-Nazi Vichy government.

Constable’s painting Dedham from Langham was auctioned at a forced sale in 
Nice in 1943. Now the family of John and Anna Jaffe want it back – but theMusée 
des Beaux-Arts in La Chaux-de-Fonds 
<http://www.chaux-de-fonds.ch/musees/mba/musee-ferme-musee-vivant/musee-ferme> 
insists it will keep the work, offering to tell the story of its provenance in 
a special gallery text on the wall instead.

Is there a backlash against restitution in the museum world?

Is there a backlash against restitution in the museum world? In recent years 
some spectacular restitutions of looted art have led to masterpieces moving 
around the world. Most notably, Gustav Klimt’s Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I, 
once a highlight of Vienna’s art collections,is now in the Neuegalerie in New 
York 
<http://www.neuegalerie.org/content/gustav-klimt-and-adele-bloch-bauer-woman-gold>
. But some museums are becoming more resistant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fswiss-gallery-nazi-art-restitution-constable-painting-jaffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9d4ae1fdac927fcafe40b6bdb08174539e10be4%2F0_0_2677_2732%2F2677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20a%20Swiss%20gallery%20should%20return%20its%20looted%20Nazi%20art%20out%20of%20simple%20decency&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fswiss-gallery-nazi-art-restitution-constable-painting-jaffe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20a%20Swiss%20gallery%20should%20return%20its%20looted%20Nazi%20art%20out%20of%20simple%20decency&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fswiss-gallery-nazi-art-restitution-constable-painting-jaffe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9d4ae1fdac927fcafe40b6bdb08174539e10be4%2F0_0_2677_2732%2F2677.jpg>
 Portrait of Adele Bloch Bauer I, by Gustav Klimt, 1907. Photograph: Apic/Getty 
Images 
Last year a panel in Austria voted  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-31747759>to reject a demand for the 
return of Klimt’s Beethoven Frieze to the heirs of Erich Lederer, who inherited 
it from his father August. In fact the case was complicated. Lederer survived 
the war and later sold the Frieze – Klimt’s masterpiece – at what the heirs 
claim was an enforced cut price. The Austrian inquiry rejected this claim.

Not so neutral: wartime workers at a Swiss arms factory – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jan/25/war-workers-swiss-arms-factory-pictures-photographs-jakob-tuggener-fabrik>
The Swiss museum says it bought Constable’s painting in good faith and 
therefore should not have to return it. Switzerland was neutral in the second 
world war – it does not carry the direct burden of Holocaust guilt that Austria 
does. But why does that make it all right to cling to war loot? British 
galleries are more open about this. The National Gallery announced unprompted a 
few years ago thata masterpiece by Cranach  
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/lucas-cranach-the-elder-cupid-complaining-to-venus>
in its collection was once in the hands of Adolf Hitler himself. No rightful 
owner has been traced, so it is still in the National Gallery – for now.

In the end, there is no case against the justice of returning works of art to 
their rightful owners when these can be found. No crime in history equals the
Holocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>. Looting art was just 
one more way that Nazism denied the humanity and individuality of Jewish 
people. There is no “on the other hand”. It is our collective duty to uncover 
the lost histories of suffering hidden in museums masterpieces and where 
justice can be done, it should be done gladly, as a basic act of respect and 
decency.
 