
The colour blue is a relatively modern invention. Prehistoric artists were 
strangers to it. You won’t find cerulean or azure in cave paintings. The 
ancient Greeks had no word for blue as we know it today – Homer described the 
sea as “wine-dark” in the Odyssey – and neither can it be found in the 
Icelandic sagas, the Koran, ancient Chinese stories or myriad other texts.

The only ancient culture to have a word for blue was the Egyptians, and they 
were also theonly culture that had a way to produce 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/what-is-blue-and-how-do-we-see-color-2015-2#ixzz3UG6GpaAM>
 a blue dye. Blue rarely appears in nature – there are few blue animals, fruits 
or vegetables – and the early painter’s palette was restricted to “earth 
colours”: reds, browns, yellows, blacks. Blue only appearedwhen the Egyptians 
started mining <> and unearthed lapis lazuli, a semi-precious stone first found 
in Afghanistan about 6,000 years ago. Lapis wasscarce and thus greatly prized 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/23/science/blue-through-the-centuries-sacred-and-sought-after.html>
, and was used to adorn the tombs of pharaohs and the eyes of Cleopatra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201689499%2F442add14-9890-47ac-b71a-d79caaff7994-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201689499%2F442add14-9890-47ac-b71a-d79caaff7994-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Scarab pendant from the tomb of Tutankhamun. Photograph: Sandro Vannini/Corbis 
The invention of the colour purple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/12/the-invention-of-the-colour-purple>
Obtaining the colour from lapis was prohibitively expensive so, about 2,500BC, 
the Egyptians donned their lab coats, lit their Bunsen burners and headed for 
the ancient equivalent of the school science lab to invent the world’s first 
artificial pigment. By heating lime, sand and copper into calcium copper 
silicate,they discovered the royal-turquoise pigment Egyptian blue 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/articles/e/egyptian_blue_on_objects.aspx>
, which spread around the Mediterranean world and was widely used until about 
AD800.

Other ancient civilisations followed suit. In China, copper was blended with 
heavy elements such as mercury to create shades of blue. So new and exciting 
were the colours created that they were attributed healing qualities and mixed 
into poisonous “medicinal” concoctions.According to Heinz Berke 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/23/science/blue-through-the-centuries-sacred-and-sought-after.html>
, a chemist who has studied the history of blue pigment at the University of 
Zurich, “It is said that 40% of the Chinese emperors suffered from 
heavy-element poisoning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201825733%2F214b32b4-1a46-408f-822e-df2e3bbab1d8-1598x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201825733%2F214b32b4-1a46-408f-822e-df2e3bbab1d8-1598x2040.jpeg>
 Vase from the Templo Mayor in Tenochtitlan, Mexico. Photograph: De 
Agostini/Getty Images 
The Mesoamericans, too, created a vivid and durable azure blue. They used it 
in paintings, pottery and even,some scientists have suggested 
<http://www.livescience.com/28381-maya-blue-paint-recipe-discovered.html>, to 
adorn the bodies of those destined for human sacrifice. Scientists know that 
Mayan blue’s two main ingredients are indigo and palygorskite, a type of clay, 
but the third ingredient – and the method used to create the long-lasting paint 
– are still hotly debated.

Wherever it came from, blue pigment remained costly to produce. It was an 
expensive, aspirational colour – and it peaked in the year AD431, whenVirgin 
Mary worship <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/virg/hd_virg.htm> and the use of 
her image was sanctioned by the Christian church at the Council of Ephesus. 
Images of Mary became wildly popular, and she wasusually depicted wearing a 
blue robe <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/2004.442>, as befitting 
the queen of heaven. The colour came to symbolise truth, peace, virtue and 
authority.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201921799%2Fe163ec3e-9ad5-4a51-bb92-bd2c2b8c6f58-1546x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20blue%20is%20the%20costliest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fcolour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429201921799%2Fe163ec3e-9ad5-4a51-bb92-bd2c2b8c6f58-1546x2040.jpeg>
 The Vysehrad Madonna of the Rains in the Collegiate Church of Sts Peter and 
Paul, Prague. Photograph: Print Collector/Getty Images 
Blue remained the colour of the rich and the divine until the industrial age – 
with one notable exception. Workadaywoad 
<http://www.woad-inc.co.uk/history.html]>, a plant used as early as the stone 
age, was used to create a blue fabric dye. The leaves were dried, crushed and 
composted with manure – which, as you might expect, was a rather stinky 
process. It was also not colourfast, and had a far less intense colour . It 
was, then, strictly the poor relation of the royal blues and azures, used only 
for clothing worn by the (smelly) masses.

But with the advent of modern manufacturing methods, cheaper blue pigments 
became available, not least in paint. The colour was used to capture different 
moods by artists: Pablo Picasso, for instance, had hisBlue period 
<http://www.pablopicasso.org/blue-period.jsp> after moving from Paris to 
Barcelona in 1901. During the next four years, the paintings he produced in 
shades of blue and blue-green seemed to reflect his experience of relative 
poverty and instability, with gloomy subjects: beggars, street urchins, the old 
and the frail and the blind.
 Alexa Chung wears double denim. Photograph: @chungalexa/Instagram 
Racing through to the 1950s, the now readily available blue permeated all 
areas of life, including fashion and music, from Elvis’s Blue Suede Shoes tothe 
rise and rise of blue denim jeans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/apr/18/james-dean-an-enduring-influence-on-modern-fashion>
. Invented by Levi Strauss and Jacob Davis, and popularised by James Dean in 
Rebel Without a Cause, blue jeans became a wardrobe staple. The indigo dye gave 
denim a unique character: it doesn’t penetrate cotton like other dyes, but sits 
on the outside of each thread. The dye molecules erode over time, causing the 
fabric to fade in a unique and personal way.

Today, we see blue everywhere we look, and in every shade we can think of. It 
is in uniforms, from the navy to nurses, and in our houses, whereit may be 
associated with 
<http://www.feng-shui-and-beyond.com/meaning-of-blue.html#sthash.k1qvlhRs.dpuf> 
clear skies, healing and refreshing waters. Blue may not have been around for 
as long as earthy red, yellow and black, but its popularity shows no signs of 
waning.
 