
If any colour can stake a claim to be the oldest, it is red. We’ve been seeing 
red (an expression which turns out to be more than just metaphorical 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/seeing-red-its-not-just-an-expression-for-angry-people-but-also-scientific-fact-9194815.html>
) since our neolithic days. It is the most primary of primary colours – the 
very blood in our veins is red. Except, of course, when it’s blue.


On the earliest daubs of our remote human ancestors, red stole the show. In 
the caves of Lascaux in France, or Pinnacle Point in South Africa, can be found 
paintings in an earthy, dusty red. This pigment – along with other colours used 
– was made from ochre, a family of earth pigments whose name is now, 
confusingly, most associated with the yellow-brown pigment found in art shops 
and painting sets. These paintings date back perhaps as far as 15,000BC. Red is 
ancient indeed.

Why blue is the costliest colour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/17/colour-blue-rich-divine-ancient-egyptians-virgin-mary>
Many Stone Age graves, too, have been found to contain red ochre. Some experts 
theorise this was simply to mark the grave, so no one mistakenly dug it up. 
Others believe it was used to colour the hair, skin or clothes of the buried – 
either way, it clearly hadimportant ritual significance 
<http://en.natmus.dk/historical-knowledge/denmark/prehistoric-period-until-1050-ad/the-mesolithic-period/a-woman-and-a-child-from-goengehusvej/why-is-ochre-found-in-some-graves/>
.


Unsurprisingly, red appears as a symbolic colour in many a warrior setting. In 
Roman mythology, it was associated with blood, of course, and courage. It was 
the colour of the god of war, Mars – and the colour of the army. Roman soldiers 
wore red tunics, while gladiators were adorned in red. Generals wore a scarlet 
cloak, and to celebrate victories would have their bodies painted entirely in 
red. Brides at a Roman weddingwore a red shawl, called a flammeum 
<http://www.paraezo.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/2-ancient-roman-wedding1.jpg>
. Red was the colour of blood – but blood was a symbol not just of death, but 
of life – of fertility and love.

Through the Middle Ages, red was utterly dominant. The emperor Charlemagne 
painted his palace red, wore red shoes and is even rumoured to have had red 
hair. In Christian art, it represented the blood of Christ and of Christian 
martyrs – and became (as it still is) the colour worn by Catholic cardinals.


From the 16th century, a new way of making red appeared in Europe, from 
cochineal beetles <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochineal> imported by Spanish 
merchants from the new world. This, naturally, made red terribly fashionable. 
Don’t hold that against it, though. It passed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F027393533aa7a9b52f91bd38454adb323ad942e2%2F0_46_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F027393533aa7a9b52f91bd38454adb323ad942e2%2F0_46_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 A traditional Chinese wedding in Dong’an, Henan province
 Photograph: Carlos Barria/REUTERS 
Today, even the most painfully fashionable western bride would be unlikely to 
walk down the aisle in red. This, though, is the tradition in China, where 
brides still wear red wedding gowns, and are carried to the ceremony in a red 
litter. In China, red has always symbolised good fortune and joy - and as a 
colour of happiness is even banned from funerals. In Greece, Albania and 
Armenia, too, brides still wear red veils.

Chinese brides also walk down a red carpet. Sound familiar? Not an invention 
of the Oscars ceremony or the film industry, as you might think. In fact the 
earliest reference to walking down a red carpet is said to be in the work of 
Aeschylus, from 458BC. When the eponymous hero Agamemnon returns from Troy, he 
is greeted by his wife Clytemnestra, who offers him a red path to walk upon. 
This is no mere coincidence – the meaning is clear:


Why green just can’t be trusted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/26/why-green-just-cant-be-trusted>
Now my beloved, step down from your chariot, and let not your foot, my lord, 
touch the Earth. Servants, let there be spread before the house he never 
expected to see, where Justice leads him in, a crimson path.

The red carpet treatment, indeed.

Inextricably linked with its association with brides, flowering and fertility, 
comes reds shadier side – and the reason those western brides would be unlikely 
to marry in it. But has the (possibly) oldest colour always been linked with 
the world’s ‘oldest profession’ and those red light districts? Perhaps not - in 
fact yellow has been more commonly associated with prostitution. In classic 
Greece, prostitutes wore saffron-dyed clothes, while in Rome they might dye 
their hair yellow. It is really a specific shade of red – scarlet – that must 
carry the can. And that association comes thanks to the bible, andRevelations 
17, verses 1-6 <http://Revelations 17, verses 1-6>, where “the Great Harlot” 
comes “dressed in purple and scarlet”. Purple clearly had a better PR team than 
poor old scarlet.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eda4bdc094f3e85a8cfc0dd2bcb6f8c700d18ef%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eda4bdc094f3e85a8cfc0dd2bcb6f8c700d18ef%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A choir sings ‘red songs’ on stage to mark the 90th Anniversary Of The 
Communist Party Of China on June 30, 2011 Photograph: ChinaFotoPress/Getty 
Images 
That PR team should have sprung into action the minute red started associated 
with revolutionaries. Long before McCarthy started hunting for “reds under the 
bed”, the colour started hanging out with some dodgy types. During the French 
revolution, revolutionaries began wearing red caps and carrying red flags. Red 
become the colour of the worker’s movement – from the French revolution of 
1848, the Paris Commune in 1870 and of socialist parties across Europe. By the 
20th century, it was the outright color of revolution – whether Bolshevik or 
Chinese, adorning flags from Russia, Cuba Vietnam and more.


So red can be both happy, honourable, brave and virginal and, well, quite the 
opposite – it’s all about the cultural context. But whether you see its 
innocence or its corruption, it turns out thatred actually enhances women’s 
attractiveness to men 
<http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.384.2315>. It even 
enhances the value of a painting – though this is down largely to its symbolic 
significance in Chinese culture affecting the international art market 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/artsales/10602004/How-red-boosts-a-paintings-value.html>
, rather than anything more, well, primitive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a90e6afeaa29fd61b56f22efbffe98472477e%2F0_187_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20red%20is%20the%20oldest%20colour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fwhy-red-is-the-oldest-colour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a90e6afeaa29fd61b56f22efbffe98472477e%2F0_187_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 A detail from self-portrait as an artist, by Vincent Van Gogh Photograph: 
Fiona Hanson/PA 
And though it is hardly rare (it is the most popular colour on national flags, 
for a start <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_flag#Colours>) there is one 
area in which red is a distinct minority: only 1-2% of the human population has 
red hair. The colour is produced by the same pigment,pheomelanin, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pheomelanin> that makes our lips red. Those 
beautiful redheads have a higher level of that, and less of the dark pigment
eumelanin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eumelanin>.


In 1888, Vincent Van Gogh <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vincent_Van_Gogh> 
wrote that he “sought to express with red and green the terrible human 
passions”. Ancient, complex and representing extremes – red is nothing if not 
passionate. Perhaps Van Gogh would have seen red, should he have lived long 
enough tosee the reds in his paintings starting to fade away 
<http://phys.org/news/2015-03-explore-red-van-gogh-art.html>. 
 