
When Belle Littenberg was born, American women did not have the right to vote. 
It was 1914, and women wouldn't be granted suffrage for anothersix years 
<http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/naw/nawstime.html>. Seventy-three years later, 
when her granddaughter Chloe was born, it was into a completely different 
world. The right to vote had been a given for two generations of women now, as 
had been a list of rights that were lofty dreams when Belle was born.

Now, women applied for their own credit cards, went to graduate school en 
masse, took birth control and had legal abortions. The first year that Chloe 
was eligible to vote in a presidential primary, she could vote for a woman who 
had a real chance of becoming the nominee.

Thanks in large part to the work of the intervening generation – of women like 
Belle's daughters – the political and cultural lives of women had changed, in 
some ways, beyond recognition. In this presidential election year, two of those 
crucial advances – access to birth control and abortion – are under threat.

In 2012, seemingly every month has brought news of a new piece of state 
legislation designed to make abortions harder to obtain. The "Heartbeat Bill 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2011/12/14/389157/ohio-heartbeat-bill-will-force-doctors-to-wail-until-a-woman-is-in-mortal-danger-to-justify-an-abortion/?mobile=nc>
" in Ohio would ban abortion at as early as five weeks, and the Mississippi "
Personhood 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/11/09/personhood-campaign-compa_n_1084984.html>
" initiative would outlaw abortion, the morning-after pill and even hormonal 
contraception like the pill and the IUD – not to mention in vitro fertilization 
(IVF) fertility treatment. Then there are the mandatory transvaginal ultrasound 
bills that failed inVirginia 
<http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/story/2012-02-22/virginia-governor-mcdonnell-abortion-ultrasound/53213156/1>
 andPennsylvania 
<http://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/PA-Senator-Counters-Ultrasound-with-Erectile-Bill-143671326.html>
, but passed and arein effect 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/04/opinion/sunday/kristof-when-states-abuse-women.html?_r=0>
 at this very moment in Texas.

These are not bipartisan efforts; they are Republican iniatives, all of them, 
and the GOP platform this year containsa plank 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/28/platform-abortion_n_1837571.html> 
supporting a constitutional amendment that would ban abortioneven in cases of 
rape, incest and when the pregnancy endangers the life of the mother. To this, 
Republicanshave added efforts to redefine rape 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2011/01/republican-plan-redefine-rape-abortion>
, which, if successful, would make rape exceptions to abortion bans even harder 
to navigate.

All this, taken with the GOP's blocking of the Paycheck Fairness Act  
<http://www.npr.org/2012/06/05/154377271/senate-republicans-block-paycheck-fairness-act>
earlier this year, and incessant threats toPlanned Parenthood 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2012/08/06/644611/gop-lawmaker-planned-parenthood-is-getting-wealthy-on-murder-for-hire/>
 – which apart from providing low-cost birth control, abortion and sex 
education also provides life-saving cancer screenings – a picture starts to 
emerge. For a woman who was born in 1914, it's a familiar and unwelcome one.

As the efforts of both parties suggest, the women's vote will matter this 
year. It will matter in that women will help decide who wins the White House. 
But for a woman like Belle, who remembers an America in which women could not 
vote or have safe legal abortions, it will matter on a political and personal 
level – and a philosophical one. What are the consequences for people who 
denigrate American women and deny them their rights? In 2008,only 65.7% 
<http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2009-04-30-black-vote_N.htm> of eligible 
women voters went to the polls. In 2012, this year of transvaginal ultrasound 
laws and all-male contraception hearings, how many American women will sit back 
in silence on election day?

At their convention, Republicans, aware that their legislative efforts have 
given some women voters pause, went to great pains to explain thatthere is no 
<http://www.npr.org/2012/08/31/160366695/gop-uses-convention-to-reach-out-to-female-voters>
 "war on women". We love women, they insisted, assigningAnn Romney 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/08/29/ann_romney_love_mitt_please/> the task of 
telling the American people just how much. The Democrats also made a play for 
women's votes at their convention, with appearances fromNancy Keenan 
<http://www.c-span.org/DNC/Events/Nancy-Keenan-at-the-2012-Democratic-National-Convention/C3797180/>
, president ofNaral Pro Choice America <http://www.naral.org/>, Planned 
Parenthood presidentCecile Richards 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/09/05/planned-parenthood-s-cecile-richards-takes-center-stage-in-charlotte.html>
 andSandra Fluke 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/dnc-2012-sandra-flukes-speech-at-the-democratic-national-convention-full-text/2012/09/05/891a642a-f7ac-11e1-8253-3f495ae70650_story.html>
, the women's rights advocate who was meant to shut up after Rush Limbaugh 
called her a "slut 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/05/sandra-fluke-speech-_n_1852637.html?utm_hp_ref=elections-2012>
", but who has done quite the opposite.

For Belle, who remembers a time when women's civic participation was limited 
by law and by culture, the number of American women who do not vote is 
distressing. Many of her friends are women who voted for Hillary Rodham Clinton 
in the 2008 primaries, and in those hot, disappointed days after Clinton 
conceded her delegates toBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, several of her friends 
declared that they if they could not vote for Clinton, they would not vote at 
all. Belle was not pleased. You have to vote, she told them. Vote because 
you're an American, and you have a responsibility not just to your country, but 
to the women who fought to secure you that right.

This year, though, Belle's exhortations to her friends have become less about 
simply exercising the right to suffrage and more about preserving other 
hard-won rights. She believes that regardless of who they vote for, all women 
should vote – but, she tells her friends, we should vote for the party that 
will do most for women. There's a great deal to be done to ensure that women 
have all the same opportunities as men, and she knows that theRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> won't do it.

The insults that have been hurled at American women in the last two years, in 
the form of legislation and in the form of actual slurs – thanks, Mr Limbaugh – 
have made "women's issues" central to the national political conversation. But 
we both reject the term "women's issues". We believe thatall Americans have a 
vested interest in creating a country where women are allowed to decide if and 
when to start a family, and are paid fairly so that they can provide for that 
family.

These aren't women's issues; they are human issues. But to American women, we 
say what Belle and her friends have been telling each other over the mahjong 
table ever since Hillary Rodham Clinton stepped aside for Barack Obama:

You might not be able to vote for a woman, but you have to vote. For women.
 