
White created by light – on a TV screen, for example, or through a prism – 
does not have its own specific wavelength. Rather, it is the sum of all the 
colours. Think of a rainbow: you can’t see the colours of sunlight except when 
raindrops refract the light rays and reveal the whole spectrum. Because of 
this, scientists do not generally count white as a colour.


Why red is the oldest colour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/01/why-red-is-the-oldest-colour>
However, in your day-to-day life, you can go to any DIY shop and see endless 
shades of white huddling together in the paint section. So when it comes to 
pigment, rather than light, white is most definitely a colour.


In prehistoric times, our ancestors used white chalk to create their art. 
Readily available, chalk is a kind of limestone made of the mineral calcite, 
which can be crushed easily to create not just cave paintings, but giant 
artworks, such asUffington’s white horse 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/white-horse-hill/> or the Cerne Abbas giant 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/cerne-giant/>.


In written records, the earliest mention of a white pigment that is not plain 
chalk comes from the Italian artist Cennino Cennini in the 13th century. He 
used the term “Bianco di San Giovanni” to describe a white lime pigment made of 
calcium carbonate and calcium hydroxide. Artists dried out lime 
<http://www.webexhibits.org/pigments/indiv/overview/limewhite.html>, then 
reduced it to a white powder that was immersed in water for eight days, with 
the water changed each day. It was then made into small cakes that were left to 
dry in the sun.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442832014962%2Fdd6f7b90-6dfb-447b-95a1-172747d4f995-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20white%20is%20a%20colour%20of%20purity%20that%20might%20just%20have%20killed%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20white%20is%20a%20colour%20of%20purity%20that%20might%20just%20have%20killed%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F21%2F1442832014962%2Fdd6f7b90-6dfb-447b-95a1-172747d4f995-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Uffington white horse. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The other way to make white was to use lead. The process was described by 
Pliny the Elder: pieces of lead were put into clay pots that had a separate 
compartment filled with vinegar. These were piled on shelves next to cow dung. 
Over a month or so, the fumes coming from the vinegar and the cow dung caused 
the lead to corrode into lead carbonate, a beautiful white compound that was, 
unfortunately, pretty toxic. Lead white was actually the only white used in 
European paintings until the 19th century, when its manufacture was finally 
restricted. Now, in the EU,lead paint can now only be used for the restoration 
<http://www.rsc.org/chemistryworld/News/2007/August/21080701.asp> of works of 
art and historical buildings.


Considering the toxicity of lead, it’s horrifying just how much it was used, 
not just in artistic painting, but in face paints. The denizens of ancient 
Greece were fans of slathering white lead all over their faces and “dead white” 
was a term that could have been applied to the most fashionable men and women 
of society through the ages.In her book, A History of Makeup, Maggie Angeloglou 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums-static/objectretrieval/node/111> includes an 
advert from the 18th century for a “chemical wash” to improve the skin “by 
taking off all deformities ... as Ringworms, Morphew, Sunburn, Scurf, Pimples, 
Pits or Redness of the Smallpox, keeping it of lasting and extreme Whiteness”. 
The problem was, these cosmetics and face creams actually irritated the skin, 
causing spots, scars and scabs. And the way that people covered the resultant 
blemishes was to apply more toxic compounds, creating a vicious circle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee8fe304817b86d1da99cffd48308109f9bbe5b%2F0_167_2878_1726%2F2878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20white%20is%20a%20colour%20of%20purity%20that%20might%20just%20have%20killed%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20white%20is%20a%20colour%20of%20purity%20that%20might%20just%20have%20killed%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fwhy-white-is-a-colour-of-purity-that-might-just-have-killed-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feee8fe304817b86d1da99cffd48308109f9bbe5b%2F0_167_2878_1726%2F2878.jpg>
 And the bride wore white Photograph: AM Corporation/Alamy 
The side effects were more than just skin imperfections: enthusiastic users of 
these lead-containing lotions and potions would be likely to suffer anaemia, 
loss of appetite, constipation, headaches, paralysis and eventual death.A 
trade-off that evidently seemed worth it, as lead makeup continued to be applied
 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/id/22546056/ns/health/t/suffering-beauty-has-ancient-roots/#.Vf0hq5cnvDs>
 into the 20th century.

So why were people willing to die for white skin? Well, it was to do with your 
status in society. Field-workers, labourers, peasants and slaves were all 
likely to have darkened skin from working outdoors in the sun. Having white 
skin marked you out as a person of leisure, wealth and status. Of course, these 
days that meaning has almost reversed: hands up who’d rather have a healthy 
glow?

For much of human history, white has been a symbol of purity. It was worn by 
priestesses in ancient Egypt and Rome, while ancient temples were faced with 
white marble. The Pope has worn white since 1566, as a symbol of purity and 
sacrifice, and it is worn by pilgrims in Islam and the Shinto religion of Japan.


Why green just can’t be trusted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/26/why-green-just-cant-be-trusted>
We all think of white as having a place at weddings – the white dress worn by 
brides symbolises virginal innocence and new beginnings. Interestingly, white 
used to be reserved solely for royal weddings – non-royals just wore their 
Sunday best – up until the 19th century, when Queen Victoria’s lace wedding 
dress inspired a fashion for white.


White is also the colour most associated with cleanliness. Laundry powders 
promise to get your clothes “whiter than white” – because white means clean. 
Refrigerators and dishes, toilets and sinks, bed linen and towels are all 
traditionally white. White was the traditional colour of the coats worn by 
doctors, nurses, scientists and laboratory technicians, and it’s often worn by 
chefs, bakers and butchers.


White is best for a fresh start. It’s a blank canvas, it’s a new page. Start 
with white and you’ll be all right (unless you’re applying makeup, that is).

 