
Alastair Humphreys has cycled around the world, walked across India and rowed 
across the Atlantic, but he captured my imagination with his adventures much 
closer to home. These include walking a lap of the M25, drifting down a river 
on tractor inner tubes, sleeping on the highest point in his county and cycling 
around the Isle of Wight.

He defines these “microadventures” as overnight, outdoor activities that are 
“achievable for normal people with real lives. They are local, cheap, brief and 
non-elitist, and open the door for total beginners to sample adventures without 
feeling intimidated or out of their depth.”

I asked him for some ideas for a microadventure novice like me. “You could 
sleep on a hill, walk a lap of your home, go for a full-moon walk or enjoy a 
5-9 commuter adventure.” I was captivated by the last suggestion, which 
involves leaving work at the usual time, going on an overnight escapade and 
getting back in time for work in the morning. It sounded like a brilliant way 
to make the most of the limited free time that a full-time job affords; a way 
to escape everyday life without waiting for the weekend or taking any time off.

I persuaded an adventurous friend, Matt, to join me (read: bribed him with 
beer), and we decided to cycle up a section of the river Lea, a 42-mile 
tributary of the Thames that flows from Leagrave, Bedfordshire, to Bow Creek, 
east London. We would leave our separate offices and meet at Springfield Park 
in Hackney, east London, and ride together up the river as far as Dobbs Weir in 
Hertfordshire, find a place to sleep in bivvy bags (waterproof covers for 
sleeping bags) rather than tents, then cycle back to work in the morning. It 
was about 20 miles each way.

“That sounds cool!” said Alastair. “That sounds completely insane,” said 
everyone else. And, indeed, as the day approached, I did feel nervous. I 
consulted Alastair about my fears. “The best thing about a microadventure is 
that the worst things – rain, poor sleep, worry – are not so bad,” he explained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43214112722c84381a91cbb6800580c5a266e165%2F0_203_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43214112722c84381a91cbb6800580c5a266e165%2F0_203_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Far away from city streets … the river Lea. Photograph: The Guardian 
Yes, one uncomfortable night may be bearable – but what about mad axe 
murderers or the dubious legality of sleeping wild? He explained that although 
we might feel exposed in a bivvy bag, we are actually far less conspicuous than 
if we had a tent. And although wild camping is illegal in most of the UK, 
except Scotland, in reality no one minds if you’re not “blatantly on private 
land, near someone’s home or otherwise being annoying”, says Alastair. With 
that in mind, we should choose an appropriate spot, leave earlyin the morning 
and leave no trace of our presence. “Remember, you are acting far more 
illegally and dangerously every time you break the speed limit in a car,” said 
Alastair.

Buoyed by his reassurance, on a Wednesday in April, we set off on our first 
ever microadventure. The cycling was more tiring than I expected – 20 miles 
along bumpy paths after a full day of work is very different to 20 miles at the 
weekend, and another 20 before work is even worse. At night, it was extremely 
cold, despite packing as many layers as I could carry. I barely slept, making 
work the next day something of an ordeal. So it is probably best not attempted 
by brain surgeons or anyone whose job actually matters. But, despite all this, 
it was brilliant – so brilliant we’ve decided to do “Wild Wednesday” every 
week. Well, once a month. Anyway, we’re definitely going to do it again at some 
point …

Grand Adventures by Alastair Humphreys is out now (£16.99, Harper Collins). 
Buy a copy for £13.59 atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378910/>. 
alastairhumphreys.com 
<http://www.alastairhumphreys.com/category/blog/microadventure/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc60a55553c1306a98c8ef4fbe5dfee81228fee6a%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc60a55553c1306a98c8ef4fbe5dfee81228fee6a%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Photograph: Rachel Dixon 
Rachel’s microadventure

17:30: King’s Cross


I leave the office on a gloriously sunny afternoon. My rucksack weighs a ton – 
perhaps prosecco wasn’t strictly necessary – but I’m excited. I rendezvous with 
Matt in the park and we set off up the towpath. There are plenty of people 
around at first, runners and rowers and cyclists, but as we head further away 
from London, they soon thin out and we feel more intrepid. “We’re a bit like 
the Famous Five, aren’t we?”, says Matt. On a serene stretch through 
Silvermeade wetlands, as the sun is setting, we stop to watch a herd of muntjac 
deer, so small that at first I think they are big rabbits.

20:15: Dobbs Weir, Herts


We reach our target destination (chosen because there is a pub and a proper 
campsite nearby, just in case “wild camping” doesn’t work out). It is certainly 
not wilderness, but there are plenty of secluded green spaces. We choose a 
suitable patch, cut down some thistles with a penknife and ready our bivvy 
bags. It all feels a long, long way from the city. We’ve only just made it in 
time: it’s dusk and it would be hard to find a good pitch in the dark. Perhaps 
the long, warm evenings of high summer would be a better time to attempt a 
microadventure …


21:30: The pub


We cycle to the pub for a pint to steady our nerves and some chips to warm us 
up. It’s great reaching a country pub under our own steam, rather than by car 
or train. Having seen our isolated sleeping spot, the chances of an 
opportunistic murderer stumbling across it seems small. We are more worried 
about hypothermia – the night is clear and bitterly cold. Matt says: “No 
offence, but if it gets to the point where we have to huddle together for 
warmth, I’m cycling home.” I check the map: home is 17 miles away. Time to put 
on our many layers in the pub toilets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caf9908e4119451712540c67dbde40634c811ff%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caf9908e4119451712540c67dbde40634c811ff%2F0_495_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
23:00: Barbecue and bed


The flames of my disposable barbecue are cheering, the hot sausages are 
delicious and I’m glad I packed the prosecco after all. It is a starry night 
with almost a full moon. We are warm in our sleeping bags and happy to be out 
in the open, with no tent creating a barrier between us and nature – Matt even 
spots bats darting around. I wish I had invested in a sleeping mat – the ground 
is hard and bumpy – but I’m tired and fall asleep easily. I wake a couple of 
hours later, disorientated and cold, and further sleep is fitful at best.

06:00: Up and off


Matt wakes me at dawn. It is a beautiful morning and the birds are in full 
voice. We pack up, bleary-eyed, and get back on the road. I spot a solitary 
heron, fishing for his breakfast, and one of the deer, which has strayed right 
on to the path. The sun rises as we ride, the human world wakes up and we are 
joined by early-morning joggers and dog walkers. Soon, we are back on busy 
London streets; a surreal change with fellow cycle commutersof pace from our 
peaceful start. I am at work by 8.20am; showered and at my desk by 9am. 
Concentrating a camping trip into just 15 hours has made for an exhausting but 
addictively intense experience.

Survival kit list

Lumo clip light


A versatile light that will attach to pretty much anything – rucksack, keys 
etc – to make sure you’re never left in the dark. £7
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bfd284423f4672f366c8c3b78c68969d62e04a3%2F214_280_2105_1262%2F2105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bfd284423f4672f366c8c3b78c68969d62e04a3%2F214_280_2105_1262%2F2105.jpg>
Blue Mountain mess tins


Big enough for a campside feast and handy to carry; with folding handles, they 
fit inside each other to save space.£8 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55403b4e48d988fb4ccb761ad8576d4d4bf79eae%2F0_0_1314_1574%2F1314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20Wednesday%3F%20Try%20an%20after-work%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fwild-wednesday-try-an-after-work-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55403b4e48d988fb4ccb761ad8576d4d4bf79eae%2F0_0_1314_1574%2F1314.jpg>
 Mini Trangia stove

A complete classic that no camper should be without – as good for lightweight 
camping as wilderness challenges, and so small it can fit in the pocket of a 
rucksack. Includes a burner, windshield and two pans. £28

 Storm Bivi

Great for wild camping when you don’t want to put up a tent, or lightweight 
trips when you don’t want to carry much – the Bivi fits over your sleeping back 
and zips up, keeping you warm and hermetically sealed inside.£60


Windproof matches


Your best friends in a storm; simple but reliable these matches are completely 
wind-resistant.£4.25

The Delta cutlery set 

Compact cutlery set that will fit easily in your rucksack. £7

 Helium 3.8 self-inflating sleeping mat 

Sleep on a mountainside in perfect comfort; this mat insulates you from the 
ground, and the foam core makes for a good night’s sleep. Large push-in valve 
allows for rapid inflation and deflation.£42.50

All equipment for Rachel’s trip provided by Cotswold Outdoor: 
cotswoldoutdoor.com <http://cotswoldoutdoor.com>

 