
José Mourinho has said that he expects the attacking midfielder Willian to 
sign for Chelsea.Tottenham Hotspur appeared poised to sign the Anzhi 
Makhachkala forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/20/tottenham-andre-villas-boas-willian>
 after he completed a medical earlier this week, but Chelsea are now in pole 
position for the deal and have agreed a fee of £32m.

"I think he's already made his decision," Mourinho said. When asked if that was
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, he nodded in the 
affirmative. He added: "I don't like to speak before time because football can 
be crazy. I know what the player wants, so in this moment we cannot hide. That 
is a possibility."

Willian has still to undergo a medical at Stamford Bridge but is in talks and 
if he signs it strikes a blow for Mourinho over his former assistant André 
Villas-Boas. It could also slowthe prospective sale of Gareth Bale to Real 
Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/21/gareth-bale-real-madrid-spurs-baldini>
, Mourinho's former club.

"That's the danger of medicals before contracts," Mourinho said of Willian. 
"You have to do the medical before, but the best thing to do is to do the 
medical in secret. If the player is fine, you can sign him. If the player is 
not fine you don't destroy his career."

Mourinho had previously insisted the Manchester United striker Wayne Rooney 
was his sole target, but said on Friday: "I couldn't say much in previous press 
conferences. I have to answer your questions and try to be honest, but at the 
same time try to hide a few things.

"I'm happy with my squad, but every one of us managers, we say we are happy, 
but we are always unhappy. We always want something of more quality and we 
never close the door to the possibility of adding more quality."
 Willian played and scored for Anzhi Makhachkala against Chelsea in the 
Champions League last season. Photograph: Epsilon/Getty Images 
Mourinho added that he anticipates departures, but only temporarily. "If 
somebody's coming, somebody will leave," he said. "The point is not to sell. I 
want a 22-player squad. If somebody comes, somebody leaves.

"Do we need to sell? No, we don't. Do we need to loan? Probably, yes. I don't 
like to work with big squads. I think 22 is the perfect number to answer to our 
needs."

He was insistent that the playmaker Juan Mata would not depart. The Chelsea 
player of the year for the past two seasons has been linked with a move, a 
prospect Mourinho dismissed. "No, speculation. He's a player we all like, he's 
a player we all want to keep and we want more quality in the team, we don't 
want less quality. We want to add quality. Juan is not a player we want to 
lose."

• Follow Friday's latest transfers in our live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/aug/23/transfer-news-latest-willian-bale-suarez-lamela>
 