
Preacher is a cherished 1990s comic book story set in motion by an affair 
between a demon and an angel. So perhaps it is appropriate that attempts to 
transfer it to the screen have been stuck in development hell for years. 
Writer/director Kevin Smith was initially rumoured to be turning Preacher into 
a movie, although he has sincedownplayed his involvement 
<http://graphicpolicy.com/2011/02/16/kevin-smiths-preacher-movie-that-never-was/>
. Then HBO were going to adapt it as a TV series with Mark Steven Johnson, the 
director of duffsuperhero blockbuster Daredevil 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/hbo-kills-preacher-television-series/>. Then it was 
going to be a Sam Mendes film, before he decided tomake Skyfall instead 
<http://collider.com/preacher-movie-sam-mendes/209263/>. No one, it seemed, had 
the gumption to do Preacher justice.
 Seth Rogen: Preacher fan. Photograph: Dave Hogan 
Now AMC, the former classic movie channel turned cable drama powerhouse, has 
given the green light to the project 
<http://insidetv.ew.com/2014/02/06/amc-preacher/>, announcing their intention 
to adapt Preacher in collaboration with Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, the 
writers of Superbad andThis is the End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/27/this-is-the-end-review>. Sam 
Catlin, one of Breaking Bad's producers, is also on board as showrunner. While 
the official announcement only came yesterday, gravel-voiced teddybear Rogen 
had been dropping some heavy hints. "Arseface. John Wayne, The Saint of 
Killers,"he tweeted last November. 
<https://twitter.com/Sethrogen/status/401876867168231425> For non-acolytes, it 
sounded like gibberish. For the legions of Preacher fans, this roll call of 
colourful supporting characters was like a dog whistle. Hallelujah!

Why is it so revered? Published by mature DC Comics imprint Vertigo, Preacher 
is a 75-issue series by writer Garth Ennis and artist Steve Dillon that doesn't 
so much grapple with big ideas – good against evil, the sacred and the profane 
– as take a tyre iron to them. It's a mythic western, a road trip, a love story 
and a harrowing tale of abuse. Jesse Custer is a preacher who loses his faith 
just as he gains a theological superpower: the ability to command anyone to do 
what he wants. Along with his trigger-happy ex-girlfriend Tulip and a boozy 
Irish vampire called Cassidy, he sets off across America to find God, who has 
done a runner. There's also a ghostly version of John Wayne, a militarised cult 
protecting Christ's bloodline, a millionaire omni-sexual called Jesus DeSade 
with a thing for armadillos ... it's violent, unpredictable, heartfelt and 
often hilarious. There are scenes that make theGame of Thrones Red Wedding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/03/game-of-thrones-recap-season-three-episode-nine>
 look like a Tupperware party.

Ennis and Dillon have given their public blessing to AMC's proposed version, 
and with producers such as Rogen and Goldberg, who clearly venerate the source 
material, and the growing prestige of the cable network – it helped turn The 
Walking Dead from black-and-white comic into a worldwide phenomenon – you could 
call Preacher the ultimate comic book adaptation. If it underperforms (and a 
character called Arseface admittedly might not be to everyone's taste), it 
would be a bitter blow to the reputation and self-esteem of comics, an artform 
that despite generating billions of dollars, still seems artistically 
undervalued. One tiny alarm bell might be that Rogen's last comic book-related 
experience was starring, co-writing and producingthe Green Hornet movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jan/13/the-green-hornet-review>, but 
unless he's hellbent on casting himself as Jesse, it's worth giving him the 
benefit of the doubt.

Though totally overshadowed by the buzz around Preacher, Syfy just announced 
they are developing a pilot of another Vertigo title,Brian Wood and Riccardo 
Burchielli's DMZ 
<http://comicsalliance.com/dmz-television-series-syfy-wood-burchielli-vertigo-dc/>
. It's a grim, gritty series told from the viewpoint of a fairly unlikable 
embedded journalist, the sole reporter in a near-future Manhattan that has 
become a shattered demilitarised zone in the aftermath of a second US civil 
war. It's another sign that, while superheroes look set to dominate movie 
release schedules for years to come, TV producers are increasingly looking to 
non-spandex-related comic material to adapt, attracted by the prospect of 
tapping an established fanbase and working with extended yet often 
self-contained source material. There's no sitting around waiting for George RR 
Martin to finish his next book.

After a disappointing Keanu Reeves movie, Constantine – a character who has 
appeared in both Vertigo and DC Comics – is coming soon to NBC, withNeil 
Marshall directing the pilot 
<http://sciencefiction.com/2014/02/04/weve-given-director-constantine-know-star-will-look-comic/>
. Brian K Vaughan and Pia Guerra's Y: The Last Man – another Vertigo series, 
about a pandemic that kills every male on the planet except for a shiftless 
escapologist and his pet monkey – was being developed as a Shia LaBeouf movie 
but it looks as if the rights will revert to the creators ifproduction doesn't 
start imminently 
<http://www.slashfilm.com/new-line-could-lose-y-the-last-man-if-they-dont-go-into-production-soon/>
. Vaughan, a writer/producer on Lost and Under the Dome since writing Y: The 
Last Man would seem well-placed to nudge it toward the small screen, which 
increasingly feels like the natural home for non-kapow! stories.

It's a shame, then, that Sandman – Neil Gaiman's sprawling, award-winning, 
goth-friendly series about the Lord of Dreams – is still being planned as a 
movie,directed by and starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/17/sandman-movie-joseph-gordon-levitt>
. Everyone loves the affable and talented Gordon-Levitt, but if he screws this 
one up, he might wish he'd stuck toBatman 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0tCb0s9KGQ>.

Are you optimistic about the Preacher TV adaptation? Let us know below.
 