
Group One

Sri Lanka

Last time winner

Form most recent first LLLWLL

Since lifting the trophy in Mirpur two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/06/cricket-t20-world-cup-final-2014-sri-lanka-v-india-live>
, Sri Lanka have not exactly strutted around with their chests puffed out, 
losing 10 of 14 Twenty20s played and feeling the dual retirement of Mahela 
Jayawardene and Kumar Sangakkara. They shamble into the current tournament too, 
following a last-minute change of captaincy, with Lasith Malinga’s fears over a 
knee injury seeing him make way for Angelo Mathews. Familiarity with conditions 
a plus.

One to watch Thisara Perera has been out of form but the all-rounder can be 
destructive

The Joy of Six: great World Twenty20 cricket innings | John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/11/the-joy-of-six-great-world-twenty20-t20-cricket-innings>
South Africa

Last time semi-final

Form LLWWWW

The captain, Faf du Plessis, had barely stepped off the plane when the 
questions about his side choking were being asked; while only victory in the 
final will end this particular curse, they appear largely equipped for it. Few 
teams boast an opening partnership as explosive as AB de Villiers and Quinton 
de Kock, the attack spearhead Dale Steyn is fit after a shoulder problem and 
the leg-spinner Imran Tahir is a top-five bowler with a white ball in hand. Are 
throats about to be cleared?

One to watch Fast bowler Kagiso Rabada is the most impressive 20-year-old on 
the circuit

West Indies

Last time semi-final

Form WLLWWW

While they roam the earth as some of the most in-demand Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> cricketers on the domestic scene, 
the 2012 champions scarcely play together in the maroon of their region, with 
just eight fixtures played in the past two years and the captain, Darren Sammy, 
the only ever-present. A pay dispute prior to the tournament did little to 
inspire confidence, while injuries to Sunil Narine, Kieron Pollard, Darren 
Bravo and Lendl Simmons mean the opener Chris Gayle and spinner Samuel Badree – 
two of the best – need to fire more than ever.

One to watch Carlos Brathwaite scored big in the recent IPL auction and the 
seamer could make an early impact in India

England

Last time Super-10 stage

Form LLWWWW

Two defeats at the back-end of their South Africa tour and injury to Steven 
Finn saw expectations drop and yet England have been bubbling up nicely in the 
past 12 months, with six successive wins prior to that. The batting appears 
sufficiently explosive and the leg-spinner Adil Rashid is a wicket-taker in the 
middle overs. The question mark hovers over the seam bowling and in the field. 
What they lack in experience they make up for behind the scenes in IPL-winning 
head coach Trevor Bayliss, his world Twenty20-winning assistant Paul Farbrace 
and Mahela Jayawardene and Paul Collingwood – who both lifted the trophy as 
players – on the staff.

One to watch Jos Buttler is the most eye-popping batsman to watch in a lineup 
packed with aggression
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c651b6004b9c59a4e100560e723ccf1857723cb%2F0_136_2189_1315%2F2189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Twenty20%202016%3A%20team-by-team%20guide%20%7C%20Ali%20Martin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Twenty20%202016%3A%20team-by-team%20guide%20%7C%20Ali%20Martin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c651b6004b9c59a4e100560e723ccf1857723cb%2F0_136_2189_1315%2F2189.jpg>
 The England leg-spinner Adil Rashid is a wicket-taker in the middle overs. 
Photograph: Gareth Copley/Getty Images, 
Afghanistan

Last time first round

Form WWWWWL

Flag-bearers for the associate nations, despite sitting above Bangladesh in 
the official rankings, Afghanistan take their place in the tournament proper 
after blitzing their qualifying group with wins over Scotland, Hong Kong and 
Zimbabwe. The wicketkeeper-batsman Mohammad Shahzad, the all-rounder Mohammad 
Nabi, the batsman Samiullah Shenwari and seamers Dawlat Zadran and Hamid Hassan 
fully deserve their exposure on this stage.

One to watch Mohammad Shahzad, the most exciting batsman outside the 
Test-playing nations, hammered 142 runs from 102 balls in the first round

Group Two

India

Last time runner-up

Form WWWWWW

Home advantage, 10 wins from 11 internationals this year and victory in the 
recent Asia Cup make MS Dhoni’s side strong favourites to win their second 
title. All bases appear covered, with a menacing top five led by Rohit Sharma 
and Virat Kohli, two seasoned spinners in Ravichandran Ashwin and Ravindra 
Jadeja and a revitalised seam attack. The captain, Dhoni, who could retire 
after the tournament, is a serial Twenty20 trophy collector with a penchant for 
a well-scripted finish.

One to watch Jasprit Bumrah has burst on to the scene this year with 15 
wickets in 11 Twenty20 internationals and an economy rate of 6.15

New Zealand

Last time Super-10 stage

Form WWLWWW

Brendon McCullum’s retirement sees few talking up New Zealand’s chances and 
yet their squad has more boxes ticked than empty, with power-hitters, strong 
death bowling, Indian Premier League experience and the class of their captain, 
Kane Williamson. The doubts perhaps come in the potency of their spin 
department, with Nathan McCullum, Ish Sodhi and Mitch Santner names that induce 
little fear, and yet they could still surprise.

One to watch Colin Munro he of the 14-ball 50 against Sri Lanka in January, is 
a six machine

Pakistan

Last time Super-10 stage

Form WLWLLL

A chaotic buildup to the tournament due to security issues is unlikely to 
affect a team well used to overcoming such adversity and yet Pakistan appear 
too lopsided to challenge for the title, with a potent pace attack offset by a 
batting lineup that does little to inspire confidence. Much will hinge on the 
wicketkeeper Sarfraz Ahmed and all-rounder Shoaib Malik. No side have played 
more than their 20 T20s since the last tournament, with their record a suitably 
inconsistent 10 wins and nine defeats.

One to watch Mohammad Amir’s international return has divided opinion but few 
dispute the left-arm quick’s talent with ball in hand
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90b5660bc61c0854544dd96e0822c777a4a2f9e%2F0_185_3148_1887%2F3148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Twenty20%202016%3A%20team-by-team%20guide%20%7C%20Ali%20Martin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Twenty20%202016%3A%20team-by-team%20guide%20%7C%20Ali%20Martin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fworld-t20-2016-team-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90b5660bc61c0854544dd96e0822c777a4a2f9e%2F0_185_3148_1887%2F3148.jpg>
 Pakistan’s Mohammad Amir bowls during a training session. Photograph: Bikas 
Das/AP 
Australia

Last time Super-10 stage

Form WWLLLL

Steve Smith’s side go into the tournament as second favourites, the result of 
a brawny batting lineup which sees them wrestling with how to accommodate Aaron 
Finch, David Warner, Usman Khawaja, Shane Watson and Smith himself in their top 
four. The power continues with Glenn Maxwell and James Faulkner lower down and 
yet as a collective they remain poor chasers and have struggled previously on 
the subcontinent. With the ball, the absence of Mitchell Starc hurts their 
chances, as does a lack of quality spin.

One to watch Glenn Maxwell is the most brilliantly bonkers batsman in the 
world game

Bangladesh

Last time Super-10 stage

Form WWLWWW

Mashrafe Mortaza’s side continue to grow in confidence following their recent 
appearance in the final of the Asia Cup, having sauntered through the first 
round on the back of Tamim Iqbal’s 233 runs, which included the first Twenty20 
century by a Bangladeshi. Their batting lacks power overall, however, with 
their 180 for two against Oman on Sunday their only total above 170 in the past 
three years.

One to watch The seamer Al-Amin Hossain gives Bangladesh a previously absent 
wicket threat with the ball
 