
All is not necessarily what it seems in India. When the England players 
arrived at the Feroz Kotla ground for their final practice (18 minutes late – 
surprisingly heavy traffic on the Jawaharlal Nehru Marg) – before the match 
against Afghanistan, they stared at a pitch that possessed quite a lot of green 
grass.

This was a bit of a surprise but there can be no guarantees about how the ball 
will behave. On a first visit here three decades ago advice about the Delhi 
pitch for a Test match was sought from Sunil Gavaskar, the captain of India. He 
replied: “Have you been to the Taj Mahal?” “No.” “Well, book up to go on the 
fourth day.” The match was still going on the fifth afternoon.


http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/sport/2016/mar/22/steven-finn-middlesex-surrey-oval-friendly

In the absence of Gavaskar Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan> was consulted about the strip. 
“I have looked at it. I expected a drier pitch. There is a lot of grass on it – 
at the moment. I don’t know what it’s going to do,” he said. “We’ll have to 
leave it as late as possible to select the side. If it’s another hot day he 
[the groundsman] might leave the grass on it.”

Joe Root leads the way as England record stunning World Twenty20 win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
Usually the pitch here is much slower than at Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/england-south-africa-world-twenty20-match-report>
; sometimes the ball turns. Hence there has been speculation that England may 
give a debut to Liam Dawson, who is described as a left-arm spinner even though 
everyone at Hampshire would recognise him as a batting all‑rounder. Not many 
cricketers are given an international debut in an International Cricket Council 
tournament but Dawson may become one.

When it was suggested to Morgan that Joe Root offered him another spinning 
option 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/afghanistan-england-world-t20-india>
, the England captain said: “He can be a viable option as a third spinner.” But 
he then volunteered: “Liam Dawson adds a lot more with the ball than Joe would 
and he will come into consideration if the grass comes off.”

An early night – but how much sleep? – was in order for Dawson. On selection 
Morgan offered one other crumb for the sleuths among us. “I think a huge 
strength of ours is our batting,” he said. “That goes deep since we are able to 
bat down to No10 and sometimes 11, depending on the circumstances.” Maybe you 
do not have to be Hercule Poirot to suggest this may mean Reece Topley could be 
omitted since he is the only genuine No11 in the squad.

Ironically Delhi may provide the sort of surface that prompted the selection 
of Topley for this tournament. Changes of pace and a variety of cutters are 
Topley’s specialities, which should work better on a low-bouncing pitch where 
the ball grips than on the faster, truer surfaces experienced in Mumbai. 
However, Topley’s confidence has looked dented after the two gamesagainst West 
Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/chris-gayle-hammers-england-with-century-for-west-indies-at-world-t20>
 and South Africa; he dropped a straightforward catch in the last match and the 
ball has not been landing in the right place. Even so, a pace attack of David 
Willey, Chris Jordan, Ben Stokes and, just possibly, Liam Plunkett has an odd 
ring to it.

Morgan, who was in the England side who lost against the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/31/england-humiliation-holland-world-twenty20>
 in the previous World T20 tournament, recognises thethreat of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/afghanistan-cricket-world-twenty20-the-spin>
 but insists his team are better prepared now. “They’re a dangerous side, 
playing a really exciting brand of cricket. Ten years ago we might not have 
known much about them but that is not the case now.”

The squad have watched Afghanistan’s games against Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/afghanistan-sri-lanka-world-twenty20-match-report>
 andSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/south-africa-afghanistan-world-twenty-20-report>
 – in both matches the full member side had uneasy moments – so perhaps they 
will be able to pick young Rashid Khan’s googly even though it seems hard to 
detect.

Afghanistan’s 13-year journey to cricket’s top table deserves greater reward | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/22/afghanistan-cricket-world-twenty20-the-spin>
Morgan was reminded of England’s defeat against the Dutch. “That was a unique 
set of circumstances. We were already out of the tournament. We probably came 
into the game with a completely wrong mindset. We were flying home directly 
after the game and had already packed our bags to leave. In my mind I was 
already at home sitting on the couch going into that game. A lot of guys were 
the same. But coming into this match we’re really refreshed.”

So Morgan is confident, eager to point out his side have prevailed on turning 
pitches in Sharjah recently. However, there were no plans to concentrate on 
England’s net run rate, the implement used to separate sides with the same 
number of points at the end of the group matches, a situation that could easily 
arise.

“Our priority is on winning,” Morgan said. “I think focusing on anything else 
at the moment, given that there are two group games left [England play Sri 
Lanka on Saturday] would be a little bit naive. Actually it would be stupid.” 
As would making too many early assumptions about the Delhi pitch.
 