
1. Söll, Austria

Söll may not share the fame of Kitzbühel but it does share its ski area. The 
Kitzbüheler Alpen AllStarCard covers 10 Austrian ski areas including Kitzbühel, 
St Johann in Tirol and the newly formed Ski Jewel area of Alpbachtal and 
Wildschönau – more than 1,000km of piste – for £188 for six days. Right in the 
centre of all that terrain lies Söll, where a double room with breakfast at the 
Apartments Sport Mayr (sportmayr.info 
<http://www.sportmayr.info/englishpages/ourhouse/index.html>) costs from £23 a 
night. The town itself has a lively après-ski atmosphere, but you will need a 
car or to brave the ski bus to get to the slopes, which are around 1km away 
from the centre. A small price to pay.
Fly Thomas Cook (thomascook.com <http://www.thomascook.com/>) has flights to 
Innsbruck for £103 return. Crystal (crystalski.co.uk 
<http://www.crystalski.co.uk/>) is offering free lift passes for kids (up to 15 
years old) with every adult pass purchase

2. Montgenèvre, France

Think of the Via Lattea and the most obvious resorts are Sestrière and Sauze 
d'Oulx. But one of the more humble destinations in the linked Italy/France ski 
area is Montgenèvre, on the French side. It's a little powder pocket, 
family-friendly and good for beginners and intermediates, with access to the 
Milky Way's 400km of piste. Go Montgenèvre (go-montgenevre.com 
<http://go-montgenevre.com>) has a week's accommodation in a self-catering 
apartment, plus a six-day lift pass, standard ski and boot hire and transfers 
from Turin airport (1½ hours) for £360pp in January.
Six-day Via Lattea pass £185. Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com/en>
) flies to Turin from £69 return

3. La Tzoumaz, Switzerland
 Chalet Auriane in La Tzoumaz 
Verbier looms large on the list of must-ski resorts, with spectacular 
off-piste terrain, efficient lifts and 410km of runs – but the cost of skiing 
there can be absurdly expensive. Drop over the Savoleyres ridge in the Four 
Valleys, however, and while you still have access to Verbier's enviable ski 
area, you get to take advantage of La Tzoumaz's prices (and north-facing, 
crowd-free slopes). Piste-side Chalet Auriane (chaletauriane.com 
<http://www.chaletauriane.com/>) is a five-star lodging, costing from £825pppw 
fully catered, with spectacular views and comes complete with its own funicular.
Six-day Four Valleys lift pass £234; six-day Savoleyres lift pass £222. Swiss 
Air (swiss.com <http://www.swiss.com/web/EN/Pages/index.aspx?Country=US>) flies 
to Geneva from £98 return

4. Avajan, French Pyrénées

The French Pyrénées have long languished in the shadow of the Alps, but do 
yourself a favour and pop it on your list as a potential because you'll find 
small villages, traditional (and good-value) restaurants and plenty of powder 
being skied mainly by French and Spanish holidaymakers. L'Ancienne Poste in 
Avajan (ancienneposteavajan.com <http://www.ancienneposteavajan.com/>) is 10 
minutes' drive from three resorts – Peyragudes, St Lary and Piau Engaly, just 
on the edge of the Pyrénées National Park. Half-board Christmas week will set 
you back £614pp, and that includes two days' guiding with the owner James who, 
conveniently, is a qualified ski instructor and mountain guide.
Six-day St Lary lift pass £192. EasyJet (easyjet.com 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/>) flies to Toulouse for £74 return

5. St Martin de Belleville, France
 Chamois Lodge in the Three Valleys 
St Martin is in the Three Valleys ski area (Méribel, Courchevel and Val 
Thorens) but because it's not slap bang in the centre of Méribel, you'll find 
incredibly reasonable prices for really quite outstanding accommodation while 
still being able to ski 600km of piste. Guests at Chamois Lodge (
thealpineclub.co.uk <http://thealpineclub.co.uk/chamois.html>) get kingsize 
beds, six-course meals, handmade furniture, deeply lavish soft furnishings, 
British plug sockets and an in-resort chauffeur, all for the rather unexpected 
sum of £579pp per week. Well worth sacrificing a convenient stagger home for.
Six-day Three Valleys pass £207; six-day Méribel pass £170. BA (
britishairways.com <http://www.britishairways.com/travel/global/public/en_>) 
flies to Chambéry for £75 one-way

6. Hochfügen, Austria

When it comes to skiing in the Zillertal region, the obvious choice is 
Mayrhofen: immense terrain, immense après-ski. A week's Zillertal SuperSki pass 
comes in at £173 for 671km of pistes, and because it includes the Hintertux 
glacier you're pretty much guaranteed snow all season. But you can still have 
access to all of that at a cheaper price if you stay in Hochfügen. The resort 
itself has 38 lifts plus a free bus to take you to other areas on the pass.
Half-board double rooms at the Berghotel (mountain-hotel-tirol.com 
<http://www.mountain-hotel-tirol.com/>) cost from £67 per night. EasyJet (
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>) flies to Innsbruck from £113 return

7. Les Houches, France
 Les Houches, with its breathtaking views of Mont Blanc. Photograph: Alamy 
Think of Alpine skiing at its most extreme and there's only one place to go: 
Chamonix. But the Chamonix valley is home to a number of little towns, each 
with its own resort. If you want guaranteed open lifts on a powder day, 
complete with a local feel and prices to match, head to Les Houches, at the 
bottom of the valley. Boutique Hotel Slalom (hotelslalom.net 
<http://www.hotelslalom.net/>) has rooms from £80 a night within two minutes' 
walk of the lifts, while at the Vieilles Luges (vieillesluges.com 
<http://www.lesvieillesluges.com/>), a beautiful piste-side restaurant, a huge 
lunch of duck thigh with porcini sauce passionately crafted and served by Julie 
and Claude will cost £12. Feel smug as you watch everyone from the rest of the 
valley queueing in their cars to get to Les Houches when none of the other 
lifts are open.
Six-day Mont Blanc unlimited pass £212; six-day Les Houches pass £147. British 
Airways (britishairways.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/global/public/en_>) flies to Geneva from 
£45 one-way

8. Andermatt, Switzerland

Andermatt is within shouting distance of big-name Swiss resorts including Saas 
Fee, Zermatt and Verbier. But at £165 for a week's pass, it is one of the 
cheapest Swiss resorts, and it's difficult to understand why it has remained 
relatively under the radar for so long. With its top lift soaring 2,963 metres 
and north-facing slopes staying powder-sure and untracked for days, it's a 
great option for confident skiers looking to get away from the crowds.
Basecamp Andermatt (basecamp-andermatt.com <http://www.basecamp-andermatt.com/>
) is an ecolodge and hostel with double rooms from as little as £26 per night. 
EasyJet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>) flies to Zurich £79 return

9. Jay Peak, Vermont, USA

The East Coast resorts of America languish in the champagne powder shadows of 
the Rockies, despite having a pretty good season last year while the Western 
resorts suffered. On top of that, the big names of Killington and Stowe tend to 
dominate. But in the past four years, while our backs were turned, Jay Peak (
jaypeakresort.com <http://www.jaypeakresort.com/>) invested $200m in its 
infrastructure, snowmaking and amenities, transforming itself into a top-class 
contender for US ski destination 2013. But because it's a fair drive from 
Boston, prices tend to be lower than most. It's worth the effort – with its 
annual snowfall of 279in it is consistently the snowiest resort on the East 
Coast.
Ski Safari has a seven-night holiday to Jay Peak, staying at the four-star 
Hotel Jay and including a seven-day lift pass, return flights to Boston, car 
hire and a two-hour daily ski lesson for £1,399pp (skisafari.com 
<http://www.skisafari.com/>) 

10. Ogden, Utah, USA

If you're thinking of skiing Stateside, by all means head to Utah, but instead 
of making a beeline for Park City, try Ogden (visitogden.com 
<http://www.visitogden.com/>), a place which quite simply should be on every 
skier's list of amazing-value destinations. It is close to Salt Lake City 
airport, and within 20 minutes' drive of your hotel you will find yourself in 
either Snowbasin, Wolf Creek or Powder Mountain – the latter with 7,000 acres 
of skiable terrain and a budget cat-skiing operation where for £11 a trip you 
can find yourself staring at 700 acres of pristine powder snow. On top of that 
a day's lift pass is £40, and a shuttle bus will take you from the city to 
either mountain, so you can save even more money in Ogden's budget 
accommodation.
The Alaskan Inn (alaskaninn.com <http://www.alaskaninn.com/>) has 
Arctic-inspired rooms from £50pppn including breakfast. KLM (klm.com 
<http://www.klm.com/>) flies to Salt Lake City from £559 return

All flights from London
 