
Winning tip: Vancouver, Canada


Cypress Mountain is only a 30-minute car trip from downtown Vancouver and 
offers an amazing variety of groomed runs, moguls and backcountry options. It’s 
as good a place to learn as it is to push your limits. One of the best things 
about the mountain is its proximity to the city. Head up in the evening for 
some jaw-dropping night skiing with the city lights below. There’s plenty of 
great après-ski in the lovely lodge bars and you have the benefit of being able 
to stay in Vancouver itself, not in an expensive resort. It’s also a fantastic 
day out for families, offering tubing, sledging and other snowy activities. 
Cypress also has a Nordic Area dedicated to cross-country skiing and 
snowshoeing, again offering incredible views of the vast mountain ranges north 
of Vancouver. This a perfect option for those seeking the comforts of a 
cosmopolitan city broken up by some alpine adventure.
• Day pass £23 adult, £17 junior, cypressmountain.com 
<http://cypressmountain.com/>
Caroline King

Almaty, Kazakhstan

 Photograph: Photoprofi30/Getty Images 
From the country’s largest city, Almaty, the Shymbulak ski slopes are on your 
doorstep and everything is easy and reasonably priced. The resort is small, but 
there were no queues at any point. From the gondola at Medeu to the toilets and 
lockers at the slopes, the services are all fine. It’s not a resort for novices 
though: the main long slopes are red and there are only a few short blues. At 
4pm the slopes are in the shade and get icy. It’s well worth going over to the 
other side of the mountain, for glacier views, and three short blue slopes. Of 
course, flying to Kazakhstan is expensive but the skiing can be made very cheap 
by renting gear fromExtremal <http://visitalmaty.kz/z5/> on the corner of 
Dostyk and Al Ferabi streets in Almaty: it’s half the price of the slopes 
rental place. Take the frequent number 12 bus from Extremal to the Medeu 
gondola (19p).
• Weekday ski pass £12 (£19 at weekends).
debbieowen

Aviemore, Scotland

 Photograph: Alamy 
We are going to Aviemore at February half-term to teach our youngest child to 
ski, following in the footsteps of her siblings. It’s a good place to start as 
conditions in Scotland can be variable and the beginners’ section is up the 
mountain not at the bottom, so if you can cope with the wind and ice you often 
find there, skiing elsewhere later is relatively easy. The cafe at the top of 
the funicular is also adjacent to the beginners’ area, so a hot chocolate is 
often appreciated.
• Day pass £35 adult, £21 junior, aviemoreski.co.uk 
<http://www.aviemoreski.co.uk/>
Callens17

Near Zakopane, Poland

 Photograph: Alamy 
If you haven’t got a clue about skiing or snowboarding but want to learn, 
Bialka Tatrzanska, a small Tatra mountain resort two hours’ drive from Krakow 
and 22km fromZakopane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/10/perfect-beginners-ski-snowboard-resort-zakopane-poland>
 is a serious contender for a snow sports crash course. Affordable one-to-one 
tuition for kids and adults, nursery slope with travelator, beginners’ slope 
with drag-lift and multiple runs with modern chair lifts are available. If 
you’re experienced, you may find the resort small, but as a beginner there are 
more than enough runs and options to give you steady progress and keep you busy 
for the week. Well-priced, good quality (and excellent customer service) rental 
facilities are on site. Overall, the scale of the resort is small enough to 
make snow newbies comfortable but there’s plenty of accommodation in 
self-catering apartments and hotels.
• Day pass £22 adult, £19 junior
veronica8a

South-west Bulgaria

 Photograph: Alamy 
There’s no such thing as a cheap ski holiday, but Bansko, three hours’ drive 
south of Sofia, comes pretty close. It’s great for beginners as lessons and 
equipment hire are cheap, and there is a reasonable range of pistes including a 
nursery slope, some excellent blues and reds, and a couple of decent blacks. 
There is some off piste, but advanced skiers may be bored. The real joy of 
Bansko is its social potential – drinks and meals are very cheap, even on the 
slopes. It’s simple to arrange accommodation (£10-40pppn depending on whether 
you want a shared apartment or full-board hotel); flights to Sofia are 
available from budget airlines and transfers can be arranged online. Once in 
the resort, a lift pass can be purchased from the gondola station and equipment 
hire and lessons arranged through a nearby shop (Bansko Sport are very friendly 
and helpful). If you’re a family or a group of people wanting to try or improve 
at skiing without spending the earth, Bansko is great fun.
• Day pass €38 adult, €28 child, bansko-sports.com 
<http://www.bansko-sports.com/>
Frankie Pedley

Haute-Savoie, France

Les Gets is family-friendly with gentle, tree-lined lower slopes for beginners 
and higher, steeper pistes. Its five mountain flanks face different directions, 
so the area is great for tracking perfect snow conditions at different times of 
day. The jewel in the crown is Praz de Lys, which mainly locals use (it’s not 
included in the main ski pass). This area has empty, beautiful runs for skiing 
and also many wonderful walking trails for non-skiers and dogs. There are great 
views across to Mont Blanc. Every Tuesday night Les Gets puts on a free evening 
of entertainment for visitors. At the base of the slopes a giant cauldron of 
steaming mulled wine is served by locals, or mugs of hot chocolate; the ski 
instructors put on a great display of skill, and the evening finishes with 
fireworks. The town itself is delightful, with many traditional restaurants and 
chalets.
• Day pass €35 adult, €26 junior, lesgets.com <http://en.lesgets.com/snow-ski/>
ID4629880

French Pyrenees

 Photograph: Alamy 
The small town of Luz-Saint-Sauveur is in the Pyrenees 25km south of Lourdes. 
The area is incredibly beautiful, the town friendly. Book accommodation and buy 
a Carte N’py Vacances onN-py.com <http://www.n-py.com/en>. With this hands-free 
card you can ski Luz Ardiden, Grand Tourmalet or Cauterets and pay a reduced 
rate, only for the days you ski. The three resorts are all very different.Luz 
Ardiden <http://www.luz.org/en/skiing.html> is great for snowboarders, Grand 
Tourmalet <http://www.grand-tourmalet.com/uk/index.aspx> is enormous and 
Cauterets <http://www.cauterets.com/> has an awesome snow park. Ryanair flies 
to Lourdes.
• Carte N’py Vacances €20
Nicolette Collins

Hautes-Alpes, France

 Photograph: Jmichel Deborde/Getty Images 
Unlike overcrowded, overpriced French ski resorts such as Courchevel or Val 
d’Isère,Orcières-Merlette in the Hautes-Alpes offers a friendly and reasonably 
priced yet varied and astonishingly beautiful set of slopes and activities. We 
stayed in the tiny village of Prapic, 35km from Gap, in a heartwarming B&B 
which served delicious, simple local food. There is plenty on offer for the 
non-skiing folks. We really enjoyed hiking and snowshoe walks.
• Day pass €33.50 adult, €27.30 child, orcieres.com 
<http://www.orcieres.com/en/winter/the-resort/overview.html>
Simon Halsey

Camonica valley, Italy


Last winter I went skiing in Aprica, in the Camonica valley, Lombardy, with a 
group of people with mixed skiing abilities. Aprica itself is a beautiful place 
with lovely hotels and apartments, and the scenery is stunning. There are 50km 
of ski runs here, many ideal for beginners like me. I was a first-timer at 
skiing but the instructor atScuola Italia <http://www.apricasci.com/> (from 
€100 for five days’ tuition) was very patient and informative. My tip would be 
to make sure you have hold of the ski lift properly! I didn’t and I fell off, 
losing the rest of my party for quite a while.
• Day pass €38 adult, €30 child, apricaonline.com 
<http://www.apricaonline.com/en/ski-runs>
Karen Durrant

Niseko, Hokkaido

 Photograph: Alamy 
Japan has some amazing resorts up on its northern island of Hokkaido, 
especially Niseko village, 90km from Sapporo, the island’s capital. The amount 
of snow the area gets annually is unreal, especially its powder snow, which the 
village is renowned for. The resort, on the slopes of the inactive 
Niseko-Annupuri volcano, also has its ownonsen or open air baths, so you can 
refresh after a busy day and soak up the local culture. To make the trip less 
expensive, visitors should look to stay at less commercial hotels in the nearby 
towns.
• Day pass £42 adult, £23 child, niseko-village.com 
<http://www.niseko-village.com/en/white/lift-passes.html>
Leanne Oughton
 