
We asked for your favourite board game, and you told us 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003?page=2>. 
Thank you. From ancient classics like Chess and Go to more modern staples like 
Scrabble and Monopoly, we heard all your stories and heeded all your words.

One of you has even made your own space add-on to Risk.
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1679969> 
Risk - Home Made Space expansion 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1679969>

Risk was always my favourite board game. I decided to send it into orbit with 
a home-made space expansion.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Nick Ellis <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Nick Ellis> 

25 August 2015, 13:20 

Mirroring the recent rise in gaming’s popularity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/25/board-games-internet-playstation-xbox>
, there were also some lesser-known titles amid the tributes to the likes of 
Cluedo and Ludo. Accordingly, we have put together a list of twenty of 
excellent but slightly lesser-known games suggested by our readers that we 
either have played and can vouch for their awesomeness, or frankly sound 
amazing and you should seek out henceforth. There are loads that didn’t quite 
make the list, but sound brilliant all the same (Bloodbowl anyone? 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681268>): 
check out the GuardianWitness assignment to see them all. 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003>

Some are rather obscure, others are already hugely popular, and you have our 
permission to roll your eyes (and then your dice) at us if we’ve mentioned a 
game that, to you, represents the very peak of gaming obviousness. But 
remember: not everyone is on the same square. Some people out there are more 
like the person writing this sentence, who only recently discovered all the 
magic (:the gathering) he was missing. Please pity the man who only got wood a 
few short years ago.

So here we are then. From the pretty well known to the rare as dragon’s teeth, 
here are a bunch of games you should consider playing with your friends, 
families, and future enemies. Maybe start this weekend? You’ll thank us later.

1) Carcassonne
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684707> 
Carcassonne is such fun, as you can see 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684707>

Perfect in front of a fire on a winter's night in a pub in the middle of 
nowhere

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By jameswalsh <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/jameswalsh> 

28 August 2015, 12:13 

We know. Sorry. But the tile-based farming / castle building / road-based 
thievery simulator has enduring popularity, and is still winning new fans the 
globe over. It’s a game that’s a dream to play in pubs, even if you have to 
wear the curiosity of fellow locals with a fixed grin at times. The game has 
loads of add-on packs to increase the complexity. “For me, it is the ultimate,” 
says an anonymous French man who owns a lot of board games.

“Well designed, well crafted, never the same scenarios. Clever extension packs 
which keep the game fresh,” murmured one reader with approval. “A brilliant 
game with near infinite re-playability,” saidYarble 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Yarble>.

2) Game of Thrones

I’ll admit: I’ve never seen Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>. But our readers 
reckon it’s fun even if you’ve not been watching the making-fantasy-acceptable 
HBO television series. “A superbly nuanced strategy game, with additional fun 
if you’re a fan of the source material,” says Paul Hetherington.


“So intense that I think of it as ‘high fantasy air-traffic control’,” says 
AlabasterC 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1682103>. 
“Just don’t ask me to explain the rules for ports again.”

3) Dominion

Not, sadly, a game based on the main bad guys in Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, 
this card related kingdom-building and ambition-thwarting game was one of the 
picks of our readers. “It’s an extremely interactive and constantly dynamic 
game, and it’s not always easy to see who’s winning until the last card count”, 
saidRobert Thé <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Robert%20Th%C3%A9>.

4) Dead of Winter
 “Dead of Winter is my current number 1 board game. A co-op game of survival 
during the winter months in a post apocalyptic zombie world.” Photograph: 
DarkGlen/GuardianWitness 
DarkGlen, who provided the picture above (excellent poster), really likes Dead 
of Winter, as did many of our respondents. It sounds ace. He explains:

“Players have to manage the colonies resources to ensure no one goes hungry 
and the camp doesn’t get too smelly, whilst trying to achieve an overall 
objective, that may be finding a cure, collecting enough gear to move on to 
another town, or just finding enough fuel to keep the generators running. Each 
player has a secret agenda, that may be nice and safe and just a bit selfish or 
may be to cause all of your friends to fail by reducing their morale to 0 
before the main objective is complete.

“Then there’s the icing on the cake, the Crossroad cards, that add narrative 
and unexpected events to the game each turn by having the player to your right 
draw a card and only trigger the event if certain conditions are met.

“Also has zombies which some people think are pretty cool.”

5) Twilight Struggle

“Yes, ok, I know, it *sounds like* The Game of Life but for vampires, but it’s 
actually a brilliant, nuanced and absorbing cold war simulator,” saysrichdhw 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/richdhw>, who really, really, really 
likes this game.

“Twilight Struggle makes you feel like you’re constantly under attack on all 
fronts, that every decision you make is important or even globally 
consequential, and that you have to pick between the best of bad or even 
catastrophic options... and that’s when you’re winning. Come to think of it, it 
probably feels a bit like being a superpower engaged in a tense standoff with a 
similarly powerful but ideologically opposing hegemon.”

kitty82 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/kitty82> is also a fan. “Even 
though it can sometimes take three days, is so tense it causes tears and 
shouting, and last time ended in deliberate nuclear annihilation in a grand, 
but ultimately pointless, desire to choose my own method of defeat. Still, 
brilliant.”

6) Netrunner

Do card games count as board games? The eternal dilemma. For the purpose of 
this exercise, they do. Netrunner is the cyberpunky card game our tech desk 
seem to play a lot of their time playing. There can be no greater endorsement.

7) Settlers of Catan

Eye-rollers, move on to the next game. Non eye-rollers: this game is awesome! 
Give it a go. The regulars at Basingstoke Discovery Centre can’t be wrong.
 Playing Catan at Basingstoke Discovery Centre. Photograph: Vicky 
Kearley/GuardianWitness 
8) 7 Wonders
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684715> 
Sweet 7 Wonders victory 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684715>

These aren't particularly impressive scores, admittedly

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By jameswalsh <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/jameswalsh> 

28 August 2015, 12:19 

I know, I know. I could easy have made this number 7. In lieu of an apology, 
Victoria McRitchie 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1680223> 
explains her journey to this superb game.

“I’ve loved board games since childhood, but usually the Mattel, Waddingtons, 
Ravensburger favourites like Cluedo, Downfall and Monopoly. It was in my 20s 
that I decided to re-ignite this passion, so I googled “best board game”, and 
came across Carcassonne, the now-infamous gateway game. It wasn’t long before 
the expansions were tumbling through my letterbox on a weekly basis, before 
graduating on to Settlers of Catan and Ticket to Ride.

“But it still wasn’t enough, I needed more. Then I found out about 
BoardGameGeek.com and their ranking of games. I started working my way through 
the top 20, and now my shelves are creaking under the weight of the European 
behemoths like Terra Mystica, Agricola and Through the Ages. Their artwork, 
mechanics and themes are quite astounding in comparison to the relatively 
mundane bestsellers like Cranium or The Game of Life. I now regularly host 
games nights at my house with friends I’ve met through Facebook groups. An 
Indian takeaway and a 5 player game of 7 Wonders for me is my ultimate night 
in, sheer bliss, especially when I win!”

9) Ticket to Ride
 Wise guy, eh? Photograph: James Walsh/GuardianWitness 
“Wise guy, eh? Are you trying to punch my ticket? I’ll send you all the way to 
Chattanooga! All aboard!”

If you’ve ever fancied pretending to be a 19th century rail magnate, then this 
is the game for you. For reasons I can’t fully explain, we tend to put on 
terrible 1920s American gangster accents while building or blocking routes 
across the continent (there’s also a Europe version), but this gets grating 
after six or seven hours. The game itself does not. “Like rummy but with added 
trains!” enthusedDeviant <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Deviant>.

10) Survive: Escape from Atlantis

Those foolish peoples of Atlantis, rightly punished by vengeful gods for their 
decadent ways. This board game has had a few mutations since it first came out 
back in the eighties as “survive!”, but our readers seem to like the current 
version.
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681381> 
Survive: Escape from Atlantis! 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681381>

A really great game where the players try to escape the sinking island 
occasionally helping each other but mainly feeding each others explorers to 
sharks and sea monsters!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Bob Cairns <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser15279680> 

26 August 2015, 10:16 

11) Pandemic: Contagion
 Victory and defeat. Photograph: TheWitchfinderGenral/GuardianWitness 
“This is another game that launched at Essen in 2014,” enthuses 
TheWitchfinderGenral <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/TheWitchfinderGenral>
. “The objective is to become the most deadly infectious disease, in a twist on 
the old “Pandemic” theme.

“The sad face on the right belongs to Martin who just lost. The smiler is 
Will, who won! Yay!”




12) Civilisation

Not to be confused with the (admittedly awesome) computer game of the same 
name, Civilisation won strong approval from some of our readers,jolo5309 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/jolo5309> among them.

“High levels of interaction between players sells me on this game. Every turn 
there is a frenetic five-minute round of open trading as players try to get 
matches to the goods they have and dump their calamities on other players,” he 
or she said. “The game play is long (usually 6+ hours), but everyone is in the 
game until the very end.”

13) Euphoria: Build a Better Dystopia
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684703> 
Euphoria - Build a better dystopia 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1684703>

Probably my favourite game at the minute. Dice-chucking worker placement fun, 
but as with all my favourite games, the thing I like the most is the 
interaction between the people, superfun times make superfriends.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Mark Cooke <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Mark Cooke> 

28 August 2015, 12:11 

14) Firefly: The Game
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681604> 
Firefly: The Board Game 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681604>

Ive been a gamer since my teens and play regularly. My favourite board game is 
coincidentally my favourite Sci Fi series Firefly. Takes some time and a lot of 
space but great fun!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Andy Williams <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser15280316> 

26 August 2015, 13:25 

15) Warhammer Quest

As someone who mis-spent part of his youth hanging around Nottingham’s 
Warhammer shop, wandering how a few plastic skeletons could be quite so 
expensive, it was important to get a Warhammer related title on the list. Gregg 
Lewis-Qualls likes it so much he even sent in a video.

Warhammer Quest Timelapse 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1683313>

Tell me if you've heard this one before: A Dwarf, a thief, a fighter and a 
priest walk into a dungeon ... Warhammer Quest is the quintessential 'Old 
School' dungeon-crawler.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Gregg Lewis-Qualls <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Gregg 
Lewis-Qualls> 

27 August 2015, 14:32 

16) Heroes Wanted
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1682294> 
Heroes Wanted 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1682294>

Assemble wacky, wannabe superheroes from two different halves and then face 
off against an equally absurd supervillain and their entourage to earn more 
fame than anyone else.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID0475915 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID0475915> 

26 August 2015, 22:01 

17) Merchant of Venus
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1680393> 
Merchant of Venus 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1680393>

Playing the Avalon Hill game 'Merchant of Venus' at Midcon (November 2012 in 
the Hallmark Hotel). A discovery and trading game where players have to explore 
trade routes and customise their ships to best exploit them. Most goods are in 
demand somewhere except for the Humans' main export - rock videos. The winner 
is the first to reach a set total of game-money, $2000, to $4000. From a few 
hours, to most of a day depending on the number of players.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By William O'Neill <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/William O'Neill> 

25 August 2015, 18:49 

18) Colt Express
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1679964> 
Colt Express with my friends 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1679964>

We bought this at Essen 2014, and it was brilliant. Essentially a train 
robbery game, and pretty much made for turning into a drinking game. Lots of 
fun!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By TheWitchfinderGenral 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/TheWitchfinderGenral> 

25 August 2015, 13:18 

19) Antiquity
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1680148> 
Antiquity 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1680148>

It took me a few years to come across the game that I could deem as my 'Grail 
Game' but eventually it happened. 'Antiquity' is quite unknown in both the 
hobby and casual gaming circles but I feel like it should be. The limited 
amount of copies in existence does a lot to hinder its reputation but for the 
few who own a copy, it is something that remains in their collection as a 
treasure. It is refined, meticulous and mentally stimulating. The rules are 
simple but the play is nothing short of genius. For most it's a game that's a 
easily passed over but for me it's my white whale.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Thecasuals <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Thecasuals> 

25 August 2015, 15:50 

20) City of Remnants
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681341> 
City of Remnants 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55db3248e4b0959e5f8de003/1681341>

It has flaws, but I love it for its built in storytelling and blend of 
different mechanics. Gang warfare in a bleak future; desperation spelled out in 
cards you never have enough of, and fights where you can lose everything, going 
in blind. Really cleverly takes a number of different game elements and 
balances them against each other to create a unique and fascinating game.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By AlabasterC <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/AlabasterC> 

26 August 2015, 9:45 

Any games we truly should have mentioned, and are scurvy fools for not having 
done so? Let us know in the comments section below
 