
The Snowy Mountains are home to Australia’s highest mountain, Mount 
Kosciuszko, a vast wilderness of snow gums and alpine heath that offers a huge 
range of outdoor pursuits from horse riding to fishing or canoeing. Yet more 
than 90% of visitors in the winter come here for one thing: to visit the 
slopes. It’s a shame, because as great as skiing and snowboarding are, there 
are so many other great, and more affordable, attractions.
 New South Wales ski resorts are popular but also slightly maligned. The 
winter snow cover at its four resorts, Perisher, Thredbo, Selwyn and Charlotte 
Pass, can be patchy, the cost of accommodation, lift passes and food and drink 
can add up, and in terms of facilities it doesn’t stack up to the experience 
overseas. A ski package to New Zealand – or even Japan – can be found for about 
the same price as a week’s skiing in NSW. Yet despite the criticisms, the 
Australian high country is unique.


Skiing in Australia on the cheap: how to save money on the slopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/03/skiing-in-australia-on-the-cheap-how-to-save-money-on-the-slopes>
Less than 1% of Australia’s landmass is covered in snow during the winter, 
most of it protected inside Kosciuszko national park, which spans about 6,900 
sq km. Despite being named after the Polish explorer who “discovered” it, the 
park has a rich Indigenous history as home of the Walgal and Ngarigo people. 
These groups visited the alpine regions in summer, feasting on the fat bogong 
moths that are abundant then, much the reverse of current visitors who flock 
there in winter.

There are also the natural history, wildlife and spectacular landscapes of the 
park. The sight of a fresh snowfall covering the ground and ghostly white snow 
gums against a bright blue sky is enough to stir up the Banjo Paterson verse in 
even the least patriotic of souls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439772412144%2Fc0cbcd13-6763-4bad-a6cd-108270dfa20e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439772412144%2Fc0cbcd13-6763-4bad-a6cd-108270dfa20e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Snowboarders and skiiers in the Snowy Mountains in August 2015. Photograph: 
Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
Despite the high price of most things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/03/skiing-in-australia-on-the-cheap-how-to-save-money-on-the-slopes>
 at the ski resorts, if you have travelled this far it’s really worth paying 
for at least a day or two on the slopes. Resort passes start at about $130 and 
a season pass at Perisher, which costs about $750, now includes access to 
resorts in Colorado, Utah, California and Nevada after itspurchase by the 
US-based Vail resorts 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/news/perisher-purchased-by-us-ski-resort-firm-vail-resorts/story-e6frg906-1227285641615>
, which is a bargain of sorts.


Friday 3pm: Poachers Pantry, Nanima Road, Hall

The drive from Sydney is a long one – about five or six hours. Alternatively 
you can fly to Canberra with Qantas, Virgin Australia or Jetstar and hire a 
car. There are also coaches daily from Central station and Canberra to 
Jindabyne.

If driving, it’s not a bad idea to break up the trip. Poachers Pantry 
<http://www.poacherspantry.com.au/>, just outside the ACT in New South Wales, 
is a good place to stop and recharge. It’s home to a cafe, a smokehouse (where 
you can pick up some excellent bacon for a fry-up when you arrive in the snow) 
and a cellar door, with a decent range of cool-climate wines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9905596874c0625ee534eecd48ed970447e552c%2F0_0_960_1280%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9905596874c0625ee534eecd48ed970447e552c%2F0_0_960_1280%2F960.jpg>
 The writer, Patrick Keneally, at Perisher resort in August 2015. Photograph: 
Patrick Keneally for the Guardian 
Poachers Pantry had its moment in the spotlight as one of the destinations on 
the taxpayer-funded taxi trip by the former Speaker, Peter Slipper. Say what 
you like about entitlements, but at least he showed impeccable taste in choice 
of venues. He also paid a visit toClonakilla winery 
<http://www.clonakilla.com.au/>, just down the road in Murrumbateman, another 
top choice. The Clonakilla riesling, which we sampled apres-ski a day later, is 
well worth facing an AFP investigation just to get your hands on it.

Friday 7pm: Lake Crackenback Resort and Spa 

Lake Crackenback Resort  <http://www.lakecrackenback.com.au/>is just next to 
the Bullocks Flat ski tube station and is an amalgamation of chalets and 
apartments. The chalet where I am staying is an immense affair – three 
bedrooms, three bathrooms, chandeliers made out of faux-antlers, underfloor 
heating and plenty of top-of-the-range technology. It all seems a little 
excessive, especially as when you are skiing you seem to spend little time at 
your accommodation, but if you split the costs between three couples, the 
$900-odd a night cost of a deluxe chalet would be worth it. There are also 
studios for about $255 a night.

The resort certainly has its upsides: an expansive view of the snowcapped 
ranges from the chalet’s balcony and a 150-metre private driveway linking the 
resort to the ski tube station. You can comfortably go from being tucked up in 
bed to getting on the first chairlift of the day in 30 minutes flat. The resort 
also offers activities for non-skiers, from mountain biking tours to archery 
and trout fishing (you can drop a line directly from the balcony of one of the 
apartments into the lake).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0cf95a43d2d8d4f2ddc577b2430ac31865c26c%2F0_98_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd0cf95a43d2d8d4f2ddc577b2430ac31865c26c%2F0_98_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Lake Crackenback Resort and Spa superior lodge in August 2015. Photograph: 
Patrick Keneally for the Guardian 
8pm: Cuisine Restaurant, Lake Crackenback Resort

The Lake Crackenback resort’s one-hat restaurant looks over the lake and the 
ranges and is the perfect place for a drink and a meal after a day’s skiing. It 
also provides breakfast. I filled up on pork belly, king browns, cauliflower 
custard, macadamia and crackling ($23) then a wagyu sirloin with skordalia, 
watercress and miso mustard ($39), a side of hand-cut chips with garlic aioli 
($12) and brussels sprouts, prosciutto and parmesan ($12). A four-course 
degustation menu with wine will set you back $125, or a five-course one for 
$150. We also ordered a bottle of Clonakilla Riesling ($58) and a couple of 
Asahi beers ($9 each) – just what you need to prepare you for a day of skiing.

Saturday 8am: group ski lessons, Perisher

If, like me, you consider yourself a reasonable skier but are largely self 
taught, the chances are you’ve been doing it all wrong. I’ve always wanted to 
be able to ski likeJames Bond in On Her Majesty’s Secret Service 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lrkerh77MYY>, fleeing an eagle’s nest lair of 
a criminal mastermind down near-vertical slopes chased by henchmen with machine 
guns, all while not spilling a drop of martini.

When I relay this dream to my Czech skiing instructor, Mataj, in the morning, 
he gives me a blank look, perhaps not realising the film’s cultural importance. 
I’m in a group of six skiers, and feel a little rusty after not having skied 
for about four years. We start off doing big gentle loops down the mountain 
following his tracks, trying to shift our balance counterintuitively down the 
slope and concentrating on technique.

Sadly, I’m not likely to get a call from MI6 to join its elite winter division 
any time soon, but I am improving. Group lesson and lift-ticket packages are 
available for $176 (about $50 on top of the usual lift ticket price) and begin 
at 9am and 11am daily.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439772916617%2F03b83f6d-3ef5-48d4-b9ff-426b5ab0f50b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439772916617%2F03b83f6d-3ef5-48d4-b9ff-426b5ab0f50b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Snowboarders and skiiers in the Snowy Mountains this August. Photograph: Saeed 
Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
1pm: The Man from Snowy River Hotel 

Good food and drink is hard to find in the snow – mostly it’s overpriced, 
stodgy pies, chips and pizzas. The Man from Snowy River Hotel does a decent job 
with a huge schnitzel and chips for $23 and a schooner of beer for $9, but it’s 
not the nice cosy pub with battered comfortable old chesterfield sofas, a 
roaring open fire and an expansive view over the valley that I had hoped for.

2pm: Private ski lessons, Perisher

After lunch, I trudge back up to the ski lifts to meet Luke, my instructor for 
the afternoon. Again he works on improving my skiing style, trying to make me 
more fluid in movements in and out of the turns. Luke chats to me on the lifts 
about what I’m doing right and wrong (mostly the latter), but putting what he 
is telling me into practice is difficult as old habits die hard. After an 
hour’s worth of lessons, I notice I am much less tense in my legs and core. The 
improvement in technique translates into less effort. As a beginner, I remember 
being wrecked at the end of a day’s skiing, but the promise of an improvement 
isn’t just to take on bigger mountains and look better, it’s also allowing you 
to conserve energy. By the time the lesson wraps up, the wind is howling and 
visibility has dropped. Skiers are being blown side to side on the chairlifts, 
which close down pretty soon afterwards because of the poor conditions.

With skiing over for the day, we head back to the resort for another amazing 
dinner at Cuisine Restaurant, a quick massage at the resort spa ($120) to iron 
out all the kinks and then off to dinner again at Cuisine restaurant. Two-hour 
afternoon private lessons are $251.

Sunday 8am: snowshoeing, Wilderness Sports, Kosciuszko Road, Perisher Valley

Bruce Easton is our guide for a snowshoeing trip out from Perisher. He is 
hugely enthusiastic about getting tourists to experience everything the park 
has to offer. He says 99% of people visiting the national park head straight 
for the resorts, and only 1% ever venture into the backcountry.

I’ve often looked out from the safety of the groomed trails and dreamed about 
heading out there, but with no experience and considering the very real dangers 
of exposure and avalanches, I’ve never been game.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F753682f5361c9f8d85ea7904348a7e0bc18b851b%2F0_107_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F753682f5361c9f8d85ea7904348a7e0bc18b851b%2F0_107_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Snowshoeing at Perisher – takes snow lovers off the beaten path. Photograph: 
Patrick Keneally for the Guardian 
The snowshoes are not the old tennis-racquet string and wood type that 
artfully grace the walls of ski lodges; they are the modern carbon fibre, 
plastic type. We pop them on and begin the trek out of the Perisher valley. 
It’s surprisingly easy to walk in them. At first the temptation is to take 
giant moonwalking steps, but I soon realise it’s not necessary. We head out 
along the Rock Creek/Porcupine Ridge trail and pretty soon are in an untouched 
sheltered valley of snow gums. Ours are the only footprints disturbing the 
surface of the powder.

Skiing in Australia: I was a novice when I got to Thredbo, but I left a 
confident man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/06/skiing-in-australia-i-was-a-novice-when-i-got-to-thredbo-but-i-left-a-confident-man>
An introductory one-hour tour is $49 and a three-hour trek to Mount Wheatley 
is $99, but if you want a more adventurous option, you can take a full-day tour 
to Mount Kosciuszko at 2,228 metres. The journey is 6.5km from the top of the 
Kosciuszko express chairlift for $149, with snowshoe hire, lunch and national 
parks fee included. Compared with the price of a one-day resort pass at $122, 
guided snowshoeing is pretty good value.


12pm: lunch, Wildbrumby Distillery, corner of Wollondibby Roadd and the Alpine 
Way, Jindabyne

At Wildbrumby Schnapps distillery I managed the find the schnitzel I had been 
hoping for: a thin piece of veal, battered, coated in breadcrumbs and then 
shallow-fried and served with a wedge of lemon. It’s not difficult, but it’s 
surprisingly hard to find. The distillery and cafe is on the road between 
Jindabyne and Thredbo and has a sculpture garden, sundeck and orchards (where 
much of the fruit for the schnapps comes from). There are about 15 schnapps on 
offer, all made in a still sitting in the middle of the cafe, with the pink 
lady apple, pear William and mango all highly recommended.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d804c0f0dbfc04d43c3b102f72ca7f14faf1e6%2F0_137_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d804c0f0dbfc04d43c3b102f72ca7f14faf1e6%2F0_137_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Wild Brumby Schnapps distillery offers the ‘perfect’ schnitzel. Photograph: 
Patrick Keneally for the Guardian 
3pm: fly-fishing at Moonbah huts, 688 Big Yard Road, Jindabyne 

Last stop before heading back to Sydney is a spot of fly-fishing. About 30 
minutes from Jindabyne,Moonbah Huts <http://www.moonbahhut.com/> has a handful 
of small, self-contained cottages available for hire and also its own lake 
stocked with brown, rainbow and brook trout. It is also just 100 metres away 
from the Moonbah river, which is one of the best spots in the Snowy region for 
fly-fishing. I’ve never done fly-fishing before, though plenty of regular 
angling. Brett Smith, our instructor, shows us how to send the rod back and 
forth and for the first 10-20 minutes we practise this with bare lines, sending 
them out over the lake and looping back. If you are doing it correctly, the end 
of the line whips past your head at speed, so as well as asking us to wear 
protective sunglasses, he wants to be sure we are competent before attaching 
hooks. No one has yet been hooked in the eye, but he doesn’t want to take any 
chances, he tells us.

The fly is supposed to imitate the type of insect the fish are likely to eat 
at different times of year and in different places, such as whether the river 
is near grasslands or forest. They are very pretty small things, colourful and 
intricate, like something a bower bird would love to drag back to its nest to 
impress a potential mate.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe882685e97d12611d54f39f967ebceb2715d0cd%2F0_79_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20the%20Snowy%20Mountains%20%E2%80%93%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F48-hours-in-the-snowy-mountains-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe882685e97d12611d54f39f967ebceb2715d0cd%2F0_79_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Fly-fishing at Moonbah huts, 30 minutes from Jindabyne. Photograph: Patrick 
Keneally for the Guardian 
With the fly/hooks attached, I send out the line to settle on the surface of 
the dam. You have about one-fiftieth of a second to react, I’m told, when the 
fish strikes, which sounds impossible. I soon find out that while that might be 
an exaggeration they are pretty quick. My fly disappears under the surface; I 
feel a slight tension and yank the rod. The trout disturbs the surface then 
nips back beneath. A couple watching from one of the huts give a yelp of 
support, then commiserations.

I missed my chance. When someone next to me hooks one and hauls it in, Brett 
helps to remove the hook, then gently lowers the trout back into the dam, where 
he holds on to it for a minute or two while it recovers then swims away. He 
explains that because of the frigid water, the trout are generally slow and 
lethargic, so they need help to get back into the swim of things.

We can see the line of the Moonbah river as it gently snakes along the bottom 
of the ridge. It’s sunny and warm until we lose light behind the ridgeline and 
then suddenly it turns very cold and dark.

I feel like one of the trout hiding at the bottom of the dam – cold, 
lethargic, slow and overfed – so it’s time to head home.

The Guardian was a guest of Destination NSW.

 