
As immigration continues to dominate the Republican presidential race, both 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Jeb Bush 
have been criticized for their use of the term “anchor babies”. Ellen Brait 
looks at what the phrase means and why it is so controversial.

Why are ‘anchor babies’ in the news?

The phrase has been used by Trump, the Republican frontrunner, and Bush, seen 
by many as the establishment favorite, while discussing immigration policy on 
the campaign trail.

Trump first used the term during an interview with Fox News’s Bill O’Reilly on 
Tuesday while discussing whether an amendment to the constitution would help 
deal with immigration reform.

“It’s a long process, and I think it would take too long. I’d much rather find 
out whether or not anchor babies are citizens because a lot of people don’t 
think they are,” he said.

On Wednesday, Bush used the term on Bill Bennett’s Morning in America radio 
show <http://www.billbennett.com/> while talking about the need for greater 
enforcement for people entering the country.

“If there’s abuse, if people are bringing – pregnant women are coming in to 
have babies simply because they can do it, then there ought to be greater 
enforcement,” he said. “That’s [the] legitimate side of this. Better 
enforcement so that you don’t have these, you know, ‘anchor babies’, as they’re 
described, coming into the country.”


When a reporter questioned Bush about his use of the term, he said that he did 
not regret saying it and blamed Democrats for the negative stigma surrounding 
the words. “You give me a better term and I’ll use it,” he said. Democratic 
frontrunner Hillary Clintontweeted 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/634426115436740608> a suggestion: 
“How about ‘babies,’ ‘children,’ or ‘American citizens’.”

When the alternative language of “American-born child of undocumented 
immigrants” was suggested to Trump, he declined to use it.

What is an anchor baby anyway?

The term is sometimes used when referring to the children of undocumented 
immigrants who are born in the US. If a child is born in the US, he or she is 
granted American citizenship regardless of the immigration status of his or her 
parents.

The word “anchor” is in reference to the belief that if a child is born in the 
US, their parents can more easily gain citizenship.

There is some truth to this, but children cannot sponsor their parents until 
they are 21, the process can take years, and even then it isextremely uncertain 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2010/aug/06/lindsey-graham/illegal-immigrants-anchor-babies-birthright/>
.

And if the family members entered the US illegally 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/the-truth-about-illegal-immigrant-anchor-babies-2012-3>
, they have to return to their home country for 10 years before they can return 
and file for citizenship.

Why do ‘anchor babies’ gain citizenship?

The 14th amendment to the constitution grants everyone born in the US the 
right of citizenship.

How long has that law been around?

Birthright citizenship was common law in America upon its founding but in 1857 
that right was revoked for people of African ancestry, following theDred Scott 
ruling <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p2932.html>. In 1868, the US 
ratified the 14th amendment, which grants citizenship to “all persons born or 
naturalized in the United States”.

Why is the term ‘anchor babies’ controversial?

Many believe that the term is dehumanizing and inaccurate 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/08/21/opinions/reyes-anchor-babies-slur/>. It 
differentiates children of undocumented immigrants from children of US citizens 
despite both being legal citizens of America.The American Heritage Dictionary  
<https://ahdictionary.com/word/search.html?q=anchor+baby>defines the term as 
“offensive”.

A group that Bush helped launch and is still listed as a member of the 
national advisory board for advised against using the phrase. The Hispanic 
Leadership Network, a group working to build GOP support among Latino voters, 
issued a memo in 2013 titled “Dos and Don’ts of Immigration Reform”. It 
provided tips on how to discuss immigration reform in a non-offensive way.

According to the Hill newspaper 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/senate-races/279753-hispanic-republican-group-to-gop-congressmen-watch-your-language-on-immigration>
, the memo said: “When talking about immigrants: Do use ‘undocumented 
immigrant’ when referring to those here without documentation. Don’t use the 
word ‘illegals’ or ‘aliens’. Don’t use the term ‘anchor baby’.”

Are any candidates proposing to change the law around anchor babies?

Trump, Rand Paul, Rick Santorum, Lindsey Graham, Bobby Jindal and Scott Walker 
are all in favor ofending birthright citizenship 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/where-the-gop-2016-candidates-stand-birthright-citizenship>
. Chris Christie has said it needs to be re-examined.

Despite Bush’s comments, he has said he does not want to end birthright 
citizenship 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/08/jeb-bush-defends-birthright-citizenship-immigrants-2016-121496.html>
.

“I think that people born in this country ought to be American citizens,” he 
said.
 