
For many years, having a child was the thing I desired most of all. Unlike 
other desires, I couldn’t articulate why. It was beyond language. I want to 
study blah because blah; I want to work at blah because blah. Obvious, easy. 
Why did I want a child? I just did. My cells did. For all my concern about 
bringing another carbon footprint into the world, I couldn’t hush a 
life-longing, that I put aside until the time was right.

When I try to explain the complex emotions of pregnancy, the words elude me. I 
am consumed by fear and desire for the baby. Fear that she will die inside me; 
hope that she will be alive when she comes out. My happiness is anchored to 
something I cannot control. It is not entirely comfortable. It is not the 
pastel-hued seventh heaven that pregnancy books speak of. Suddenly, I have so 
much more to lose.

I become pregnant sometime in December and am immediately sick for five 
months. From the moment I wake to the moment I sleep, I am nauseous. Every 
other day, I puke bile the colour of sunflowers. I cast around for literature, 
words to find myself – ourselves – in. I need to get my head around the 
weirdness of sharing my body with another and my changing sense of self. There 
is a new, practical language to learn.Episiotomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/21/how-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know>
. Surge. Latch. Tongue-tie. Dilation.D-MER, or, Dysphoric Milk Ejection Reflex 
<http://d-mer.org/> (the sudden decrease in dopamine that occurs as some women 
begin to breastfeed.) Intervention. Anterior lip.

My husband and I arrive at the hospital. I am bent double. My body has been 
contracting every four or five minutes for 22 hours. When the muscles of my 
uterus tighten, the energy surges up through my body and into my throat.

Go for a walk when the contractions start, I was told. Sleep. Bake brownies. 
Bake brownies? As the first contraction hits, a quake disturbs internal 
tectonic plates that shift and scrape and shake and ache, crescendoing over 90 
seconds before a short break. It is a white-hot, searing rumble, unlike any 
pain I’ve experienced. It is not like a period cramp, or a cut, or bruising. It 
is in the ore of me – and it is odd, mysterious and frightening.

I breathe and moan in the waiting room, waiting for the opening of my cervix, 
the innermost slit, a taut doughnut of pale pink muscle. A kind midwife sticks 
her fingers inside my vagina to measure my cervix but it is only 2cm dilated. 
Nowhere near the 10cm needed for our baby to squeeze through. We are sent home.

Eight hours later, we return. I have been in labour for 30 hours now. I had no 
idea it could take this long. I have missed two nights’ sleep and barely eaten 
since Saturday morning. It is Monday. How will I find the energy to birth my 
baby?

We wait to be seen. There are two other labouring women in the shadows. I’m 
surprised by how little I care that others can hear my undignified moos. After 
an hour or so, I get on the gas and air and it is heaven, for a while. My 
cervix is examined again. 4cm: enough to be admitted. (As my cervix effaces, so 
too does my previous self, my identity. As she is readying to be born, part of 
me is dying. I don’t realise this until later.)

The birthing suite is windowless, so I soon lose all sense of time. It is a 
large space with a bathtub, double bed and equipment to sit or squat on, or 
lean over. My birthing cave. I contract for some hours, gripping the pillow 
I’ve brought from home, gulping Entonox. Another examination. Still 4cm, after 
33 hours. The midwife offers to break my waters to speed things up. I agree, 
she pierces the sac with a small crochet hook and a warm amniotic lake soaks 
the towels on the wipe-clean bed. A dial is turned up, the contractions 
intensify, juddering through me, around 350 tidal waves in total. I had planned 
not to use pain relief, but I want the opioid pethidine now. Let’s try the 
water first, they say, because you can’t use the bath after taking a 
painkiller. I am in the bath, gas and air pipe clamped between my teeth. And 
then, I start tripping.

A procession of characters that I recognise from preverbal childhood dances in 
front of me. Objects from the depths of my inner psyche are here to spur me on. 
A gunky slice of volcanic lava cake, crimson and egg-yolk yellow. With eyes and 
spindly legs. Three rabbits in woollen shoes, tap dancing. A frog playing a 
creaking accordion. A hedgehog waltzing. A hare called Mr Tibbins. I am 
delirious with pain, the gas and air and the psychedelic story that is playing 
out for me. It gives me succour. I think this is what they call “transition”. 
It is one helluva wormhole.

At one point, it appears the baby may tear through my perineum, so I’m swiftly 
moved into another stance. Over the next couple of hours, I am placed in 
various positions to harness the force of gravity: all fours, a sort-of chair, 
kneeling and finally, lying on my side with one leg on a midwife’s shoulder 
because, by then, I’m too tired to hold myself up.

I trust the midwives and my husband, but surely I am dying or at least 
splitting in half. Cut her out, cut her out, cut her out. I am birthing a 
hurricane. A spiked mace. A heap of barbed wire. A bladed melon. An inflated 
pufferfish. A prickle of hedgehogs. A Christmas tree.

Her heart rate has dropped and she is in jeopardy. The red emergency button 
above the bed is pressed. Doctors fill the room in seconds. A man asks 
permission to use a ventouse to suck her into the world. I can barely speak, so 
nod. I have never wanted anything more than to get the baby out and for her to 
be alive and healthy. I pool my last drops of strength into a final push. She 
breaks through and spurts out. Her dark eyes are humongously wide. Her hands 
are splayed open. She is placed on my chest. My heart explodes.

For years, my mother told me the pain of childbirth was fine, that my large 
feet would make it easy. Then she broke rank. She told me it was really bad and 
questioned my decision to do it without drugs.

And still, it is not finished. Do I want an injection to speed up the 
placenta’s ejection? After 43 hours, I’m over my wish for an intervention-free 
birth. It flops out after 10 minutes or so. I ask if I can see it before they 
take it away. (To where? A bin? The sea?) It is surprisingly navy; bulbous, 
slimy and as big as a beret. I look around and, well, my cave resembles a crime 
scene. Quickly and briskly, the blood and mess is cleaned up and I am sewn back 
together in the middle of the room, sucking on gas and air with my eyes resting 
on my daughter. I don’t care that they get the stitches wrong and have to do it 
again. My baby is in the corner and I am enjoying the high of licit drugs.

I am warned about the “baby blues” that can arrive five days into motherhood. 
I think the birth is the hardest thing I will ever do, so it will be fine. And 
then I experience the riptide of postpartum sleep deprivation. The nights are 
anarchic and I am bruised by fatigue. I’m breastfeeding 18 times a day, for an 
hour each time. “That’s wonderful,” I’m told, as I slip into nervous exhaustion.

“Just feed, feed, feed, feed, feed,” says the midwife. “Feed on demand,” says 
the literature. “You can’t overfeed a baby.” I don’t understand why she isn’t 
putting weight on when I am feeding incessantly. I am distraught that I’m 
unable to nourish my baby well enough.

Eventually, a kind, old, Irish midwife hears madness in my voice and gives me 
the permission I need to buy formula milk. The baby starts to grow and her 
jaundice recedes.

In those feverish weeks, I often sleepwalk into the living room cradling an 
imaginary baby. “She’s here, I have her,” says my husband, gently. Confused, I 
come to. Even when we are not in the same room, I think she is with me. I 
notice she has her own smell and I am surprised it is not the same as mine. 
When I close my eyes, I see her. I hallucinate her face in the wooden blinds, 
in the faces of the Queen, Dominic Cooper, Vince Vaughn, Yoda.
 ‘I am melting into her and she into me’ … Lucy Jones with Evelyn. Photograph: 
Felix Clay for The Guardian 
Some days I feel obliterated by the loss of agency. I am melting into her, and 
she into me. Hours morph into one another. The walls and days are porous and 
interchangeable.

Will I ever feel un-split again? I love my child, but I love my work, too. I’m 
vexed by the tension. I am surprised by the subliminal, contradictory messages 
I seem to have internalised, that a) modern motherhood is low-status drudgery 
that plucks a woman out of the “real world” and consigns her, voiceless, to the 
sidelines and b) mothers are selfish to go back to work (the “real world”) 
because it will harm the child (whether they can afford not to remains beside 
the point). I reject these facile, rubbish notions, but still wonder where they 
came from.

Physically, I am changed, too. I wince at myself in the mirror. I am someone 
else. My stomach is an empty cocoon, doughy and spent. My breasts are misshapen 
and scrawled with angry stretch marks. I have cut my hair short to save time 
washing it. My body smells earthier than normal because I don’t have time to 
bathe every day. And it is buttered with a layer of fat that waxes around my 
hips and thighs. I have thickened. “Matronly” might be the word for it. I 
resolve to buy scales instead of bagels.

Three months in, forged by the fourth trimester, I am learning to live with 
higher stakes, to bear the reality that she is vulnerable and nothing is 
certain. I am learning to enjoy the frightening enormity of this new love. 
Autumn is turning to winter; the world shrinks and brittles. More changes and 
evolutions will surely come but, for now, the waters feel calmer. We call her 
Evelyn. It means “longed-for child”.

This is an edited extract of Longed-For Child 
<http://somesuchstories.co/story/longed-for-child>, which originally appeared on
somesuchstories.co <http://somesuchstories.co/>
 