
Did you hear the one about the woman still being told to smile, over a hundred 
years after her death? As most of us celebrated thedecision to put the 
inspiring Harriet Tubman on the $20 bill last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/24/harriet-tubman-20-bill-myths-freed-slaves-quotes>
, some people just couldn’t handle the fact that shedidn’t look quite as 
cheerful as they’d have liked 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/best-responses-to-people-who-want-harriet-tubman-to-smile_us_5718d4c5e4b0479c59d7156e>
. “They could make her smile a little can’t they?” wrote one person on 
Facebook. “I would be too discouraged to buy anything with this bill.”

It’s worth noting that Andrew Jackson, the bill’s current incumbent, is not 
exactly beaming in his picture either – but unsurprisingly nobody seems to have 
taken issue with his facial expression in the 88 years since he first appeared 
on the currency.

After escaping slavery, Tubman faced enormous challenges and prejudice 
throughout her life as she fought for the abolitionist cause and helped others 
to escape slavery via the Underground Railroad. But even after death, it seems, 
women are not safe from the kind of casual sexism that many of us contend with 
on a day-to-day basis.

In fact, Tubman wasn’t even the only woman subject to posthumous gender 
inequality last week alone. WhenVictoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood>, writer, actress, director, 
comedic genius and five time Bafta winner, passed away at the age of 62, the
Times published an obituary 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/obituaries/article4736354.ece> that 
mentioned either her weight, relationship with food, or appearance six times. 
It also stated that: “It was her relationship with her husband, the magician 
and television personality Geoffrey Durham (aka the Great Soprendo), that 
boosted her confidence and did much to help her further her career.” Her 
multiple awards were finally mentioned – in the penultimate paragraph.

It is true that Wood herself spoke about weight and dieting – at one point, 
she madea documentary about these issues <http:// 
http://www.standard.co.uk/news/woods-big-fat-findings-7297572.html>, and the 
obituary quotes her own self-deprecating comments about her looks. But it was 
by no means a defining feature of her life and career, and certainly not to the 
extent required to justify such a focus on the topic within her obituary.

It is common, even in death, for women to be seen through the same media lens 
as in life: as a woman first, and a person second. Just look at Yvonne Brill, a 
rocket scientist and winner of the National Medal of Technology and Innovation, 
whoseNew York Times obituary began 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/amy-davidson/yvonne-brill-and-the-beef-stroganoff-illusion>
:

“She made a mean beef stroganoff, followed her husband from job to job and 
took eight years off from work to raise three children. “The world’s best mom,” 
her son Matthew said.”

 Or consider this headline 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article3055430.ece> on an article 
aboutMargaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> 
published following her death in 2013: “Margaret Thatcher: a better politician 
than wife and mother.” There was even a section entitled: “In pictures 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article3055430.ece#tab-4>: did 
family come second?” Can you imagine such a question being asked about a former 
male prime minister on the occasion of his death? Meanwhile when Colleen 
McCullough, Australia’s bestselling author, died last year,her obituary 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/arts/the-thorn-birds-author-colleen-mccullough-dies-on-norfolk-island/news-story/4df21f435226642fcf481cce11700c89>
 stated in its opening paragraph: “Plain of feature, and certainly overweight, 
she was, nevertheless, a woman of wit and warmth.”

Of course, women are only treated to these appallingly reductive overviews of 
their lifewhen they are lucky enough to be memorialised in the first place. 
Just 25% of the ‘notable deaths 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/obituaries/notable-deaths-2015.html>’ 
listed by theNew York Times for 2015 were of women. And research 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247870998_Invisible_Lives_Women_Men_and_Obituaries>
 has found that while women were the subjects of far fewer obituaries than men, 
they were also likely to have shorter obituaries, with the longest obituaries 
received by those women who happened to be the relative of a famous man.

Indeed, for many women, their relationship to a man overshadows their own 
identity and achievements, even in death. When well-known fashion designer 
L’Wren Scott died in 2014, for example,headlines 
<https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/445875179067936768> about her 
passing included: “Mick Jagger’s girlfriend found dead”, “Mick Jagger’s 
girlfriend reportedly found dead in New York”, and even: “Rolling Stones cancel 
Perth concert.”

For those who will argue that this is merely a case of what is newsworthy, it 
is worth noting that the same rule holds true for ordinary women whose deaths 
are reported in the press because they happen to be tragic or premature. See, 
for example,headlines 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/421942/Drowned-GP-wife-may-have-been-trying-to-save-her-son>
 such as: “Drowned GP wife may have been trying to save her son”, (the ‘wife’ 
in question, Rosemary Wickstead, was a research scientist).

 While these women are at least beyond the point of feeling the impact of such 
sexism, the rest of us are not. It’s true that obituaries usually memorialise 
older people, who might have lived during generations when women were less 
represented, especially in fields such as business or technology. But there are 
still plenty of impressive and successful women to spotlight, should we choose 
to do so. In fact, it could be argued that it is even more of a reason to make 
sure that we highlight women of note when they pass away – giving them the 
recognition they may have deserved but missed out on during their career.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> face sexism, 
discrimination and bias at every stage of their lives. The very least we can do 
is give them a break from it when they die.
 