
Holly Throsby’s first solo album as a singer-songwriter was released in 2004, 
and after over a decade of music-making and a swag of Aria nominations, she has 
recently shifted gears and moved from music to books.

Goodwood is Throsby’s debut novel, named for the small, fictional Australian 
town in which the story is set – a town in which two people mysteriously go 
missing.

“The idea for writing a novel had certainly been sitting with me for a long 
time,” Throsby says. She explains her choice of genre as a desire to write the 
kind of “page-turner” that she would want to read herself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Feerie-and-disturbing-holly-throsby-on-mh370-true-and-her-first-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219db9b1a3f6460b96adaff9dc3d8ac5ad667daa%2F0_0_1808_2764%2F1808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eerie%20and%20disturbing'%3A%20Holly%20Throsby%20on%20MH370%2C%20true%20crime%20and%20her%20first%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Feerie-and-disturbing-holly-throsby-on-mh370-true-and-her-first-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eerie%20and%20disturbing%27%3A%20Holly%20Throsby%20on%20MH370%2C%20true%20crime%20and%20her%20first%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Feerie-and-disturbing-holly-throsby-on-mh370-true-and-her-first-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219db9b1a3f6460b96adaff9dc3d8ac5ad667daa%2F0_0_1808_2764%2F1808.jpg>
 Throsby says she wanted to write the kind of page-turner she was interested in 
reading. Photograph: Allen & Unwin 
Throsby’s protagonist, Jean Brown, is 17 in the year 1992 and the early-90s 
setting is poignant for Throsby. “I was 13 at the time and I was very much at 
that point in life when your eyes are wide open, and you’re working out what it 
is that you like and what you don’t like … I was fascinated by my stepsister 
who was five years older than me who I just thought was so unbearably cool.” 
One Goodwood’s two missing characters, Rosie White, is “that kind of girl for 
Jean”.

Australia has an undeniably gothic obsession with missing people. “Stories 
like Picnic at Hanging Rock are so enduring and captivating and compelling 
because of how possible and terrifying that prospect is,” Throsby says. She 
remembers several intense crimes happening in New South Wales in the early 90s. 
“I was terrified and perplexed by some of those real life events and they are 
things that work their way into the town of Goodwood.”

Adding to the unease that permeates the story, Throsby was writing Goodwood 
while one of the biggest mysteries of 2014 played out in the media. “The story 
of MH370 was really hovering over me, and over the entire world, and I think 
that is something that I found that extremely eerie and disturbing.”

There is a marked difference between writing songs and writing a book in terms 
of creative process, Throsby notes. “As a songwriter I was always very focused 
for short periods of time and then strikingly unfocused for the other period.” 
She describes songwriting and the album-making process as cyclical, with a 
period of writing followed by recording, mixing, and touring. “I always enjoyed 
that process because when it came time for songwriting again I’d sort of 
gathered my nuts for winter, like a squirrel, creatively.”

Working on her first novel was entirely different, however, and she uses words 
like “massive” and “expansive” to describe the project, saying it was a new 
experience to get her mind “across a story that has a lot of characters with a 
lot of personal detail for each of them as well as a main narrative push.”

Bookmark this: from Fielding to feminism – October's literary highlights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/08/bookmark-this-from-fielding-to-feminism-octobers-literary-highlights>
In spite of that Throsby says her overall approach to the structure of the 
book was informed by her music practice. “In this book there are these kind of 
refrains along the way in terms of things that certain characters might say or 
images that may be repeated, and I think when you’re used to working with 
choruses maybe that was natural to me, to come back to things often.”

Throsby says that readers will “find the book to have quite lyrical flourishes 
at times” and described the passages that she is most happy with as having “a 
certain internal rhythm”.

Throsby is already four chapters into her next novel, set in Cedar Valley just 
to the south of Goodwood, because she isn’t quite ready to leave her fictional 
world behind yet. “As soon as the characters [in Goodwood] arrived to me a lot 
of them felt weirdly real, and that was something I was really surprised about 
with fiction and I’m sure most authors feel the same way – how quickly a 
fictional world feels real to its creator. When I finished the book the fact 
that it was over was quite a sad thing for me, in a way.”


In the meantime she’ll be returning to songwriting. “That sadness was 
alleviated for me by being back in the studio and making music again.”

• Goodwood 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/fiction/Goodwood-Holly-Throsby-9781760293734>
 is published by Allen & Unwin and is available now
 