
The #FreeKesha campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/ruling-against-kesha-free-kesha-dr-luke-woman-told-her-body-isnt-her-own>
 has grabbed the hearts,and wallets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/22/taylor-swift-donates-250000-kesha-dr-luke>
, of some of the world’s biggest stars. For working women around the world it’s 
also highlighted the one thing we just don’t talk about: that when it comes to 
sexual harassment in the workplace we’ve all signed an NDA.

Public outcry may help free Kesha from contract with Dr Luke's label
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/23/kesha-dr-luke-sexual-assault-claims-kemosabe-records>
At an event a few weeks ago a woman asked my advice. A colleague had confided 
in her that she’d been sexually harassed by their boss on a night out. She 
didn’t want to report the incident – but neither did she want to work with the 
man involved. She had sworn her fellow-worker to secrecy and this woman was now 
cracking under the pressure of it. Should she tell HR? If he’d done it to one 
woman, could he do it again?

There’s not a lot of good advice you can give someone in that situation 
because as #FreeKesha shows, speaking out doesn’t guarantee a happy ending. We 
might not say it, but every working woman knows: making a complaint of sexual 
harassment is much the same as resigning. Taking that complaint out of the 
office and into the wider world is a quick way to end your career.

In a survey by Business in the Community 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/system/files/project_28-40_the_report.pdf> (BITC) last 
year, 12% of women said they had experienced some form of sexual harassment in 
the workplace.Significantly fewer had reported it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/apr/02/52-percent-women-experience-bullying>
. Rather than addressing a culture that allows sexual harassment of women to go 
unchallenged, workplaces would rather pay off the victim and leave the 
perpetrator to continue as they please.

“What employers need to understand,” says Kathryn Nawrockyi, gender equality 
director at BITC, “is that people often don’t report these incidents, either 
because they accept that such behaviour is the norm in their organisation, or 
because they don’t know how to articulate what is happening to them, or because 
they are afraid – of not being believed, or worse still losing their job.”

In the BITC research, respondents again and again pointed out the fear of 
recrimination if they spoke out.

The ruling against Kesha: yet again, a woman was told her body isn't her own | 
Jennifer Gerson Uffalussy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/ruling-against-kesha-free-kesha-dr-luke-woman-told-her-body-isnt-her-own>
“Reporting problems only leads to exclusion and further harassment and makes 
individuals less inclined to report.”

“I think there are two main reasons why people don’t report it: one, because 
it seems too insignificant to bother doing anything, and the other is that you 
feel that nothing is going to be done, because they’re someone important in the 
hierarchy of the firm. By reporting it you are potentially going to mark 
yourself down as someone who is a troublemaker.”

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, told since childhood 
they should be seen but not heard, polite and no trouble, keep their mouths 
shut rather than risk their jobs.

Annie Ridout, editor of online magazine The Early Hour, experienced exactly 
this when working in a gallery five years ago. “Two of the male trustees were 
suggesting that my face should appear on the monthly arts programme. I said it 
didn’t make sense, as my role was behind the scenes. One (a photographer) said 
that it didn’t matter and that he could photograph me. The other asked if it 
would be a ‘glamour shoot’ and if he could watch. I was 25 and just starting 
out, I was too scared of losing my job to say anything.”

This fear of not being believed, or of being labelled a troublemaker, is 
something programmer and consultant Valerie Aurora knows only too well. She 
found herself on the end of sexual harassment in the workplace, and her 
experience illustrates the desire companies have to brush it under the carpet.

“The first problem I faced [when reporting the harassment] was who to talk to. 
My manager was male and had made it clear he was interested in me, so I 
couldn’t talk to him. I went to HR, they were sympathetic but then came back a 
few days later and simply said ‘he says you made those remarks to him, not the 
other way around’. They claimed that my background as a feminist activist meant 
that I had ‘a history in this area’; something that had been a positive when 
they hired me was now being used against me. I ended up leaving; let’s just say 
the decision was mutual.”

Dr Luke responds to Kesha lawsuit allegations: 'I never had sex with her'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/22/dr-luke-response-kesha-lawsuit-sexual-assault-claims-innocence>
So what do you tell a woman who doesn’t know whether to speak up or keep 
quiet? My instinct is to say that this behaviour is unacceptable and that we 
should call it out. But there’s also a need to protect someone who’s been 
through a painful situation from more hurt or damage. That voice in my head is 
saying, keep your mouth shut, find another job and get out of there as quickly 
as you can. Of course, that leaves him free to do it again. And again.

Aurora, now working as a diversity and inclusion consultant, thinks we need to 
start teaching men how to respond when they see their male colleagues behaving 
inappropriately. She thinks office culture is too much about protecting the 
company and the perpetrator, even if that’s not how others in the organisation 
would want to behave. “We need to stop making it [reporting this behaviour] the 
job of the person with the least power,” she says.

Nawrockyi agrees but says organisations have to get tougher to show that 
sexual harassment is completely unacceptable.

“”The first step is to actively seek to understand the problem; listen to what 
your employees are saying. That is not just about waiting for people to report, 
but creating safe forums for them to do so, such as anonymous surveys or focus 
groups led by a trusted external partner. Be prepared to make some difficult 
decisions. If there are toxic individuals in your organisation, make it clear 
that there is no place for their harmful behaviour.”

Whether we like it or not, this code of silence means that we’ve traded safety 
for economic freedom. Maybe #FreeKesha will finally give us both.
 