
Meghan Milloy grew up in southern Mississippi, a deep red state steeped in 
conservative Christian values. In high school, she founded a Teenage 
Republicans club, and before she was eligible to vote, traveled to New 
Hampshire to knock on doors for George W Bush’s re-election campaign. She later 
joined the CollegeRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
and worked for Mitt Romney in Ohio in 2012.

This year, however, Milloy cannot stomach supporting her party’s nominee, 
Donald Trump –and she’s not alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/millennial-voters-young-republicans-trump-2016-election>
. The Pepperdine law school alumna is part of a constituency that no Republican 
presidential nomineesince 1956 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/trump-may-become-the-first-republican-in-60-years-to-lose-white-college-graduates/>
 has lost but one that Hillary Clinton stands poised to win: white voters with 
a college degree.

“I never thought that it would get to a point where I would have to make a 
decision not to vote for the Republican nominee,” said Milloy, chair of 
RepublicanWomen <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> for Hillary.

While blue-collar workers, and men in particular, helped Trump clinch the 
Republican nomination and will be critical to him in November, the Republican 
nominee is struggling to attract college-educated white voters.


Trump’s brash temperament and hardline politics are accelerating the gradual 
splintering of white voters along educational and gender lines. And the 
publication of an 11-year-old recording in which Trump boasted that being 
famous allowed him to force himself on women is only expected to exacerbate 
this.

Hidden faultline: how Trump v Clinton is laying bare America's class divide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/trump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide>
In  a recent Washington Post/ABC survey 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/page/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016/09/25/National-Politics/Polling/question_17451.xml?uuid=l5UrXoLUEeaVeFWMwSXHug#>
, 62% of white voters without a college education support Trump compared with 
39% among white college graduates, a 23-point margin. And in Pennsylvania, a 
major battleground state this election, a majority of voters with a college 
education – or 56% – support Clinton, according to an NBC News/Wall Street 
Journal/Marist Poll released last week. If this holds, it would be the largest 
educational divide among white voters in at least three decades.

“If Clinton wins, white educated voters, especially white educated women, will 
be a crucial voting bloc in getting her elected,” said William Frey, a 
demographer at the Brookings Institute.


This constituency could hand Clinton an edge in key battleground states like 
North Carolina, Virginia and Colorado where a significant proportion of the 
electorate has a higher education.

White college-educated women could buffer Clinton against an exceedingly high 
turnout for Trump among white non-college-educated men, according to a 
projection model 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2016/08/16/educated-white-women-could-trigger-a-decisive-trump-defeat/>
 Frey designed based on current polling, US Census Bureau data and 2012 turnout 
rates. In another scenario, this group delivers a landslide victory for the 
white, college-educated woman on the Democratic ticket at a level unmatched 
sinceRonald Reagan in 1980 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/race-gender-education-keys-2016-election-poll/story?id=41404170>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-jailed-florida-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20again%20calls%20for%20Clinton%20to%20be%20jailed%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-jailed-florida-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20again%20calls%20for%20Clinton%20to%20be%20jailed%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-jailed-florida-video&media=>
Trump again calls for Clinton to be jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/13/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-jailed-florida-video>
The defection of non-college-educated white voters – once a bedrock of the 
Democrats’ coalition – to the Republican party and, conversely, the march of 
college-educated white voters to the Democratic party has been slowly occurring 
over the past several election cycles. Frey said that although Romney won both 
constituencies in 2012, President Obama held a slight edge among 
college-educated white women.

Trump’s path to the White House relies heavily on maximizing turnout among 
non-college-educated white men to deliver wins in the Rust Belt states.

He has firmly embraced this constituency, stoking the fires of a working-class 
revolt with his populist appeal. “We won with poorly educated,” the Wharton 
School of business graduatebragged at a rally 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vpdt7omPoa0> after winning the Nevada 
caucuses. “I love the poorly educated.”

But in the process of appealing to this demographic group, Trump has pushed 
away white voters with a college degree who are more likely to view immigration 
and global trade – issues that have animated his campaign – as positive forces, 
said Michelle Diggles, a senior policy analyst at Third Way, a liberal 
thinktank that examined the splintering of white voters.

“White people with a college degree are much more likely to be optimistic 
about their own lives,” Diggles said. “They tend to think they have efficacy, 
that they’re in control of their own life and that they can successfully or 
relatively successfully navigate the forces that are transforming our society 
and economy much better.”

A survey 
<http://s3.amazonaws.com/content.thirdway.org/publishing/attachments/files/000/000/935/December_2015_National_Poll_of_Registered_Voters.pdf?1453831785>
 conducted by Third Way found that more than half of white voters without a 
college education believed the economy was rigged. By contrast, nearly half of 
college-educated white voters said they believed it was not. Similarly, 45% of 
non-college-educated whites said the deck was stacked against people like them, 
while only 29% of college-educated white voters agreed with the sentiment.


Diggles added: “White people without a college degree are much more likely to 
see a rigged system, to see the forces of globalization acting against them and 
they don’t feel like they have control over their own destiny.”

Gregory Rosenthal, a retina surgeon and a member of Republicans for Clinton 
<http://www.r4c16.org/>, is deeply disdainful of Trump’s anti-intellectual 
appeal to uneducated voters’ fears and anxieties and equally critical of the 
GOP nominee’s apparent want for complex ideas and speech.


“Trump is an imbecile like the fictitious Chauncey Gardiner, supported by a 
rogues’ gallery of cynics hoping to control him,” Rosenthal wrote in an emailed 
response, making reference to the lead character in the 1979 movie Being There.

Rosenthal described his gradual split with the Republican party over its 
nominee as a “slow motion spiral into a dark hole” and that nothing Trump does 
at this point could win back his vote.

 This isn’t the first time he has supported a Democratic nominee, however. In 
2008, Rosenthal voted for Obama after John McCain selected Sarah Palin as his 
running mate.
 