
“The first time I put up a tweet and I got a negative reaction to it, I 
recoiled into my corner,” says Irish MEP Mairead McGuinness. “We’re all human 
beings. One negative comment outweighs 1,000 positive ones.”


German MEP Terry Reintke agrees that it’s hard not to let the virtual world 
impact on her real life. She should know: after she pledged support for 
Poland’s pro-abortion campaigners, Reintke was subjected to online abuse, 
including being called “filthy baby killing scorch of the earth”.

 Reintke, who has compiled a European parliament report on empowering women in 
the digital age 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+REPORT+A8-2016-0048+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN>
, wants to see much more cross-border action and exchange of best practice, to 
make social media a safer space for women.

 McGuiness and Reintke were just two of a panel of female MEPs who gathered in 
the European parliament on 11 October to launch a new report about social 
media, based on a survey of more than 900 female parliamentarians from 107 
different countries. All the MEPs agreed: social media can be an pretty ugly 
place if you’re a woman in politics.

And, at an event in London the previous day, held in honour of the Labour MP 
Jo Cox,killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/20/mps-pay-tribute-to-jo-coxs-humanity-compassion-and-irrepressible-spirit>
 in her West Yorkshire constituency in June, former Australian prime minister 
Julia Gillard said thatonline abuse can deter women  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/julia-gillard-says-online-abuse-deters-women-from-political-careers>
from political careers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Ffemale-politicians-social-media-abuse-european-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d6741d16fc2fb7d37e8f87a4f9ae4b839d1c42%2F0_268_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Social%20media%20can%20be%20a%20pretty%20ugly%20place%20if%20you're%20a%20woman%20in%20politics'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Ffemale-politicians-social-media-abuse-european-parliament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Social%20media%20can%20be%20a%20pretty%20ugly%20place%20if%20you%27re%20a%20woman%20in%20politics%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Ffemale-politicians-social-media-abuse-european-parliament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d6741d16fc2fb7d37e8f87a4f9ae4b839d1c42%2F0_268_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Julie Ward MEP. Photograph: Women in Parliaments/Woman in Parliaments 
 The 11 October report, Social media: advancing women in politics 
<http://www.womeninparliaments.org/studies/>, by global network Women in 
Parliaments <http://www.womeninparliaments.org/> (WIP), which aims to increase 
the number and impact of women in politics, was put together in collaboration 
with Harvard University and Facebook. It concludes that social media can level 
the playing field for disadvantaged candidates.

While negative portrayals in traditional media can put women off politics, 
social media can be a way for female politicians to engage the public on their 
own terms and become known without relying on journalists or political parties. 
According to the report, 86% of female politicians use social media. It is low 
cost, which is good for women because they receive fewer private donations on 
average than male politicians. It’s also a flexible and time-efficient format 
for campaigning, allowing women to bypass what the report’s author, Harvard 
University’s Thomas Patterson, describes as the “motherhood penalty”.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> with children are as active on 
social media as those without, he says.

British MEP Julie Ward, speaking at the report’s launch said: “Women have 
found a space for themselves on social media that they didn’t have on a 
platform otherwise.”

Globally, only 22.8% of national members of parliament are women, and there 
are still 38 countries in which more than 90% of MPs are men.

But women still fail to fully utilise social media, falling short when it 
comes to using it as a humanising device, not just a broadcasting tool. 
“Although research has found only marginal differences in how female and male 
leaders use social media, personal postings are an exception,” says the report. 
While men tend to view messages about their private lives as a way to 
demonstrate their softer side, women tend to worry such exposure will activate 
gender stereotypes that counter an image of strong leadership.

Julia Gillard says online abuse deters women from political careers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/julia-gillard-says-online-abuse-deters-women-from-political-careers>
Kaja Kallas, an Estonian MEP, says it can be difficult to find the balance of 
showing a lighter side online without pandering to an entertainment-driven news 
cycle. “Women tend to keep themselves from it to show they are serious,” she 
says. “But people don’t really like serious topics.”

McGuinness is always surprised by what works on social media. Her most popular 
posts have included a picture of cereal crops devastated by a wet harvest, and 
one of her aunt, a 93-year-old nun and the last surviving member of her 
father’s family. “If you don’t have that personal input it becomes quite a cold 
place,” she says. She does, however, concede that personal posts can put women 
at greater risk of backlash. Half of the women surveyed – regardless of 
country, background, age, position and party – had received insults or threats 
online.

McGuinness has a coping strategy. If she fears there will be a negative 
response to something she posts, she doesn’t look – for a while. “I do think 
there’s a psychology about this that we’re not trained in but I’m learning by 
accident,” she says.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 