
She may be the UK’s second female prime minister, but Theresa May’s silence on 
women’s issues has been “deafening”, the leader of the Women’s Equality party 
has said, criticising the government for its lack of action on pay 
transparency, childcare and social care.

Ahead of the party’s first annual conference in Manchester, Sophie Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>
 said 2016 had been a testing time for women in politics, despite May’s 
elevation to No 10, adding that theelection of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
 meant politicians could no longer deny the scale of sexism in politics.

On the steps of Downing Street after she became prime minister, May said the 
gender pay gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jul/13/theresa-mays-speech-what-she-said-and-what-she-meant>
 was one of the key issues of economic inequality that she was determined to 
tackle. “She has done nothing and it has been a huge disappointment,” Walker 
said.

“There was this hope she had come into the job with an understanding of what 
needed to be done for equal opportunities. The Conservatives said they would axe
section 78 of the Equalities Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/dec/16/equal-pay-sarah-champions-bill-a-start>
 and insist businesses move towards total pay transparency and we were 
delighted, but since then, nothing.

“The government said it would issue guidelines this autumn to companies and 
we’ve seen absolutely nothing. There’s nothing in the autumn statement about 
childcare or social care. The silence is deafening.”

Walker, a former London mayoral candidate, called Trump’s victory in the US a 
“devastating blow” and said her party expected to see a jump in membership 
figures in the weeks to come.

“At least now we don’t have to debate if misogyny exists. We don’t have to 
debate sexism,” she said. “I’m so used to starting interviews with people who 
begin by saying, ‘women are equal, come come, there isn’t a problem’.

“In some respects, now all that awfulness is exposed to the light, it is very 
clear what we are up against and there is a real push for an alternative.”
 Sophie Walker: ‘She has done nothing and it has been a huge disappointment.’ 
Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images 
Formed 18 months ago, Walker said many of the party’s 65,000 members and 
registered supporters had expressed interested in standing in strategic seats, 
though the party has joined the Greens in a progressive alliance in Richmond 
Park to give its backing to theLib Dems’ Sarah Olney, who is fighting the 
former Tory candidate Zac Goldsmith, now an independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/greens-back-lib-dem-candidate-against-zac-goldsmith-in-byelection>
.

As well as stepping up its electoral strategy, Walker said the party would 
continue to “challenge the idea that affordable childcare, fair pensions, 
ending violence against women are somehow something to be done once the more 
important stuff has happened”.

The party has devised specialist training for candidates to prepare them for 
being in the public eye. “It is very difficult for women to be public figures. 
They come under levels of abuse that are entirely disproportionate and are 
specific to our sex,” Walker said.

“I am very conscious, doing this job, I am saying, ‘come with me, be part of 
this, let’s stand together’ and I am aware what a big ask that is because you 
are offering yourself up to abuse. But the more women there are in politics, 
the more we can look out for each other and normalise women’s voices.”
 