
The award-winning novelist Neil Griffiths is launching a new literary prize 
celebrating the “small presses producing brilliant and brave literary fiction” 
in the UK and Ireland – and is preparing to “guilt trip” some of the country’s 
bestselling writers into supporting it.

Griffiths, whose novel Betrayal in Naples won the Writers’ Club first novel 
award <http://www.authorsclub.co.uk/?page_id=360> and whose Saving Caravaggio 
was shortlisted for the Costa best novel award, said he decided to found the 
new prize after realising that works from small presses represented the best 
fiction he had read in the last year.

Among his highlights were Zone by Mathias Énard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/10/zone-mathias-enard-review-nicholas-lezard>
,Pond by Claire-Louise Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/18/pond-claire-louise-bennett-review>
 andEimear McBride’s A Girl Is a Half-Formed Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/20/girl-half-formed-thing-review>, 
published by the small presses Fitzcarraldo Editions and Galley Beggar Press. 
He also praised And Other Stories, Dalkey Archive, Coffee House Press and CB 
Editions, and said he understands the financial difficulties such imprints face.

“Publishing is a terrible business model,” he said. “These small presses are 
doing it often for the love of super-niche books, whether they’re in 
translation, or highly literary … We always hear about independent booksellers 
being under threat, but it’s essentially the same story for these publishers, 
[and] they’re even more vulnerable.”

He decided that “every time I read a Galley Beggar Press book, for example, 
that I think is extraordinary, I’m just going to pay £100 for it ... It was a 
small way of using my small amount of disposable income to demonstrate the 
value I think they’re bringing to the world of literature, and I did that for a 
couple of writers”.

But then, remembering the difference a Costa shortlisting had made to his own 
sales, he came up with the idea of an award. Calledthe Republic of 
Consciousness prize for best novel published by a small press 
<http://www.republicofconsciousness.com/prize/>, Griffiths intends that it will 
be judged by independent booksellers, with the first winner to be announced in 
January 2017.

“The winner will be chosen based on two criteria, perfectly expressed on the 
Galley Beggar website as ‘hardcore literary fiction and gorgeous prose’,” he 
writes on the award’s website. Participating UK and Irish publishers “will have 
a maximum of five full-time people working for them”, with one novel to be 
submitted per publisher per year.

The prize money will be split between author and press. Griffiths is currently 
putting up £2,000 of his own money, but is planning to persuade other writers 
to contribute. “I think I’m going to try and put a bit of a guilt trip on 
high-selling literary novelists, asking them to match what I’ve thrown in,” he 
said. “I’m hoping to get it up to about £10,000 … These quite niche, quite 
difficult literary novels are really important in terms of making sure we have 
a vibrant literary life, so let’s support them.”

Griffiths was previously published by Penguin, but said that his own new 
novel, Family of Love, will be placed with an independent press. “We need small 
presses: they are good at spotting the literary outliers,” he writes on his
Republic of Consciousness 
<http://www.republicofconsciousness.com/2016/02/a-broadside-against-mainstream-publishing/>
 site. “Their radar is calibrated differently from agents, or mainstream 
publishers. Small presses don’t ask how many copies will this sell, but how 
good is this – what is its value as literature? Quality is the only criterion.”
 