
Tommy Marr lives with his mum in Ealing, west London, shops in Topman and 
follows Tottenham Hotspur. He tweets about everything from his toenail falling 
off to "giving it large in Croatia" and posts pictures of his coffee cup 
decorated with a smiley face because the "Starbucks lady 100% fancied me". So 
far, so your average 18-year-old boy in 2014.

That coffee comment might not have been just adolescent bravado. Marr is 
likely to turn heads, even of the most harried barista: he's 1.9m (6ft 2in) 
tall, blond with green eyes, a cheeky grin, a baby face with added cheekbones. 
He's also a male model. On the books of Next, one of London's biggest agencies 
(they also look after supers includingArizona Muse 
<http://www.nextmanagement.com/london/profile/arizona-muse> and Malgosia Bela) 
<http://www.nextmanagement.com/london/profile/malgosia-bela>, today he's on his 
way around London for appointments with Longchamp, Burberry and Margaret Howell.

These are castings – open model auditions – for shows at London Collections: 
Men <http://www.londoncollections.co.uk/>, the menswear fashion week that takes 
place in January. He is on his way from his agency's office on Old Street to a 
casting for a Longchamp presentation around the corner. Once inside, the world 
of the male model starts to take shape. Five or six other boys, all accompanied 
by the telltale "book" – a black A4 portfolio with photos of previous work 
inside – and regulation cheekbones, sit on benches in a reception area, staring 
straight ahead in silence. This is not an industry where friends are easily 
made. Marr, who also plays football semi-professionally, says "it's almost as 
competitive. I have a couple of model friends but not loads. You don't tend to 
go around together".

When Marr's name is called, another aspect of his day-to-day reveals itself – 
quite literally. Marr strips off to be photographed in one of the brand's 
suits. He's wearing pants with the Superman logo on the waistband. He's still 
just a boy. He may have started his career with an exclusive on the Calvin 
Klein catwalk in Milan, but he's inexperienced. "I have done shoots when I have 
to pretend it's summer, standing in my pants, been in a bath and asked to blow 
bubbles," he says, with a smile at the mysteries of the industry.

Following Marr – chosen at random from a selection of new faces – is a study 
in one of fashion's least high-profile industries. Every move of the 
zeitgeist's current favourite modelCara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne> is followed in its 
minutiae, but her male counterparts are left well alone. Ask a passerby to name 
a male model and they would probably sayDerek Zoolander 
<http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0007758/>, the antihero of Ben Stiller's 
hilarious 2001 spoof of the industry. While the 80s produced a couple of models 
that edged towards household name –Tyrese 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyrese_Gibson>, Marcus Schenkenberg 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcus_Schenkenberg> – the trend hasn't continued.

The idea of a stable of male supermodels equivalent to Naomi, Kate, Claudia 
and Christy seems remote, sure, but men's fashion is on the up. Estimated to be 
worth£10.4bn in 2013, it's grown 12% in the past five 
<http://www.londoncollections.co.uk/news/609/London-Collections:-Men-Facts-> 
years, and a study by Mintel suggests this will continue, with growth to 2017 
predicted at 11%. In line with this change, the interest in male models is also 
growing. Forbes magazine now publishes a list of the highest-paid male models 
alongside its one for women, and there are a couple of names on there – David 
Gandy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Gandy>, Sean O'Pry 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sean_O%27Pry> – that might just resonate outside 
of the industry. The March cover of US men's magazine Details features 10 of 
the biggest names working in men's fashion today.
 Tommy getting changed backstage at the Superdry show 
Male models are still small fry compared with the female of the species, 
though. The combinedtotal earnings of the top 10 male models – £4.85m – 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/vannale/2013/10/08/the-worlds-highest-paid-male-models-2013-oprys-1-5m-still-far-from-giseles-42m/>
 is dwarfed by their female counterparts, who earned more than £50m. Sarah 
Vickery, Marr's agent at Next, is quite upfront about it. "It's the only 
industry, apart from prostitution, where men get paid less," she says.

Vickery – who has the unenviable task of organising the lives and careers of a 
bunch of teenage boys – is sanguine. "The day rate for a catalogue model is 
around £3,500 for a guy, but it's £8,000 for a girl," she says. "There's not 
really much you can do about that."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL9SKauFyYI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL9SKauFyYI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRL9SKauFyYI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Patrick McKenzie, who began modelling in the noughties was paid $500 (£307) 
for appearing in a Gucci campaign, while the girls "were probably on $10,000. I 
didn't care – I thought it was a fortune". Fifteen years later, Marr is 
resigned to the difference, too. "Unless you're David Gandy, you don't earn as 
much money as the girls," he says, sat on the 55 bus from Old Street as it 
lurches around another corner on its way to Hackney Central. "I guess it kind 
of makes sense – there's a lot more focus on girls' fashion."

Indeed. Menswear's £10.4bn worth has nothing on the women's industry, which 
was estimated at about£20.7bn in 2012 
<http://store.mintel.com/womenswear-uk-april-2013>. This massive disparity 
could be down to the fact that, for an average Joe who likes fashion, an 
interest in models is not an extension of being interested in clothes. 
According to Kevin Braddock, editor-in-chief of style magazineSleek 
<http://www.sleek-mag.com/> (which published a special on masculinity earlier 
this year), "Any heterosexual guy found staring at another guy is going to have 
an elbow in the ribs from his friends."

While society sees a direct link between female models and how young girls 
feel about their looks, Braddock believes their male counterparts have less 
impact on their sex's self-esteem.
 Tommy trying on a jacket at the Superdry show 
"I think most men would dismiss a male model as 'just a model'," he says, 
"blank and cold-looking. Men are less interested in what other men look like," 
adding that's why sportsmen often star in ad campaigns: "They care about 
someone likeTheo Walcott  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/theo-walcott>
because he's part of their wider belief system or allegiances."

If neither supermodel fame nor house-buying riches are on the cards for most 
male models, why do they do it? Unlike women in the industry, many seem to have 
second jobs. Marr has a Saturday job inHollister 
<http://www.hollisterco.com/shop/uk?DM_PersistentCookieCreated=true> – proving 
staff at the store really do have model looks – and others I talk to work as a 
graphic designer, photographic studio manager and a DJ. This is often a 
necessity, rather than a sideline. The websitepayscale.com 
<http://www.payscale.com/> reported last year that a moderately successful 
female model would be on £29,000, while a male model would be on £16,000. Doing 
the maths, Linda Evangelista – who famously said she wouldn't get out of bed 
for less than $10,000 – wouldn't even roll over for £16,000 a year.

Still, the appeal seems to be – for teenagers like Marr at least – earning 
enough from doing relatively little. "Before modelling, I was scavenging off my 
mum," he says. "I genuinely don't know what I would have done if this hadn't 
happened. I might have worked with my dad in the garage."
 Tommy makes his way to a casting session on the tube 
"A successful guy is never going to reach the heights of Gisele [Bündchen, the 
world's highest-paid model, who earned more than £25m last year 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/news-features/TMG10256289/Gisele-Bundchen-tops-highest-paid-models-list-for-seventh-consecutive-year.html>
]," says Ryan Frost, a men's booker at London agency,Models 1 
<http://www.models1.co.uk/>, "but if you're an 18-year-old kid, the money isn't 
bad."

Marr models only part-time, but he's giving it a good go. Now at the casting 
for Common – a Swedish brand making its debut at LC:M – in an industrial estate 
in Hackney Wick, he's struggling to get his footballer's thighs into regulation 
skinny trousers. Not that he lets that trouble him much – for a young model, it 
is all about casting your net wide. Rejection from one designer might mean open 
arms from another. He has high hopes for Burberry andTom Ford 
<http://www.tomford.com/>, both of whom tend to use more athletic body types. 
"You have to be quite resilient," he says, on the walk to the train station, 
checking his phone for his next appointment. Marr's look – healthy, fresh-faced 
and with good bone structure – works in his favour. Adam Hindle, a casting 
director who works across Tom Ford toDamir Doma <http://www.damirdoma.com/en>, 
says the aesthetic changes depending on the client but "it has been more 
grownup over the last few seasons".

"People want healthy at the moment," Vickery adds, "kind of like Bruce Weber 
<http://www.bruceweber.com/> but less bulky." Marr, with a bit of fake tan, 
would fit right in.

Even with all this on his side, Marr should be prepared for a shockingly short 
career. Frost says out of 10 boys that Models 1 might initially sign, only 
three or four move from new faces to the main board – where established models 
are grouped – and therefore stand the test of time. Even then, an editorial 
model – a boy who has an indie rather than boyband look – could be modelling 
for only four years.
 Tommy (second left) waits with fellow models for a casting session at Gieves 
and Hawkes 
As with the women, male models are often young and naive when they start to 
work in a grownup industry. This can spell classic "too much too young" 
trouble. Patrick McKenzie, the Gucci model, started working in 1999 after he 
was spotted by a casting agent. He started at the top. The California native's 
first job was in front ofMario Testino' <http://www.mariotestino.com/>s lens, 
paired with supermodelJacquetta Wheeler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacquetta_Wheeler>. For a 19-year-old boy, it 
felt great. "Guys are happy to be an object of desire," he says.

But he quit after five years because he felt overwhelmed by it. "You're in 
your formative years, legitimately an adult but really you're just out of high 
school. And living like that, it really does a number on you because there's no 
accountability other than turning up on time."

Now 33, he's since rejoined the industry, but works as a film-maker. He's 
art-directed videos for big names such asTaylor Swift <http://taylorswift.com/>
, and he is currently working on a documentary about the alienation of the male 
model experience. It was partly prompted by the suicide of several friends, 
including Josh Sangster, a Canadian model who died after a work trip to Tokyo. 
McKenzie is keen to stress that modelling wasn't to blame for the tragedies, 
but says that it's an easy industry for young men to disappear without a trace. 
"These guys had some serious emotional and psychological issues before becoming 
a model, but the lifestyle is certainly not conducive to a man prone to 
depression," he says. "There wasn't anything unusual about staying in bed for a 
week or doing copious amounts of drugs to escape."
 David Gandy in an ad for Dolce & Gabbana … Gandy is one of very few 'big 
name' male models 
While Marr seems too much of a happy chap to succumb to this dark side, he 
says modelling has made him grow up. "I used to be a right little shit," he 
admits with a smile.

The new mature Marr does still make a few mistakes. After those December 
castings, he's in Tenerife with his mates during the crucial post-Christmas 
flurry when designers such as Tom Ford and Burberry – the big guns – are on the 
hunt for models. Back in London in time for the shows, he is booked for just 
two –Bobby Abley <http://bobbyabley.com/>, the young London designer who is 
part of the MAN initiative, andSuperdry <http://www.superdry.com/>, clothier to 
the masses. Watching him walk in Abley's show – with bunny ears and 
cartoon-printed top – followed by the hoodies and jeans of Superdry is a 
surreal snapshot of 24 hours in the life of a male model.

It turns out, though, it's one Marr is turning his back on, at least for the 
moment. He has been signed elsewhere – to play as a fullback for League Two 
side Chesterfield. "This is my last show for six months," he says, backstage at 
Superdry. "I hope I can come back to it."

Vickery has little doubt he can. "He's a classic cool boy, so has longevity," 
she says. "The football might even add to his appeal – clients these days want 
personality."

To be a male model seems like a transient stage in a young man's life, a 
moment in front of the camera on the way to something else. The prize might not 
be as greenbacked as Gisele's but – if the floodlights of a football pitch 
don't come calling – other rewards are certainly theirs for the taking.

One thing's for sure, though: a male Cara Delevingne won't be on the scene any 
time soon.

• This article was amended on Friday 7 March 2014 to correct the spelling of 
two names. Patrick McKenzie's name was formerly given as Patrick Kenzie and 
Josh Sangster as Josh Stagner.
 