
Something is going on behind St Petersburg's elegant but inscrutable classical 
facades. While Russia's former capital has always had the looks, its 
personality has been, at best, enigmatic and, at worst, dull. But now, 
characterful creative spaces and cafes serving top-notch street food are giving 
the city some edge. Ground zero for this transformation is the strip of land 
between the rivers Moyka and Neva. Recently rejuvenated by the new metro 
station at Admiralteyskaya, the area – also home to big-hitters like the 
Hermitage museum – is easy to explore on foot and a perfect introduction to the 
future of St Petersburg.

Set yourself up for a day in the snow with brunch at 22.13 
<http://22-13.com/legend> (Konushennaya ploshad 2) 1, a local favourite that 
hides its past as a taxi garage with a beautiful arched ceiling, spiral 
staircase and vintage furniture from Paris. You can try modern variations on 
Russian specialities, such as cottage-cheese pancakes with berries for around 
£5. There are brunch classics, too, plus Russians' beloved pan-Asian options, 
if you fancy a Thai squid-and-ginger omelette first thing.

Each day, coaches disgorge thousands of tourists into Palace Square so they 
can troop round the Hermitage. Dodge them with a whirl round the mega-museum's 
bold new contemporary wing opposite,Hermitage 20/21 
<http://www.hermitagemuseum.org/html_En/13/hm13_2_020.html> (2, Palace Square 
hermitagemuseum.org)2. After courting controversy by opening with a show by the 
Chapman brothers, raffish young director Dmitry Ozerkov is now curating a 
Japanese show. Next year will seeManifesta <http://manifesta.org/>, the roving 
art biennale known for pushing boundaries: get set for clashes with the city's 
conservative elites.

If you've a taste for irony, or just a hankering for fresh air, take a winter 
stroll in theSummer Gardens  
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/parks/summer-garden/> 3, the city's oldest and 
most elegant park – recently restored. WithMikhailovsky Garden 
<http://www.rusmuseum.ru/eng/museum/complex/mih_palace/mih_sad/> and the Field 
of Mars <http://www.saint-petersburg.com/parks/field-of-mars/>, this forms a 
picturesque little green lung at the intersection of all the city's many 
watercourses. If you get peckish, pop in to retro pie emporiumStolle 
<http://www.stolle.ru/en/spb/menu.html> (Konyshenny pereulok 1/6) 4: a hearty 
slice of the rabbit and mushroom pie will make your day, or even change your 
life.

Nursing a single espresso for two hours so you can use the Wi-Fi has been 
consigned to history by Russia's beloved "anti-cafes", where you pay (pennies) 
for the time you spend there and get all the tea, biccies, books and impromptu 
concerts your heart desires thrown in.Miracle 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/russia/st-petersburg/Restaurants-in-St-Petersburg/coffeeteahouses/Miracle_105444v>
 (Moshkov Pereulok 4)5, is one of St Petersburg's best – a good place to take a 
break and meet the locals.
 The Hermitage museum’s new contemporary wing. Photograph: Igor Simkin 
Head next door to Taiga Space 
<http://translate.google.co.uk/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&u=http://space-taiga.org/&prev=/search%3Fq%3DTaiga%2BSpace>
 (20 Palace Embankment)6, a former mansion on the banks of the Neva river that 
has been renovated by its tenants and transformed into a creative space with 
workshops, design studios and cafes. It's also a fashion destination, thanks to
8-Store <http://8-store.ru/> (), a boutique that sells affordable bags, clothes 
and jewellery from Russian independent labels. Check outAsya Malberstein 
<http://asyamalbershtein.com/>'s leather handbags and other accessories and 
Sasha Chi Jewellery <http://www.behance.net/chisashad14e>. For something more 
highbrow, wander down the Moyka to theNabokov Museum 
<http://www.nabokovmuseum.org/index1.html> (47 Bolshaya Morskaya Street) 7, 
housed in the building where the writer was born. It's a real slice of 
pre-revolutionary aristocratic St Petersburg, stuffed with family mementoes and 
some of the author's stunning butterfly collection.

The best places for an early supper are around Gorokhovaya Street: for 
mind-blowing apple pie and the best service in St Petersburg (not a hotly 
contested prize), tryJerome 
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/dining/restaurants/jerome/index.asp> (round 
the corner at Bolshaya Morskaya 25)8; if you just want a quick (and trendy) 
refuel, go toPotato with Mushrooms 
<http://www.sptimes.ru/index.php?action_id=2&story_id=38658> (Gorokhovaya 12) 9
, a newly opened temple of the tattie that specialises inkapsalon, a recently 
invented Dutch street-food delicacy – fries, kebab meat, melted Gouda and 
salad. If that's not your cup of heart disease,Clean Plates Society 
<http://cleanplates.ru> (Gorokhovaya Ulitsa 13) 10, does a good butternut 
squash salad.
 Clean Plates Society. Photograph: Igor Simkin 
Darkness descends early at this time of year, leaving ample time to explore 
the area's flourishing bar scene. The cosyBistro Dekabrist (Yakubovicha Street 
2)11, serves great burgers (on wooden slabs), plus a good selection of beers 
and ciders (still a rarity in the city).Mayakovsky <http://mayakovskybar.su/en/>
 (Pochtamptskiy Pereulok 5)12, is the place for classy cocktails with a Russian 
twist, inspired by avant-garde poetry and Russian folk tales.

St Petersburg has enough great bars for several nights' worth of bar crawling 
(and there is nothing locals like more), but not many nightclubs. Nevertheless, 
the real party starts late. There's plenty of post-midnight drinking and 
dancing to be had atMore (Malaya Morskaya 20) 13, which is tucked away in an 
old residential building near the imperious St Isaac's cathedral. The way in – 
via an unmarked courtyard and up a flight of stairs – gets you in the mood for 
an adventure and a night of live music and cocktails. Alternatively, head back 
east toArchitector (Millionnaya Ulitsa 10) 14, a creative cluster that really 
comes alive at night in a passable impression of East Berlin. Superbly named 
skateshopAngry Boards will be shut by then, but Las Veggies churns out 
piping-hot mushroom soup until dawn, or whenever you spill out of one of the 
six bars on site.

• This feature was supplied by The Calvert Journal <http://calvertjournal.com/>
 