
My first Skype class learning Russian had me discussing sandwiches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/04/russian-via-skype-languages-challenge>
, so by lesson two my appetite was whet for talk of cream cakes or maybe a 
fresh fruit salad. But my conversation with Olga has switched from finger food 
to the revolution.

Despite the latter being of particular relevance at the moment, it's merely 
coincidental that it comes up in class – Olga begins our lesson by giving me an 
English word and making me guess how to translate it into Russian.

It's a nice way to ease into the lesson and it gets me thinking rather than 
just parroting every word she says. So, knowing that the words follow a similar 
pattern to those suffixed with "tion" in English, I can work out how to say
organizatsiya(organisation), konstitutsiya (constitution) and revolyutsiya 
(revolution).

Not the type of vocabulary I had in mind when signing up for beginner's 
Russian, but learning words in this way highlights the importance of intuition 
in language learning. Also, it's essential to build up my repertoire before 
tackling simple sentences.

More vocabulary comes in the form of job titles. I can now tell people "Ya 
zhurnalist" (I'm a journalist) – while if I fancy taking on a more glamorous 
alter ego for my honeymoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/24/russian-language-of-love-online-challenge>
 I could always lie and say "Ya aktrisa" (I'm an actress).

Russia has masculine and feminine equivalents for jobs, so the word for actor 
isaktyor. Although there is also a feminine equivalent for journalist (
zhurnalistika), Olga tells me I can just use zhurnalist.

While I ponder whether this choice could be due to Olga's feminist leanings, 
we've swiftly moved on to some more typical tourist vocabulary. There's no time 
for critical theory in a one-hourSkype 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/skype> class.

Since discovering Anna Pavlova's mesmerising Dying Swan performance, the 
Mariinsky Theatre has been the main force pulling me to St Petersburg, so after
pasport i viza, it would be most useful for me to learn phrases related to the 
balliet (ballet).

Keeping up the cultural theme, Olga tells me that Moscow's Bolshoi Theatre – 
another place I've long dreamt of visiting, literally means big theatre. This 
helps when it comes to remembering how to say "thank you very much", or quite 
literally "big thanks" – it'sbolshoe spasibo.

On the subject of good manners, Olga might have been watching a few too many 
Richard Curtis films, or at least she hasn't taken the tube during rush hour, 
because she tells me British people are far more concerned with being polite 
than Russians. Nevertheless, I'm advised to precede any questions withizvinite 
(excuse me).

So, if lost and looking for the Mariinsky Theatre I'd approach a friendly 
looking native and enquire "Izvinite, gde teatr?" Understanding their response 
will have to wait till next week. Another hour has passed. These lessons zoom 
by.

I bid farewell to Olga (do svidaniya), and with a British reputation to 
maintain, tell herbolshoi spasibo at least three times.

Anna Parkin is a freelance journalist based in London, she is learning Russian 
via Skype as part of theGuardian online language learning challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/the-case-for-language-learning>. 
Follow her progess on the case for language learning series, or on Twitter 
using the hashtag#LearnALanguageOnline 
<https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23LearnALanguageOnline>
 