
“Money kills the imagination,” says the narrator of Claire Kilroy’s 2012 novel 
The Devil I Know <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/devil-i-know.html>, a 
fiendishly good satire of the moment the Irish boom went bust. “It makes us 
want the same thing.” The book is set in 2016 and takes the form of one man’s 
testimony to a tribunal intended to uncover the sleaze and short-termism that 
enabled a giant property bubble to inflate in the years leading up to the 
global financial crash of 2008. In the autumn of 2015, we have not yet caught 
up with Kilroy’s future setting, but as the real-world aftershocks of the 
Celtic Tiger’s downfall continue, one Irish sector is booming: with the rise of 
a new wave of writers, fromPaul Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-murray>, Kevin Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-barry> and Donal Ryan to first-time 
authors such as Eimear McBride,Sara Baume 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/07/sara-baume-readers-nominee-guardian-first-book-award-2015>
,Lisa McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/01/the-glorious-heresies-lisa-mcinerney-review-sweary-lady>
 andColin Barrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/guardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories>
, there is a palpable energy to Irish fiction.

“There weren’t that many significant debuts during the entirety of the boom,” 
Kilroy says now. “Back then, by becoming a literary writer, you were pretty 
much setting yourself in opposition to the dominant ideology of the time, which 
was to make money, buy property and spend ostentatiously. I would suggest that 
a large proportion of my generation has been artistically neutered, for the 
time being at least.”

“It was hard to write in Ireland during the Tiger times – there was a sense of 
‘Get with the programme, you’re off message’,” agreesAnne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-enright>, who was appointed the 
inaugural laureate for Irish fiction at the beginning of this year. “The boom 
was also estranging – the whole dance of it.”

Murray’s latest novel, The Mark and the Void 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/307980/s/the-mark-and-the-void/>
, is set in Dublin’s financial district at the moment the whole teetering 
edifice of derivatives and inter-banking loans came crashing down, and features 
a bitter failed novelist, also called Paul, whose crippling mortgage on a 
jerry-built luxury flat drives him towards bank robbery. Writing? “I don’t do 
that shit any more.”

So what’s happening now? “The glorious old-fashioned thing that you can’t get 
a job, you might as well write, has always applied in Ireland,” continues 
Enright, who says the current renaissance has been brewing for a couple of 
years. “It has something to do with the agility of the small presses and their 
ability to pick up talent and run with it. Things in the UK feel increasingly 
corporate – everybody there has amalgamated.” While the wave of Irish novelists 
who rose to prominence in the early 90s – Enright,Roddy Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roddydoyle>, Colm Tóibín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/colmtoibin>, Sebastian Barry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastian-barry> – tended to be published 
from London, the current dynamism of Ireland’s publishing scene means that new 
authors are being picked up there first.

We only publish stuff that's so exciting it makes us want to set ourselves on 
fire and jump out of a window
Tramp Press 
Longstanding literary magazine Stinging Fly <http://www.stingingfly.org/>, 
which showcases new Irish and international writing, has had its own publishing 
imprint for a decade. It is run by Declan Meade – a man who, Enright says, “has 
never made a mistake. His list of authors is completely impressive” – and 
brought out the debut collections of Barry (Impac winner), Barrett (Guardian 
first book award winner) and the Costa-shortlistedMary Costello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/25/academy-street-mary-costello-review>
. Stinging Fly has been instrumental in, asJulian Gough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julian-gough> puts it, “changing the 
landscape of Irish fiction, issue by issue, book by book”. Short stories, often 
seen as hard sells by bigger publishers, are its life blood. Its newest title, 
published last week and slated for UK release in January, isDanielle McLaughlin 
<https://twitter.com/dannilmc>’s Dinosaurs on Other Planets 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/359176/>, “not just a 
book of short stories,” as Enright points out, “but a book ofanticipated short 
stories. Could such a thing exist in England?”

Last year also saw the launch of the energetic new publisher Tramp Press 
<http://www.tramppress.com/>, which picked Baume from the slush pile, while 
journals such asGorse <http://gorse.ie/about/> and Banshee 
<http://bansheelit.tumblr.com/about> are springing up all the time. Sarah 
Davis-Goff and Lisa Coen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/28/writers-influences-female-inspirational-authors-gender>
, the pair behind Tramp, decided to join forces when their contracts at fellow 
indieLilliput Press <http://www.lilliputpress.ie/> ran out. They point out that 
it’s easier to set up a company, to risk losing everything, “if you don’t have 
anything to lose”. As well as Baume’s novelSpill Simmer Falter Wither 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/303247/>, now 
longlisted for the Guardian first book award, they commissioned a centenary 
anthology of reworkings of Joyce’s short stories,Dubliners 100 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dubliners-100.html>. They sum up their 
manifesto as: “Only publish stuff that’s so exceptionally exciting it makes us 
want to set ourselves on fire and jump out of a window; be ballsy; never stray 
too far from the slush pile.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444925512599%2F831792cd-6b7c-4870-b554-12d82b0d340f-737x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444925512599%2F831792cd-6b7c-4870-b554-12d82b0d340f-737x2040.jpeg>
 Illustration: Lara Harwood/heartagency.com 
As with Stinging Fly, this willingness to take the kinds of risks that 
corporate publishers never would is what makes the books special – but it takes 
money. Davis-Goff stresses the role of the Irish Arts Council in the current 
resurgence, whose literary branch is “extremely supportive” of new work. “There 
are talented writers with excellent publishing opportunities, a little bit of 
money to go around and a supportive media. And the readers themselves are 
engaged: they go to launches, they’ve book clubs, they talk to each other, they 
get to the literary festivals.” Meade agrees that funding is key, “both 
directly for writers and then also for the general literary infrastructure of 
festivals, publishers, resource organisations”. Cuts have been made, of course, 
but there is still an emphasis on funding new writers.

Small presses create possibilities for experimental writers, the most obvious 
recent example being McBride’sA Girl Is a Half-formed Thing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-is-a-half-formed-thing.html>. This year 
notable debuts have includedCaitriona Lally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/12/eggshells-caitriona-lally-review-novel-debut>
’s whimsically strangeEggshells 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298259/s/eggshells/> 
fromLiberties Press <http://www.libertiespress.com/>, about a Dublin woman who 
thinks she is a changeling; and the contemplative, insularPond 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/338840/> by 
Claire-Louise Bennett 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/books/claire-louise-bennett-on-writing-pond-1.2226535>
, an English writer who has settled in Galway, published to huge acclaim by 
Stinging Fly in Ireland earlier this year and Fitzcarraldo in the UK this 
month. But the experimental strain isn’t confined to the tiny outfits:Gavin 
Corbett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/13/green-glowing-skull-by-gavin-corbett-deeply-strange-and-strangely-deep>
 has followed up his extraordinary monologue in the voice of an Irish Traveller,
This Is The Way <>, with the riotously strange Green Glowing Skull <http:> for 
4th Estate, whileRob Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/15/here-are-the-young-men-review-rob-doyle>
’s second book, out next January from Bloomsbury, will be a series of 
fragmented pieces hovering between fiction and non-fiction,This Is the Ritual 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/363834/>. Hawthorn 
and Child <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hawthorn-and-child.html>, an 
expectation-confounding quasi-crime novel from Dublin authorKeith Ridgway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/11/hawthorn-child-keith-ridgway-review>
, who now lives in London, was one of the literary highlights of 2012.

“I think it would be smug and premature to herald a golden age but maybe a 
proper radicalism is at last starting to re-emerge in Irish writing,” says 
Barry, who is credited by many with re-energising Irish fiction. “We should 
always remember that being innovative and wild and not afraid to go completely 
fucking nuts on the page is what built its reputation in the first half of the 
20th century.”

It is all very different from five years ago, when the Berlin-based writer 
Gough ruffled feathers by describing Irish literary writers as “a priestly 
caste, scribbling by candlelight, cut off from the electric current of the 
culture 
<http://www.juliangough.com/journal/2010/2/10/the-state-of-irish-literature-2010.html>
”. For a while, historical novels were the order of the day, concentrating on 
deprivation and emigration, rural poverty, famine and the power of the church. 
“Irish literature had gotten smug and self-congratulatory during the boom; lots 
of novels about how terrible Ireland’s past was, with all its sexual repression 
and poverty,” Gough says now. “Heritage literature, and very conservatively 
told. All old-fashioned lyrical realism, not a trace of the wild 
experimentalism of Beckett, Joyce andFlann O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/30/my-hero-flann-obrien-sansom>.

“The unspoken assumption was that we were much wiser and nicer and smarter, 
and richer, now. It was moral masturbation. The crash plunged us back into 
self-doubt and anger and black humour and negative equity; places in which 
Irish literature is more comfortable. Irish writers function best when 
everything is going to hell, whether a psyche or an economy.”

Today’s writers, Enright says, are writing “about anything at all, and that 
includes contemporary Ireland. That fictional sense of ‘Grand Ireland’, which 
happened in the past and was rural, has gone almost entirely.” She also points 
to “a confidence in female voices that I haven’t seen ever before – a hugely 
important thing. Traditionally, Irish writing has been about breaking silences. 
The biggest silence has continued to be about the real lives of women.” Enright 
herself muses on various silences – of betrayal, of female experience, of the 
nationwide suspension of disbelief as the property bubble went into overdrive – 
in her 2011 novelThe Forgotten Waltz 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/forgotten-waltz.html>, which looks back on an 
adulterous affair during the boom years from the colder, wiser vantage point of 
the crash. This year’sThe Green Road 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283515/s/green-road/> 
takes two classic Irish subjects, the west of Ireland and a family’s 
relationship to the matriarch at its centre, then spreads its wings to New York 
and Mali as well as diving deep into the perspective of Rosaleen, the difficult 
mother at the heart of the book. “I am not a Freudian about this money shit,” 
Enright wrote in a 2010article 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v32/n01/anne-enright/sinking-by-inches> about the crash. 
“These days I play with the idea of money as mother’s love: her body, her 
attention, the blessing of her gaze.”

Belinda McKeon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/belinda-mckeon> and Claire 
Keegan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/05/claire-keegan-short-story-interview>
 have also won acclaim for novels exploring the changing mores of countryside 
and family, while the anthologyThe Long Gaze Back 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360826/>, published 
by New Island last month, showcases 30 stories by female writers including
Christine Dwyer Hickey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/18/cold-eye-heaven-christine-dwyer-hickey-review>
,Lucy Caldwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/21/all-the-beggars-riding-lucy-caldwell-review>
 andLia Mills <https://libranwriter.wordpress.com/>. “If anything 2015 is 
dominated by new Irish female voices,” says the anthology’s editor,Sinéad 
Gleeson <http://www.sineadgleeson.com/about/>. “The old patterns of 
male-dominated anthologies, men-only book panels and reverence around men’s 
writing are finally changing.”

“New zines, new writers, new arguments, lots of experiments, Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> finally connecting properly with 
its diaspora; it’s a wonderful time to be an Irish writer,” concludes Gough. 
“Everything’s improved since 2010, except house prices in Leitrim.”

Paul Murray
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843256277%2Fa44481b7-0cab-494f-99a0-02d48be79b10-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843256277%2Fa44481b7-0cab-494f-99a0-02d48be79b10-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Patrick Bolger Photogrraphy 
Murray’s first novel, An Evening of Long Goodbyes, mocked boomtime Ireland 
through the figure of a pretentious young layabout who longs to live in a more 
refined age, but it was his second book,Skippy Dies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/skippy-dies.html> – a tragicomic boarding 
school epic taking in love, lust, string theory and existential crises – that 
made him a star. It also vertiginously raised expectations for his next novel, 
this year’sThe Mark and the Void, which tackles the global financial crash, and 
Ireland’s starring role in it. Murray, now 40, had been planning a book about 
the Irish banking system since 2002, when his sister took a job working for the 
Bank of Bermuda in Dublin. His descriptions of the financial apocalypse as seen 
by Claude, a business analyst with the Bank of Torabundo, may read like 
hyperbolic satire, but are firmly rooted in the feverish actuality: when it 
comes to the corruption, graft and confidence tricks of derivatives trading, 
you didn’t have to make it up. The book is a wry, tricksy enactment of the 
difficulties of facing up to reality when the stories we have let ourselves 
believe turn out to be baseless, and the challenge of making up new ones.

Eimear McBride
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444905907903%2F16b8aa8f-057e-414d-bd5a-a9bcd22cf499-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444905907903%2F16b8aa8f-057e-414d-bd5a-a9bcd22cf499-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Photograph: Teri Pengilley 
Written in 2004, turned down by all the major houses with “glowing refusals” 
and eventually brought out by a small press in 2013,A Girl Is a Half-formed 
Thing has been one of publishing’s more unusual success stories. Sparked by 
readingUlysses on her morning commute to a dead-end job, the dense, fractured 
prose of McBride’s debut has its roots in the modernism of Joyce, Beckett and 
Faulkner. A young woman, growing up in an atmosphere of Catholic shame and 
guilt, wrestles with psychological and sexual trauma after being abused by her 
uncle, addressing her monologue to a beloved brother who was damaged in 
childhood by a brain tumour: “You there sleeping. My boy. My brother. Wish my 
eye for yours tooth for your tooth. You’re a better. No. It’s all fuck gone. 
Gone to the gone to the wrong wrong wrong.” McBride hasdescribed her style 
<http://www.thewhitereview.org/interviews/interview-with-eimear-mcbride> as 
“attempting to tell a story from a point so far back in the mind that it is 
completely experiential, completely gut-reactive and balancing on the moment 
just before language becomes formatted thought”. It is a visceral, overwhelming 
read, which took not only the inauguralGoldsmiths prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/nov/14/eimear-mcbride-goldsmiths-prize-literature>
, set up to reward innovative fiction, but theBaileys women’s prize for fiction 
<>, generally a far more mainstream award.

Born in Liverpool to Northern Irish parents who moved to the Republic when she 
was two, McBride left Ireland to go to drama school in London and now lives in 
Norwich. Subject and style place her firmly in the Irish tradition, but “for 
literal, as well as motivational, reasons I feel much closer to the diaspora 
writers.Edna O’Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edna-o-brien> became 
very important to me early on in my reading life and the small difference 
between the ‘in’ and ‘of’ perspective describes my own position.”

McBride’s second novel, The Lesser Bohemians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/14/eimear-mcbride-lesser-bohemians-second-novel-faber>
, has been eight years in the writing, and will be published by Faber next 
year. Set in 1990s north London, it centres on a young woman who, like McBride, 
has come over from Ireland to study acting, and promises an “evolution” in the 
style of her debut. “The financial crisis has slain some of the complacencies 
and made room for the plethora of interesting small presses, whose focus is 
considerably higher than a lot of the pudgy, gormless rubbish that was so 
touted in times gone by,” McBride says. “It is also worth saying that many of 
the writers who have gone up through the literary ranks in the last 10 or 15 
years are proving considerably more supportive of those coming behind than may 
traditionally have been the case.”

Kevin Barry
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843372570%2F74f1fbda-de77-4b41-b617-879fb32915cf-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843372570%2F74f1fbda-de77-4b41-b617-879fb32915cf-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/Guardian 
Barry’s debut short story collection There Are Little Kingdoms 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/there-are-little-kingdoms.html>, published in 
2007, announced an unstoppable new voice. He followed it withCity of Bohane 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/city-of-bohane.html>, a brash, swaggering 
fantasia set in a twisted version of the west of Ireland with shades of the old 
wild west, which went on to win theImpac prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/07/kevin-barry-impac-award>. Though 
set in the 2050s, the novel has its roots in Ireland’s early-21st century 
apocalypse: “I think it reverberates off the lurid and desperate tone or notes 
that played in actual Irish cities at that time,” Barry says now. “Whenever you 
set a story in the future, it’s always a kind of projection on the present 
moment.” His new novelBeatlebone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Beatlebone&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, published this month and alreadyshortlisted for the Goldsmiths prize 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/goldsmiths-prize/prize2015/>, is a gloriously 
freewheeling tale imagining an attempt by John Lennon to visit the island he 
had bought off the coast of Mayo in 1967 (and whichcame back on the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/22/john-lennon-clew-bay-island-for-sale>
 in the wake of the recession). Barry weaves his own odyssey to “Beatle Island” 
into a tale of fame, freaks, bad liquor and bad weather, with Lennon – angry, 
brilliant, sarcastic, tender, on a doomed quest for artistic release and his 
Irish roots – at its centre.

Donal Ryan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444905978506%2F9fdebd4a-f08d-4e98-8ed8-c80ceb92f8e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444905978506%2F9fdebd4a-f08d-4e98-8ed8-c80ceb92f8e0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod/Guardian 
Described by Sebastian Barry as the “chief pathologist and poet” of the Celtic 
Tiger’s bones, Donal Ryan had amassed no fewer than 47 rejection letters before 
publishingThe Spinning Heart 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/spinning-heart.html>, a polyphonic novel 
about an Irish village reeling under the recession that took the 2013 Guardian 
first book award, as well as beingshortlisted for the Impac award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/11/impac-literary-prize-shortlist-knausgaard-vasquez-ryan>
 andlonglisted for the Booker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2013/jul/23/man-booker-international-prize-2013-booker-prize>
. Told through 21 linked monologues – from laid-off construction workers and 
thwarted youths to a single mother stuck on a half-finished ghost estate – it 
pieces together a darkly brilliant portrait of a community in crisis. Ryan has 
since publishedThe Thing About December 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thing-about-december-4.html>, set in the same 
fictional village a decade earlier when soaring land values stoked a frenzy to 
buy, and this autumn’s short-story collection,A Slanting of the Sun 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/untitled-collection-of-short-stories.html>, 
which continues to anatomise rural despair.

Ireland feels “less stressed now”, he says, than in 2010, when he began The 
Spinning Heart. “Our innate fatalism has been compromised a little bit by our 
awakening to our own resilience: the worst happened to us economically and 
we’ve mostly survived. Almost unbelievably, though, the mindless, half-arsed, 
a-la-carte neoliberalism that nearly destroyed us is already starting to 
resurrect itself.”

Sara Baume
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906049533%2F16518e34-234a-4cc7-8664-a139b637a047-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906049533%2F16518e34-234a-4cc7-8664-a139b637a047-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Gary Doak/Writer Pictures 
For Sara Baume, the recession was a key factor in finding her voice. A fine 
art student who went on to do a creative writing MA, she was driven out of 
Dublin after the crash by a combination of soaring rents and dwindling job 
opportunities, and found herself scraping by in rural Cork. “Spill Simmer 
Falter Wither could certainly never have been written if I’d been working in a 
nice job and living in the city,” she says. “It came about almost directly as a 
response to the change in my circumstances, and I really only managed to finish 
it because I felt under no apparent pressure to avail myself of more lucrative 
opportunities; there simply weren’t any. The recession forced me to reassess 
the essentials, even granted me the freedom to just write.”

Arranged in four sections that span the seasons, her novel is set in an 
unnamed town on the Cork coast rather like the one where Baume now lives, with 
Ray, a withdrawn man in his late 50s – “Too old for starting over, too young 
for giving up” – pouring out his pent-up feelings to an unprepossessing mutt 
called One Eye, who lost the other to a badger in a fight. Ray is the kind of 
outsider you find, Baume says, in every village in rural Ireland, as well as 
shambling through the pages ofBeckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett> or Patrick McCabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrickmccabe>. But Baume’s prose has an 
energy and cadence all her own: utterly unsentimental, but in its open-hearted, 
sidelong engagement with the mercurial One Eye and the changing seasons, 
strangely joyous. Ray’s life may be tragic, his potential stifled and hopes 
ignored, but he tells his story, as Baume’s early championJoseph O’Connor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joseph-o-connor> put it, with “the 
measured tenderness of a man who doesn’t realise he’s in love with the world”.

Oona Frawley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906101115%2F1b092fa6-9d1a-477f-b5f8-d2ca29838656-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906101115%2F1b092fa6-9d1a-477f-b5f8-d2ca29838656-2060x1373.jpeg>
Like McBride’s A Girl Is a Half-formed Thing, Oona Frawley’s impressively 
cosmopolitan debutFlight 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/357112/> languished 
for nearly a decade without a publisher, before it became the launch title for 
Tramp Press last year. It was written in “a very different Ireland”, says 
Frawley, who was born in New York to Irish actor parents, but moved to the 
Republic as an academic in 1999. “One that couldn’t see the financial crisis 
coming, or quite how it had transformed into a multicultural society.” When she 
initially sent the book out, publishers objected to the main character, a black 
Zimbabwean woman working in Ireland to earn money to send back home. “It was 
said repeatedly thatFlight didn’t fit into the categories of the Irish novel. 
There was a request to cut Sandrine, and another to make her Polish. They 
didn’t seem to believe that readers would accept an Ireland or versions of 
Irishness that challenged the standard mode.” Today the book reads as an 
assured portrait of a changing country, and the moment it became a magnet for 
migration rather than the reverse: it is set in the runup to 2004’s referendum 
on ending automatic citizenship for babies born in Ireland, an issue that 
becomes increasingly urgent for Sandrine, who is nursing a secret pregnancy. 
She works as a carer for an elderly couple lapsing into dementia, and their 
memories of life abroad, working in the spice trade, are woven into the 
narrative along with Sandrine’s homesickness and her cautious exploration of 
her new, rainy, unwelcoming home.

Lisa McInerney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906181154%2Fc8f24791-f816-4727-9d14-b04da41881dd-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906181154%2Fc8f24791-f816-4727-9d14-b04da41881dd-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Gary Doak/Writer Pictures 
Born in 1981, Lisa McInerney was celebrated for her blog long before her debut 
novel,The Glorious Heresies, came out this spring. She started Arse End of 
Ireland 
<http://www.lisamcinerney.com/#!What-Happened-To-Arse-End-Of-Ireland-Anyway/c1q8z/5548a2390cf273133516c0d1>
, a sideways look at life in a Galway council estate, in 2006, but “I always 
felt like a slumbering novelist”, she says. “Blogging obviously requires a much 
more rapid-fire kind of creativity; the requisite writing is both shallow and 
risky. What it did give me was a deep appreciation for the kind of gallows 
humour particular to Ireland – canny, irreverent, occasionally cruel.”The 
Glorious Heresies, which evolved out of a first, “relentlessly grim” novel 
about post-Magdalene, post-crash Ireland, is all three: a rollicking tale of 
drug-dealing, young love and accidental murder in Cork. “Many of us outside 
Dublin didn’t experience much of the boom,” she points out. “I wonder if things 
have not so much changed post-crash as returned to normal. On an everyday 
level, it meant that I had to move to the countryside so I could afford to 
write full-time, which is a problem because I’m happiest in the city. But 
writers are supposed to be miserable, right?”

Mary Costello
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843439292%2F129b4e7e-a135-4d05-8a20-6a28496c8d83-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444843439292%2F129b4e7e-a135-4d05-8a20-6a28496c8d83-2060x1371.jpeg>
“My ears pricked up when I saw Mary Costello being published by Stinging Fly 
because I thought it was going to be another boys’ club,” Enright says. She was 
an early supporter of Costello’s debut short-story collection,The China Factory 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/china-factory.html>, which zeroes in on big 
events in ordinary lives. Costello grew up in Galway and now lives in Dublin; 
her first novel,Academy Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/25/academy-street-mary-costello-review>
, was a beautifully understated portrait of one woman’s life, from the early 
loss of her mother in 1940s rural Ireland, to emigration and a withdrawn yet 
intense adulthood in New York.Shortlisted for the Costa first novel award in 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2014/nov/19/the-costa-book-awards-shortlists-2014-in-pictures>
, its quiet power is reminiscent of Tóibín.

Tana French
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906248289%2F051ace4c-eebb-480c-a3eb-2c2bec7aeab2-2060x1476.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906248289%2F051ace4c-eebb-480c-a3eb-2c2bec7aeab2-2060x1476.jpeg>
 Photograph: Corbis 
The tricky and often dark interplay between past and present runs straight 
through Irish literature
Tana French 
Crime fiction, says Tana French, is ideally placed to explore the huge 
collective moral and psychological upheaval that hit Ireland over the last 
couple of decades. Her Dublin Murder Squad series brilliantly anatomises modern 
Ireland and its uneasy relationship between past and present, with her 2007 
debutIn the Woods <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-the-woods.html> 
investigating an old mystery unearthed by the construction of a boomtime 
motorway.Broken Harbour <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/broken-harbour.html> 
is set on a half-built ghost estate outside Dublin, where a family’s golden 
existence has been brought to a bloody end by the crash. “I was writing it 
surrounded by the wreckage of the economic boom and the devastation it had 
wreaked – not just financially, but psychologically and morally – on great 
swaths of my generation,” French says. “I ended up with a book about what 
happens when people do what they’re told to do, follow the rules, and then the 
rules kick them in the teeth.” French was born in the US but has adopted Dublin 
as her home, and sees her work as very much in the Irish literary tradition. 
“The themes that fascinate me,” she says, “the tricky and often dark interplay 
between past and present, the human need to define and/or construct reality 
through imagination and language – run straight through Irish literature.”

Claire Kilroy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906388997%2F91e7aef2-3698-4da6-9628-349fb5d8f8dc-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906388997%2F91e7aef2-3698-4da6-9628-349fb5d8f8dc-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Photograph: Helen Kilroy 
“I remember turning on the radio one Sunday afternoon in 2009 after the crash 
and hearingNeil Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/may/24/horror> speaking at the 
Farmleigh Global Economic Irish Forum,” says Kilroy, who was born in 1973 and 
studied for a creative writing MPhil at Trinity College, Dublin. “He pointed 
out that the banks had failed the Irish people, the church had failed us, the 
government had failed us, but the culture industry had not failed us. I was 
working on my boom and bust novel,The Devil I Know 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/devil-i-know.html>, at the time.” The book 
dramatises the property bubble through the figure of an alcoholic returnee to 
Ireland, bemused by the equally addictive behaviours he sees around him. It is 
both a medieval morality play, with the devil lurking in the background, and a 
barbed, lyrical portrait of modern Ireland. It follows three earlier novels 
about art and obsession, includingAll Names Have Been Changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/08/all-names-have-been-changed>, 
set among Dublin creative writing students in the 1980s. Kilroy plans to set 
her next novel outside Ireland. “Having become a mother in 2012,” she says, 
“I’m writing about the boom and bust I’ve experienced with that.”

Colin Barrett
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906465033%2Fcc6419a3-c7d4-4741-9e22-a133951f737c-2060x1554.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906465033%2Fcc6419a3-c7d4-4741-9e22-a133951f737c-2060x1554.jpeg>
Born in 1982, Barrett grew up in County Mayo and worked for a mobile phone 
company in Dublin before doing an MA in creative writing. His slim short‑story 
collectionYoung Skins <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/young-skins-262548.html>
, published by Stinging Fly in 2013 and Jonathan Cape a year later, won two 
prizes. The pieces are nearly all set in the fictional town of Glanbeigh in the 
west of Ireland – “nowhere you have been, but you know its ilk” – among young 
people kicking against the bounds of smalltown life. Stark, tender, lyrical and 
gritty by turns, they bear the influence of US mastersDenis Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/03/the-laughing-monsters-review-denis-johnson>
 andBarry Hannah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/20/barry-hannah-obituary> but also 
announce a remarkably achieved new voice. Barretthas said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/15/first-book-award-the-shortlist> 
that he is attracted to the short‑story form “for its capacity to access and 
maintain intensities – tonally, atmospherically, linguistically – that more 
capacious narrative forms too often cannot tolerate”. He may not be done with 
Glanbeigh yet.

Julian Gough
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906560885%2Fd03ba738-9fc2-41ca-8512-3ee0cadc999f-2060x1388.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20Irish%20literary%20boom%3A%20the%20post-crash%20stars%20of%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fnew-irish-literary-boom-post-crash-stars-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F15%2F1444906560885%2Fd03ba738-9fc2-41ca-8512-3ee0cadc999f-2060x1388.jpeg>
 Photograph: Anne Marie Fives 
Gough was born in London, grew up in Tipperary and Galway, and now lives in 
Berlin (“It has always been handy for Irish writers to get the feck out of the 
place”). An energetic satirist of everything from the Christian Brothers to EU 
funding directives, he has also rejoiced in literary pranks such asstealing 
Will Self’s pig 
<http://www.juliangough.com/journal/2008/5/27/stealing-will-selfs-pig.html>, 
awarded as part of the Wodehouse prize for comic fiction (Gough was also in the 
running, with the first in his picaresque novels about the hapless anti-hero 
Jude). Recently, he has made canny use of the internet’s crowdfunding 
possibilities, raising funds through Kickstarter to write and research his next 
novelby offering to send readers postcards written in blood or shot through 
with bullet holes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/19/julian-gough-litcoin-kickstarter-economics-reading-postcards>
. That stack of 250 blank postcards started to look “awfully like an unwritten 
book”, he says, but the cards are now being sent out and the book, a literary 
SF novel set in the Nevada desert, calledConnect 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/books/julian-gough-signs-major-book-deal-with-picador-1.2177149>
, is due out from Picador next year. “I’m not an indie writer at the moment,” 
he says, “which is strange, as I’m used to being on the margins.”
 