
In becoming the first EU state to regulate its own gaming industry through its 
Malta Gaming Authority (MGA), the country established itself early on as the de 
facto jurisdiction of choice for the industry. Today enticing a highly 
innovative ecosystem of operators and supporting service companies, the 
industry now employs over 6,000 people and accounts for nine percent of Malta’s 
gross value added.

Success hasn’t come without challenges, however, and the complexities of 
regulation have remained an ever-present threat to that growth. In 2014, during 
his first full year as executive chairman of MGA, Joseph Cuschieri introduced 
his plans to capitalise on Malta’s position and consolidate its future. A tall 
task given the dynamic nature of the industry, it was nevertheless an integral 
part of the successful move to reinforce the country’s reputation as a hub of 
excellence in the sector, whilst also protecting its customers.

Despite its inherently borderless nature, governments continue to try to 
ring-fence their interests and those of their growing numbers of online gamers. 
Cuschieri, however, saw an opportunity to turn the perceived wisdom on its head 
and create interdependence between jurisdictions, to ultimately reduce the 
regulatory burden.

“The reform of the sector for Malta takes a different meaning,” he said. “For 
most it means a shift in regulatory design and governance in order to move from 
state operation and monopolisation of gaming markets to a full or partial 
opening. This reform in Malta took place more than a decade ago, and 12 years 
later Malta is at the dawn of its second generation of reforms.”

We are promoting Malta … as the home of the gaming industry for Europe and the 
world
Christian Sammut, chairman of Gaming Malta 
That new dawn saw the MGA begin 2014 with the sizeable task of reviewing and 
consolidating Malta’s regulatory framework, the results of which will help 
provide a more consistent, evidence-based and progressive governance of its 
gaming sector. Cuschieri’s desire to streamline objectives, and with them 
compliance costs, across Europe and into emerging markets like Latin America, 
represents a fresh approach to overcoming one of the industry’s enduring 
obstacles. The arrival of European gaming giant BetClic from Gibraltar earlier 
this year was just one indication that the approach has been well received.

The MGA’s three-year plan is also counting on a significantly larger workforce 
to see through its mission. Growing from a staff of 58 in 2013 to 108 by the 
end of last year, expansion helped the agency carry out 7,409 inspections in 
2014, almost three times as many as the 2,651 the year before, and central to 
bringing greater transparency and accountability to the industry.

Growth has also led MGA to move premises, with a new home at state-of-the-art 
technology park SmartCity.

That move dovetailed with structural changes within the agency, most notably 
the creation of a new training academy set to become a global hub of excellence 
for the industry. “The Gaming Academy will bring together various educational 
initiatives and partners in order to promote and provide the competencies and 
expertise this dynamic industry needs and deserves”, added Cuschieri, “thus 
strengthening the existing eco-system that supports this industry in Malta, 
allowing its base to grow and innovate.”

Further innovation came in the form of Gaming Malta, the company established 
to oversee the promotion of the country within the industry and ensure that 
those investments are recouped. “As well as our knowledge base and regulatory 
framework, one of our advantages comes in the country’s compact size,” says its 
chairman, Christian Sammut. “The ability to meet the right people is made 
easier, so we are promoting Malta not just as a licensing jurisdiction but as 
the home of the gaming industry for Europe and the world.”

Pushing through new regulations to encourage cruise ships to spend more time 
in Maltese waters was just one recent success story. Now, ships with a minimum 
of 150 passengers calling at ports in at least three different states will be 
able to operate their casinos where previously they would have been forced to 
close.

Positioning itself as a centre of excellence for not just gaming innovation 
but consumer protection and international regulation and market development, 
the new-look MGA’s bold three-year plan underlines the advantage of Malta as 
the jurisdiction of choice for gaming. “The ever-changing technological and 
regulatory environments faced by Malta’s industry base has compelled government 
and the MGA to take a fresh and comprehensive look in order to re-position 
Malta’s stance and augment its relevance within the global gaming space,” 
concludes Cuschieri.

Interview: Joseph Cuschieri, executive chairman of Malta Gaming Authority
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fa-safe-bet-for-the-online-gaming-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2499e0d3104a56373cf8303f348328550aca2493%2F0_0_980_588%2F980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20safe%20bet%20for%20the%20online%20gaming%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fa-safe-bet-for-the-online-gaming-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20safe%20bet%20for%20the%20online%20gaming%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fa-safe-bet-for-the-online-gaming-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2499e0d3104a56373cf8303f348328550aca2493%2F0_0_980_588%2F980.jpg>
 Joseph Cuschieri. 
Formerly the Lotteries and Gaming Authority, Malta’s gaming regulator, the 
MGA, underwent a rebranding and organisational overhaul in early 2015 to 
reflect the key role it plays in bringing together Malta’s enormous casino, 
betting and gaming sector in one safely-regulated environment.

Information 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/report-company/malta/boxouts/gaming.html>
What are the advantages for companies who choose to establish themselves in 
the country?
Malta is a vibrant gaming jurisdiction which has continuously developed over 
the years since its inception as a remote gaming jurisdiction in 2004. Malta 
distinguished itself as the first member state to specifically regulate remote 
gaming, and it has over the years developed a unique chain of supporting 
services and infrastructure that today form a sophisticated ecosystem which 
supports all forms of gaming products and various sizes of operators from 
start-ups to global brands. Apart from the business-friendly environment and 
the evolved physical and economic infrastructure and services, Malta provides a 
competitive fiscal environment that makes it the jurisdiction of choice for 
primary establishment in Europe.

What challenges does the gaming industry face in Malta?
Notwithstanding the borderless nature of the internet, the regulation of 
remote gaming markets in Europe and beyond has developed along territorial 
lines and the incumbent state-by-state regulation. This has burdened the 
industry with increased costs of access and compliance attributed to the 
diversity of requirements that must be fulfilled, even if they seek to achieve 
the same objectives of consumer protection and the prevention of fraud and 
crime. These developments, which have now become the rule rather than the 
exception, are calling for jurisdictions to align the methodologies imposed by 
regulators to comply. Formally or informally, regulators seek to tap the 
standing and compliance records of a company that is already established and 
operating under Maltese licence. Malta is possibly distinct in the perspective 
it adopts and that is the industry and consumer experience perspective, rather 
than territorial boundaries.

MGA is seeking very active cooperation with other jurisdictions in Europe and 
beyond in order to streamline, and as much as possible, avoid duplication and 
costs of compliance from an industry perspective without compromising 
regulatory performance.
 