
The Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> are coming 
to a close, having demonstrated once again that Rio de Janeiro knows how to 
organise and promote big events. But after the party, and the billions spent to 
show the world that we deserve a place among the great democracies, comes the 
hangover; the bills begin to arrive, and we have no way to pay. As the festive 
air and the tourism subside, and with theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> due to start in a matter 
of weeks, the old problems remain.

It is now that the residents of Rio de Janeiro begin to wonder: what will the 
legacy be? As we present ourselves to the world, have we revealed our faults? 
Or has the power of our cultural creativity come to the fore? Therein lies the 
contradiction of Rio: the combination of beauty and poverty, hedonism and 
inequality, a carnival atmosphere and bloody violence.

Hosting the Olympics in Rio was the latest effort – an extreme, titanic one – 
to impose the ideal version of Rio over the complexities and contradictions of 
real Rio. In real Rio, the state government does not have enough money to keep 
police vehicles on the roads. Police stations are running out of paper. 
Hospitals are in a precarious situation. State universities are on strike: so 
far they have not received a penny towards the costs of the current academic 
year. The state’s 500,000 public servants have received their salaries late. 
Building work has been interrupted. Unemployment is increasing. Social 
and economic inequalities have become more pronounced. Just before the 
Olympics, Rio state declared a state of emergency, shifting all these problems 
on to the shoulders of the federal government – which handed it almost 
a billion dollars to prevent chaos during the Olympics. But Rio’s anxious 
population is already wondering not so much how the Games have gone as what 
will happen afterwards?

Eduardo Paes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/11/rio-mayor-eduardo-paes-2016-olympics>
, the mayor of Rio de Janeiro, has done everything to try to stop a 
parliamentary inquiry commission being opened in the municipal chamber to 
investigate spending on the Olympics. Of the original promises made by Paes for 
the Games’ legacy, mainly involving investment in urban mobility and the 
reduction of pollution, barely half have been met on time. The Games’ proposed 
budget of $13bn was exceeded a long time ago – but a lack of transparency over 
the real costs has fuelled suspicions of corruption. And there is more: in the 
weeks leading up to the Games, the mayor was still racing to complete the 
building programme. Other pledged projects will be left in the in-tray of his 
successor, to be elected in municipal elections in October. The newly laid 
asphalt on main roads has already started to fail; on 21 April, a section of 
cycle path on Avenida Niemyer, along Rio’s waterfront, collapsed weeks after it 
was opened, killing two people. Public confidence in City Hall, already low, 
plummeted further. Today, 57% of Rio’s population do not trust the mayor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cf958b8d16d21c4140a06e33114ba9433bade3d%2F0_0_5310_3517%2F5310.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cf958b8d16d21c4140a06e33114ba9433bade3d%2F0_0_5310_3517%2F5310.jpg>
 A mural by Eduardo Kobra depicting an indigenous Brazilian. Photograph: Mario 
Tama/Getty Images 
The mayor has done everything to try to stop an inquiry being opened to 
investigate spending on the Olympics

All this is without even factoring in the Zika epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>, thankfully now less virulent 
during these cooler winter months. Although not Rio residents’ most immediate 
concern, it casts an ever-present shadow, especially given the risk of infected 
pregnant women passing the virus on to their children, with potentially 
devastating consequences. Zika started to spread through Brazil in April 2015. 
From the start of this year up to 28 May, 161,241 probable cases of the virus 
were registered; of these, 46,027 were in the state of Rio de Janeiro.

For anyone who has lived through Brazil’s progress over the last two decades, 
this is a shocking situation. When, on 2 October 2009, Brazil and Rio de 
Janeiro won the bid to host the 2016 Olympic Games, they did so in the glow of 
economic success. The enthusiasm of the then president,Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva>, was contagious: 
“Now is our time! It’s here! Of the world’s 10 largest economies, Brazil is the 
only country that has not hosted the Olympic and Paralympic Games. This will be 
an unrivalled opportunity for us. It will boost the self-esteem of Brazilians; 
it will consolidate recent victories; it will stimulate new progress.”

In Rio de Janeiro, tens of thousands of people partied on Copacabana beach in 
the wake of the decision. There seemed plenty of reasons to celebrate. In 2011, 
Brazil earned its best rating in the Gini inequality index since 1960, the year 
the index was introduced. Brazil had benefited greatly from a boom in the value 
of Brazilian exports – soy, iron ore, sugar cane and more – during this time, 
and economic growth during the governments of theWorkers’ party president 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/alfredo-saadfilho/debacle-of-workers%E2%80%99-party-in-brazil>
, known as Lula, was accompanied by successful social policies such as the
“Bolsa Família” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bolsa_Fam%C3%ADlia> programme, 
which topped up the income of the poorest families so long as children 
and adolescents were in school. Other important initiatives included an 
increase in the minimum wage, and the introduction of policies against racism 
and the exclusionary effects of poverty.

In 1993, 23% of the Brazilian population lived in extreme poverty, meaning 
that their income was insufficient for the minimum number of calories required 
for healthy survival. By 2009, this figure had fallen to 8.4% – still 
unacceptable, of course, but a dramatic reduction nonetheless. The period from 
2003 to 2011 saw 39.6 million Brazilians join the ranks of the so-called new 
middle class.

But during this time, Brazil also got lucky. In 2006, before the end of Lula’s 
first term in office, the government-owned oil companyPetrobras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/brazil-raids-petrobras-corruption-investigation-odebrecht>
 announced the discovery of an oil reserve off the Brazilian coast some 800km 
long and 200km wide, a substantial chunk of which lies alongside the state of 
Rio de Janeiro. In the 1990s, Petrobras had been an ailing institution; 
suddenly, its net profit soared, from $2bn in 2002, to $19bn in 2008. The news 
of this discovery of one of the world’s biggest reserves of “black gold” gave 
Brazilians further optimism: things seemed blessed and glorious. Brazil, and 
Rio in particular, had not felt such self-confidence since the late 50s and 
early 60s. This, of course had been the era of accelerated industrialisation, 
thecountry’s first football World Cup victory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Syncd5yq8o4> and the construction of Brasília 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/01/iconic-origins-brazil-capital-city-brasilia-picturing-place>
, the new capital and temple of modernist architecture; the age ofbossa nova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/01/bossa-nova-highest-culture-brazil>
, of Tom Jobim and João Gilberto, ofCinema Novo 
<http://library.brown.edu/create/fivecenturiesofchange/chapters/chapter-8/cinema-novo/>
 and the great film directorGlauber Rocha 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glauber_Rocha>; of groundbreaking theatre and 
literature, of socialist dreams. A golden age,violently ruptured by the 
civil-military coup of 1964 
<http://nacla.org/news/2014/4/1/remembering-brazils-military-coup-50-years-later>
, which installed a regime that endured for two decades. Now, in the 2000s, it 
seemed to many as though that golden age might be reborn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223d37c4e7f9272b669917277620c7aa103be758%2F0_0_4900_3267%2F4900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223d37c4e7f9272b669917277620c7aa103be758%2F0_0_4900_3267%2F4900.jpg>
 Children play on a podium erected in front of the Olympic rings. Photograph: 
Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP/Getty Images 
Rio’s culture, after all, had never stopped bubbling with variety and 
vitality. Music continues to be a strong influence, from sophisticated rock 
shows to funk dance parties in the favelas.More than a million people went to 
see the Rolling Stones on the beach at Copacabana 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/4725050.stm>, and three million take 
samba to the streets during the four days of the annual carnival.

This organic connection between art and everyday life, the rhythm that pulses 
in the favelas and appears in more sophisticated visual art, does not occur by 
accident. It is the product of the most important cultural project of Brazil, 
which started in Rio, where it found fertile ground.Tropicália 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/may/13/popandrock> began in 1967 with 
Hélio Oiticica 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/helio-oiticica/helio-oiticica-exhibition-guide>
 and moved into the music of Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil. A 1967 exhibition 
of Oiticica’s work at Rio’s museum of modern art, entitledTropicália, included 
the sound and movement of musicians and dancers from the favela of Mangueira. 
By then, though, Brazil was a military dictatorship, and the idea of black and 
poor people dancing samba was not accepted by the directors of the museum. 
Oiticica resolved the question by moving into the street with the musicians and 
dancers. This performance made a permanent mark on the Brazilian imagination; 
it has served as touchstone and inspiration for generations of artists ever 
since. In Rio, cultural explosion has always been a form of democratic 
resistance to racism and inequality.

In Rio, cultural explosion has always been a form of democratic resistance to 
racism and inequality

But the economic boom promised by the discovery of oil was not to materialise. 
Deep-water oil exploration requires heavy investment in technology and 
equipment – investment that led to excessive debt. Then, in late 2014, the 
price of oil collapsed and, with the dollar rising to 3.50 reais, the cheap 
money dried up. In desperation, the government ofDilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff>, Lula’s successor, 
artificially controlled the price of oil to combat inflation, caused by weak 
fiscal policy and the extraordinary costs of subsidised loans to entrepreneurs 
selected by arbitrary criteria. The operation cost Petrobras $34bn dollars. 
Approximately the same amount was lost by the company through the devaluation 
of the currency.

The damage done by the halting of construction work on new refineries came to 
almost $46bn. Another $2bn is estimated to have been leached away in corruption 
involving members of the federal government, state and municipal governors, and 
almost 200 federal members of congress and senators from across almost all 
parties. This, the greatest scandal in the history of the Brazilian republic, 
is still being investigated by thePublic Prosecutor’s Office 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_Prosecutor's_Office_%28Brazil%29> and the 
federal police. Its repercussions have been unprecedented. Along with the 
economic crisis and the government’s consequent deep unpopularity, the scandal 
created the conditions for theimpeachment of President Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/the-guardian-view-on-dilma-rousseffs-impeachment-the-political-system-should-be-on-trial-not-one-woman>
, still ongoing in the federal senate. Today, Petrobras’s debt stands at around 
$100bn. It is now predicted that production in 2020 will be no more than 2.8m 
barrels per day.

The optimism of the mid-2000s is now a distant memory – particularly in the 
state ofRio de Janeiro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>, 
whose economic expectations are so heavily dependent on oil. Rio has ended up 
a victim of the so-called “oil curse”, the paradox of those countries which, 
despite an abundance of oil reserves, end up with less economic stability, less 
democracy and worse development than countries without oil. In the wake of the 
fiscal crisis, the economic depression and the collapse of the state came the 
social effects: the decrease in the already precarious quality of public 
services – dramatically impacting on healthcare, as the Zika epidemic has 
so horrifyingly shown – mirrored by increases in unemployment and violence. In 
February this year, unemployment in Rio had reached 8.2%: serious, although not 
yet a catastrophe. But after the Olympics and Paralympics, the situation is 
expected to deteriorate.

There are other worrying trends. In 2015, there were 1,202 homicides in 
the city and 310 deaths resulting from police action. The first three months of 
2016 saw a further 328 homicides and 76 deaths resulting from police action. 
The two state police forces in the city of Rio, the military (responsible for 
patrols) and the civil (which carries out investigations), are among the most 
violent in the world; they also cause the most fatalities. Between 2003 and 
2015, 11,343 people were killed by police in the state of Rio, mainly by 
military police. The overwhelming majority of victims are young, black and 
poor. Investigations, when they do take place, are generally inconclusive. In 
other words, extrajudicial executions are indirectly authorised by governments, 
institutions and the population itself, with people widely believing that the 
killings will reduce crime. Yet in the first seven months of 2016, 60 police 
officers were also killed. Despite the declaration in 1988 ofBrazil’s first 
truly democratic constitution 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitution_of_Brazil>, committed to human 
rights and the rejection of racism, Brazil’s authoritarian tradition is alive 
and kicking – especially as far as concerns worker exploitation, the selective 
administration of justice, and the lack of public services and support for the 
most vulnerable slums and their peripheries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f371e8a55dfb9431a2ed9dea8f48940baefb0f%2F0_0_4900_3267%2F4900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20party%3A%20Rio%20wakes%20up%20to%20an%20Olympic%20hangover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Frio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f371e8a55dfb9431a2ed9dea8f48940baefb0f%2F0_0_4900_3267%2F4900.jpg>
 A teenager flies a kite past more murals depicting the rings. Photograph: 
Yasuyoshi Chiba/AFP/Getty Images 
Rio de Janeiro is a traditionally progressive and iconoclastic city, sceptical 
of establishment interests and critical of power. Now it is more divided than 
ever, lacking direction and leadership. The masses find consolation in
Pentecostal religious fever 
<http://www.religiousstudiesproject.com/podcast/os-seres-mataves-pentecostalism-in-the-prisons-of-rio-with-dr-andrew-johnson/>
, now vying with Catholicism for hegemony. This marvellous picture-postcard 
city, celebrated in poetry and prose as the paradise of tropical hedonism, of 
beauty, of sensuality, is beginning to button up its collar and dress demurely. 
For many people, Sunday is no longer a day for partying and the beach; its new 
missionary mood, chaste and abstemious, is taking over squares, Bibles under 
arms and proselytism in hearts and voices.

Paes’ greatest error in planning the Olympics was arguably to privilege 
business and, in doing so, turn a deaf ear to society. Instead of introducing 
public policies for housing, hospitals, transport and schools in the poorer 
areas, the mayor has invested in the city’s more prosperous western zone, 
providing further incentives for people to move from the already underpopulated 
central and northern areas.

Territorial expansion, when there is a lack of resources to provide adequate 
infrastructure, ends up creating pockets of misery. There have been violent 
forced displacements, in order to build sports arenas whose maintenance cannot 
be guaranteed by the public administration and which private interests will 
have no desire to take on.

Despite all this, the Rio Olympics have been a success. What worries me – and 
many residents – is what happens the day after they finish. In a short while the
Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> will be memory, 
but they will last for us, who live in Rio, as a major object of political 
dispute and a challenge for the future. Rio de Janeiro is good – incredible – 
at the spectacular. Our problem is the everyday.

Translation © Lucy Greaves and David Linger. Rio de Janeiro: Extreme City 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rio-de-janeiro-444648.html> by Luiz Eduardo 
Soares is published by Penguin.
 