
My friendship with the great actor and director Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> did not have a particularly 
auspicious start.

It was March 2003 when Alan turned up at London’s Royal Court theatre, 
clutching an edition of the Guardian’s G2 section featuring thepowerful last 
emails <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/18/usa.israel> of Rachel 
Corrie, the American activist killed by a bulldozer in Gaza. Alan had 
recognised that Rachel’s voice could work brilliantly on stage, and I was 
commissioned to help him turn her words into a play.

'Let me fight my monsters'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/08/theatre.israelandthepalestinians>
But the theatrical and journalistic worlds are culturally very far apart – the 
former creative and thoughtful, the latter dynamic and urgent – and, as a 
Hollywood film star, Alan had been bitten by others in my trade. We had, shall 
we say, a lot of vigorous debate. Once, when I said something like: “Let’s just 
get on with it,” he turned to me and said, dripping with flamboyant disdain: 
““Dear God, you’re such a fucking JOURNALIST.” We fought. He found me 
wearisome, then.

But the play we edited together, My Name is Rachel Corrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/08/theatre.israelandthepalestinians>
, had a greater impact than we ever imagined, with two runs at the Royal Court, 
a West End transfer, and productions around the world, from New York to Haifa. 
And on the opening night we each admitted that we couldn’t have done justice to 
Rachel’s words without the other. We’d been a partnership, we agreed, however 
crotchety. A friendship was born.

And that was lucky for me, because Alan had a great gift for friendship. He 
was devoted to a large number of people and would somehow always manage to 
visit their obscure art exhibition, or phone them at 2am when he heard they 
were in deep trouble, or attend their opening night even when, as we now know, 
he was already seriously ill. He threw dinners; he ordered every dessert on the 
menu if you couldn’t decide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fcd5c104377d33d2907869cd9cec851683d7628%2F1091_30_1479_2220%2F1479.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20the%20most%20loyal%2C%20playful%20and%20generous%20of%20friends%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20the%20most%20loyal%2C%20playful%20and%20generous%20of%20friends%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fcd5c104377d33d2907869cd9cec851683d7628%2F1091_30_1479_2220%2F1479.jpg>
 Megan Dodds and Rickman at the New York premiere of My Name Is Rachel Corrie. 
Photograph: Rob Loud/Getty Images 
I once asked if a friend, a teacher from Huddersfield, could cook for him so 
that she could put it on her CV – “cooked for Alan Rickman” (it made sense at 
the time). He not only said yes, but acted as her sous-chef and rustled up a 
top politician and a Hollywood actor as fellow guests. When asked recently 
about his proudest Royal Court moment, his answer was not about him: he said it 
was when he took Rachel Corrie’s parents outside the front of the theatre to 
show them their late daughter’s name in neon lights.

Different people love Alan as an actor for different reasons – there’s the 
Truly Madly Deeply crowd, the Die Hard set, those who became obsessed after 
Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves. But his role asSeverus Snape 
<https://www.pottermore.com/explore-the-story/severus-snape> in the Harry 
Potter movies introduced him to a whole new generation. Of course he loved 
Harry, but as a classical actor he did get fed up with how often it came up. 
While we were doing interviews for My Name Is Rachel Corrie, Alan would have a 
rule: they could ask just one Harry question and no more. I remember teasing 
him: “But Alan, you’re such a wonderful Snape, you’re so good at it!” He turned 
to me and said, with that languorous diction, “I know what’s required.”

He didn’t mind being teased. His resistance to technology was a running theme 
(and a way of keeping some privacy in a very public life) until he finally got 
on email, in 2010, describing himself proudly as a “new computer geek”. From 
then we’d all receive witty little notes or occasionally, in my case, 
complaints (particularly about star ratings on Guardian reviews, which in his 
view made viewers lazy and reviewers power-mad). Like his partner, Rima Horton, 
a former Labour councillor, Alan was deeply committed to politics – a 
compassionate Labour man to his core.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcf9e6af3fc31dbf21a911859015f674e7513276%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20the%20most%20loyal%2C%20playful%20and%20generous%20of%20friends%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20the%20most%20loyal%2C%20playful%20and%20generous%20of%20friends%20%7C%20Katharine%20Viner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcf9e6af3fc31dbf21a911859015f674e7513276%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Rickman in Washington Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
'We are all so devastated': acting world pays tribute to Alan Rickman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-death-movies-actor-harry-potter-snape>
He had been recognised everywhere he went for many years, was kind to his fan 
club (particularly the Arizona branch, who flew en masse to London to see My 
Name Is Rachel Corrie) and, as one of the Sexiest Men Alive (according to 
numerous polls), women would stare open-mouthed as he passed.

But the fame reached a new level with Snape. I saw this up close in April, 
when Alan came to theWhite House Correspondents’ Dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/apr/25/white-house-correspondents-dinner-2015-red-carpet-arrivals-and-pre-parties-live>
 as the Guardian’s guest; taking the short walk along a street in Washington DC 
from the event to a nearby whisky bar he was accosted by a succession of drunk 
young people, one woman sobbing loudly while begging for a selfie. (He refused 
all selfies – a solid rule about dignity. Non-selfie photos were fine.) He 
recovered quickly, and then stayed up until 3am with us all, discussing Obama, 
this bloody government, our hopes and dreams, the state of the world, the state 
of that bar, this life.
 