
'We are all so devastated': acting world pays tribute to Alan Rickman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-death-movies-actor-harry-potter-snape>
Alan Rickman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman>, one of the 
best-loved and most warmly admired British actors of the past 30 years, has 
died in London aged 69. His death was confirmed on Thursday by his family who 
said that he died “surrounded by family and friends”. Rickman had been 
suffering from cancer.

A star whose arch features and languid diction were recognisable across the 
generations, Rickman found a fresh legion of fans with his role asProfessor 
Snape in the Harry Potter films <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhOQ4VW6xV8>. 

Cast and crew on those movies were among the first to pay tribute to the actor.
In a lengthy post <https://plus.google.com/+DanielRadcliffe/posts>, Daniel 
Radcliffe wrote that Rickman was “one of the greatest actors I will ever work 
with” as well as “one of the loyalest and most supportive people I’ve ever met 
in the film industry”.

JK Rowling, who wrote the Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> books, said: “There are no words 
to express how shocked and devastated I am to hear of Alan Rickman’s death. He 
was a magnificent actor & a wonderful man”, while Michael Gambon, who played 
Dumbledore, said: “Everybody loved Alan. He was always happy and fun and 
creative and very, very funny.”

Alan Rickman: the most loyal, playful and generous of friends | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends>
The actor had been a big-screen staple since first shooting to global acclaim 
in 1988, when he starred as Hans Gruber, Bruce Willis’s sardonic, dastardly 
adversary in Die Hard <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TSdpRP_bVOM> – a part he 
was offered two days after arriving in Los Angeles, aged 41.

Gruber was the first of three memorable baddies played by Rickman: he was an 
outrageous sheriff of Nottingham in 1991’sRobin Hood: Prince of Thieves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/26/my-guilty-pleasure-robin-hood-prince-of-thieves>
, as well as a terrifyingRasputin  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLmpPtche_Y>
in an acclaimed 1995 HBO film.

But Rickman was also a singular leading man: in 1991, he starred as a cellist 
opposite Juliet Stevenson in Anthony Minghella’s affecting supernatural romance 
Truly, Madly, Deeply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82784/truly-madly-deeply-review>; four 
years later he was the honourable and modest Col Brandon in Sense and 
Sensibility, starring and scripted by Emma Thompson. He was to reunite with 
Thompson many times: they played husband and wife in 2003’sLove, Actually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/11/in-defence-on-my-favourite-movie-love-actually>
 and former lovers in 2010 BBC dramaThe Song of Lunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/oct/08/the-song-of-lunch-review>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D31SHaFJfxhI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D31SHaFJfxhI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D31SHaFJfxhI&media=>
In 1995, he directed Thompson and her mother, Phyllida Law, in his directorial 
debut, the acclaimed Scottish dramaThe Winter Guest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=31SHaFJfxhI>. Thompson – who said she had 
“just kissed him goodbye” – wrote:

What I remember most in this moment of painful leave-taking is his humour, 
intelligence, wisdom and kindness. His capacity to fell you with a look or lift 
you with a word. The intransigence which made him the great artist he was – his 
ineffable and cynical wit, the clarity with which he saw most things, including 
me, and the fact that he never spared me the view. I learned a lot from him. He 
was the finest of actors and directors. I couldn’t wait to see what he was 
going to do with his face next. I consider myself hugely privileged to have 
worked with him so many times and to have been directed by him.

He was the ultimate ally. In life, art and politics. I trusted him absolutely. 
He was, above all things, a rare and unique human being and we shall not see 
his like again.

Last year, Rickman reunited with Kate Winslet, another Sense and Sensibility 
co-star, for his second film as director,A Little Chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-little-chaos> – a period romance set in the 
gardens of Versailles.

Yet it was Rickman’s work on stage that established him as such a compelling 
talent, and to which he returned throughout his career. After graduating from 
Rada, the actor supported himself as a dresser for the likes of Nigel Hawthorne 
and Ralph Richardson before finding work with the Royal Shakespeare Company (as 
well as on TV as the slitheryReverend Slope in The Barchester Chronicles 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=035BSEU_hQ4>). 

His sensational breakthrough came in 1986 as Valmont, the mordant seducer in 
Christopher Hampton’s Les Liaisons Dangereuses. He was nominated for a Tony for 
the part; Lindsay Duncan memorably said of her co-star’s sonorous performance 
that audiences would leave the theatre wanting to have sex“and preferably with 
Alan Rickman” <http://www.scotsman.com/news/a-man-for-all-seasons-1-1414715>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7e8ae24201c38f3e29eedffadff6463933c0a5%2F0_0_1399_1449%2F1399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%2C%20giant%20of%20British%20screen%20and%20stage%2C%20dies%20at%2069&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%2C%20giant%20of%20British%20screen%20and%20stage%2C%20dies%20at%2069&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7e8ae24201c38f3e29eedffadff6463933c0a5%2F0_0_1399_1449%2F1399.jpg>
 Alan Rickman and Lindsay Duncan in ‘Private Lives’ Photograph: Peter Jordan/PA 
He and Duncan – as well as their director, Howard Davies – reunited in 2002 
for Noel Coward’s Private Lives, which transferred to Broadway after a 
successful run in London.

Other key stage performances included Mark Antony opposite Helen Mirren’s 
Cleopatraat the Olivier Theatre in London 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/a-case-of-hype-and-fall-as-rickman-and-mirren-are-put-to-the-sword-1180144.html>
, and the title role in Ibsen’sJohn Gabriel Borkman at the Abbey Theatre in 
Dublin in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/15/john-gabriel-borkman-review> – 
again with Duncan, and again transferring to New York. The following year he 
starred as a creative writing professor inSeminar  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pIVCtBz1Ivo>on Broadway.

Alan Rickman: an actor of singular charm and hypnotic charisma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-an-actor-of-singular-charisma-whose-hold-over-audiences-was-hypnotic>
In 2005, Rickman directed the award-winning play My Name is Rachel Corrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/14/theatre.politicaltheatre>, which 
he and Katharine Viner – now Guardian editor-in-chief – compiled from the 
emails of the student who was killed by a bulldozer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/12/rachel-corrie-family-appeal-israel-court>
 while protesting against the actions of the Israel Defense Forces in the Gaza 
Strip.

Oscar nominations and Alan Rickman – the Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-and-alan-rickman-the-dailies-film-podcast>
Rickman remained politically active throughout his life: he was born, he said, 
“a card-carrying member of the Labour party”, and was highly involved with 
charities including Saving Faces and the International Performers’ Aid Trust, 
which seeks to help artists in developing and poverty-stricken countries.

Rickman publicly spoke of his unhappiness about the “Hollywood ending” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/alan-rickman-nearly-turned-down-villain-in-die-hard#comment-50550909>
 of 1996 film Michael Collins, a historical biopic of the Irish civil war, in 
which he portrayed Éamon de Valera, and expressed hisbelief that art ought to 
help educate as well as entertain 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/a-man-for-all-seasons-1-1414715>. “Talent is an 
accident of genes, and a responsibility,” he once said.

He and his wife, Rima Horton, met when they were still teenagers; she became 
an economics lecturer as well as a Labour party councillor. In 2012, the pair 
married, having been together since 1965. The Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was
one of the first to pay tribute on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/687616249275244545>, followed by 
former leader Ed Miliband 
<https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband/status/687628074612068352>. 

Others offering condolences included Stephen Fry 
<https://twitter.com/stephenfry/status/687619639971561472?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>, 
Eddie Izzard 
<https://twitter.com/eddieizzard/status/687619750533410816?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>,
Charlie Sheen <https://twitter.com/charliesheen/status/687637277359521792>, Mia 
Farrow <https://twitter.com/MiaFarrow?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> and Richard E Grant. 
<https://twitter.com/RichardEGrant/status/687624784612569091?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 Manydrew parallels 
<https://twitter.com/piersmorgan/status/687620288977178630?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
between the deaths of Rickman and David Bowie, from the same disease at the 
same age and in the same week.

Rickman was an actor unafraid of the unexpected. He voiced a monarch in an 
episode of cult cartoon King of the Hill and a megalomaniac pilot fish called 
Joe in the Danish animator Help! I’m A Fish. In 2000, Rickman appeared as 
Sharleen Spiteri’s love interest in the music video for Texas’s 2000 hit‘In 
Demand’ <https://vimeo.com/62559676>, which involves them tangoing at a petrol 
station. In 2015, Rickman again featured in the video for one of their singles, 
this time with vocals.


He spoofed his own persona in comedy Galaxy Quest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83449/galaxy.quest> (2000), in which he 
plays a Shakespearian-trained actor who has found fame as a Spock-style alien 
in a long-running sci-fi series and inVictoria Wood’s Christmas special 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zoHS4lgaxTI> of the same year, as an upright 
colonel at the Battle of Waterloo.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJIaRnsyaIc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJIaRnsyaIc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSJIaRnsyaIc&media=>
Rickman was sanguine about his legions of admirers, who declared their love on 
countless websites, video tributes and at stage doors. Even scientists were not 
immune: in 2008,linguistics professors concluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2008/may/30/aformulafortheperfectvoic>
 that the most appealing male voice mixes elements of Rickman, Gambon and 
Jeremy Irons.

Alan Rickman – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-a-life-in-pictures>
Recent film roles included an art-loving lord in the Coen brothers’ scripted 
farceGambit  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149493/gambit>(2012), as 
Ronald Reagan in Lee Daniels’sThe Butler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a0Ke8kUKpUY> – and a humorous, imperious King 
Louis XIV in A Little Chaos.

Rickman is still to be seen in Eye in the Sky, a thriller about drone warfare 
that won rave reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/eye-in-the-sky-review-helen-mirren-gavin-hood-drones-tiff>
 at the Toronto film festival last year, and repeating his voiceover asAbsolem 
the Caterpillar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6lu0IzD3lw4> in Alice Through 
the Looking Glass, also due for release later this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkiMz-e2ZcE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkiMz-e2ZcE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkiMz-e2ZcE&media=>
Alan Rickman obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary> 
His final job was taping a voiceover for a short film called This Tortoise 
Could Save a Life, in aid of Save the Children and Refugee Council. Released in 
mid December 2015, the film’s audio was recorded at Rickman’s home in London at 
the end of November.

That Rickman never won an Oscar (he did receive a Golden Globe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bQi4It09pk0>, an Emmy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XioOcfkXyMA>, a Bafta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ICdPZKc9bVY> and many more) became a perennial 
topic in interviews but did not seem to trouble the actor himself. “Parts win 
prizes, not actors,” he said in 2008. It was the wider worth of his art to 
which Rickman remained committed, saying that he found it easier to treat the 
work seriously if he could look upon himself with levity.

“Actors are agents of change,” he said. “A film, a piece of theatre, a piece 
of music, or a book can make a difference. It can change the world.”

• ‘We are all so devastated’: acting world pays tribute to Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-death-movies-actor-harry-potter-snape>
 