
Tourism manager Dominique Geissberger is looking out from her office in the 
small Swiss alpine ski resort of Villars at forests dusted with fresh snow and 
spectacular mountains dazzling in the winter sunshine. “This pristine landscape 
is what we all depend on,” says Geissberger. “It’s what tourists expect to find 
when they come here.”

In an effort to protect the environment upon which the village’s tourist trade 
relies, Villars has embarked on a comprehensive programme of sustainability 
initiatives ranging from introducing a fleet of hybrid buses that ferry skiers 
about, to low-energy snow-making systems.

Why pictures of polar bears don't always tell the truth about climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/02/images-climate-change-mislead-polar-bear>
In recognition of its pioneering environmental work, Villars has become the 
first ski resort in Switzerland and one of three resorts in the Alps to be 
awarded theFlocon Vert <http://www.flocon-vert.org/> – the green snowflake – a 
sustainable certifying label run byMountain Riders 
<http://www.mountain-riders.org/index_en.php>, a French group that campaigns 
for a more sustainable winter sports industry.

Exploring the use of labels as a way of encouraging and implementing 
sustainable development in mountain regions is a key goal for theSustainable 
Mountain Tourism Alliance (SMTA) <http://www.sustainable-mountain-tourism.org/>
, a global network of groups and organisations working for sustainability in 
alpine tourism that has recently been launched in Switzerland.

“Climate change is the number one environmental concern now facing mountain 
communities,” says Dr Tobias Luthe, professor of sustainability science from 
the SMTA, speaking at its launch conference which was attended by 
representatives from the mountain-based tourism industry.

“Last year was the warmest on record and already this winter many alpine ski 
resorts have had an unusual lack of snow, leading to major economic losses. We 
urgently need new sustainable business models and labelling systems have an 
important role to play in promoting sustainable development in these mountain 
communities,” says Luthe. “By quantifying different criteria such as energy 
use, transport and waste, labels can be used to communicate sustainability to a 
range of different markets and, crucially, encourage best practice in the 
sector.”

The economic case for ensuring sustainable development in the Alps is 
compelling:about 80 million tourists visit the Alps every year 
<http://www.climateadaptation.eu/france/tourism/>, generating close to €50bn 
Euros, providing an estimated 10% of all jobs in the region.

Already this winter many alpine ski resorts have had an unusual lack of snow, 
leading to major economic losses
Dr Tobias Luthe 
There are more than 50 different labels available for mountain-based resorts 
and hotels across Europe and they vary enormously in what they measure and the 
scale and scope of qualifying businesses. For example, with 42 different 
environmental and social criteria, the Flocon Vert is one of the most rigorous 
labelling schemes and applies to the whole operation of a ski resort, from its 
transport infrastructure to its use of renewable energy.

The Swiss-based Ibex Fairstay <http://ibexfairstay.ch/hp1/Startseite.htm> 
scheme meanwhile only certifies individual hotels and is a more entry-level 
scheme requiring relatively few environmental initiatives for businesses to 
qualify.

So what are the benefits of these labels? “The key benefit is that many labels 
require businesses to reduce their energy and water use which in turn can save 
them money,” says Herbert Hamele, who chairsEcotrans 
<http://destinet.eu/who-who/civil-society-ngos/ecotrans>, the European network 
for sustainable tourism development. “The other key benefit is that businesses 
which have been awarded a label also have a marketing edge over their 
competition.”

Murky waters: the hidden environmental impacts of your cruise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jan/05/cruise-ship-holidays-environmental-impact>
Anne Dorte Carlson, who manages the Sustainable Destination Norway 
<http://www.visitnorway.com/uk/where-to-go-uk/eco-friendly-destinations-and-activities-in-norway/>
 label, agrees with Hamele: “We’ve surveyed tour operators and 62% say that 
they would more likely be interested in a destination if it carries a 
sustainable or environmental label,” says Carlson. “We believe that in the 
future this will give us a competitive advantage.”

The commercial benefits of an environmental label have been confirmed by Trip 
Advisor <http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/>, a colossus in the global tourist 
industry which is now rolling out itsGreen Leaders programme 
<http://www.tripadvisor.com/GreenLeaders> in Europe, having launched the scheme 
in North America in 2013.

“The Green Leaders programme is designed to help travellers book a greener 
trip by recognising hotels and B&Bs that engage in environmentally friendly 
practices ranging from recycling to energy use,” says Trip Advisor’s Tom 
Breckwoldt, speaking at the SMTA’s launch conference. “Qualifying properties 
are then marked with a badge on their Trip Advisor home page.”

Significantly, Breckwoldt revealed that Trip Advisor’s own research has found 
that Green Leader businesses are 20% more likely to be booked compared with 
those that haven’t signed up to the free scheme.

With more than 300 million people using Trip Advisor every month 
<http://www.traveller.com.au/tripadvisors-funniest-reviews-biggest-controversies-and-best-spoofs-11t8u5>
, many believe that this new initiative has the potential to be a game-changer 
in the push for more sustainable development in mountain regions. “Small groups 
such as Mountain Riders are doing great work but they don’t reach the majority 
of people,” says Luthe.

“Trip Advisor is a very powerful way of reaching a massive audience and if 
they implemented a combination of tools recommended by the SMTA then this could 
be really exciting.”

Back in Villars, Geissberger is in no doubt about the importance of ensuring 
that the village heads in a more sustainable direction. “The environment is our 
future, it’s how we earn our living,” says Geissberger. “If we lose it, we’ll 
lose our tourism and then we’ll lose everything.”

The sustainable living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-living> hub is 
funded by Unilever. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled brought to you by. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.


Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/?INTCMP=dis_233592> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
 