
Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> has pledged to 
renationalise the railways “line by line” if he becomes prime minister.

The shadow health secretary will launch his Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership election manifesto on 
Thursday, promising to end the “fragmentation and privatisation” of the rail 
system.

“We need a new approach to our railways – one that puts passengers before 
profit. That’s why I will work to bring the railways back under public control 
and public ownership,” Burnham will say in the manifesto.

Pointing to the success of the east coast mainline  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/18/east-coast-rail-line-taxpayer-subsidy>
when it was in public ownership, Burnham will promise to set up a national rail 
governing body accountable to the transport secretary, to further regulate the 
bus network and campaign for an east-to-west high-speed rail route.

Burnham will claim the UK railway system costs 40% more to run than other 
systems across Europe and that private investment in the railways has halved 
since 2010 at the same time as private profits have grown.

The announcement comes as Burnham’s rival Jeremy Corbyn appears to be ahead in 
the leadership contest. Last month,a YouGov poll for the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4504838.ece> put the MP for 
Islington North ahead, with 43% of the first-preference vote, and he has gained 
the backing of Unison, the Communication Workers Union (CWU) and Unite.

Purism v pragmatism: Labour’s dilemma | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/05/purism-v-pragmatism-labours-dilemma>
Corbyn’s surprise surge has left his immediate rivals – Burnham and Yvette 
Cooper – struggling to compete for attention, though Burnham is still the
bookies’ favourite 
<http://www.oddschecker.com/politics/british-politics/next-labour-leader> to 
win the race.


Corbyn has pledged to renationalise the railways and bring energy companies 
back into public ownership.A YouGov poll  
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2014/05/11/why-do-people-support-rail-nationalisation/>
 from May 2014 suggested 60% of the public were in favour of renationalising 
the railways, compared with 20% who were against.

Anti-austerity unpopular with voters, finds inquiry into Labour's election loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/04/anti-austerity-voters-poll-jeremy-corbyn-labour>
Burnham’s rivals said the policy had been taken straight from Labour’s general 
election manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/13/labour-manifesto-pledges-what-the-experts-say>
, which promised to legislate to allow a public sector operator to “take on 
lines and challenge the private train-operating companies on a level playing 
field”.

They argued that the majority of rail franchises were up for tender in the 
next five years, making the policy important for the 2015 election but leaving 
it less meaningful as a policy for the 2020 general election.

Manuel Cortes, general secretary of the Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Salaried Staffs’ Association, said 
the union was “extremely pleased” that the future of the railways was being 
discussed as part of Labour’s leadership election. “Jeremy has pledged to bring 
our railways back into public ownership and Andy has now announced their 
‘progressive renationalisation’,” he said. “However, it appears that Andy wants 
to leave some kind of bidding process in place. This is costly and unnecessary.

“Andy should follow Scottish Labour’s example. They are campaigning extremely 
hard to stop the SNP bidding process which is likely to see lifelineCalMac 
ferry services privatised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/26/scottish-ferry-workers-strike-privatisation-row>
. Passengers are sick to their back teeth of private rail companies making 
profits at their expense. A no ifs, no buts pledge to bring our railways back 
into public ownership is a clear vote winner.”

In a seminar in Leeds on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/04/jeremy-corbyn-shrugs-off-coup-risk-in-labour-leadership-battle>
, Corbyn launched a document called Northern Future, in which he outlined plans 
to rebalance the British economy. In addition to greater investment in the rail 
network in the north, he would seek to encourage manufacturing in the north to 
reduce Britain’s dependence on the services industry.

Corbyn said: “None of what we have said on this platform today would be seen 
as remotely exceptional, extreme or leftwing in Germany, where they proudly 
have public investment in all kinds of industries and don’t feel ashamed about 
it. Why have we got this obsession with not getting public involvement in what 
is the essential basis of our society and our economy?”
 