
In grim, reflective mood, Israelis are marking the 20th anniversary of the 
assassination of Yitzhak Rabin – the prime minister who took a historic step 
towards peace with the Palestinians – linking his murder by a rightwing 
nationalist to thelatest wave of Arab-Jewish violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/ban-ki-moon-due-in-jerusalem-for-talks-amid-escalating-violence>
 and the bleak prospects for ending the conflict.

Rabin was honoured on Monday in ceremonies at the Mount Herzl cemetery in 
Jerusalem and in the Knesset, after President Reuben Rivlin solemnly pledged 
that his unrepentant killer, Yigal Amir, would never be released from prison. 
Many other events are taking place acrossIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in the coming days.

In September 1993, Rabin signed the Oslo agreement with the PLO leader, Yasser 
Arafat <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yasser-arafat>, with President Bill 
Clinton watching their famously hesitant handshake on the White House lawn. It 
was a landmark in the century-long war over the Holy Land – though a 
controversial one that generated furious opposition on both sides.


 But his murder at a peace rally in Tel Aviv on 4 November 1995 (the 
anniversary is marked according to the Hebrew calendar) was widely seen as a 
hammer blow to hopes that the interim deal, involving a partial Israeli 
withdrawal and the creation of a Palestinian Authority, could indeed lead the 
way to a just and lasting peace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fanniversary-yitzhak-rabins-assassination-what-ifs-violence-israelis-palestinians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8343f1b941f31efd00aef89c0889642bdeb09e9b%2F0_77_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anniversary%20of%20Yitzhak%20Rabin's%20murder%20stirs%20what-ifs%20amid%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fanniversary-yitzhak-rabins-assassination-what-ifs-violence-israelis-palestinians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anniversary%20of%20Yitzhak%20Rabin%27s%20murder%20stirs%20what-ifs%20amid%20violence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fanniversary-yitzhak-rabins-assassination-what-ifs-violence-israelis-palestinians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8343f1b941f31efd00aef89c0889642bdeb09e9b%2F0_77_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Yitzhak Rabin’s daughter Dalia speaks at a ceremony marking the 20th 
anniversary of his murder. Photograph: Debbie Hill/AFP/Getty Images 
 “Sadly, I have no news,” Rabin’s daughter, Dalia, said poignantly at her 
father’s graveside on Monday, in one of the memorial speeches broadcast live on 
TV. “There is no peace process. We are facing terrorism. Blood is being shed 
again. I have no other country and my country has changed.”

David Grossman: The night our hope for peace died
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/04/israelandthepalestinians.middleeast>
 Rabin is remembered as a soldier, having expelled Palestinians en masse 
during the 1948 war and as chief of staff during the 1967 victory, when Israel 
occupied the West Bank, East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. But the 
general-turned-peacemaker was also the first Israeli political leader to be 
murdered – and, shockingly, by another Jew; not, as had always seemed more 
likely, by an Arab.

 The 20th anniversary of his death has seen a torrent of comment against an 
unusually turbulent background: high tension over the Temple Mount/Haram 
al-Sharif site in East Jerusalem and the deaths of 50 Palestinians and 10 
Israelis in the last month.Whether or not this constitutes a new intifada 
(uprising) or not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/third-palestinian-intifada-on-way-or-already-begun>
, it has come as a vicious reminder of the intractable nature of the conflict 
and the persistence of the occupation – not to mention the hatred and 
desperation that can erupt when hopes for finding a solution die.

We have been given a frightful glimpse into Netanyahu’s mind | David Grossman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/26/frightful-glimpse-binyamin-netanyahu-mind>
 Binyamin Netanyahu, the Likud prime minister, made an immediate connection 
with the current violence. “I didn’t agree on everything with Yitzhak Rabin,” 
he told the Mount Herzl gathering. “Rabin wanted to end the conflict and he 
worked for peace, but he too was forced to deal with a cruel wave of terror. No 
knife, no stone, no petrol bomb or mine will stop us. We will never surrender 
to terrorism.”

In the mid-1990s, Netanyahu, then in opposition and a fierce opponent of the 
Oslo accord, was blamed for contributing to an atmosphere of incitement. 
Rightwing activists portrayed Rabin in SS uniform, while extremist, 
pro-settlement rabbis ruled that by talking to the PLO and ceding territory to 
Arafat, Rabin was a traitor – views that Amir used to justify his crime.

Much of the current discourse around Rabin’s death is about the danger of 
extremism in Israeli society. “The shots that killed him targeted the very 
essence of the sovereign Jewish state,” the thinker Prof Yedidia Stern 
commented in Haaretz this week. “The blood on the pavement was the blood of 
democracy itself.” Schools are holding classes on the meaning of political 
murder and the importance of tolerance.

Yet critics question the way Rabin is seen. “The main political forces in 
Israel today are the extreme settlers, and Rabin’s memory has nothing to do 
with them,” argued Tom Segev, one of Israel’s leading historians. “Rabin has 
become the poster boy for what Zionism and Israel have lost. He was the 
opposite of the fanatics. He was secular, pragmatic and sane. He was the last 
of the beautiful Israelis.”

Rabin, the Last Day review – form and structure hamper Israeli PM murder story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/rabin-the-last-day-review-israel-netanyahu-amos-gitai>
Many clearly hanker after a more decisive prime minister than Netanyahu, 
whatever their views. “Israel needs a leader with Rabin’s DNA, who will act 
with faith and determination to reach an agreement,” said Uzi Baram, a former 
Labour minister.


Palestinians are sceptical. In 1987, when the first intifada erupted, Rabin 
was the defence minister who threatened to “break the bones” of the young 
stone-throwers confronting the occupation. “Rabin never wanted a Palestinian 
state,” insisted Mahdi Abdel-Hadi of the Passia thinktank. “He played politics 
and worked with an isolated, corrupt Arafat. He wanted to contain the PLO, to 
tame the shrew. Oslo was an illusion. Israelis who believe it would have led to 
a real peace are indulging in wishful thinking.”


But if the memory contains elements of myth, it remains a powerful one. On 
Monday evening, Israel’s Channel 2 TV broadcast an interview about Rabin with 
Clinton, who describes his devastation when the stunning news reached the Oval 
office. “My first thoughts were not even for the peace process,” the former US 
president said. “They were just for my friend. Then immediately I thought, 
‘This could kill all his dreams.’”


Twenty years after Rabin’s death, Israelis and Palestinians agree on little. 
But many on both sidesare certain that Oslo is dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/30/mahmoud-abbas-palestinians-no-longer-bound-by-oslo-accord-with-israel>
, or in its dying days – with doubts growing that its institutional legacy, the 
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank under Arafat’s successor, Mahmoud Abbas, 
can survive much longer.


“Rabin probably stood a better chance of forging a durable reconciliation 
between Israelis and Palestinians than any other leader before or since,” 
writes Dan Ephron in Killing a King, 
<http://www.amazon.com/Killing-King-Assassination-Yitzhak-Remaking/dp/0393242099>
 a riveting new book about the prime minister and his murderer. “That we’ll 
never know how close he would have come is one of the exasperating consequences 
of the assassination.”
 