
Have we gone back to the 1930s? Could we see the return of fascism? After all, 
hatred and prejudice, which many people thought had been marginalised in 
western democracies by the defeat of fascism in 1945, decolonisation and the 
American civil rights movement now seem to be part of the mainstream.

Furthermore, democratic institutions appear threatened. The rightwing UK press 
depicts judges as enemies of the people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/assault-uk-judges-brexit-press-judiciary-constitution>
, whileNigel Farage warns of riots 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/11/06/farage-warns-of-riots-over-brexit-ruling-in-clash-with-gina-miller-6238634/>
 if Brexit is not implemented. Donald Trumpmight not accept the US election 
result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/trump-clinton-support-election-winner-debate-interview>
, andadmires Vladimir Putin’s semi-authoritarian regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/trump-putin-senate-republicans-marco-rubio-john-mccain>
.

Nigel Farage's fascist barrage | Michael White
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2013/may/17/nigel-farage-fascist-barrage-ukip>
It’s easy to see parallels with the 1920s and 1930s: economic crisis, chronic 
unemployment,poverty wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/low-paid-workers-sports-direct-university-staff-rights-mike-ashley>
 for many workers, the decline of middle-class wealth. If Trump becomes 
president and keeps his promise to deport millions, parallels with Nazi Germany 
will inevitably be made.

The march of far-right parties appears irresistible. Perhaps their success in 
Hungary and Austria, or even France, could be seen as a reversion to type, for 
authoritarian regimes were present there before 1945. But now the far right is 
advancing in the UK and US too – once seen as protected from extremism by their 
“democratic cultures”. There are clear parallels between the modern far right 
and fascism – authoritarianism, charismatic leadership, nationalism, racism, 
protectionism, anti-liberalism …

Yet whatever the similarities, we should think twice before interpreting the 
present as a re-enactment of the past.

For one thing, fascism is notoriously hard to define. Decades of research have 
not enabled academics to agree on a definition. The problem is that fascism – 
like socialism or any other political movement – was diverse and meant 
different things to different people. Even if we confine our attention to those 
Italians who described themselves as Fascists between 1919 and 1945, we find an 
enormous range of views on what fascism was. Some thought that the state should 
be supreme, others that the party should rule. Some advocated government 
intervention in the economy; others wanted capitalists to be left to get on 
with the job. Fascists did not agree what fascism was, so it’s not surprising 
that scholars don’t either.

The problem is even greater if we include nazism within the category of 
fascism. The German regime learned from Italian fascism in many ways. Yet many 
Nazis were contemptuous of Italians as poor soldiers, who had betrayed Germany 
by joining the Allies in the first world war. The Nazis were reluctant to call 
themselves fascists, because doing so implied that they were imitators.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fali-gharib-is-trump-a-fascist&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20Gharib%3A%20is%20Trump%20a%20fascist%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fali-gharib-is-trump-a-fascist>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20Gharib%3A%20is%20Trump%20a%20fascist%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fali-gharib-is-trump-a-fascist&media=>
Ali Gharib: is Trump a fascist? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/dec/15/ali-gharib-is-trump-a-fascist>
There were important differences between the regimes. True, racism was never 
absent from Italian fascism, especially towards Slavs, and in its imperialist 
war inmodern-day Ethiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1935/oct/03/italy.mainsection>. Yet before 
1938 there was no equivalent in Italy of the Nazis’ extreme antisemitism and 
drive for a biologically pure race. If we impose the category of fascism on 
nazism, we risk obscuring the importance of this antisemitic racism.

The contemporary far right is equally diverse. Parties have different 
attitudes to Europe for instance, and some are more anti-democratic than 
others. All we can say is that some aspects of the modern far right are like 
some elements of fascism.

Some modern far-right movements were designed to rehabilitate fascism – that 
was true of the French Front National in the 1970s, and theItalian Social 
Movement <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/apr/26/worlddispatch.france> 
(MSI) in the 1990s, but one never knows where such efforts will lead. While the 
FN has in some ways become more extreme, for instance on European immigration, 
the MSI was eventually absorbed into the mainstream right.

If we simply see these movements as reinventions of fascism, then we risk 
obscuring what is specific to our own times. Italian fascists saw socialists as 
their chief enemies, while for the Nazis it was “Judeo-Bolshevism”. These days, 
the labour movement is in retreat, and the subculture that sustained it has 
largely gone. Disillusioned working-class voters in Europe and America provide 
a more important fund of support for the modern far right than they ever did 
for fascism or nazism, notwithstanding the often underestimated support of 
middle-class voters for the contemporary far right.

Another major difference is that whereas fascism and nazism came to power by 
combining paramilitarism on the streets with electoral victories, the modern 
far right relies on the latter alone. Indeed, it rarely opposes democracy in 
principle and actually takes advantage of the discriminatory potential of 
democracy itself – those who do not conform to the characteristics and wishes 
of the “majority” – judges or Muslims – are enemies of “the people”.

Ultimately, perhaps, it matters less than we might think whether Trump or any 
other figure is “fascist” in some academic sense. The real question is moral – 
do we see their policies as morally acceptable? And if history teaches 
anything, it is that people who called themselves neither fascist or Nazi were 
capable of complicity in repugnant acts.
 