What is Labour's policy on arms sales? 
"Labour will not permit the sale of arms to regimes that might use them for 
internal repression or international aggression," theparty's manifesto 
<http://www.psr.keele.ac.uk/area/uk/man/lab97.htm> promised before its election 
in 1997.

In government, say critics, it has followed a subsequent manifesto pledge more 
closely: "We support a strong UK defence industry, which is a strategic part of 
our industrial base as well as our defence effort."

The sale of arms to foreign countries is big business - and Britain is the 
second biggest exporter of arms in the world. The latest annual report on 
British weapons sales records the granting of more than 10,000 export licences 
in 1998 to a number of countries, including Argentina, China, Colombia, India, 
Mozambique,Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, Sri Lanka and 
Zimbabwe.

Foreign secretary Robin Cook, who inaugurated an "ethical foreign policy 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/indonesia/Story/0,2763,19238,00.html>" one 
month into office, last July reaffirmed the importance of ethical 
considerations when importing arms. He said that the government "will not issue 
an export licence if there is a clearly identifiable risk that the proposed 
export might be used for internal repression" and promised to publish an annual 
report detailing arms export applications.

But the tension between Labour's two manifesto promises has continued, as 
demonstrated by rows over the sale ofarms to Indonesia 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/indonesia/0,2759,19228,00.html> and now by a 
serious cabinet dispute over the issuing ofarms export licences to Pakistan 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/uk_news/story/0,3604,121635,00.html>.

How are British-made weapons sold to other countries?

Licences to export "strategic goods" are issued by the government's export 
control agency <http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/>, which is part of the 
department of trade and industry.

Businesses wanting to export their products fill in a form (they can even do 
it online). The DTI circulates relevant licence applications to other 
ministries, such as the foreign office and the department for international 
development, before approval is given. A raft of regulations and guidance notes 
for exporters restricts the sale of arms or other goods which could be used to 
make weapons, to regimes embroiled in conflict.

The UK also has to obey EU-wide arms trade embargos. Robin Cook courted 
controversy after approving the delivery of nine British Aerospace Hawks to 
Indonesia, part of an export contract agreed under the previous Conservative 
government. Three were delivered in September 1999, but a four-month EU embargo 
on arms sales toIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> stalled 
the remaining delivery.

How is the government divided on the issue of arms?

The department of trade and industry works to boost British industry: its 
ministers and civil servants favour free trade and tend to take a relaxed view 
of exporting weapons. Similarly, the ministry of defence instinctively supports 
Britain's arms industry. The secretaries of state for these two ministries, 
Stephen Byers and Geoff Hoon respectively, are reported to be in favour of 
lifting restrictions on arms sales to Pakistan.

The foreign office and Claire Short's department for international development 
are reported to be against lifting arms restrictions on Pakistan. The foreign 
office works to boost exports with the DTI throughBritish Trade International <>
 and theInvest in Britain bureau <http://www.dti.gov.uk/IBB/flash/index.html>, 
and more than a third of foreign office staff time is spent helping British 
exports and investment opportunities abroad. However, Robin Cook, the foreign 
secretary, has repeatedly stressed the importance of an ethical foreign policy 
since 1997.

What about export credit guarantees?

The government's export credit guarantee department (ECGD) operates as 
insurance for British exporters involved in risky export projects. It 
guarantees that if a foreign country defaults on paying for British goods the 
government will recompense the exporter. Last year, more than 50% of ECGD cover 
supported arms sales.

In December 1999, prime minister Tony Blair controversially allowed an export 
credit guarantee to be issued to underwrite engineering firm Balfour Beatty's 
building of ahotly disputed Turkish dam 
<http://www.guardianunlimited.co.uk/Archive/Article/0,4273,3944182,00. html>, 
which will flood 52 Kurdish villages and 15 towns.

Yesterday, chancellor Gordon Brown announced that the treasury would ban 
export credits <http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/debt/Story/0,2763,121638,00.html>
 for arms sales to 63 of the world's poorest countries. These include Bolivia, 
Mozambique, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, as well as countries embroiled in wars, 
such as Sierra Leone and Ethiopia.

While these moves appear to discourage British arms exporters and bad debt, 
the Campaign Against the Arms Trade argues that the government has not gone far 
enough. It says that, with the exception of Sri Lanka, none of the countries 
listed are big customers of the UK arms trade. Big markets in the past have 
included Indonesia, Pakistan and Nigeria.

At what point good business becomes bad ethics, as well as bad diplomacy, will 
continue to trouble the government.

Useful links

DTI: Export Control Organisation <http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/>

Robin Cook's July 1999 speech on arms exports 
<http://www.dti.gov.uk/export.control/policy/statement.htm>

Robin Cook's "ethical foreign policy" speech 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/indonesia/Story/0,2763,19238,00.html>

Labour's 1997 manifesto <http://www.psr.keele.ac.uk/area/uk/man/lab97.htm>

Campaign Against Arms Trade report into arms trade with Indonesia 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/indonesia/Story/0,2763,80705,00.html>

John Pilger on Labour's ethical foreign policy 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/indonesia/Story/0,2763,19751,00.html>
 