
Two weeks ago, 13 September, was the 23rd anniversary of the signing of the 
Oslo agreement <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/7385301.stm>, 
Shimon Peres’ diplomatic masterstroke that was supposed to lead to a peace 
treaty between Israel and the Palestinians. In the early afternoon, a rocket 
streaked across the Mediterranean, clearly visible from the windows of his 
office in the Peres Peace Center near Jaffa’s coastline. It was carrying a spy 
satellite, made by the Israeli Aerospace Industry that Peres had founded over 
half a century earlier. The rocket was a civilian version of the Jericho 
missile, reported to be the launcher of Israel’s nuclear weapon, developed by 
the project founded by Peres in the 1950s.

That evening, as he was being rushed to hospital in the early stages of a 
massive stroke from which he would not recover, a new$38bn military aid deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/13/us-israel-aid-38-billion-record-military-assistance>
 was announced in Jerusalem and Washington. It had been Peres who had signed 
the first arms deal with the United States in 1963.

Shimon Peres, who has died at the age of 93, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/shimon-peres-former-israeli-leader-dies>
 spent the first half of his public career building Israel’s military might and 
ensuring its security. The second half was focused on increasingly forlorn 
attempts to bring peace to his country. The sad irony of his life was that he 
had been much more successful in his first chapter. His efforts to reconcile 
the Jewish state with its Arab neighbours failed to achieve similarly lasting 
results.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0a38dc4f0ef31038dc55c3e4804103b62f88431%2F17_405_2035_1222%2F2035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20a%20peacemaker%2C%20Shimon%20Peres%20never%20won%20over%20the%20Israeli%20public%20%7C%20Anshel%20Pfeffer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20a%20peacemaker%2C%20Shimon%20Peres%20never%20won%20over%20the%20Israeli%20public%20%7C%20Anshel%20Pfeffer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0a38dc4f0ef31038dc55c3e4804103b62f88431%2F17_405_2035_1222%2F2035.jpg>
 Shimon Peres: ‘the sad irony of his life was that he had been much more 
successful in the first chapter, building Israel’s military might.’ Photograph: 
GPO/Getty Images 
If Peres had resigned from frontline politics at the age of 54, as many of his 
colleagues were demanding, after having lost the 1977 general election as 
leader of the Labour party toLikud’s Menachem Begin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menachem_Begin>, he would be remembered as one 
of Israel’s most legendary security “hawks”. The man who had purchased the arms 
for Israel’s army during its early years and conducted the secret negotiations 
with France for the supply of the Dimona nuclear reactor. The first patron of 
the Jewish settlers in the West Bank. Instead, most of the eulogies now being 
written in his memory are extolling him as a man of peace. For a man who loved 
to talk of his own experiences and thoughts, Peres never explained the 
transformation he underwent in the wilderness of opposition.

His many detractors said that Peres simply had no choice. With Begin and 
Egyptian president Anwar Sadat ending the state of war between the two nations 
and signing theCamp David peace agreement 
<https://www.britannica.com/event/Camp-David-Accords>, he had no choice but to 
move leftwards and try to present himself as a better peacemaker than his Likud 
rivals. His supporters explained that Peres knew more than anyone else just how 
strong and secure Israel had become, and could therefore make concessions and 
take risks for peace in its dangerous neighbourhood. Whatever his motives, he 
failed to convince the Israeli public with his vision.

He led the Labour party in five general elections between 1977 and 1996 and 
failed each time win an outright victory. His best result was a stalemate with 
Likud in 1984 which meant he had to share power with his hardliner opponent, 
Yitzhak Shamir. In two years as prime minister he was busy mainly with 
stabilising the economy and pulling most of Israel’s troops out of Lebanon. In 
1986, he became foreign minister and began secretly negotiating with Jordan’s 
King Hussein. But the London agreement they reached, which could have launched 
a peace process including the two countries and the Palestinians as well, was 
vetoed by Prime Minister Shamir. Peres simply did not have the political or 
public support to defy him.

Six years later, he succeeded, once again as foreign minister, in persuading a 
reluctant and scepticalYitzhak Rabin to go along with the Oslo process and 
shake hands with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/september/13/newsid_3053000/3053733.stm>
 on the White House lawn. The international community recognised the 
breakthrough by giving the three men a joint Nobel peace prize, but it was 
Rabin who had won the election and sold the agreement to the Israeli public. 
AfterRabin’s assassination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/night-yitzhak-rabin-was-assassinated>
, Peres was left to carry Oslo on his own and lost yet again. This time by a 
sliver of a point toBenjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>. The Oslo process never 
survived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3b93de0a5817967abbf8f9e6daffae15e68313%2F0_116_2816_1689%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20a%20peacemaker%2C%20Shimon%20Peres%20never%20won%20over%20the%20Israeli%20public%20%7C%20Anshel%20Pfeffer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20a%20peacemaker%2C%20Shimon%20Peres%20never%20won%20over%20the%20Israeli%20public%20%7C%20Anshel%20Pfeffer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fpeacemaker-shimon-peres-israeli-public-peace-deals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3b93de0a5817967abbf8f9e6daffae15e68313%2F0_116_2816_1689%2F2816.jpg>
 Yitzhak Rabin shaking hands with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat at the White 
House in a deal brokered by Peres. Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex/Shutterstock/Sipa 
Press/REX/Shutterstock 
There was always something too outlandish, too foreign and detached from 
reality in the way Peres spoke of his visions for a “new Middle East”. While 
opinion polls showed a majority of Israelis in favour of his positions, in 
principle, at the ballot box they preferred a stern rightwinger in government. 
They were willing to trust Labour only with a reassuringly tough retired 
general leading the party, like Rabin or Ehud Barak. Prime minister Peres 
simply wasn’t a combination of words that inspired enough confidence and 
security.

Perhaps the final irony of Shimon Peres’ life was that his last act in the 
service of peace, remains secret and undocumented. As an octogenarian 
president, he observed the conventions of the ceremonial office and refrained 
from openly intervening in politics. That didn’t stop the commanders of the 
army and chiefs of the intelligence services turning to him for advice when 
they felt their political masters were dangerously wrong. Towards the end of 
his seven-year term, he was the secret leader of the faction within the defence 
establishment that successfully worked to block the plans of Netanyahu, the 
prime minister and the defence minister Ehud Barak to launch amilitary strike 
against Iran’s nuclear installations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/23/leaked-spy-cables-netanyahu-iran-bomb-mossad>
, before it could build an atomic bomb.

Ultimately he had to rely on the generals and spy chiefs to avert war. He 
never convinced ordinary Israelis to make the same leap of faith he had.
 