
Britain is facing calls to loosen its ties with Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/13/human-rights-abuses-bahrain-cast-shadow-over-2m-uk-aid-support>
 after three Shia Muslim men convicted of killing an Emirati police officer and 
two Bahraini police officers in a 2014 bomb attack were executed.

Related: Bahrain torture ‘ignored’ by UK-funded monitor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/bahrain-torture-foreign-office-criticised>

The death sentences on Sunday were the first to be carried out in Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> since 2010, and protesters claimed 
that confessions were extracted under torture.

There were street protests in Bahrain following the executions, the first of 
Bahrainis since 1996, and it remains to be seen how the UK Foreign Office 
reacts. Britain opposes the death penalty and says it has beenworking to improve
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/amnesty-uk-utterly-disingenuous-about-human-rights-in-bahrain>
 Bahrain’s human rights record.

Maya Foa, the director of the death penalty team at Reprieve 
<http://www.reprieve.org.uk/>, said: “It is nothing short of an outrage and a 
disgraceful breach of international law that Bahrain has gone ahead with these 
executions. The confessions were extracted through torture and the trial was an 
utter sham.

“It would be shameful if the UK continued to support Bahrain’s security 
apparatus and interior ministry in the face of such terrible abuses.”

Agnes Callamard, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, 
tweeted:

The executions came less than a week after the country’s highest court 
confirmed the punishment against Abbas al-Samea, 27, Sami Mushaima, 42, and Ali 
al-Singace, 21. The court found there was “no evidence of coercion in the case 
documents”.

The three men had been charged with “organising, running and financing a 
terrorist group [al-Ashtar Brigade] with the aim of carrying out terrorist 
attacks”. They were also accused of “possession and planting of explosives with 
the intention to kill”.

Mushaima is said to be largely illiterate, while Samea was arrested three 
hours after the bombing incident. It is also claimed by their supporters that 
Samea was subjected to beatings, electric shocks, and deprivation of food and 
water.

State news agency BNA said the men were executed by firing squad in the 
presence of a judge, a doctor and a Muslim cleric. When their families went to 
see the men for the last time, they were subjected to police intimidation, it 
is claimed.

The Arab spring demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/14/bahrains-young-people-mark-fifth-anniversary-arab-spring>
 led by Bahrain’s Shia majority werecrushed by the Sunni-ruled government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/08/bahrain-protests-repression-getting-worse>
 with help from its Gulf Arab neighbours in February 2011.

In the past year, Bahrain has instituted a crackdown on Shias – imprisoning 
the most senior rights campaigner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/bahraini-activist-nabeel-rajab-freed-bail-after-months-detention>
, closing themain opposition group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/17/bahrain-al-wefaq-shia-opposition-group-sunni>
, al-Wefaq, andrevoking the citizenship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/20/bahrain-strips-influential-shia-cleric-isa-qassim-citizenship>
 of the community’s spiritual leader.

Over the past four years, the UK has spent millions training Bahraini police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
 and helping with the independent police ombudsman. The UK insists it is 
working to improve the judicial and police system, but critics say the money 
has turned largely into a front so Britain can expand anaval base in Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/bahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism>
 largely funded by Manama.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
UK signs deal to expand naval presence in Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2014/dec/06/uk-signs-deal-expand-naval-presence-bahrain-video>
The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, issued a statement on Sunday, which 
said: “The UK is firmly opposed to the death penalty and it is our longstanding 
position to oppose capital sentences in all circumstances. The Bahraini 
authorities are fully aware of our position and I have raised the issue with 
the Bahraini government.”

Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei of the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy 
<http://birdbh.org/> called on Britain to institute a complete arms ban until 
human rights changes have been implemented. He said Bahrain was becoming a 
security threat to the region.
 