
The Bahrain government, under renewed international criticism for arresting 
human rights activists and closing down an opposition party this week, is 
paying the bulk of the costs of the construction of a newRoyal Navy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-navy> base in its country, a freedom of 
information request has revealed.


The precise value of the Bahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> 
contribution is being kept secret under UK government disclosure rules, but the 
UK is to pay only £9m over three years towards the construction of the new 
naval base central to the UK government’s new “East of Suez” strategy. The 
contract for the Mina Salman support facility was signed in 2014. It is 
currently under construction and is designed to service all Royal Navy ships in 
the region.

Britain pulled back from the Gulf in the early 1970s, but with the US focusing 
more of its attention on the Asia-Pacific region, the UK envisages an enhanced 
role east of Suez in the Gulf, the Near East and north Africa, and the new base 
is part of that strategy.

In a major new report reviewing the Foreign Office relations with Bahrain, 
which is a former UK protectorate, the UK-based Bahrain Institute for Rights 
and Democracy (Bird) claims the UK has become “an unconditional ally” of the 
Sunni-led kingdom.

Bird claims that the UK government’s interest in Bahrain’s human rights and 
promoting political dialogue has “declined precipitously” since the 2014 
agreement to construct the port, with the number of meetings between the 
Foreign Office and Bahrain advocacy groups falling sharply.

It also claims UK government funds to improve Bahrain human rights 
institutions since the repression that followed the Arab spring has largely 
been spent on well-intentioned bodies that have proved not to be truly 
independent of government.


The criticisms, in a 75-page report assessing the Foreign Office approach to 
Bahraini politics, comes after a Bahraini court suspended the activities of the 
country’s main Shia opposition group on charges of terrorism, extremism and 
violence. The court declared the Al-Wefaq society suspended pending a decision 
on its total dissolution.

The decision to suspend Al-Wefaq came the day after the family of leading 
human rights activist Nabeel Rajab said he had been detained by police. Another 
prominent activist, Zainab al-Khawaja, fled to Denmark last week after 
reportedly being threatened with prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c976497fc39c2d10901d580895e92aae98092a5%2F0_206_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bahrain%20paying%20for%20Royal%20Navy%20base%20despite%20human%20rights%20criticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bahrain%20paying%20for%20Royal%20Navy%20base%20despite%20human%20rights%20criticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c976497fc39c2d10901d580895e92aae98092a5%2F0_206_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Al-Wefaq’s headquarters in Bilad al-Qadeem, west of Manama. Photograph: Hamad 
I Mohammed/Reuters 
Rajab was charged with publishing and broadcasting false news that undermined 
the prestige of the state. He was detained for seven days. His arrest came as 
Bahraini human rights activists travelled to Geneva for the opening day of a 
session of the UN’s human rights council. His arrest has been condemned by the 
UN and the US State Department.

Since the Bahraini uprising in 2011, Rajab has spent two years in jail between 
2012 and 2014. The government says the resistance movement is funded and 
supported by Iran.

The latest crackdown – five years after the uprising – is a setback for the UK 
government, which has invested considerable effort and £3.4m in providing 
technical assistance on human rights to the UK’s closest ally in the Gulf.

Bird claims this assistance “has become a facade to hide the lack of political 
will in the kingdom to implement reforms”.

The Foreign Office funding helps with a new ombudsman for the Ministry of 
Interior, the National Institute for Human Rights, the Prisoners’ and 
Detainees’ Rights Commission, as well as to train the police and judiciary.

Allegations of arbitrary arrest and torture are frequently made against the 
authorities.

Bird claims the ombudsman is appointed by the minister and partly funded by 
the interior department. Any complaints of torture or mistreatment have to be 
sent to the special investigations unit in the public prosecutor’s office, and 
there is no guarantee that complaints to the ombudsman are kept confidential 
from other government departments, with the result that witnesses are 
intimidated.

Similarly, Bird questions the independence and quality of the prisoners’ 
rights and human rights committee, since many of its key figures are members of 
the Bahraini parliament, which denies that torture takes place in the country.

The UN special rapporteur on torture has been repeatedly denied entry to 
Bahrain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41fde1813d464d5d6795b75ca741b9f8c42ed242%2F0_149_3672_2203%2F3672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bahrain%20paying%20for%20Royal%20Navy%20base%20despite%20human%20rights%20criticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bahrain%20paying%20for%20Royal%20Navy%20base%20despite%20human%20rights%20criticism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbahrain-paying-royal-navy-base-human-rights-criticism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41fde1813d464d5d6795b75ca741b9f8c42ed242%2F0_149_3672_2203%2F3672.jpg>
 Human rights activist Zainab al-Khawaja has left Bahrain for Denmark. 
Photograph: Hasan Jamali/AP 
Bird claims: “The laws governing these bodies, and actions by individuals 
within them, undermine the mandates of all these institutions. The net effect 
is to give the appearance of substantial reform: however, they continue to fail 
to hold human rights violators to account. No high-level official has been held 
to account for any human rights abuses occurring between 2011 and the present, 
and no such official looks set be held accountable.”

The Foreign Office points out it has classified Bahrain as a country of human 
rights concern, and the decline in contact appears to stem from the UK 
government’s regret that the main opposition party, Al-Wefaq, decided to 
boycott the 2014 Bahrain elections.

But Bird claims: “The UK government has avoided overtly criticising the 
government of Bahrain for the prosecution of political leaders, human rights 
activists, trade unionists and street protesters alike. Rather than sending a 
clear message rejecting the abuse of human rights and condemning the arbitrary 
arrest of human rights defenders and opposition leaders, the FCO instead calls 
for due process to be followed.”

They said foreign secretary Philip Hammond’s last visit to Bahrain on 30 May, 
when he welcomed “Bahrain’s commitment to continuing reforms”, came on the same 
day an appeals court increased Al-Wefaq leader Sheikh Ali Salman’s prison 
sentence from four years to nine.
 