
A new hostel in the Belgian city of Ghent is looking to put an inky spin on 
budget travel by allowing guests to stay in dorms and bedrooms named after 
famous newspapers. And, yes, you can choose to show your allegiance by staying 
in the Guardian dorm – with the paper’s name, in its idiosyncratic typeface, on 
the exterior of the room. Suggestions that authenticity extends to comical 
subediting inaccuracy are yet to be confirmed …

The reason for the newspaper theme at Backstay Hostel Ghent 
<http://www.backstayhostels.com/> comes from the building that houses it: a 
superb 1930s art-deco design which was once the home of the socialist 
newspaper, Vooruit. Re-opened at the end of June, this heritage building has 
been transformed into a series of pod-style dormitories with 108 beds, plus 
several double rooms that aim to be as comfortable as a B&B – though guests 
here do have to share a bathroom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F27%2Fbed-breaking-news-ghent-belgium-newspaper-hostel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F27%2F1409152870359%2Fcb025d17-22e1-4705-8a71-b5017dd1b6d2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bed%20and%20breaking%20news%3A%20Ghent%E2%80%99s%20newspaper%20hostel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F27%2Fbed-breaking-news-ghent-belgium-newspaper-hostel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bed%20and%20breaking%20news%3A%20Ghent%E2%80%99s%20newspaper%20hostel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F27%2Fbed-breaking-news-ghent-belgium-newspaper-hostel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F27%2F1409152870359%2Fcb025d17-22e1-4705-8a71-b5017dd1b6d2-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Guardian dorm at Backstay Hostel Ghent. Photograph: Luc Roymans/PR 
Although Vooruit has long since closed down as a paper, its spirit is still 
present, with each bedroom and dorm named after a famous newspaper: Le Monde, 
the New York Times, Die Zeit, El País, and the Guardian. And up in the 
lighthouse turret, at the top of the building, there is the Blog Room, which is 
open to hostel visitors and locals to sit down and post their thoughts and 
traveller’s tales, either on their laptops or vintage typewriters. The hostel 
is designed to be a meeting place for visitorsand the local Gantois, with a bar 
fashioned from wooden typesetting letters that is open to all. There is also a 
restaurant and a summer terrace, as well as a chill-out zone on the ground 
floor featuring table football, a library and comfy sofas, plus a piano and 
guitars for evening jam sessions.
 The bar area on the ground floor 
The Backstay is 15 minutes’ walk from the historic centre of Ghent, opposite 
the mainVooruit <http://vooruit.be/en/> building, a former socialist workers’ 
centre that is now one of the city’s cultural centres for concerts and film 
screenings, along withTerras <http://vooruit.be/en/information/detail/123/Patio>
, a popular new restaurant and bar.

• +32 9 395 96 60, backstayhostels.com <http://www.backstayhostels.com/>. 
Dormitory beds from €20.50 a night B&B, double rooms from €68 B&B
 