
The body of a British man who was killed while fighting alongside Kurdish 
forces in northern Syria has been recovered fromIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> territory, Kurdish activists have told 
the BBC.

Ryan Lock, a chef from Chichester in West Sussex, was killed during an advance 
on Raqqa, Isis’s de facto capital, on 21 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/02/briton-ryan-lock-killed-while-fighting-against-isis-in-syria>
. He was one of many foreign volunteers who have gone to fight alongside the 
Kurdish People’s Defence Units (YPG).

BBC News said <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38590001> it had been told that 
the 20-year-old’s body had only now been recovered from Isis fighters, who had 
retrieved it after his death. Lock’s remains have been taken to north-east 
Syria for an official postmortem, the broadcaster added. There were no details 
on how the body was recovered.

It is understood that Lock, who had no previous military experience, fought 
with the YPG for three and a half months before he was killed on the frontline. 
He had travelled toSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> last August 
after telling family he was going on holiday to Turkey.

On 24 November he witnessed the deaths of most of his unit when it was bombed, 
allegedly by Turkish jets, in Arima, a village 13 miles north-east of the 
Isis-held city of Bab. Twelve YPG fighters were killed, including an American, 
Michael Israel, and a German national, Anton Leschek.

Lock is the third Briton to be killed fighting Isis since the first foreign 
volunteers arrived in Iraq and Syria in autumn 2014.

Konstandinos Erik Scurfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/04/konstandinos-erik-scurfield-ex-marine-died-someone-elses-war-ypg-isis>
, a 25-year-old former Royal Marine from Barnsley in South Yorkshire, became 
the first when a missile hit his vehicle on 2 March 2015 near the north-east 
Syrian town of Tel Hamis.

On 21 July 2016, Dean Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/29/isis-wasnt-about-killing-people-what-drove-british-farmer-syrian-frontline>
, 22, a dairy farmer from Warminster in Wiltshire, was killed by a 
rocket-propelled grenade as he attempted to rescue a fallen comrade during a 
street battle in the city of Manbij, northern Syria.

It is understood Lock’s family are receiving advice from the Foreign Office 
(FCO) on how best to get their son’s body back to the UK for burial.

A Foreign Office spokeswoman said: “The UK has advised for some time against 
all travel to Syria. As all UK consular services there are suspended, it is 
extremely difficult to confirm the status and whereabouts of British nationals 
in Syria.

“Anyone who does travel to these areas, for whatever reason, is putting 
themselves in considerable danger.”
 