
Central to the story of the Egyptian diplomat Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s time as 
secretary general of theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> was his relationship with the 
US. By the end of his controversial five years in the post, from the start of 
1992 to the end of 1996, Boutros-Ghali, who has died aged 93, believed that he 
had served the world body well. But he was also convinced that he was a victim 
of American domestic politics. Although he always sought to shrug off the US 
administration’s refusal to support renewal of his mandate, he regretted what 
he saw as the vendetta that undermined his endeavours to improve the UN’s 
effectiveness of the world organisation in the post cold war age.

Boutros-Ghali had been consistently demonised by the Republican party. He also 
had his critics among the Democrats. However he convinced himself – possibly 
quite wrongly – that PresidentBill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> had decided to drop him in the 
belief that to do otherwise would lose precious votes for his own run for 
re-election.

The experience reinforced Boutros-Ghali’s view that the US, the only remaining 
superpower, was incapable of providing consistent leadership and lacked the 
commitment to turn the UN into a credible instrument of international security. 
So he devoted himself to championing the interests of developing countries, 
especially of the French-speaking world.

From 1997 until 2002 he acted as secretary general of the Organisation 
Internationale de la Francophonie 
<http://www.francophonie.org/Welcome-to-the-International.html>. Living most of 
the time in Paris, Boutros- Ghali also supported a campaign for the 
establishment of a UN parliamentary assembly, and was director of Egypt’s
National Council of Human Rights <http://www.nchregypt.org/index.php/en/> 
(2003-2012). His memoir of his tenure at the UN,Unvanquished: A US-UN Saga 
<http://www.amazon.com/Unvanquished-A-U-S-U-N-Saga/dp/0812992040> (1999), 
confirmed the disappointments he suffered there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4677203e6303cff105e7ff9bc0550eab0d5df3d%2F0_34_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4677203e6303cff105e7ff9bc0550eab0d5df3d%2F0_34_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Boutros-Ghali, right, with Kofi Annan at the UN in New York in 1996. 
Photograph: Peter Morgan/Reuters 
All along, Boutros-Ghali had an uneasy relationship with the Americans. 
President George HW Bush made no secret of US misgivings when, in 1991, 
Boutros-Ghali put himself forward as a candidate for the UN post. Then, in the 
summer of 1992, only a few months after “Boo-Boo’s” election, they clashed 
famously over the UN’s role in Bosnia and Somalia, and the Americans tried to 
force his resignation. Clinton, inaugurated as president at the start of 1993, 
never once invited him to the White House for one-to-one talks. Boutros-Ghali, 
fatally, made little attempt to curry support with the US Congress or the 
American media.

Yet, Boutros-Ghali, born in Cairo to Youssef and Sophie (nee Sharobim), might 
have been expressly bred for the top UN post. As an Egyptian, he was African 
enough to win acceptance among Africa’s UN membership. But as a member of a 
distinguished Coptic Christian family (his grandfather had been Egypt’s first 
Coptic prime minister, and his father had served as finance minister) he was a 
sophisticated intellectual, who had moved from academia to politics, served as 
President Anwar Sadat’s minister of state for foreign affairs (1977-91) and 
then for a short time as deputy foreign minister, and was fully experienced in 
international diplomacy. He was considered almost – if not quite – “one of us” 
by the western powers.

France championed him because he had studied international law at the 
Sorbonne, because French was his preferred language, and becauseFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, next to Egypt, was his favourite 
country. The Russians and Chinese were confident that he would be his own man 
and not a western puppet. Though he was more comfortable in the francophone 
world, Boutros-Ghali also spoke fluent English. And though he was Arab, he was 
not a Muslim, and his wife Leia (nee Nadler), a second-generation Egyptian, was 
Jewish.

He was excoriated by Muslims and remained under threat of assassination 
because he had joined Sadat in 1977 on the historic journey to Jerusalem and 
afterwards played a key role in the Camp David negotiations betweenEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> and Israel. But by the time 
Boutros-Ghali became UN secretary general, the first stirrings of a new mood 
towards a wider Middle East peace settlement were apparent, and the Arab 
members of the UN accepted his election without protest. However, the Americans 
considered Boutros-Ghali was already too old when he put himself up for 
election in 1991, and worse, too arrogant, too close to France, too preoccupied 
with the problems of the African continent.

With the end of the cold war Bush was consumed with his vision of a New World 
Order. He questioned whether Boutros-Ghali had the stamina and dynamism to 
steer the UN into uncharted territory. Bush backed Canada’s Brian Mulroney for 
the UN post, but did not want to offend Egypt by casting a veto against 
Boutros-Ghali.

The British too were lukewarm, and had another preferred candidate. But 
Boutros-Ghali, championed by the French president,François Mitterrand 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-francois-mitterrand-1323110.html>
, lobbied hard. He gave an undertaking, which he failed to keep, not to seek 
re-election after his first term. Late in November 1991, after a series of 
secret ballots in the security council, Boutros-Ghali emerged the victor with 
11 votes out of 15 in his favour, and of course no veto from any of the 
permanent members.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1a139c660b715c6131f534440dfa83820dcf4d%2F28_33_1861_1116%2F1861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a1a139c660b715c6131f534440dfa83820dcf4d%2F28_33_1861_1116%2F1861.jpg>
 Boutros-Ghali with Bill Clinton in 1996. Photograph: Reuters 
Boutros-Ghali was taller than photographs usually projected. He was an austere 
dresser, normally sporting well-cut suits and only rarely allowing himself any 
informality. A workaholic, to his wife’s disappointment he took little interest 
in New York’s social glitter. Nobody ever accused him of courting popularity. 
He gained the muted respect of senior aides, but reluctant to delegate, he 
often failed to inspire their loyalty. He was widely perceived as stiff, 
autocratic, cynical and uncaring. Yet among confidants he could be warm and 
funny and exercise an old world charm. He was an enthralling raconteur.

The Metropolitan Museum and the Museum of Modern Art in New York each lent 
several masterpieces for display in the elegant town-house occupied by the 
secretary general. But Boutros-Ghali kept pride of place for a series of 
Matisse drawings, a gift from one of the artist’s models. Many years ago, 
before his marriage to Leia he hastened to explain, he had had a relationship 
with her, and she gave him the drawings on his appointment.

Daunting challenges faced Boutros-Ghali after his installation in his lofty 
38th floor office in the UN’s headquarters. During the cold war, the UN’s 
potential had been stymied by the east-west divide and the frequent use of the 
Soviet veto. Now it was at last placed to fulfil its promise: to address global 
problems of the environment, of population, of women, of development and human 
rights, and above all, to help build an institutional framework for 
international peace and security. As a first step he decided to streamline the 
bulging UN secretariat, reducing the number of under secretaries and appointing 
high-calibre personnel. In deference to American complaints about inefficiency 
and over-spending, the US was invited to nominate the person to head the top 
budget and management job.

Boutros-Ghali’s aim was to set in motion a radical reform programme to 
relaunch the UN during its 50th anniversary in 1995. In this task he was 
encouraged by the first ever summit of the security council, which commissioned 
him to draw up a blueprint for the improvement of the “UN’s capacity for 
preventive diplomacy, for peacemaking and peacekeeping”.

In June 1992, he came up with his answer, the ambitious Agenda for Peace – 
easily the best reform proposals yet put forward for the UN. He envisaged a 
revamped organisation with enough teeth to stifle conflict and promote peace 
settlements. He called on member governments to create a standby peacekeeping 
army by establishing specially trained peacekeeping units for deployment at 
short notice under the UN command. They would have to be available both for 
peacekeeping duties and to underpin preventive diplomacy by interposing 
themselves between potential adversaries. The Agenda for Peace also insisted on 
new measures to end the UN’s chronic financial crisis, and on greater use of 
regional organisations for the implementation of security council mandates.

Member states professed to welcome Boutros-Ghali’s recommendations – but 
failed to act on them. They, and he, had other preoccupations. By mid-1992, the 
UN was already engulfed by peace-keeping operations in former Yugoslavia and 
Somalia, as well as in Cambodia. The security council, its members divided over 
the best course of action in Bosnia, was nevertheless adopting mandate after 
mandate, charging the secretary general with running the UN Protection Force in 
Bosnia and Croatia, with the enforcement of “safe havens” in Bosnia and 
supervision of sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro. He warned that the UN 
could only accomplish this if the membership provided him with enough properly 
trained and equipped forces, and were prepared to pay the costs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cdad935f2a848ca0f2cab6e0b754e3833b402ea%2F0_54_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boutros%20Boutros-Ghali%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fboutros-boutros-ghali-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cdad935f2a848ca0f2cab6e0b754e3833b402ea%2F0_54_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Boutros-Ghali, right, with Egyptian president Anwar Sadat, centre, flanked by 
the Israeli foreign minister Yitzhak Shamir, left, in 1980. Photograph: Bill 
Foley/AP 
Rashly, he also complained that Yugoslavia was “a rich man’s war” because the 
western powers were focusing too much on ex-Yugoslavia at the expense of 
Somalia, of Afghanistan and other trouble spots. Britain and the US responded 
with outspoken criticism of Boutros-Ghali’s UN stewardship. Matters were made 
still worse whenhe accused Britain of treating him like “a wog” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/profile-the-big-noise-at-the-un-boutros-boutros-ghali-the-secretary-general-has-solutions-to-the-1539268.html>
.

Relations with Britain were gradually improved; but with the US they steadily 
deteriorated. The Republicans depicted Boutros-Ghali as a sinister, 
power-hungry figure planning to impose world government.Senator Jesse Helms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/04/usa>, chairman of the Senate 
foreign relations committee, became vociferous in demanding Boutros-Ghali’s 
head. As US ambassador to the UN, Madeleine Albright (promoted to become 
secretary of state in the second Clinton administration) campaigned to bar 
Boutros-Ghali from a second term. She charged that he had failed to initiate 
vital administrative and budgetary reforms, and betrayed the security council’s 
trust.

All this persuaded Clinton that Boutros-Ghali’s candidacy was a thorn in his 
re-election campaign. Without forewarning, the secretary of state,Warren 
Christopher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/20/warren-christopher-obituary>, 
informed Boutros-Ghali that the US was prepared to veto his re-election. As 
consolation prize,the US was prepared to propose a one-year extension of his 
term, allowing him to remain until his 75th birthday.

Boutros-Ghali curtly dismissed Christopher’s proposition. He might have 
accepted two more years – enough to complete his reform programme. But a mere 
12 months were interpreted as an insult. Even though all other members of the 
security council initially cast votes inhis favour, the US refused to alter 
course. In mid-December, the others caved in. In his place the security council 
unanimously elected Kofi Annan.

Boutros-Ghali had been the sixth incumbent of the secretary general’s post, 
but only the first to serve a full term after the cold war. It was a unique 
opportunity to adapt the UN for a new world freed from the shackles of 
east-west confrontation. During his first couple of years he played a fairly 
sure hand. With his Agenda for Peace and his efforts to trim the bloated UN 
bureaucracy and improve coordination with the its specialised, autonomous 
organisations, Boutros-Ghali demonstrated his leadership qualities. But from 
the outset it was evident that he had a poor understanding of political 
realities and lacked the personality to lobby effectively, work with the media 
or to gain public understanding for his ideas.

Then came the conflicts in Bosnia and Somalia, with the UN blamed – often 
quite wrongly – for many of the ills that beset international efforts to secure 
peace. This set Boutros-Ghali at odds with the US, and to a lesser degree with 
Britain. They lost confidence in him, and he, feeling increasingly embattled, 
seemed to lose nerve in his ability to achieve reform, acting more and more on 
the defensive. His decision to run for a second term, breaking the undertaking 
that he would keep to on, provoked embarrassment among UN member countries 
friendly to him.

The powers of the secretary general will always be severely circumscribed by 
the policy dictates of the security council. Boutros-Ghali could never have met 
all the expectations that were vested in him. Even so, had he continued with 
his Agenda for Peace in the second half of his term of office, he might have 
gone down in the annals of the United Nations as a significant player in post 
cold war politics. As it is, he will more likely be remembered as a diplomat 
who began his tenure at the UN with impressive reforming zeal, but ended it, 
disillusioned and frustrated, and without the tangible achievements he had 
sought to round off a lifetime of public service.

He is survived by Leia.

• Boutros Boutros-Ghali, diplomat, born 14 November 1922; died 16 February 2016
 