
“By the time I got to New York/I was living like a king,” sings David Bowie on 
Lazarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/lazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video>
, his final single and alsothe title of the theatre work he co-wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/08/lazarus-review-david-bowie-jukebox-musical-off-broadway-new-york>
, which opened just last month.

Though the creative team behind him were Europeans – Bowie, Irish playwright 
Enda Walsh and the Belgian directorIvo van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ivo-van-hove> – it now seems significant 
that Bowie chose to stage his last live work in New York, just a 10-minute walk 
from his Lafayette Street apartment, and for the lead role to be taken by an 
American,Michael C Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/25/michael-c-hall-interview-cold-in-july>
.


A musical containing many of Bowie’s best-loved songs, Lazarus continues the 
story ofThe Man Who Fell to Earth, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/14/man-who-fell-to-earth-review> and 
Hall takes the role Bowie embodied in the film – Thomas Newton, an alien 
marooned on Earth, going mad on a diet of TV and booze. Bowie could be, at 
times, almost exaggeratedly English in his fey,Anthony Newley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/16/musicals-anthony-newley>
-influenced aspects, yet he was steeped in American culture, from the films of 
Stanley Kubrick to the music of Aretha Franklin.

The most famous scene in Cracked Actor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/27/david-bowie-screen-oddity>, the 
BBC documentary made about Bowie by Alan Yentob in 1974, shows the singer being 
driven through the desert near LA in a black limousine. “Since you’ve been in 
America, you seem to have picked up a lot of the idioms and themes of American 
music and American culture,” observes Yentob. Bowie, who looks thin, wired and, 
in his black fedora, incredibly glamorous, is drinking from a carton of milk 
and listening to Aretha Franklin’s (You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman on 
the car radio. Bowie says: “There’s a fly floating around in my milk. He’s a 
foreign body in it and he’s getting a lot of milk, and that’s kind of how I 
felt – a foreign body and I couldn’t help but soak it up.” Although Bowie goes 
on to say that he hated America when he first visited, soon enough the country 
“filled a vast expanse of my imagination … The imagination can dry up in 
England – it just supplied a need in me, America; it became a myth land for me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRYtGDZ0K2Bg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRYtGDZ0K2Bg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRYtGDZ0K2Bg&media=>
In fact, Bowie’s previous material indicated that America had been a mythical 
land for the suburban Bromley boy from a far earlier age. Take, for instance,
Did You Ever Have a Dream <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v1-MRrRljgo>, one of 
Bowie’s many unsuccessful attempts to break through in the late 60s – a 
cheerful mod-ish pop song that advises: “You can walk around in New York while 
you sleep in Penge.”

As with so many members of his generation, Bowie’s sensibility was changed 
forever by American rock’n’roll, which, after failed experiments in folk, mod 
and psychedelia, he revisited in the character of Ziggy Stardust.

Ziggy was a 50s rocker seen through the prism of the 70s, an American seen 
through the eyes of an Englishman. Alien and androgynous, Ziggy was partly 
based onVince Taylor <http://www.rockabilly.nl/artists/vtaylor.htm>, the 
Middlesex boy who moved to LA and returned as a leather-clad rock star, before 
falling prey to madness and drugs.

As we know from his songs about them on Hunky Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
, Bowie had other formative American influences: Bob Dylan and Andy Warhol. 
Dylan’s musical transformations and insatiable artistic restlessness set an 
example Bowie would follow, while Warhol’s multimedia explorations of American 
culture, from the underground to the mass media, also prefigured Bowie’s 
merging of high and low culture into something futuristic and sexy.

Queen Bitch on the same album is also a homage to the Velvet Underground, to 
whose music Bowie was introduced by his then manager. The Velvet Underground’s 
sinisterly thrilling, entirely unapologetic musical portraits of New York’s 
gay, drug-taking demimonde must have seemed overwhelming to a British suburban 
kid in the late 60s. However much London may have been swinging, it contained 
nothing quite like that.

David Bowie: five of his best North American concerts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/david-bowie-best-concerts-north-america>
Bowie first travelled to New York in 1970, and though he saw the Velvet 
Underground perform, it was with Doug Yule fronting them rather than Lou Reed 
(Bowie spoke to Yule for an hour thinking that he was Reed). Bowie would, of 
course, go on to galvanise Lou Reed’s post-Velvet Underground career by 
producing his albumTransformer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/22/transformer-lou-reed>. 
Detroit’s Iggy Pop, too, would have his life changed by Bowie’s influence. 
After meeting Iggy at Max’s Kansas City in New York in 1971, the following year 
Bowie produced The Stooges’ album Raw Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/11/iggy-and-the-stooges-raw-power>. 
It is hard to imagine punk rock on either side of the Atlantic without the 
influence of those two records – especially the second.

Yet as well as being a cultural and intellectual frontier, America was also 
scary. Bowie’s 1973 album Aladdin Sane, recorded between the two North American 
stints of the Ziggy Stardust tour, was conceived as “Ziggy goes to America”, 
the rock demigod encountering a place equal to his glamour and madness, from 
the riots of Panic in Detroit to the Hollywood decadence of Cracked Actor, and 
the sexual alienation of Drive-In Saturday, the title alone a play on the 
drive-in movie theatres which even now seem so glamorously foreign to Brits. 
This ambivalence towards America never seemed to leave Bowie, even after he’d 
moved here and married a Somali-American wife, Iman; as late as 1997 he 
released a single called I’m Afraid of Americans including disdainful lyrics 
like: “Johnny combs his hair/And Johnny wants pussy in cars”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPVrFIP0CMs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPVrFIP0CMs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPVrFIP0CMs&media=>
This ambivalence was returned by America itself. Bowie’s first US tour saw him 
play as Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars. Despite the fact that the 
band were fizzing with a savage energy – just listen to the sensational 1972 
bootlegLive from Santa Monica 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/11947-live-santa-monica-72/> – Bowie 
struggled to connect in America’s heartlands beyond New York. In San Francisco, 
Bowie said that the audiences didn’t want him because they had Sylvester, the 
pioneering genderqueer singer who supported him; elsewhere, Bowie almost 
certainly seemed too English, too queer, not authentic enough; someone playing 
with rock’n’roll rather than really meaning it. Nevertheless, Bowie persevered, 
moving to New York even while songs as imperishable as Rebel Rebel were missing 
the US top 40 (though scoring at home in the UK), and in 1974 embarking on his 
Diamond Dogs tour, a massively theatrical undertaking that traversed America 
without going to Europe at all.

It’s the Diamond Dogs tour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PMBGVGcT2fU> 
captured by Cracked Actor. Years ahead of its time, it saw each song presented 
theatrically, the musicians concealed in the wings (although Bowie said that 
they kept creeping on to the stage, literally unable to resist the spotlight) 
and with Bowie performing on a cherry-picker and on a giant hand, both of which 
kept breaking down. Yet after the tour got to New York, with two triumphant 
nights at Madison Square Garden, Bowie junked the expensive set (in today’s 
money it would have cost about $1m a night to stage) and the tour resumed as a 
slick soul revue, Bowie dressed in suits instead of the outre costumes of glam.

He had, of course, started recording the album that would be Young Americans. 
Recorded mainly at Sigma Sound in Philadelphia, the crucible of Thom Bell and 
Gamble and Huff’s exuberant but edgyPhilly soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/03/philadelphia-philly-soul-1970s> 
sound, it marked the start of Bowie’s working relationship with the guitarist 
Carlos Alomar and also introduced the world to Luther Vandross, who sang 
backing vocals and created the vocal arrangements. An audacious stylistic leap, 
the title track depicts a couple in a turbulent, post-Nixon USA riven by 
corruption and racial tension, yearning for authentic emotion in a country of 
fear and confusion: or, as Bowie unforgettably puts it, “Ain’t there one damn 
song that can make me break down and cry?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScVi_L817ec&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScVi_L817ec>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DScVi_L817ec&media=>
Yet despite its lyrical cynicism and musical complexity, this song resonated 
with the wider American public, and was Bowie’s first real hit, getting to No 
28, while the follow-up, Fame, co-written with John Lennon, another British 
hero residing inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, pushed 
Bowie into the stratosphere – it got to No 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 
September 1975.

The sight of America clutching Bowie to its bosom is a strange and fabulous 
one, summed up bya picture of Elizabeth Taylor feeding him a cigarette 
<http://vickielester.com/2013/02/06/an-unlikely-pair-bowie-and-taylor/> – the 
perfect mixture of Hollywood glamour and English pop perversity. Like the long 
line of British pop stars from Dusty Springfield to Adele, who have attempted 
their own version of American soul, Bowie was unabashedly embraced by the 
African American soul establishment, though Aretha Franklin signalled some 
ambivalence at that year’s Grammys when she said, accepting an award from a 
coked-up and tuxedo’d Bowie, “I’m so happy I could kiss David Bowie.” That year 
Bowieperformed on Soul Train <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Shnrnqx_wsY>, 
looking pencil-thin and impeccably cool, miming to Fame and Golden Years, 
another US top 10 hit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxUu-_F9vWnk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxUu-_F9vWnk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxUu-_F9vWnk&media=>
However, behind the nihilistic, numb facade of his new character, the Thin 
White Duke, Bowie was in trouble. In March 1975 he moved to Los Angeles, and 
over the course of the following year would be increasingly gripped by cocaine 
addiction, though in this state he managed to produce one of his very best 
albums, the glittering, malevolentStation to Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/16/station-station-david-bowie>
 – despite being so out of it he claims not to remember recording it.An 
interview with Cameron Crowe done over the course of that year for Rolling Stone
 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/ground-control-to-davy-jones-19760212>
gives a flavour of the time, Bowie living an itinerant lifestyle around spooky, 
decadent LA, culminating in a megalomaniacal rant: “I believe that rock’n’roll 
is dangerous. It could well bring about a very evil feeling in the West. I do 
want to rule the world.”

 Bowie was also getting unhealthily interested in the occult; in her memoir, 
his then wife Angie Bowie describes how he was convinced that the indoor pool 
in their house in Doheny Drive was possessed by the devil 
<https://dillsnapcogitation.wordpress.com/2010/06/10/david-bowies-cocaine-fueled-pool-exorcism/>
, which led to the pair of them attempting an exorcism. The water bubbled as if 
it was boiling, and afterwards the bottom of the pool was stained with a shape 
Angie describes as “a beast of the underworld; it reminded me of those twisted, 
tormented gargoyles screaming silently from the spires of medieval cathedrals.”

It’s no wonder that Bowie made his escape – to Berlin, where he made the 
famous trilogy of albums which are the lodestone of his creativity. He still 
kept a foothold in America, however. In 1979, he performed Boys Keep Swinging 
on Saturday Night Live with two of the heroes of New York’s avant garde music 
and theatre scenes, Klaus Nomi and Joey Arias, bringing them to the attention 
of mainstream America and showing that he still had an eye on the city’s 
underground.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzkv_david-bowie-klaus-nomi-tvc15-boys-k_music&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzkv_david-bowie-klaus-nomi-tvc15-boys-k_music>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fx7nzkv_david-bowie-klaus-nomi-tvc15-boys-k_music&media=>
By this stage, of course, New York was the centre of the music world, with 
disco, punk rock and hip-hop all blossoming as the city’s infrastructure 
collapsed. It was no surprise that Bowie returned to the city – he played The 
Elephant Man on Broadway in 1980 – but few would have predicted the musical 
direction he would choose. The catalyst was a chance meeting in 1982 with Chic 
guitarist and frontman Nile Rodgersin an after-hours club in New York called 
the Continental 
<https://www.yahoo.com/music/david-bowie-changed-my-life-nile-rodgers-180120507.html>
. In just 17 days, the pair recorded the album Let’s Dance, an irresistible 
melange of funk and pop that became Bowie’s most popular album ever, but saw 
him abdicate from his decade-long position on rock music’s cutting edge.

Since then, Bowie’s records have been less specifically associated with a 
place, not least because they became more sporadic. As the 90s saw him become 
more artistically hungry again, Bowie drew from American alternative culture, 
paying homage to the Pixies and striking up a fruitful artistic collaboration 
with Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails. It’s also worth rememberingNirvana’s 
spectral cover of The Man Who Sold the World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fregObNcHC8>, immortalised on their Unplugged 
Live in New York performance recorded five months before Kurt Cobain’s death, 
which indicated exactly how much alternative American music owed to Bowie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOy7vPwEtCw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOy7vPwEtCw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdOy7vPwEtCw&media=>
Then, in 2003, the records stopped and Bowie devoted himself to life in New 
York with Iman to bring up his daughter Alexandria, occasionally spotted in the 
streets of SoHo. When he suddenly came back three years ago, with The Next Day 
– recorded, like his final album Blackstar, in New York – it marked the 
beginning of an engagement with a new generation of American musicians. The 
Steve Reich-indebted mix James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem did for Love is Lost 
leaves us full of regret about the creative possibilities which might have been 
still to come.

Bowie is dead, but Lazarus continues to play, a tiny indication of the 
indelible impact he had on American culture, and on the world. From grunge to 
disco, from soul to avant garde cabaret, it’s hard to think of a musical genre 
he didn’t influence, and of few American musicans and music fans who won’t 
profoundly miss him.
 