
Martin T:son Engstroem has been coming to Verbier for 25 years, regular as 
clockwork – Swiss or otherwise. “I had been here skiing in the winter and in 
1991 decided with the kids to try it out in the summer. It was pretty boring. 
The restaurants and hotels were open, but there was no… animation,” he 
explains. “We went horseback riding, mini golf, swimming, hiking, outdoor 
activities but, in the long run, there wasn’t enough on offer.”

If you don’t ski and aren’t a millionaire, you may have scored Verbier off 
your go-to list. But it’s worth a visit now

And so the Stockholm-born Engstroem embarked on an endeavour that would do 
more than any other to transform Verbier’s summer fortunes. He started a
classical music festival <https://www.verbierfestival.com>. As you do.

This year, its 23rd, the Verbier Festival <https://www.verbierfestival.com> – 
which runs for two weeks straddling the end of July and the beginning of August 
– attracted 42,500 visitors to 57 concerts. While previous years featured 
talents as diverse asRufus Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rufus-wainwright>, Anoushka Shankar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/20/anoushka-shankar-alchemy-festival>
 andJulian Lloyd Webber <http://www.julianlloydwebber.com/>, this year’s 
festival had performances by the likes ofBryn Terfel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bryn-terfel>, the Gipsy Kings <> and Nina 
Stemme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/02/nina-stemme-brunnhilde-ring-cycle>
, the world’s most sought-after Wagner soprano. Yodelling, however apposite 
that would have been in the Alps, it was not.

For when the hills are alive with the sound of music, Verbier is buzzing. The 
festival includes 51 hours of free music events from 200 musicians crowd that 
add a welcome diversity that the town otherwise lacks. (Even with musicians 
from all over the world, Verbier can feel overwhelmingly white).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed792fa23619ef5f39a489b2762399f86427858%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ed792fa23619ef5f39a489b2762399f86427858%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Ring my bell: the Combat des Reines or cow fight – a traditional Swiss event. 
These are rare Herens cattle. Photograph: Getty Images 
If you don’t ski and aren’t a millionaire, you may have scored Verbier off 
your go-to list – it is most famous for its winter sports, when the price of 
accommodation sky-rockets. But the place is worth a visit now because of the 
variety of activities on offer, as well as the sheer beauty of the countryside 
that otherwise would be blanketed in snow.

“In winter, there’s skiing and snowboarding, and there’s drinking,” explains 
Adam Brook, who moved to Verbier from London after losing his job in the 2008 
crash. “But, before then, there’s so much more, from hiking to mountain 
biking.” He now runs Les Elfes, a kids’ camp. “On my day off last week, I drove 
out of town and up a mountain, had a great hike, and ended up watching some
Swiss cow fighting <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Pbb1rQW8qw>.” It is a 
tradition, apparently.

You don’t even need to drive to discover the lush, verdant joys of 
Switzerland’s second largest nature reserve: theHaut Val de Bagnes 
<http://www.bagnes.ch/en/Discover/Nature-Landscape/Haut-Val-de-Bagnes-protected-zone/>
. With eagles, ibex, marmosets and awesome views, the place is magical. There’s 
also theMauvoisin Dam <http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/mauvoisin-dam.html>, 
the eighth highest dam in the world and an amazing feat of engineering. It’s a 
must-see that ranks alongside theHoover Dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2014/apr/23/eyewitness-hoover-dam> 
in the US.

Sarina Papadopoulos, a 26-year-old from Liverpool who made Verbier her home 
eight years ago, prefers her pastimes altogether less geeky than dam-spotting. 
She advises taking the cable car up Mont Fort and stopping off for a picnic 
before you reach the glacier at 3,300m, where it feels like a cross between 
deep winter and another planet entirely. (From the top of Mont Fort, you can 
see Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn – one of the few spots from which you can see 
both.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc416d205a705add02b2dbb01d8cb5fec86e3cb%2F0_93_2392_1435%2F2392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc416d205a705add02b2dbb01d8cb5fec86e3cb%2F0_93_2392_1435%2F2392.jpg>
 Hitting the high notes: a fiddler on the roof, complete with piano and hound, 
as part of the Verbier Festival. Photograph: Getty Images 
After training as a skiing instructor, Papadopoulos now owns a business and is 
Brook’s fiancée. “They say that if you go three seasons here, you stay for 
ever,” Papadopoulos says. “And now Verbier is definitely home for us.”

Brook agrees: “Quietly and slowly we fell in love with the place – and each 
other – and that we’re bringing up our children here tells you how much we love 
it, whatever the season.”

Among their favourite hang-outs are The Shed <http://www.leshed.info/home/>, 
an upmarket burger restaurant where it’s best to eat before 6pm as they make 
their burgers fresh daily and often run out, andPub Mont Fort 
<https://www.facebook.com/pubmontfortverbier/?rf=200126343401305>. The latter 
hosts as close as Verbier gets to a cool crowd, and a great burger and chips is 
£20, which counts as relatively affordable here.

Which brings us to perhaps the biggest stumbling block that stands in 
Switzerland’s way to being a great tourist destination – the expense. It’s got 
even more expensive recently: following the Brexit vote, there’s practically 
parity between sterling and the Swiss Franc. So at the perfectly average Fer a 
Cheval restaurant, a meal for two – pizzas, green salads and a bottle of one of 
the cheaper wines – will set you back £80.Though if you’ve recently spent £7 on 
a ham and cheese baguette at Geneva Airport, this can suddenly seem like good 
value.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85a96a819a148a2a6e878185a0c03c094d197ea%2F0_84_2598_1559%2F2598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bringing%20the%20hills%20to%20life%20in%20Verbier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fverbier-switzerland-music-festivals-summer-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85a96a819a148a2a6e878185a0c03c094d197ea%2F0_84_2598_1559%2F2598.jpg>
 Musical passions: Bryn Terfel and Annette Dasch in Don Giovanni. 
But, says Papadopoulos, you can do Verbier on a budget – if you’re clever. 
Hiring a chalet with a group of friends, for example, cuts accommodation costs, 
andAirbnb <https://www.airbnb.com/> has more than 150 listings in the town. 
“While there’s no getting away from the high cost of living in Switzerland, 
it’s worth it.”

For Engstroem, the location trumps all other considerations. “It’s on a 
plateau, 1,500m up, and it faces south – so there are many more hours of 
sunshine here than in a village at the bottom of a valley. No one passes 
through Verbier by chance: people who come here really want to be here. It’s a 
destination. That makes it exceptionally special.”

And riding in the cable car, ascending to the heavens above hushed regiments 
of pine trees that line the mountainside, you understand Engstroem’s point. 
Verbier is special. But at that height, it isn’t the views that are the most 
striking thing – it’s the quiet. So by all means visit Verbier for the music – 
or the vistas, or the hiking or the biking, or indeed the raclette, which is 
delicious– but stay for the silence. It’s breathtaking.

Essentials

British Airways (britishairways.com <http://britishairways.com>) flights from 
Heathrow to Geneva start at £60 single. Hotels range from Hotel Les Touristes (
hoteltouristes-verbier.ch <http://hoteltouristes-verbier.ch>) at ₤100 per night 
for a double to the W (wverbier.com <http://wverbier.com>) at ₤350 a night for 
a double. Search airbnb.co.uk for more affordable options. For details of the 
Verbier Festival, go toverbierfestival.com <http://verbierfestival.com>.
 