
A British-Iranian woman being held in an Iranian prison has been released from 
solitary confinement, her husband has said.

Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, 37, was sentenced in September to five years in 
prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/british-iranian-woman-jailed-five-years-in-iran-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe>
 on secret charges related to a “soft overthrow” of the country’s government 
that were not revealed in open court.

She had been restricted from any contact with fellow inmates at Tehran’s Evin 
prison until a week ago, when she was moved to a general ward, Richard 
Ratcliffe, her husband, told the BBC.

However, Ratcliffe also criticised the lack of action from the British 
government, which has never publicly called for his wife to be released. 
Insisting his wife is innocent, he accused officials of allowing his family to 
be “caught up as a bargaining chip in international politics”.

The British government must act now to free Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe | Tulip 
Siddiq and Richard Ratcliffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/british-government-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-iran-jail-health-human-rights>
Ratcliffe told the BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that his wife was released 
from solitary confinement for the first time over the Christmas period and was 
now being held with about 30 other women.

She had been on hunger strike and had suicidal thoughts, he said, but the move 
had lifted her spirits. “She’s still sad and very low but there’s more fight in 
her again. I think having been moved so that she’s with other women makes a big 
difference,” Ratcliffe said.

Zaghari-Ratcliffe was arrested at Imam Khomeini airport on 3 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/british-government-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-iran-jail-health-human-rights>
 as she was trying to return to Britain after a holiday visiting family with 
her two-year-old daughter, Gabriella. The toddler is being looked after by her 
grandparents in Tehran.

Ratcliffe had originally kept silent about the plight of his wife and 
daughter, but eventually went public in an effort to put pressure on Iranian 
authorities – a move he credits with helping improve her situation. But he said 
he had been left “pretty cross” by the apparent lack of effort made by Britain 
to secure her release.

“I think they certainly could have stood up for Nazanin a bit more. They have 
never publicly called for her release, they never criticised her treatment,” 
Ratcliffe said. He has previously said he believesan unpaid £500m debt relating 
to an arms deal dating back to Iran’s pre-revolutionary era 
<https://www.change.org/p/free-nazanin-ratcliffe/u/18543449?tk=-3NqEMPbLo4KQsiBJXixR3J6p_MPNIlHem3Yug72p8k&utm_source=petition_update&utm_medium=email>
 may be a motive behind Iran’s actions.

“And I would stand by that,” he said. “It’s exactly what it’s about and 
obviously then our family being caught up as a bargaining chip in international 
politics is a pretty tough place to be.”

Ratcliffe said he expected his wife’s appeal to be heard on Wednesday, and 
hoped the new hearing would reveal some detail of the charges she faced. In the 
meantime, he is trying to get a visa to enter the country and visit his 
daughter, who celebrated her second birthday in June without her mother or 
father.
 