
A British-Iranian woman being held in Tehran’s notorious Evin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/british-iranian-woman-jailed-five-years-in-iran-nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe>
 prison has appeared in an appeals court, using the last legal opportunity to 
challenge her five-year jail sentence.


Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a project manager with the Thomson Reuters 
Foundation, the news agency’s charitable arm, was found guilty in September on 
unspecific charges relating to national security.


On Wednesday, she attended a court session in the Iranian capital that lasted 
up to three hours, her husband told the Guardian. Few details have emerged 
about the hearing but a verdict is expected to be announced next week.


The exact reason why the 38-year-old has been convicted in Iran is still 
unclear, but the Revolutionary Guards, which arrested her at the airport in 
April while she was about to return to the UK after a family visit, haveaccused 
her of fomenting a “soft overthrow” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/iran-holds-web-designer-in-solitary-confinement>
 of the Islamic republic.

“What I know is that the appeals happened and went on for three hours, the 
family weren’t able to go but Nazanin was there and her lawyer was there,” said 
Richard Ratcliffe. “There were lots of revolutionary guards there from both 
Kerman’s branch and the Tehran branch.”


After her arrest at the airport, Zaghari-Ratcliffe was initially transferred 
to the southern Iranian city of Kerman, where she was held for several weeks in 
an unknown location before being taken to Evin prison. Her then 22-month-old 
daughter, Gabriella, who was accompanying Zaghari-Ratcliffe during her visit to
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, has been placed in the care of 
her mother’s Iranian family.


“The lawyer sounded quite calm on the phone, Nazanin’s family are not calm,” 
Ratcliffe said. “It’s very hard to read what any of it would mean but [with] 
lots of people [having] turned up from Kerman, I guess it means that there 
would be a thorough review of what the case is – three hours is as long as the 
original trial. But in terms of whether it means it is a positive thing or a 
negative, it’s hard to read at this point. I’m certainly not hopeful, but am 
trying not to be too bleak.”

According to Amnesty International <https://www.amnesty.org/en/>, Iranian 
authorities have hinted that Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s arrest is connected to the 
2014 imprisonment of several employees of an Iranian technology news website. 
They were givenlengthy prison terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/20/iran-technology-news-website-staff-jailed-bbc>
 for participating in a BBC journalism training course. Zaghari-Ratcliffe was a 
project assistant at the BBC’sMedia Action <http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/>, 
the broadcaster’s international development charity, in 2008-09.

Ratcliffe has claimed his wife is being held to be used as a pawn by the 
Iranian authorities in exchange for their political deals with the UK. Iranian 
officials have denied this but Iran has arrested other dual nationals in recent 
months in a string of cases that activists say demonstrate a pattern in 
Tehran’s behaviour.

UK woman jailed in Iran at 'breaking point' after starting hunger strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-british-iranian-woman-iran-hunger-strike>
Last year, Iran notably released the Washington Post journalist Jason Rezaian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/03/jason-rezaian-iran-lawsuit-washington-post>
 alongside a number of other Iranian-Americans, swapping them with a number of 
Iranian nationals held in US jails for crimes including violating economic 
sanctions.


Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s prolonged detention has brought much embarrassment for 
president Hassan Rouhani’s administration, which hasbeen trying to mend 
relations with the west 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/hassan-rouhani-in-first-europe-visit-by-iranian-president-in-16-years>
. But under the Iranian constitution, Rouhani’s hands are tied with respect to 
judiciary affairs.

Rouhani and the judiciary chief are at odds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/nov/28/iranian-judicial-authorities-attempt-arrest-of-mp-mahmoud-sadeghi>
 and in recent days, the president has been involved in a public spat with the 
head of the judiciary over other issues, including the financial transparency 
of the institutions under their control.


Ratcliffe said he last spoke to his wife on Christmas Day. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, 
who was previouslydescribed as being at breaking point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-british-iranian-woman-iran-hunger-strike>
, has recently been removed from solitary confinement and taken to Evin’s 
women’s wards alongside other political prisoners including journalist Reyhaneh 
Tabatabaei and leading activist Narges Mohammadi, and a number ofBaha’i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2012/mar/30/iran-bahai-leaders-days-imprisonment>
 women held because of their faith.


“She’s just had a family visit on that day and she had a birthday cake because 
her birthday is on Boxing Day, and she was also just being told that she was 
going to be moved to general cells, so her mood was a little bit more 
positive,” he recalled. “There was some fight in her.”

 