
There’s nothing wrong with being a bureaucrat. So you’re a tiny cog in a 
machine made of abstract rules, paperwork, and the broken dreams of those who 
do not understand either. So what? You’re just misunderstood. Without you, 
nobody would know where to file their TPS reports. Nobody would even knowwhat a 
TPS report is <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TPS_report>.

But writers understand. As species of personality go, the writer and the 
bureaucrat are closely related: they’re deskbound creatures who enjoy the 
comfortable certainties of Microsoft Office and dazzling us with wordcraft, be 
it small-print legalese or the impenetrable prose of literary fiction. Of 
course, Kafka understood the true power of the bureaucrat because he was one – 
and thus portrayed bureaucracy as a looming, all-powerful presence. The 
wonderful Douglas Adams imagined an entire planet faking the apocalypse just to 
get all its middle managers to evacuate inThe Restaurant at the End of the 
Universe, 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/restaurant-at-the-end-of-the-universe.html> 
while in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld, hell itself is one endless system of 
bureaucratic red tape, where doomed souls are made to sit through every last 
codicil and sub-paragraph of the rules pertaining to Health and Safety – all 
40,000 volumes of them.

Today’s fantasy authors are more empathetic to their managerial cousins. Paul 
Tsabo, the hero ofFlex by Ferrett Steinmetz 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/flex-317184.html>, is a “Bureaucramancer”: 
able to wield the mystical skills of office administration and harness the 
powers of human resources magic. In all of his books, Steinmetz imagines a 
world where all our geeky obsessions can lead to magic: a world filled with 
Videogamemancers, Origamimancers and Culinomancers. Steinmetz twists our 
traditional view of magic from something, the thing which surely stands apart 
from all things mundane, to a thing that stems instead from all that is most 
mundane.

What is Rule 34, you ask. Let Charles Stross explain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/11/rule-34-charles-stross-damien-walter>
Charles Stross <http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/fiction/faq.html>
’s Laundry Files novels have been blending the occult and the bureaucratic for 
more than a decade now, with the seventh and most recent volumeThe Nightmare 
Stacks <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nightmare-stacks.html> published this 
summer. Bob Howard works for the Laundry: a top-secret section of the British 
security service dedicated to dealing with occult threats to the nation. Unlike 
James Bond, Bob spends as much time fighting the terrors of public-sector rules 
and regulations as he does the horrors of Stross’s beautifully imagined 
Lovecraftian universe.

The Watchmaker of Filigree Street by Natasha Pulley 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/watchmaker-of-filigree-street.html> charts 
the humble life of Thaniel Steepleton in the vast bureaucracies of Victorian 
London. But Thaniel has the one thing that even the most lowly clerk secretly 
dreams of … power! His insignificant job as a telegraphist at the Home Office 
gives Thaniel information that can save the nation. Pulley perfectly captures 
the essence of the “portal fantasy”, where a most ordinary person is swept into 
a fabulous world. Show me a bureaucrat who does not secretly lust for that.

Why does the fantasy genre find inspiration in all things mundane? Perhaps, as 
Charles Stross argues, it’s because magic provides the perfect metaphor for 
modern technological life, in which we “might not have starships, but there’s a 
Palantír in every pocket” – an argument I certainly have a lot of time for. Or 
perhaps it’s because we’re all trapped in a Kafkaesque bureaucratic nightmare 
of our own making, and we’re desperate to escape it …
 