
When is a news story just a news story? And when does it become a “debate”? 
It’s a difficult question to answer, particularly for harried researchers and 
editors on tight budgets, and tighter deadlines. But the answer matters, 
because it dictates how any given topic is framed for an audience and, 
consequently, the way in which the public engages with it.

When I first heard Donald Trump’s taped comments 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 that surfaced last week, I was most struck by the complacency with which he 
boasted about being able to commit sexual assault because of his status as a 
powerful, famous man. It was a hierarchy with which many women are familiar. 
So, too, are we horribly accustomed to the “harmless talk” excuse he tried to 
use in the aftermath of the tapes’ release.

But, this time, the excuses didn’t seem to be working. Even men famous for 
their own misogyny, men who had turned a blind eye while Trump made sexist, 
racist and Islamophobic comments in the past, seemed to have decided that his
words were indefensible 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/outrage-over-the-trump-tape-is-more-dangerous-and-repugnant_us_57fac20fe4b0d786aa52b6b7?>
.

So it was something of a surprise to be asked to take part in a conversation 
on Radio 4’s Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07x2zcr#play> 
that ended up responding to the tapes by asking whether men need space to 
discuss women in sexual terms, and whether certain types of “compliments” are 
acceptable. Those are valid questions in their own right. But to frame a 
discussion of Trump’s remarks in those terms risks downplaying and mitigating 
the very serious nature of what he said, playing right into the hands of his own
“locker room” banter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/oct/10/trumps-banter-what-is-locker-room-chat-really-like>
 excuse. Indeed, it even required the presenter to ask at one point that we set 
aside the most serious element of Trump’s words in order to focus on the rest:

“If you put that on one side though, the specific part of what he was taped 
saying that was obviously to you about assault, and you take the rest of it, is 
the rest of it acceptable?” I asked the presenter which bits he meant by “the 
rest of it” – perhaps Trump’s description of a woman as a bitch, or his graphic 
and misogynistic description of her breasts? He responded: “So it’s all the 
same, any description that objectifies a woman is an assault?”

Later he said: “The serious issue … is whether or not in 2016 it’s acceptable 
for men together to talk about women in a sexual manner without feeling guilty 
about it.” It boiled down to the question: calling a woman sexy – acceptable or 
not? I would argue that perhaps that wasn’t, in fact, the serious issue at hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fhow-not-to-discuss-trump-tapes-calling-woman-sexy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a5e96e242d7f7acb624553410fb98cbae5cc67%2F0_0_2560_1068%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Calling%20a%20woman%20sexy%3A%20acceptable%20or%20not%3F%20%E2%80%93%20how%20not%20to%20discuss%20the%20Trump%20tapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fhow-not-to-discuss-trump-tapes-calling-woman-sexy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Calling%20a%20woman%20sexy%3A%20acceptable%20or%20not%3F%20%E2%80%93%20how%20not%20to%20discuss%20the%20Trump%20tapes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fhow-not-to-discuss-trump-tapes-calling-woman-sexy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83a5e96e242d7f7acb624553410fb98cbae5cc67%2F0_0_2560_1068%2F2560.jpg>
 Laura Bates on the Today programme on Tuesday. Photograph: BBC 
Comments as shocking as Trump’s require a less sympathetic media response, 
especially in light of thereality of sexual violence  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
– 400,000 women are sexually assaulted in the UK annually, with one in five 
women experiencing some form of sexual offence in their lifetime. And, in a 
country wheresexual violence is enormously underreported 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
 andvictim-blaming is rife 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/11409210/Drunk-or-flirty-rape-victims-often-to-blame-says-survey.html>
, the framing of debates such as these not only sends a strong message to 
survivors about how their experiences are viewed, but also risks inadvertently 
validating those who hold views like Trump’s. Broadcasters have a power over 
public opinion, and presenting something as “up for debate” leads listeners to 
believe there are two equally valid sides to the story. Sometimes there aren’t.

This is not to suggest that debate isn’t healthy, or that difficult topics 
shouldn’t be openly tackled. Of course they should. But this can be done in a 
way that doesn’t imply equal validation of those inciting and opposing 
something like sexual assault. There are certain serious events and issues 
simply reported as news stories, or condemned in the media without the need for 
a “devil’s advocate” argument. The question is, who decides what is “beyond 
debate”? It often feels as if issues around sexism and sexual violence are 
presented as even, two-sided questions even when what is discussed is extreme. 
And sometimes “debate” is artificially manufactured for the sake of creating a 
more controversial news item.

In August, the Trades Union Congress and the Everyday Sexism Project released 
a piece of research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/half-of-women-uk-have-been-sexually-harassed-at-work-tuc-study-everyday-sexism>
 revealing that more than half of all women have experienced sexual harassment 
in the workplace. About one in eight women reported unwanted sexual touching or 
attempts to kiss them – which could be defined as sexual assault under UK law.

But the day the research came out, I was repeatedly asked to go on radio or 
television shows to “debate” whether women were making a fuss about nothing, or 
whether the harassment and assault the report described was just “office 
banter”. These discussions had little to do with the facts of the report, and 
risked undermining its message, giving audiences an inaccurate impression of 
the news story. Usually, I refuse these invitations and try to explain why I 
think it is problematic to frame the conversation in this way, but that 
invariably results in the “debate” going ahead anyway while I listen in 
frustration at home, so this time I raised the issue when it arose on the 
programme instead.

Such misinformation is similarly perpetuated by news outlets that frame issues 
such as “Is it OK to grab a woman on the street? 
<https://twitter.com/BBCNewsbeat/status/781496508613099530>” as questions, when 
the law already tells us the answer 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/42/contents>. This isn’t a problem 
restricted to any one programme or media outlet – and it is complicated by the 
real need for balanced reporting. But there are many ways to achieve balance, 
such as debating the different ways to tackle a problem, which don’t have to 
involve undermining the problem itself. And there are times when, at victims’ 
expense, it feels as if “balance” is a thinly veiled euphemism for controversy, 
clickbait or catfight.
 