
One of Britain’s best loved comedians, Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/caroline-aherne>, has died at the age 
of 52 following a battle with lung cancer.

Aherne, whose influential and innovative comic creations included The Royle 
Family, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/18/liam-williams-caroline-aherne-comedy-hero-royle-family>
The Fast Show and her spoof chat host Mrs Merton, died at her home in Greater 
Manchester on Saturday.

Naturally funny, cross-generational: Steve Coogan on Caroline Aherne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/02/naturally-funny-cross-generational-steve-coogan-on-caroline-aherne>
Having previously been treated for bladder and eye cancer, the award-winning 
actress and television writer revealed two years ago that she had been 
diagnosed with lung cancer.

Earlier this year Aherne - a smoker who also struggled with alcoholism – 
became the voice behind the UK government’s One You health campaign to persuade 
people to cut down on cigarettes and alcohol.

Although she had largely withdrawn from the public eye, she was also the 
narrator of the Channel 4 reality seriesGogglebox.

Aherne rose to prominence in 1994 in the guise of her created character Mrs 
Merton, who presided over the Bafta-winning mock chatshow,The Mrs Merton Show, 
during which celebrities found themselves on the receiving end of outrageous 
faux naive questions.

Caroline Aherne battling lung cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/13/caroline-aherne-battling-lung-cancer-manchester>
Perhaps Aherne’s most memorable moment on the show was when she asked 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lj-9lSEBBm0> Debbie McGee, the partner of 
magician Paul Daniels: “So, what first attracted you to the millionaire Paul 
Daniels?” Another celebrated punchline involved Aherne’s elderly alter ego 
asking feminist Germaine Greer: “You were a right old slapper in the 70s, 
weren’t you?”

Aherne had struggled with health problems for years and in June 2014 appeared 
in Manchester at the launch of the Macmillan Cancer Improvement Partnership, a 
£3.4m scheme to coordinate cancer care in the city. During the event, she said 
a sense of humour had helped her in her battle against the disease. That year 
her brother Patrick revealed “the form of lung cancer that she is suffering 
from is genetic and linked to the retinoblastoma she had as a baby”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D78r3Sr2jTIk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D78r3Sr2jTIk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D78r3Sr2jTIk&media=>
 Mrs Merton interviews George Best. 
Born in London to Irish parents, Aherne considered Manchester her home. She 
lived there from the age of two, and in her career used the city as the base 
for her groundbreaking sitcom The Royle Family, which she wrote and starred in. 
The show won two Baftas in 2000, and another in 2007 for best situation comedy. 
Within moments of her death being confirmed, tributes flooded social media. 
Actress Sue Johnston, who played the Royle mother, Barbara, said: “I am 
devastated at her passing and I am numb with grief.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftributes-pour-in-for-caroline-aherne-who-has-died%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28a8d69b93bdf0351c37a716b3fd2ce7dc82bd2%2F19_52_1364_1704%2F1364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caroline%20Aherne%3A%20tributes%20pour%20in%20for%20creative%20force%20behind%20The%20Royle%20Family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftributes-pour-in-for-caroline-aherne-who-has-died%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caroline%20Aherne%3A%20tributes%20pour%20in%20for%20creative%20force%20behind%20The%20Royle%20Family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Ftributes-pour-in-for-caroline-aherne-who-has-died%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe28a8d69b93bdf0351c37a716b3fd2ce7dc82bd2%2F19_52_1364_1704%2F1364.jpg>
 The Royle Family, 1998, starring from left, Caroline Aherne, Craig Cash, Ricky 
Tomlinson, Ralf Little and Sue Johnston. Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Ralf Little, who starred alongside Aherne as her brother Antony in the sitcom, 
wrote on Twitter: “Sorry for silence – I just … don’t know what to say. What a 
sad, sad day. We’ve lost another one of our best. A character. A legend. A 
boss. A sister, real and (for me) fake. A boss. A writer. An actor. A genius. A 
friend. Big, big heart. Goodbye. X.”

Omid Djalili described her as “such a funny and talented woman” while David 
Baddiel said news of her death had “done me in”.

Aherne’s influence was undimmed. In an interview last year, one of a new 
generation of comedians, Liam Williams, described her as “one of the funniest, 
smartest, coolest figures of the last golden age of British comedy”.

On Saturday her publicist, Neil Reading, said her family had requested privacy 
“at this very sad time”. A statement added: “Caroline Aherne has sadly passed 
away, after a brave battle with cancer. The Bafta award-winning writer and 
comedy actor died earlier today at her home in Timperley, Greater Manchester.”

Aherne was married to Peter Hook, of the influential Manchester rock band New 
Order, from 1994 until 1997 and later started a romance with television 
researcher Matt Bowers who was caught on camera fighting with Hook at a party 
in Manchester. Although they split up, Aherne was devastated when Bowers died 
of cancer at the age of 28.

During the 1990s Aherne is reported to have suffered from depression and 
alcoholism, and in 1998 attempted suicide and was treated at the Priory. 
Following a drug overdose, she said she was an alcoholic and said that she had 
not been aware of the harm she was doing to herself.

In an attempt to avoid the glare of publicity, she moved to Australia, 
continuing to write there. Within a year she had producedDossa and Joe – a 
sitcom about an Australian couple who don’t do very much. She returned to the 
UK in 2002.

Recently she said her illnesses had squashed her desire to work, and last year 
she made an appearance on screen in a brief cameo for Sky 1’sAfter Hours.
 