
Picture the scene: a male celebrity is exiting an event when suddenly someone 
runs up to him, dodging his security team, and attempts to grab his wallet from 
his pocket. Reacting instinctively, the celebrity puts up a hand to stop the 
attacker, perhaps pushing them away or to the ground. Headlines relay the 
shocking event, many praising the “action hero” for his real-life reflexes.

Yet while our sympathies would likely be firmly aligned with a famous man 
facing an attempted robbery, the reaction seems to be very different when 
female celebrities experience what amounts to attempted assault.


While exiting a fashion show in Milan last week, model Gigi Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gigi-hadid> obligingly smiled and posed 
for selfies with a crowd of fans. Suddenly, without warning, a man approached 
Hadid from behind and grabbed her, physically lifting her off her feet and into 
the air. Hadid swung her elbow backwards, forcing the man to release her and 
run away.


It must have been a terrifying moment. But instead of focusing on Hadid’s 
wellbeing or praising her for her quick instincts, the international media had 
another angle in mind. “NOT MODEL BEHAVIOUR,” blaredone disapproving headline 
<https://twitter.com/CarolineHirons/status/778971592969912320>. Another said 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3801777/Furious-Gigi-Hadid-LASHES-man-tries-pick-leaves-Milan-fashion-show.html>
: “furious supermodel … lashes out”, emphasising that she had to be “held back 
by security”, as if she had reacted with undue aggression. While some 
publications came to her defence, the general consensus was that a highly 
strung and violent Hadid had overreacted. When Marie Claire ran an article 
praising Hadid for her actions, the magazine’sTwitter account 
<https://twitter.com/marieclaire/status/778957920046346240> shared it with the 
tagline “unpopular opinion”. Multiple media outlets suggested that the 
perpetrator,Vitalii Sediuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/oct/02/vitalii-sediuk-comic-genius-grabbing-famous-women-kim-kardashian-brad-pitt>
, was a “fan” of Hadid’s, subtly implying that she owed him some debt of 
gratitude.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcelebrity-consent-attacks-women-pranks-gigi-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F505bcd27f40abc5a071068b87f01a657584b8531%2F23_104_1890_2896%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrity%20consent%3A%20stop%20branding%20attacks%20on%20women%20as%20'pranks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcelebrity-consent-attacks-women-pranks-gigi-hadid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrity%20consent%3A%20stop%20branding%20attacks%20on%20women%20as%20%27pranks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fcelebrity-consent-attacks-women-pranks-gigi-hadid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F505bcd27f40abc5a071068b87f01a657584b8531%2F23_104_1890_2896%2F1890.jpg>
 Sediuk goes to ambush Kim Kardashian in Paris. Photograph: Marc Piasecki/GC 
Images 
He is in fact a repeat offender who deliberately targets celebrities. Before 
the story had died down, Sediuk struck again, this time ambushingKim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> as she entered a 
restaurant in Paris. Sediuk lunged at Kardashian,attempting to grab her leg and 
kiss her bottom 
<http://news.sky.com/story/serial-prankster-vitalii-sediuk-ambushes-kim-kardashian-in-paris-10597786>
, before being pulled to the floor by a security guard.

Yet again, the media responded bafflingly. BBC Newsbeat chose to turn the 
issue into a “debate”,tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/BBCNewsbeat/status/781496508613099530>: “Is it OK to grab 
a woman on the street, even if it’s for a ‘prank’?” The linked article presents 
the issue as a dilemma, giving space to Sediuk’s excuses and “explanations”, 
includinghis claim 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/37503354/vitalii-sediuk-says-kim-kardashian-prank-was-over-her-butt-implants>
 that he was “protesting Kim for using fake butt implants”. Other outlets have 
also described Sediuk’s actions as a form of protest, and described them as
pranks and 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3801777/Furious-Gigi-Hadid-LASHES-man-tries-pick-leaves-Milan-fashion-show.html>
stunts 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3801777/Furious-Gigi-Hadid-LASHES-man-tries-pick-leaves-Milan-fashion-show.html>
.

These aren’t jokes, they are scary and unacceptable attacks. It isn’t a 
coincidence that many of them deliberately target women, nor that the “pranks” 
are often of a sexual nature and in several cases would clearlyconstitute a 
form of assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/02/how-video-pranksters-are-cashing-in-on-the-abuse-and-harassment-of-women>
. In another example, Sediuk famously ambushed actor America Ferrera, trying to 
crawl underneath her dress on the red carpet at Cannes. This time, he was 
described in media reports as a“pest” and “unwanted guest” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2630720/America-Ferrera-ambushed-serial-red-carpet-pest-attempts-climb-dress-Cannes-Film-Festival.htm>
.

While the media reaction must be upsetting for the individuals involved (Hadid 
herselfresponded <https://twitter.com/GiGiHadid/status/778929637543915520> by 
pointing out that she had every right to defend herself), it also has a 
trickle-down effect for the rest of us. Such attitudes underline the message 
that women should be gracious and grateful for any male attention, even when it 
takes an aggressive and unwanted form. They cast men who approach and manhandle 
women in the street as cheeky chappies and women who object as angry harpies. 
In short, they only exacerbate the street harassment thousands of womenalready 
face on a daily basis 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/news/234/85-of-younger-women-in-uk-have-been-sexually-harassed-in-public>
. Whether its on the red carpet or the pavement, it’s time we started to 
recognise these assaults for what they really are.
 