
Upon his death the playwright Ben Johnson declared that his friend, William 
Shakespeare, was not “of an age, but for all time”, a phrase which was 
inscribed in the First Folio of the Bard’s works. You need look no further than 
Michael Fassbender’s PTSD-plagued Macbeth; Russel T Davies’ recent joyous and 
subversive retelling of A Midsummer Night’s Dream; The Lion King or 10 Things I 
Hate About You to garner a sense of the playwright from Stratford-upon-Avon’s 
longevity. On the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death, Malorie Blackman 
has published Chasing the Stars.

This is, first and foremost, an epic love story, set against that most epic of 
backdrops, outer space. Malorie Blackman populates this with worlds such as 
‘Barros 5’, ‘Mendela Prime’ and stranger entities including the ‘Zandari ion 
storm’, which would not be out of place a long time ago and in a certain galaxy 
far, far away. A reference on the very first page – “Pressing a make-believe 
switch to activate my imaginary lightsabre” (apparently in the year ‘AD 2164’, 
when spaceships can tunnel vast intergalactic distances through ‘wormholes’, 
the Star Wars franchise is still a going concern) – introduces a whole host of 
sly nods and winks. There is even a ‘Resistance’, fighting an apparently doomed 
struggle against a powerful ‘Authority’, which is largely played out in the 
story’s background. You get the sense Malorie Blackman enjoyed smuggling these 
in; as a reader I certainly enjoyed being on the look-out for them.

As the novel opens Vee and her brother, Aidan, are the only survivors after an 
incurable virus wreaked havoc on their Earth research vessel, leaving their 
parents dead. They are trying to reach Earth, their grandparents, the familiar, 
when Vee as acting captain makes a split-second decision to rescue human 
settlers who are being hounded out of Barros 5 by the terrifying, xenophobic, 
Mazon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fchasing-the-stars-malorie-blackman-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e1bf2ca5ac2d852c828f0a10561d58d0050fb4%2F0_0_899_1382%2F899.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chasing%20the%20Stars%20by%20Malorie%20Blackman%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fchasing-the-stars-malorie-blackman-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chasing%20the%20Stars%20by%20Malorie%20Blackman%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fchasing-the-stars-malorie-blackman-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e1bf2ca5ac2d852c828f0a10561d58d0050fb4%2F0_0_899_1382%2F899.jpg>
Initially, it seems as though the Mazon will be a generic, uniformly ruthless 
alien race, but a much more nuanced picture is gradually teased out (Malorie 
Blackman couldn’t even leave the Daleks unremittingly evil in her 2013 Doctor 
Who short story, so perhaps this isn’t too surprising). The consequences of 
this split-second decision, as well as a number of other haunting, past and 
future decisions, all of which are subject (what human decisions aren’t?) to 
pressure, emotion and prejudices, unravel over the course of the novel.

Vee meets and falls in love almost instantaneously with Nathan, one of the 
survivors from Barros 5. Chasing the Stars is told entirely from the first 
person perspective (which can, inevitably, undermine moments of high tension, 
as it is being told in the past tense) which shuttles rapidly back and forth 
between Vee and Nathan. The rapidity of the shift in perspectives gives the 
novel an unrelenting pace – even in the tenderest moments between the young 
lovers, it is hard to forget the atmosphere of threats surrounding them – and 
allows Malorie Blackman to deploy dramatic irony to maximum effect, as Vee and 
Nathan desperately try to second-guess each other’s innermost feelings, hopes 
and suspicions, to which the reader gains instant access.

The essential storyline derives from Othello; anyone familiar with at least a 
hazy outline of the play’s plot knows Vee and Nathan’s love story will be 
rocky, to say the least. The invisible barrier dividing Vee and Nathan, given 
less limelight than in Noughts and Crosses, is that Nathan is a “drone”, an 
under-caste of menial workers whom the Authority deploys to do the most 
physically and emotionally degrading work (robots being comparatively expensive 
to manufacture). Inequality remains a pertinent theme, but in this novel 
Malorie Blackman sharpens the focus on the ‘undeserving poor’ and the desperate 
rather than race. One cannot escape ‘drone’ status without desperately 
scrabbling enough ‘credits’ – a Sisyphean task.

This gives Chasing the Stars a timely resonance. I found it hard to read the 
passages where the Mazon indiscriminately fire on the settlers – men, women, 
children, doctors – without thinking of harrowing images from the Syrian civil 
war. Malorie Blackman does her utmost to keep this current, moral crisis in the 
uppermost of the reader’s mind, repeatedly referring to the survivors as 
“refugees” (which is of course what they are). At a time when the very word 
refugee has all too often become something disturbing, this simple, accurate 
use of the noun can feel (sadly) shocking and provocative. I was reminded of 
the way John Steinbeck repeats the phrase “the migrant people” in The Grapes of 
Wrath so that what starts as an accurate term descends into the fear and 
loathing-drenched phrase used by people who are terrified by what the migrants 
represent. Chasing the Stars poses a number of moral dilemmas for Vee which 
make human and manageable the vast questions echoing in the minds of Europe’s 
leaders, but also its citizens and civil society right, now. The reaction of 
Aidan, Vee’s brother, also suggests that a fear of refugees can be due to 
prejudice but also a sense of alienation for which someone is not entirely 
responsible. Chasing the Stars offers no easy solutions.

The loss of humanity is a theme pervading the novel. When Nathan first 
introduces himself as a drone, Vee dismisses it as a joke: ‘They’re just 
sub-intellect labourers doing all the…work that’s too filthy or hazardous for 
normal people to do’. Later, another character appeals to Vee’s ‘love of 
literature and films and music and art, all the things that separate us from 
beasts and drones’.

The theme is also developed in more unexpected, yet still poignant, ways. From 
the beginning of the novel, when there is an unexpected, disorientating, shift 
in time, the plot of Chasing the Stars never leaves the reader feeling entirely 
secure. Both Vee and Nathan are unreliable first-person narrators who withhold 
crucial information, allowing the reader to share other characters’ sense of 
shock when revelations break through. Like some of the deep ethical, 
intellectual and even metaphysical questions posed by the novel (intelligent 
science-fiction fits cosily into the adrenaline-doused battle sequences and 
emergency ship manoeuvres) these twists occasionally seem to come too late in 
the novel to unleash their full impact. Furthermore, the ‘mystery’ element can 
seem somewhat bolted on, and its resolution is a tad obvious if you know the 
story of Othello.

Nevertheless, this is a thoughtful, entertaining novel built around a 
heartrending love story. (Its more ‘soppy’ moments are always humorously 
undercut by Nathan and Vee’s own awareness of the cheesiness of their 
relationship – hinted at by the title itself.) There is a sense of timelessness 
about it, but a searing relevance for 2016. The novel does make demands of the 
reader, and the questions it poses return to nag. The very casualness with 
which Malorie Blackman introduces a multi-racial crew of characters and 
same-sex relationships is refreshing and offers hope they do not have to be 
tackled in ‘issues’ novels – surely a sign of progress in itself. Chasing the 
Stars does deliver a conclusion which is both satisfying in terms of the plot 
and emotionally; it feels like a proper ending, although I’m sure if Malorie 
Blackman wanted to return to this universe she’s left herself plenty of scope 
to do so.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/heart-break-girl.html>  