
Christopher Steele, a former British intelligence officer, has been identified 
in reports as the author of a dossier that claims Russia collated a file of
compromising information on Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
.

Steele, 52, who runs London-based Orbis Business Intelligence, was widely 
named as having compiled the dossier, which contains unverified allegations 
that Russian security officials havematerial on Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
 including lurid sex videos that could be used to blackmail him.

Intelligence sources vouch for credibility of Russia dossier author
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
Steele, a former MI6 officer, is one of two directors of Orbis, according to 
UK company records, along with Christopher Burrows, 58.

The Telegraph said Steele left his home on Wednesday morning as it became 
clear his name would become public and that he feared a backlash from Moscow.

The other director, Burrows, refused to “confirm or deny” that Orbis had 
produced the report.


According to the Wall Street Journal, Steele repeatedly declined requests for 
interviews in recent weeks, with an intermediary telling the newspaper the 
subject was “too hot”.


A neighbour said he was away for a few days, the Wall Street Journal said.

Orbis describes itself as being able to “provide strategic advice, mount 
intelligence-gathering operations and conduct complex, often cross-border 
investigations”.

 Its website says it was founded in 2009 by former British intelligence 
professionals and utilises a “global network” of experts and “prominent 
business figures”.


The firm, based in Grosvenor Gardens, close to London’s upmarket Belgravia 
area, says it “draws on extensive experience at boardroom level in government, 
multilateral diplomacy and international business to develop bespoke solutions 
for clients”.


“Our tailored approach means the directors are closely involved in the 
execution and detail of every project, supported by an in-house team of 
experienced investigators and professional intelligence analysts,” it says.

Burrows formerly worked for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office as a 
counsellor, according to his LinedkIn profile, with postings to Brussels and 
Delhi in the early 2000s.

The dossier has been circulating in Washington for some time as media 
organisations, uncertain of its credibility, held back from publication. After 
it finally became public Donald Trump gave a press conference on Wednesday 
where hehit out over its release and angrily denied the contents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Reports on Tuesday said the Orbis report was given to US intelligence in 2016 
and, after being investigated, formed the basis of a two-page addendum to the 
US intelligence chiefs’ presentation last Friday to Trump of a classified 
report on Russian interference in the elections.

The report attributed to Steele says Russia’s intelligence services, directed 
by President Vladimir Putin, sought to support Trump and hurt his rival Hillary 
Clinton in the 2016 US presidential election.


It said the Trump campaign maintained regular contact with Russian officials 
and operatives, and that Moscow held compromising materials on Trump that could 
be used to pressure him.

None of the content has been substantiated but US intelligence, through its 
own investigation, has also concluded that Putin ordered a campaign to support 
Trump against Clinton.

From MI6 to the ‘dirty dossier’

The Reuters news agency, citing former British intelligence officials, said 
Steele spent years working for MI6 in Russia and Paris, and at the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office in London.


After leaving MI6 he supplied the FBI with information on corruption at Fifa, 
international soccer’s governing body. In the summer of 2010, according to 
emails cited by Reuters, members of a New York-based FBI squad assigned to 
investigate “Eurasian Organised Crime” met Steele in London to discuss the Fifa 
allegations. His company assisted football governing bodies in their 
investigations, Reuters said.

In the US presidential campaign Steele was initially hired by a Washington DC 
political research firm, to investigate Trump on behalf of Republicans opposed 
to his candidacy. He was kept on the assignment after Trump won the nomination 
and his information was circulated to Democratic party figures and members of 
the media, Reuters said.

Eventually he began dealing with the FBI regarding the dossier, sources told 
Reuters, but he became frustrated at the bureau’s slow progress and cut off 
contact. The material then circulated in political and media circles before 
ultimately making its way into the public domain.

With the Press Association and Agence France-Presse
 