 Syrian and Israeli delegations finally embarked yesterday on detailed 
negotiations aimed at reaching a lasting peace settlement, after two days of 
posturing and brinkmanship, and anxious mediation by the US president, Bill 
Clinton.
Joint committees of experts sat down with US arbitrators at a conference 
centre in Shepherdstown, West Virginia, to discuss the issues that have divided 
the two countries since Israel's creation in 1948: territory, security, water 
and the normalisation of relations.

Both Israeli and Syrian officials agreed that the committee meetings, the 
first such technical discussions for four years, marked an important milestone 
for the negotiations.

The talks had been bogged down for their first two days by procedural 
problems. Syria, led by the foreign minister, Farouk al-Shara'a, wanted to 
begin by discussing the return of the Golan Heights, captured byIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in 1967.

Israel wanted to start with its chief area of concern, security, and in 
particular how Syria intends to stop attacks across the Lebanese border by the 
guerrilla movement Hizbullah, which is backed by both Syria and Iran.

President Clinton, who is determined to make the talks succeed, proposed a 
compromise, suggesting that security and territory be discussed simultaneously. 
The committees assigned to deal with border demarcation and water rights 
immediately held brief informal talks.

White House officials are reportedly making exploratory contacts with the 
American congress to pave the way for a massive US aid package which will be 
needed to make any peace agreement stick. The Syrian government needs economic 
aid, while the Israeli defence ministry has presented a shopping list of 
military hardware it wants to make up for the loss of the natural defensive 
barrier of the Golan.

James Rubin, the US state department spokesman, said Israeli newspaper reports 
that the list added up to $17bn (£10.4bn) and included cruise missiles were 
"wildly premature". But he did not deny them outright.

Mr Rubin said that the three-way meeting chaired by Mr Clinton on Tuesday had 
been "a very constructive and productive discussion that put the process 
clearly on track. But he added it was unlikely that an accord could be reached 
by the end of the week. White House aides said Mr Clinton had set aside the 
weekend and at least some of next week to allow him to join the talks if 
necessary.

The Israeli army pulled out of six bases and camps in the northern and 
southern West Bank yesterday as part of the transfer of 3% of the land to 
Palestinian civil rule.

The withdrawal was to be one of the last before Israel and the Palestinians 
draw their final borders in a peace treaty in September. Once the pull-outs are 
completed, the Palestinians will have full or partial control over 40% of the 
West Bank.

Today, the Palestinians are due to receive full control over an additional 2% 
of the land.
 