
Four white men arrived to give evidence to a group of influential MPs 
yesterday. The subject? The under-representation of women in parliament, of 
course. EvenJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, 
one the aforementioned witnesses - alongside Lib Dem leader Tim Farron, 
Conservative party chair Sir Patrick McLoughlin and SNP’s parliamentary group 
leaderAngus Robertson - pointed out it did seem “slightly odd”.

The riposte from the chairman of the women and equalities committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/womenandequalities> Maria Miller came before he’d 
even finished the sentence: “With respect,” she said sharply, “That’s your 
fault, not ours.”

And while after more than an hour and a half of grilling all four party 
representatives agreed on the need for gender parity in the house of commons, 
exactly when that might happen remains a moot point.

Questioned by the select committee Jeremy Corbyn said he was determined that 
half of allLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs following 
the next election would be women.


Labour – which has 43% female MPs – risks losing 23 sitting MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/13/corbyn-johnson-and-osborne-among-mps-hit-by-electoral-shakeup>
 as a result of the 2018 Boundary Commission review, while more than 20 female 
Labour MPs could face deselection, according to the committee.

.


“I fully understand the danger of the situation,” said Corbyn. “We are 
determined to achieve 50% representation and our national executive will be 
considering this urgently at my request […] It may well be we intervene to 
ensure there are all-women shortlists or, in some cases, make sure women are 
added to shortlists to ensure there is that choice there.”


Corbyn said the party would take steps to achieve “50% of women’s 
representation in the next parliament”, leaving open the possibility that 
all-female shortlists will be put in place in safer seats.

A Labour spokesman later confirmed the party’s support for all-female 
shortlists, but said decisions on how to achieve parity in the party would have 
to be resolved at the national executive committee.

Corbyn indicated that Labour could introduce all-female shortlists for mayoral 
elections – in 18 Labour mayoral selections, only two have been women, said 
Gavin Shuker, the Labour MP for Luton South.


“It is not acceptable to have the vast majority of our mayoral candidates 
being men when we want to achieve the same as we want to achieve in 
parliamentary representation,” he said. He had “sympathy” with the idea of 
further positive discrimination -such as ensuring places on shortlists - for 
black and ethnic minority and LGBT representatives with current equality laws, 
he said.

Whoever he is, Labour’s next leader must set right the party’s women problem | 
Rachel Holmes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/24/labour-party-leader-women-shadow-cabinet>





BBC Parliament (@BBCParliament) 
Jeremy Corbyn tells @Commonswomequ <https://twitter.com/Commonswomequ> it's 
"strange" to interview just men for inquiry.@Maria_MillerMP 
<https://twitter.com/Maria_MillerMP> tells him "that's your fault, not ours" 
pic.twitter.com/npQTPW0FCj <https://t.co/npQTPW0FCj>
 <https://twitter.com/BBCParliament/status/786137975394476032> October 12, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/BBCParliament/status/786137975394476032> 
The fact that all party representatives giving evidence at the select 
committee were male “said it all”, said Jess Philips, Labour MP for Birmingham 
Yardley, who accused both parties of resting on their laurels. “Labour have 
done much more but rely on their body count in parliament, while the 
conservatives rely on the prime minister. Both have a cultural problem [with 
women] and both have found a tick box to try and disprove they have a problem.”

Sir Patrick McLoughlin, the Conservative party chair, said the Tories had made 
progress, going from having only 17 female MPs in 2005 to 68 in the last 
election. It was “not enough but a good move forward”, he said. Currently, 20% 
of Conservative MPs are women.


Challenged as to why only two out of ten directors at Tory HQ were women and 
only one of the officers of the influential 1922 committee, McLoughlin said: 
“If we are awarding points I hope we get a bonus for the prime minister. It is 
sometimes that people don’t want to put themselves forward and we can’t force 
them to do that.

“We don’t impose all-women shortlists because we do try and give local 
associations as much freedom as possible in the way they go about selecting 
their candidates before a general election.”


There are no female Labour mayoral candidates. It’s a leadership problem | 
Jess Phillips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/labour-mayoral-candidates-men-feminism-corbyn>
Imposing restricted shortlists on Conservative associations “would possibly 
risk a resentment which would not help that candidate once they were selected”, 
he said.


Conservative historian Tim Bale said that sentiment was in keeping with party 
membership. “There is a feeling that it is tokensim and anti-meritocratic,” he 
said. “In spite of the evidence that shows it’s basically the only thing that 
can work.”

Anne Jenkin 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/baroness-jenkin-of-kennington/4229>
, who founded the conservativeWomen2Win <https://www.women2win.com/> network 
with Theresa May, said the Tory party had made “significant ground” on women’s 
representation at the last election. “I would prefer not to have [all-women 
shortlists], that’s just not the conservative way - and most women candidates 
don’t like it, they don’t feel women have got there on their own merit.” But 
she added: “you have to make sure you become ever vigilant to make sure you 
don’t go backwards.”

The house of commons is 71% male, with 459 men and 191 women. More than 50 
other countries have proportionally more women in their Parliaments than the 
UK, according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union 
<http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm>, while according to a 2011 report 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/publication-download/sex-and-power-2011>
 from theEquality and Human Rights Commission 
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en>, it would take 70 years - or 14 
general elections - to achieve an equal number of women MPs.

“The fact that there are 140% more men that women in the House of Commons is 
not only a democratic deficit it is a democratic disgrace,” said Frances Scott, 
founder of50:50 parliament <http://www.5050parliament.co.uk/>, which has a 
petition calling for gender parity 
<https://www.change.org/p/there-are-140-more-men-than-women-in-the-commons-we-want-more-women-at-westminster-and-better-gender-balance-in-parliament-5050parliament>
. “If the diverse majority that are women are having such difficulty breaking 
through many minorities must and do face insurmountable hurdles too. Addressing 
this issue is the key to making Parliament more representative and diverse 
generally.”

Tim Farron, the leader of the Lib Dems, and Angus Robertson, the SNP’s 
parliamentary group leader told the all-party select committee that all-female 
shortlists were necessary to change the status quo. Farron said the Lib Dems’ 
record in parliament had been “lamentable”, but added the party had passed a 
motion in the spring in favour of all-female shortlists, all-disabled 
shortlists and had committed to ensuring places on shortlists for black, 
minority ethnic and LGBT candidates.

Robertson said he was “proud to be the leader of the gayest parliamentary 
party”, and added that when the SNP decided to tackle the lack of 
representation of women in its ranks it found role models and encouragement 
were not enough. “There needs to be a mechanism,” he said.




“It’s impossible to explain to the electorate why there have been fewer than 
500 female MPs in 90 years,” said conservative MP Maria Miller, chairman of the 
women and equalities committee. “It’s inexcusable and we can no longer say 
things we change by osmosis, something has to be done.”

• This article was amended on 13 October 2016 to remove an incorrect paragraph 
that was meant to have been removed during the editing process.
 