
TELL HIM HE’S PELLÈ

It’s not easy being beautiful. The constant, superficial attention. The glare 
of so many flashbulbs. The number of moisturising products that must be applied 
thrice-daily in order to maintain such a flawless visage. The feeling of guilt 
that everyone cannot be so visually wonderful. The sense of disgust at all 
these hideous trolls scampering around your feet. Not easy at all.

Of course, The Fiver wouldn’t have a clue about any of that, as we try to cope 
with our own lack of aesthetic pleasantness by hiding under a tarp and belching 
out Tin gas. Graziano Pellè would, though. The former Southampton striker, who 
paused for about two seconds before wisely taking the massive sacks of coin on 
offer from Chinese side Shandong Luneng in the summer, is almost cartoonishly 
handsome, a man who would challenge darts player Steve Beaton’s title as “not 
A-donis, he’s THE Donis” (c. Sid Wadell). Perhaps his inner turmoil at the 
problems created by his lovely face is the reason behind his behaviour with the 
Italy squad this week. For Pellè has been cordially invited to a reception at 
the Do One ambassador’s residence by coach Giampiero Ventura, shooed off home 
afterItaly’s 1-1 draw with Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/world-cup-qualifying-roundup-de-rossi-draw-italy-spain-iceland-finland>
 on Thursday. His crime? Committing the dreadful faux pas ofneglecting to shake 
Ventura’s hand after he was substituted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/graziano-pelle-italy-sent-home-shake-hands-coach>
, and will thus miss Sunday’s game in Macedonia.

Graziano Pellè sent home by Italy after refusing to shake coach’s hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/graziano-pelle-italy-sent-home-shake-hands-coach>
“To be part of the national team implies the sharing of common values and 
behaviour conforming to the wearing of the blue shirt, beginning with respect 
towards the management, players and fans,” droned an Italian FA statement. What 
a naughty boy he’s been. “These things happen,” Ventura shrugged, his 
strictness on the handshake issue leading to speculation that he’s actually 
Ailsa from Home and Away in a mask. “Pellè was angry. I think this was not so 
much because of the substitution as the way we had played up to that point.” 
Which begs the question of why the rest of the team weren’t also sent home if 
they were so bobbins, but we digress.

For his part, Pellè was contrite, apologising in the only manner appropriate 
in these digital times – on InstaChat. “Unfortunately, it’s happened again, 
I’ve messed things up,” he wept, accompanying his mea culpa with a picture of 
the Italy side, just to absolutely prove he’s a team player. “It was 
unacceptable behaviour, firstly against the coach and also, towards my 
team-mates … Like any great mistake, I accept the consequences … I must offer 
my apologies from my heart to everyone.” For Pellè’s part, he was offered some 
advice. “He’s a great guy and in the cold light of day, I’m sure he will 
realise he was wrong,” cheered Gigi Buffon. “If he apologises for his 
behaviour, we will be happy to embrace him.” With a promise like that, it’s no 
wonder he said sorry.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Paul Doyle in the coveted 7.45pm BST slot for hot clockwatch coverage of 
the night’s World Cup 2018 qualifiers, including France 3-1 Bulgaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“It’s lamentable that certain police officers didn’t collaborate to ensure 
compliance with a judicial order. If they say this man earns so much, why 
doesn’t he pay monthly to his daughter” – Paul Marin, a legal suit representing 
the mother of Enner Valencia’s five-year-old daughter, takes aim at the 
Ecuadorian bizzies who failed to detain Valencia over alleged unpaid child 
maintenanceafter half-heartedly chasing him from the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/enner-valencia-everton-chased-police>
 during the 3-0 win over Chile despite the striker being prone on a golf cart 
having suffered some kind of knack. Valencia’s legal bod later claimed the 
matter had been settled.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fenner-valencia-chased-police-after-being-substituted-in-world-cup-qualifier-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Enner%20Valencia%20chased%20by%20police%20at%20World%20Cup%20qualifier%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fenner-valencia-chased-police-after-being-substituted-in-world-cup-qualifier-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Enner%20Valencia%20chased%20by%20police%20at%20World%20Cup%20qualifier%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fenner-valencia-chased-police-after-being-substituted-in-world-cup-qualifier-video&media=>
Football player gets substituted not quite as dull as it seems. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/07/enner-valencia-chased-police-after-being-substituted-in-world-cup-qualifier-video>
FIVER LETTERS


“I understand Dan Markham’s feelings about the state of the (English) national 
game (yesterday’s Fiver letters). Assuming his perspective is based on the 
Jacksonville Jaguars against the Indianapolis Colts, and considering their one 
win each four games into the season, one wonders how our perspectives might 
change if, say, Middlesbrough played an exhibition game against Swansea City 
here in San Francisco” – Stephen Alexander.


“Poor Andy Marriott (yesterday’s letters). One can only feel his angst at 
relocating to that empty space grandly named ‘the London Stadium’. Perhaps Lady 
Brady could follow the much-lamented Delia Smith, grab a mic and give a 
half-time talk to all those bubble-blowers? I wonder what the reaction might 
be?” – James Johnson.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is… Rollover.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

It’s Football Weekly Extra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/oct/06/coventry-in-crisis-and-bob-bradley-swans-into-south-wales-football-weekly-extra>
! Join AC Jimbo and a packed pod in near-earth orbit.

NEXT GENERATION 2016

Sixty, count ‘em, of the world’s best young footballers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/05/next-generation-2016-60-of-the-best-young-talents-in-world-football>
 who, lucky for them, weren’t even born when B*Witched were in their pomp. And 
this is our check-in with the classes of2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/oct/07/next-generation-2015-50-of-the-best-young-talents-in-world-football>
 and2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/ng-interactive/2014/oct/14/next-generation-2014-40-of-the-best-young-talents-in-world-football>
.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

China boss Gao Hongbo is hanging to his job by a thread thinner than Weird 
Uncle Fiver’s last remaining hairafter Syria’s 1-0 World Cup qualifying win in 
Xi’an 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/07/anger-on-streets-in-china-as-football-team-suffer-shock-defeat-by-war-torn-syria>
. “Our football players played hard,” sniffed suit Yu Hongchen. “But the result 
is unacceptable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-graziano-pelle-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55bd30ad282f6893f6d626d15892ab8b3e005ef2%2F0_0_3000_2004%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Cordially%20invited%20to%20a%20reception%20at%20the%20Do%20One%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20residence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-graziano-pelle-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Cordially%20invited%20to%20a%20reception%20at%20the%20Do%20One%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20residence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-graziano-pelle-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55bd30ad282f6893f6d626d15892ab8b3e005ef2%2F0_0_3000_2004%2F3000.jpg>
 A China crisis, earlier. Photograph: China Stringer Network/Reuters 
Asante Kotoko technical director Malik Jabir says he has been misquoted over 
claims that Ghanaian players struggle over 90 minutes because of excessive $ex. 
“What I said was about my personal life experience not about Ghanaian 
footballers,” he tooted.

England’s World Cup qualifying hopes have been dealt a … hang on, let’s start 
again. Phil Jagielka has been ruled out of England’s World Cup qualifiersdue to 
thigh-gah! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/phil-jagielka-england-squad-thigh-injury>

Goal-machine Joe Allen is set to miss Wales’s 2-1 victory over Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/wales-austria-2018-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
 on Sunday after suffering a nasty bit of hamstring-twang during their draw in 
Austria.

The FA’s eager inquiry bods have been told to wait until the fuzz have 
finished watching blurred videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/fa-wait-police-evidence-sam-allardyce>
 that may or may not reveal corruption in football before they start their own 
investigation.

Robbie Brady is likely to miss Republic O’Ireland’s 1-1 draw with Moldova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/republic-of-ireland-georgia-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 on Sunday despite a positive assessment of the head-knack he suffered in the 
win over Georgia by Martin O’Neill: “The doctors are pleased with him … and I 
hope he will be fine. He’s as brave as a lion, great courage obviously and a 
fine player.”

Bastian Schweinsteiger may be given the chance to switch roles as chief 
stalker of Old Trafford’s dusty corridors to chief stalker of some dusty pitch 
or other in the USA! USA!! USA!!! “We would welcome Bastian with open arms. He 
would be a leader for our many young players,” cooed Major League Soccerball 
chief suit Don Garber.

And Zorya Luhansk chief suit Sergei Rafailov has very possibly emerged from 
under a spotless rock to share with the world these enlightened views about 
Manchester. “I did not like the city. It was very dirty,”he parped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/zorya-ceo-manchester-dirty-city-men-kissing>
. “Near the hotel, which was, incidentally, in the city centre, there were 
homeless people sleeping on the pavement at night. I went out for a walk in the 
evening and went a little further from the centre. It was even worse there. 
Masses of drunk people. It was bizarre for me to see men walking down the 
street and kissing. I did not like it.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Boom! In the space of a year Jürgen Klopp has bear-hugged his Liverpool 
players into a bunch of believers,cheers Andy Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/07/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-energy-giver>
. There’s alsothis snazzy video of his year at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/07/jurgen-klopp-first-year-at-liverpool-in-review-video>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjurgen-klopp-first-year-at-liverpool-in-review-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp's%20first%20year%20at%20Liverpool%20in%20review%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjurgen-klopp-first-year-at-liverpool-in-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%27s%20first%20year%20at%20Liverpool%20in%20review%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjurgen-klopp-first-year-at-liverpool-in-review-video&media=>
Here you go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/oct/07/jurgen-klopp-first-year-at-liverpool-in-review-video>
. 
Is Andros Townsend actually any good? If he is then he’d better start showing 
it for England,reckons Jacob Steinberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/andros-townsend-england-crystal-palace-gareth-southgate>
.

New York City FC are off to Mexico for a really special date that, 
disappointingly, wasn’t arranged through Soulmates.Luis Miguel Echegaray has 
more. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/07/new-york-city-fc-mls-necaxa-mexico>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

PEP TALK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/pep-guardiola-exclusive-interview-johan-cruyff-unique>
 