 Supported by  <https://www.ingdirect.com.au/> About this content <> 
Last year the World Economic Forum (WEF) coined the phrase the fourth 
industrial revolution 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond>
 for the sweeping changes technology is set to make to our world. This 
revolution will irrevocably alter our fundamental concept of work, and our 
ability to trade time and skill for money. This is not something we’re waiting 
for though; it’s happening right now.

McKinsey and Company recently reported 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/four-fundamentals-of-workplace-automation>
 that of the 2,000 work activities they examined, 45% “could be automated using 
already demonstrated technology.”

The WEF also identified 
<http://reports.weforum.org/future-of-jobs-2016/women-and-work-in-the-fourth-industrial-revolution/>
 that women would be more affected by the coming changes than men.

“In absolute terms, men will face nearly 4m job losses and 1.4m gains, 
approximately three jobs lost for every job gained, whereas women will face 3m 
job losses and only 0.55m gains, more than five jobs lost for every job gained.”

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, however, are not a 
homogenous group, and the changes will not be spread evenly across the female 
population.

Basic income for all: a 500-year-old idea whose time has come?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/basic-income-for-all-a-500-year-old-idea-whose-time-has-come>
For women with transferable skills, the fourth industrial revolution could be 
a boon, as technology and dismantling of the traditional eight-hour office day 
makes flexible work, new careers and start-up opportunities more accessible. 
Furthermore, those skills traditionally associated with women, including caring 
and empathising, may become more highly prized in the workplace, which could be 
a plus for female workers.

The nature of work for women is also hopefully going to undergo a seismic 
shift, as the momentum of the feminist movement continues to push women further 
into what were once male-dominated industries and positions of leadership.

Those women already in disadvantaged groups, however – older women, women 
lacking education or formal qualifications, rural women and immigrant women – 
could have a very difference experience. Their existing disadvantages will be 
compounded by diminishing opportunities for unskilled work, and higher barriers 
to upskilling.

Additionally, many female-dominated industries are going to be altered by the 
increasing automation of what used to be labour intensive fields, like sales, 
nursing and administration.

Yet coming to grips with the future of work for women requires a clear 
understanding of the current barriers facing working women.

Changing women’s work

Current ABS data shows the highest ratio of women’s employment is in clerical 
and administrative jobs (76% female), followed by community and personal 
services (68% female) and sales workers (64% female).

Despite the high numbers of women employed in those areas, more than 
three-quarters of women in these jobs earn less than the average salary for 
their sector.

The reasons for this are split evenly between women being predominantly 
employed on a part-time or casual basis, and men taking most of the senior (and 
therefore better paid) positions. In addition to skewing the pay rates, these 
factors also mean women are more exposed to job losses when low-skilled and 
repetitive tasks are automated.

That WEF report 
<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_GenderGap.pdf> predicts 
two-thirds of the expected 7.1 million job losses over the next five years will 
occur in office and administration areas, as self-serve checkouts, online 
sales, and automated bookkeeping processes become more widespread

Following this trend, it seems likely that working women with low or limited 
skill sets are at immediate risk of long-term unemployment, with few options 
for retraining or alternative career paths.

A good example of this is the fast food industry, which employs 
<http://rapstc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/Fast-Food-Environmental-Scan-2015.pdf>
 nearly 200,ooo people in Australia – 55% of whom are women and 65% of those 
women are employed on a casual basis.

In 2012 Momentum Machines built a robot 
<http://www.xconomy.com/san-francisco/2012/06/12/hamburgers-coffee-guitars-and-cars-a-report-from-lemnos-labs/>
 that can make, wrap and bag 360 individually customised hamburgers in an hour. 
As Momentum Machines co-founder Alexandros Vardakostas toldXconomy:  
<http://www.xconomy.com/san-francisco/2012/06/12/hamburgers-coffee-guitars-and-cars-a-report-from-lemnos-labs/>
“Our device isn’t meant to make employees more efficient. It’s meant to 
completely obviate them.”

Technology to replace low-skilled or repetitive jobs is not something we’re 
waiting for; it has existed for years. All we’re waiting for is the rate of 
uptake to increase. And while there might be more job opportunities in 
designing new hamburger-making robots, it seems unlikely that many women 
employed to sling burgers are going to make an easy jump to robotics 
engineering.

At the other end of the scale, 57% of professional workers are women. While 
there is still a significant gender skew in senior and full time roles, jobs 
requiring specific skills and creative thinking are, at least in the short 
term, less vulnerable to automation.

40% of Australia’s medical practitioners are women, but they are 
under-represented in positions of seniority

In the longer term, however, even highly skilled professional jobs are at risk.

Five years ago, IBM’s supercomputer, Watson, played a game of Jeopardy against 
two humanchampions 
<http://www.pcworld.com/article/219900/IBM_Watson_Wins_Jeopardy_Humans_Rally_Back.html>
, and won. At the time, it wasn’t much more than a novelty, perhaps a hint of 
things to come, but not a serious threat to human creativity and employment.

Since then, Watson has grown up, studied medicine and is now a faster and more 
accurate 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/ibms-watson-cracks-medical-mystery-life-saving-diagnosis-patient-who-baffled-doctors-1574963>
 diagnostician than human doctors. Unlike humans, Watson does not ever get 
tired or bored, it does not make mistakes of overconfidence or bias, it doesn’t 
specialise in only one field, thereby missing symptoms outside its area of 
speciality, and it is always up to date with the latest medical discoveries.

Additionally, while it may have been hugely expensive to develop, it is cheap 
to replicate and can operate anywhere in the world, without ever needing food 
or sleep. No human, regardless of talent and knowledge, can match this.

The moral challenge of military robots arises when we delegate fighting wars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/02/the-moral-challenge-of-military-robots-arises-when-we-delegate-fighting-wars>
Around 40% of Australia’s medical practitioners are women, but they are 
dramatically under-represented in positions ofseniority 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/5/11/e009384/T1.expansion.html> and areas of 
highspeciality 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4102.0Main+Features20April+2013>
 and ground-breaking research. As with fast food workers, this makes female 
doctors vulnerable to job losses due to automation. It may take longer for 
computers like Watson to permeate the medical field than it will for robots to 
take over fast food kitchens, but, without significant structural change in the 
medical profession, the end result will be the same.

The same vulnerabilities exist in accountancy, the law, and even creative 
industries, like advertising and media.

For instance, Watson is not just a doctor, it’s also a lawyer. American law 
firmBaker & Hostetler <https://www.bakerlaw.com/> recently announced it would 
be using Watson’s technology in its bankruptcy practice, which currently 
employs around 50 lawyers. Another artificial intelligence system recently
predicted 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/10/this-ai-judge-is-predicting-the-results-of-human-rights-cases>
 the outcome in human rights cases just by reading the case text. While 
researchers were quick to say that AI wasn’t replacing judges any time soon, 
this sounded more like reassurance for nervous judges than a statement of 
ability.

Last year Associated Press said 
<https://blog.ap.org/announcements/automated-earnings-stories-multiply> it was 
“automatically generating more than 3,000 stories about US corporate earnings 
each quarter, a tenfold increase over what AP reporters and editors created 
previously”. Sportsreporting 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/7/4/12092768/ap-robot-journalists-automated-insights-minor-league-baseball>
 is also a growth area for automated journalism.

Earlier this year McCann Japan’s “Artificial Intelligence Creative Director” 
designed an ad 
<http://www.campaignasia.com/article/ai-creative-director-produces-first-ad-battles-human-for-supremacy/426624>
 for Clorets breath mints, in competition with a human. Consumers narrowly 
preferred the human ad, and much of the actual design work was done by humans, 
but creative AI is still in its infancy. The potential for replacing human 
work, particularly inanalytical targeting 
<http://www.momentumww.com/news/2016/11/13/marketing-dive-how-artificial-intelligence-is-transforming-marketing>
, is endless.

While the number of women in these professions is slowly increasing, senior 
and full-time positions are dominated by men. And again, this makes women more 
vulnerable to inevitable job losses.

Stem as a growth area 

Seventy-five per cent of the fastest growing jobs in Australia require 
science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem) knowledge and skills. 
Australia is not producing enough workers with these skills, which makes this a 
potential area of opportunity for women.

Women are historically absent 
<http://www.chiefscientist.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/Chapter-2-Demographics.pdf>
 from Stem fields. Roughly 30% of Stem graduates are women, less than 30% of 
Stem jobs are held by women and the gender pay gap in the Stem fields is also 
around 30%.

But the pressure to increase the number of women in Stem fields is growing, 
withgovernment programs 
<http://www.officeforwomen.sa.gov.au/womens-policy/STEM/girls-in-stem> and 
industry initiatives 
<http://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/science/role-models-launch-5050-initiative-women-science>
 gaining strong support.

And this appears to be having some effect 
<http://www.chiefscientist.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/Chapter-2-Demographics.pdf>
. The number of women with Stem qualifications increased by 23% between 2006 
and 2011, whereas the number of men only increased by 14%.

Programs designed to encourage young women to enter traditionally male areas 
like coding, engineering and robotics are also growing.Rail Girls Summer of Code
 <http://railsgirlssummerofcode.org/about/> pays a stipend to women and girls 
contributing to open source code. Code the Future is offering programs for
primary aged girls 
<http://www.codefuture.org/projects/206-accepting-for-2017:-girls-can-wulagi-primary-school>
 to learn and innovate with technology, whileTech Girls Movement 
<http://www.techgirlsmovement.org/who-are-we/> is dedicated to supporting girls 
interested in Stem careers. Grassroots organisations like these are also 
supported by federal governmentprograms 
<http://www.innovation.gov.au/page/opportunities-women-stem> designed to 
support greater diversity in Stem.

Entrepreneurs

Another area of positivity is in small businesses and start-ups. While women 
are still only around 34% of all business operators in Australia, this number 
has increased by 46% over the last 20 years, one of the few areas of 
significant growth for women. And this trend is continuing, with 44% of people 
who started a small business in 2013 were women.

Encouragingly, this group has strong representation 
<https://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/profile_of_australian_women_in_business.pdf>
 of migrant women, women with disabilities, rural women and older women, the 
groups most likely to be affected by job losses in the fourth industrial 
revolution.

A common barrier for entrepreneurs is capital costs, but this is an area where 
technological advances could make a significant difference to women. The 
ability to create and sell products to a global market, which would once have 
required expensive shop fronts and significant marketing costs, can now be as 
simple as setting up an Etsy store and a craft table in the corner of the 
lounge room. This is not a small thing.Eighty-six per cent 
<http://extfiles.etsy.com/Press/reports/Etsy_NewFaceofCreativeEntrepreneurship_2015.pdf>
 of the nearly 1.4m Etsy sellers are women, and 76% of them consider their work 
on Etsy a business. Indeed for 30%, it is their sole source of income.

This ability to create locally and sell globally with very little up-front 
investment is entirely a product of the digital age and it will be a major 
source of job growth for women in coming years.

Encouragingly a recent study of middle market firms 
<http://about.americanexpress.com/news/docs/2015x/GCP-DB-Middle-Market-Wmn-Minority-Report.pdf>
 (where revenue is between $10m and$1bn) by Dun and Bradstreet found “the 
number of all middle market firms increased by 4% from 2008 to 2014, yet the 
number of women-owned middle market firms rose by 24%”.

As with the Stem support programs, entrepreneurial women in Australia are 
banding together. Networking groups likeLeaders in Heels 
<https://leadersinheels.com/> and Business Chicks 
<http://www.businesschicks.com.au/>, and angel investors like Scale 
<http://scaleinvestors.com.au/> and SheStarts <https://www.shestarts.com.au/>, 
have a huge following. They provide seed funding, advice, connections and 
practical assistance for women with innovative ideas who need help to get their 
businesses off the ground.

The WEF report identified the three most common barriers to gender parity as 
unconscious bias from managers, lack of work-life balance, and lack of role 
models. The underlying cause of all those issues is the insidious persistence 
of gender roles, and our expectations of how both men and women will conform to 
outdated stereotypes. Unless this is addressed the future looks bleak for 
women, regardless of automation.

Automation will embed gender inequality at work – unless we fix it now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/09/automation-will-embed-gender-inequality-at-work-unless-we-fix-it-now>
Past and future gender roles

Women of the future are not optimistic about their career prospects. A recent 
survey 
<https://www.plan.org.au/learn/who-we-are/blog/2016/10/11/everyday-sexism> by 
Our Watch and Plan International found that 90% of girls aged 15 to 19 do not 
think they are treated equally to boys, only 14% think they have the same 
opportunities to get ahead in life as boys, and 41% say lack of support will 
make them re-evaluate whether to start a family.

They have some basis for their fears. Despite increasing public debate about 
women’s economic disadvantage, the overwhelming pressures of rigid gender roles 
and workplace practices have remained relatively immune to change.

Prof Janeen Baxter has been studying the attitudes to women’s roles at home 
and work for many years. Shesays 
<https://radio.abc.net.au/programitem/pgZ961o9z7?play=true> gendered 
expectations of parenting roles have become more, not less, conservative since 
the 1990s. She ascribes this to the difficulties parents have managing the 
demands of work and families, where the rhythms of the workplace and childcare 
are still very much out of sync. Infrastructure and services have simply not 
caught up with the expectation that women should not be denied economic and 
professional advancement when they have children. Baxter says that without 
significant pressure on government and business, this mismatch of the services 
needed and those provided will not change.

As these unmanageable pressures force parents to divide rather than share work 
and family roles, they fall back into traditional gender assignments.

This pattern of splitting family roles along gendered lines both creates and 
reinforces the perceptions that women’s professional skills and abilities are 
not as valuable as men’s. Women aresupposed 
<http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/JMD-10-2015-0149?journalCode=jmd>
 to be gentle and nurturing, men are driven and authoritative, and deviating 
from those expectations is perceived as both a moral and personal failure.

To quote the WEF report 
<http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FOJ_Executive_Summary_GenderGap.pdf>:

While in nearly all industries and geographies there has been a marked shift 
away from deliberate exclusion of women from the workplace, there continues to 
be cultural beliefs that lead to unconscious biases. This includes perceptions 
that successful, competent women are less ‘nice’; that strong performance by 
women is due to hard work rather than skills; and assumptions that women are 
less committed to their careers.

If women are going to protect themselves from inequitable disadvantage in job 
losses due to automation, these gendered expectations need to change. This 
requires significant shift attitudes to and from men, as well as women.

Valuing men as caregivers, subordinates, and part-time workers will have a 
twofold benefit. Firstly, it removes the assumption that women are primarily 
caregivers, and secondly, it provides men, who are also going to experience 
deteriorating employment opportunities, with an alternative means of finding 
identity and self-worth outside work.

This is the most fundamental change necessary to achieving gender equity in 
the current and future workplace.

Around 85% of fathers and 19% of mothers with children under five work full 
time

The Australian Workplace Gender Equality Agency 
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/sites/default/files/BCEC_WGEA_Gender_Pay_Equity_Insights_2016_Report.pdf>
 puts the current full-time-equivalent gender pay gap at around 27%. As 
shocking as this is, even this figure doesn’t tell the full story of women’s 
systemic economic disadvantage, brought about by unequal responsibilities for 
childcare, endemic bias against women achieving senior positions, and 
persistent inequalities in remuneration.

The total average 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mediareleasesbytitle/E43B2C9601568740CA2568A900136315?OpenDocument>
 weekly cash earnings (which includes part-time as well as full-time workers) 
in 2014 was $1,430 for men and $940 for women. Thus, the real gender pay gap, 
if you look at how much money women earn in comparison to men, is around 50%.

The reason for including part time work in gender pay gap calculations is that 
the realities of most women’s working lives do not include ongoing full-time 
work.

Around 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/4125.0August%202016?OpenDocument>
 85% of fathers and 19% of mothers with children under five work full time, and 
more than 70% of working women in Australia in 2014 were employed part time. In 
the part-time workforce, less than 9% of men care for dependent children, while 
more than 60% of women do. Despite this, women are paid significantly less than 
men in the part-time workforce, and this discrepancy only increases with age.

Music with a message: engineering industry tackles shortage of female students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/19/music-with-a-message-engineering-industry-tackles-shortage-of-female-students>
Melbourne University’s Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia 
Survey 
<https://www.melbourneinstitute.com/downloads/hilda/Stat_Report/statreport_2015.pdf>
 study shows that a staggering 40% of women of working age are not in the 
workforce at all, and nearly half of those women cite caring for children as 
the reason they’re not working. By comparison, only 25% of working age men are 
not in the workforce and only 6% of them ascribe this to caring for children.

The sum of all these statistics paints an unarguable picture of women bearing 
the full brunt of the lost economic opportunity inherent in raising children. 
That women are already so far behind men in terms of earning ability and career 
progression makes the threat of automation and concomitant job losses much more 
serious. These are the barriers that must be overcome just to reach a level 
playing field, and alarmingly, it needs to be done as the pressure of millions 
of job losses loom over everyone.

The long-term cost of this is far more significant than the simple diminished 
earning capacity during the childcare years. It demonstrates a lifetime of 
career disadvantage, and the impact on superannuation, savings, wealth creation 
and most particularly on housing, leads to women at high risk of poverty in old 
age.


Factoring in the pressures on the job market likely to occur over the next 
five to 10 years, women are at significant risk of becoming permanently 
deprived of the ability to create an economically secure life.

The known unknown

Predicting the future is tricky. Technological advances, unimaginable only 20 
years ago, are now prosaic, and humans are endlessly inventive and adaptable. 
Despite all the gloom of the current outlook, we can’t discount the possibility 
of currently undreamed-of innovation making radical changes to society and our 
expectations of the future.

Without such an intervention, however, the future of work for women could be 
grim. The gender roles of the past do not fit with the realities of the 
present, let alone a future where opportunities for work are going to be very 
limited. Ensuring that women have an equal role in the future of work will 
require significant attitude changes for both men and women.

We already know this, the only thing we don’t yet know is whether these 
changes can happen quickly enough to protect women from a very disturbing 
future.
 