
Several pills taken from Prince’s estate in Paisley Park after his death were 
counterfeit drugs that actually containedfentanyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/03/what-is-fentanyl-prince-deadly-overdose>
, a synthetic opioid 50 times more powerful than heroin, an official close to 
the investigation said on Sunday.

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the continuing 
investigation, said many pills were falsely labelled as “Watson 385”. According 
toDrugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs>.com, that stamp is used to 
identify pills containing a mix of acetaminophen and hydrocodone.

VIP syndrome: why do the doctors to the stars make fatal mistakes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/17/vip-syndrome-doctors-prince-michael-jackson-elvis>
About a dozen tablets were found in a dressing room at Paisley Park, but the 
vast majority was in bottles of Vitamin C and aspirin that had been tucked 
inside a suitcase and bags, including onePrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> often carried with him.

Autopsy results released in June show Prince died 21 April of an accidental 
fentanyl overdose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/prince-died-opioid-overdose-tests>
. The official said records show the 57-year-old Prince had no prescription for 
any controlled substances in the state of Minnesota in the 12 months before he 
died. Authorities are still investigating how Prince obtained the drugs.

Fentanyl has been responsible for a surge in overdose deaths in some parts of 
the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/fentanyl-drug-heroin-new-hampshire-mexico-cartels>
. When it is made intocounterfeit pills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/10/fentanyl-drug-overdoses-xanax-painkillers>
, users do not always know they are taking fentanyl, increasing the risk of 
fatal overdose. The Star Tribune first reported about the mislabelled pills in 
a story published on its website late on Saturday.

One pill with the “Watson 385” stamp that was analyzed by the Minnesota bureau 
of criminal apprehension tested positive for fentanyl, lidocaine and another 
drug. Officials found nearly two dozen pills similar to the one that was 
tested, the official said.

Another aspirin bottle had 64 counterfeit tablets in it. Some pills that were 
analyzed contained fentanyl, lidocaine and U-4770, a synthetic drug that is 
eight times more powerful than morphine.

Authorities also found a prescription bottle in someone else’s name that 
contained 10 oxycodone pills, the official said, without revealing who was 
listed on the prescription.

The official said Prince had many of these pills with him on 15 April when the 
aircraft he was on made an emergency stop in Moline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/22/prince-protege-reveals-terror-as-stars-plane-made-emergency-landing>
, Illinois, after he fell ill from a suspected drug overdose as he was heading 
home from a performance in Atlanta. Prince was given two doses of Narcan, an 
antidote used to reverse suspected opioid overdoses, the official said.

The official said roughly 20 different bottles or pill containers had been 
analyzed.

U-4770 can be tested for in toxicology screens, but this is not done routinely 
because it is a relatively new chemical. Presence of the drug was not tested in 
Prince’s case, but the levels of fentanyl in his system were more than enough 
to be toxic, the official said.

Tests on Prince before his death did not show fentanyl in his system, which 
means he was not a long-time abuser of that drug, but probably took the fatal 
dose in the 24 hours before he died, the official said.

The official did not elaborate on those tests. But at least one doctor, 
Michael Todd Schulenberg, saw Prince on 7 April and again on 20 April, the day 
before he died. According to a search warrant, he told a detective he had 
ordered tests for Prince and prescribed medications. Schulenberg’s attorney, 
Amy Conners, has said patient-privacy laws do not allow her to say what the 
prescriptions were.

The autopsy report also shows Prince had diazepam, lidocaine and hydrocodone 
acids in his body, the official said. Diazepam is an anti-anxiety pill sold as 
Valium. It is a sedative and can also be used to control seizures, which Prince 
suffered from as a child. Lidocaine is a local anesthetic.
 