
Hiding in plain sight … the letter H 

You've met A 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/24/crossword-blog-letter-a>
,B 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/19/crossword-blog-what-does-b-mean>
,C 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/16/crossword-blog-letter-c>
,D 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/12/crossword-blog-meet-letter-d>
 andE 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/21/crossword-blog-meet-letter-e>
,F 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/sep/27/crossword-blog-meet-letter-f>
 andG 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/25/crossword-blog-meet-letter-g>
; now let's see what H gets up to incrosswords 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords> … 

Hello, H. Hi. Thanks for talking to us. I have to say, you were hard to get 
hold of.

You find me elusive, Alan? Good. That's the way I like it. I'm hardly even 
there. Try saying the "h" at the start of "huh". Are you using your teeth? No. 
Your tongue? No. Your lips, your tongue, even your vocal cords? You are not. 
And that suits me fine.

Hiding in plain sight – like the "H"s on fire hydrants that you pass on the 
street and don't even notice. That's why nobody has ever got rid of me, like 
they did withG 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/25/crossword-blog-meet-letter-g>
. I just … hover.

We do see you here and there, though …

But always in the background: on a hot tap, a road sign for a hospital, at the 
non-business end of ahard pencil. 

And if a solver sees any of those in a clue, it's a strong hint that there's 
an H in the answer.

Agreed, also husband. I apologise, though, to your readers: knowing that 
there's an H in the middle of a word often doesn't give the solver a strong 
sense of how to "say" the letters they've got to try to elicit the answer. 
"Fight", "yacht", even "alphabet" … I'm there each time but the sound I make is 
not a "huh". They just sound like "fyte", "yot" and "alfabet".

And sometimes we're unsure whether to pronounce you at all.

Good point. Cockneys famously drop me …

Ah yes, we did a little For Beginners primer on 'Cockney clues' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/12/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-cockneys>
 here …

How lovely for you. Cockneys famously drop me, as I said, and I'm very relaxed 
about that. Less huffing and hawing – easier for everyone. And when the French 
do it, we think it's classy, not common. But there was a time when some folk 
were so desperate not to sound like aitch-dropping Cockneys that they started 
adding me where I had no place, such was their"hanguish and hanxiety" 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=-bswAQAAMAAJ&dq=%22hanguish%20and%20hanxiety%22&pg=PA32#v=onepage&q&f=false>
. And it hardly helps reassure the nervous speaker when they hear haughty types 
talking about staying in "an 'otel".

So what's your advice?

It depends whether I'm in the syllable that's being stressed. I tend to be 
more audibly sounded in words like "Hungary", say, than words like "Hungarian". 
I risk tripping you up if I'm not in the bit you want to emphasise. When the 
spotlight is on me, I retreat into the shadows. As for "an 'otel" – that habit 
sounds so mannered nowadays that it draws attention to me. Just sayhotel with a 
light breath – that's my name in the Nato alphabet, after all.

And you're barely noticeable even in your own name.

"Aitch"? Well spotted, or rather not spotted. While the other letters make 
themselves known – the B in "the letter bee", the D in "dee" – I keep my head 
down. Some people find it unusual and I suppose that force of habit makes them 
say "haitch". The establishment used to think "haitch" was theheight of bad 
manners but theirhearts aren't in it nowadays. The BBC now officially allows 
its reporters to say "haitch" <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-11642588>, 
although they get a lot of emails about it. I have to say I prefer "aitch". 
More discreet.

As you mentioned, the way you're said is affected by any consonant that might 
be next to you.

Actually, I affect the others. Subtly, like. Very discreet. "C" becomes "ch", 
"t" becomes "th" and before you notice it, you've moved on to the next word. 
It's what Ben Jonson called "the life and the quickening" of the other letters 
you've been talking to:
 Extract from Ben Jonson's The English Grammar. 
I contain them, impose a sense of order. It makes sense: the Phoenicians drew 
me with my top and bottom joined together and called mekhet, fencing for 
keeping your beasts from roaming off.

And it all varies. Take an expression like "wheelie bin". In England, they say 
it more like "weelie bin"; in Scotland you get a fuller "wh-" sound; and in Old 
English, I was right up at the front of all of the "wh-" words – pronounced and 
spelled "hw-", like "hweelie bin".

I'm not sure they had wheelie bins in Anglo-Saxon times …

Hwatever. 

As well as coming eighth in the alphabet, you're also the eighth most common 
letter in English …

True, but that's partly down to THE, which you don't find often in crosswords. 
And we should talk about my use in science, which solvers need to look out for 
in clues. To a chemist, I'm colourlesshydrogen; to a physicist I'm also 
invisible –magnetic field strength, though you wouldn't expect to see that 
often in a daily puzzle. And I can be indicated by some of the greatest minds 
in the history of humanity: JosephHenry; Max Planck, because in lower case I'm 
thePlanck constant …

And of course H from Steps 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/oct/12/have-you-been-watching-steps-reunion>
. One final question: are you even really a consonant?

Maybe not. But I'm not a vowel either. I'm unique, if that's what you mean. 
You could even call me, ahem, aspirational. Ha ha ha.

Ho ho ho.

Ah, hours of fun. Except for H-bombs and the drug that stole my name, heroin. 
Hasta la vista!
 