
A timely spot of housekeeping.

This post comes to you in new clothes, or rather via the Guardian’s new 
content-management system. Now, I don’t know my<iframe>s from my <div>s 
nowadays, butthis Composer doodah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/developer-blog/2014/mar/20/inside-the-guardians-cms-meet-scribe-an-extensible-rich-text-editor>
 looks to me a Very Good Thing, in part because it’s based onScribe 
<https://github.com/guardian/scribe>, a rich-text editor which the kindly 
Guardian developers have open-sourced.

If you are unmoved by that, or by the switch from R2 to Composer tout court, 
you can take comfort in knowing that the technology which brings this website 
to you is ethically sound and is elsewhere quietly making the world a better 
place.

The actual content is unchanged – with one less-glaring exception. The 
colour-coding which has given regular readers such enlightenment and migraines 
for so long is no more. There are good reasons for this, including 
consideration for readers with interesting vision (though our old colour scheme 
of #DF7401, #20B2AA, #B404AE and the others was chosen with this solicitude).

No longer, then, will our featured clues have “old solvers knocked back” in a 
shade to match the EY in the answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jul/28/crossword-sport-commonwealth-games-clues>
. It seems only courteous to ask how we should proceed.


The “cleanest” way might be to continue to denote the definition part of a 
clue inbold and the wordplay in italics, and to explain how that wordplay works 
in as near to brief plain English as possible –see last week’s roundup for an 
example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/sep/15/crossword-roundup-scottish-independence-cryptic-clues>
. And it might be no bad thing to link more often to entries inour ongoing 
series Cryptic Crosswords for Beginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
.


An alternative is to use some of the notation that cryptic devotees have 
developed over the life of the puzzle. I’m personally comfortable-ish enough 
when looking at the solution for, say, a Listener puzzle to findstrings of 
metacryptic code such as these 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/Solutions/S2014/Notes_4299.html> ...


T(ob)Y (en)G(in)[E](er)S

ZAG < + [P]ER

... but I’m not thoroughly convinced that these jibe with this blog’s mission 
to avoid further terrifying those who are interested in – but intimidated by – 
cryptic crosswords.


But we might be missing a fourth way. Over to you.

 