
It’s official: crosswords are a waste of time.

A waste of time, that is, if you’ve ever justified your hobby by insisting 
that it’s insurance against dementia.

The notion of crosswords as a cerebral prophylactic has been around for years, 
despite the little problem of there being no research to back it up. Until 
recently,the only study that I’d seen was from the Journal of Experimental 
Psychology <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10406103>, and it found no 
evidence ...

... to suggest that amount of crossword puzzle experience reduces age-related 
decreases in fluid cognition or enhances age-related increases in crystallized 
cognition.

In plainer language, puzzles don’t help us (a) to remember the words we need 
to fill in the blank squares, or (b) to reason our way through cryptic clues’ 
wordplay.

Alzheimer's treatment closer as brain inflammation shown to be key
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/08/alzheimers-treatment-closer-as-brain-inflammation-shown-to-be-key>
Last week, newspapers reported a new study, with headlines variously stating 
and denying an effect of crossword-solving on Alzheimer’s disease (trudge 
through the coverage yourself, if you can bear it 
<https://news.google.com/news/story?ncl=d-l8cSu4ogf2JQM2h3RzySRrBOD0M&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwigiPvY4Z_LAhUCRBQKHTcsDYIQqgIIITAA>
). As is often the way, the title of the original paper –Effect of Intellectual 
Enrichment on AD Biomarker Trajectories Longitudinal Imaging Study 
<http://www.neurology.org/content/early/2016/02/24/WNL.0000000000002490.short?sid=4e4c2971-ec47-41f5-ae44-e41c812fd6d8>
 – does not, in fact, mention crosswords.

And, well, nor does the paper itself. Crosswords seem to have appeared 
somewhere between publication and press release. But if we take “crosswords” as 
journalistic shorthand for “using your noddle”, there is something of interest 
hiding in the coverage.

What is termed “high midlife cognitive activity” – which is how I’m going to 
refer tothe Guardian quiptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quiptic> from now on – doesn’t 
do anything to prevent dementia for most people. But itis “associated with 
lower amyloid in APOE4 carriers”, for which read: if you have a gene variant 
(that’s the APOE4 bit) which increases your risk of developing Alzheimer’s 
disease, get yourself doing some cognitive activity and get rid of those sticky 
protein fragments (that’s the amyloid bit).

But ... what if you don’t know whether you’re an APOE4 carrier or not? Perhaps 
a more cheering way of looking at negative results is to conclude that there is 
no evidence that doing crosswordscauses any mental disorders, or indeed any 
kind of suffering beyond frustration, which is pretty much what a solver signs 
up for anyway. Just because you don’t have a specious justification for 
something doesn’t mean you can’t do it.

I’m not a doctor. But my advice is: carry on solving, and find yourself 
another excuse.
 