
The news in clues

As we know from our encounter with him here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/10/puzzles>, 
Gaff is a specialist in anniversary puzzles – and a dab hand at very long 
anagrams, the one whichappeared to be about the royal wedding 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/d8f716a4-5eca-11e0-8e7d-00144feab49a.pdf>
 being a personal favourite.

So in a FT prize puzzle, 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/4cef55a8-5468-11e4-b2ea-00144feab7de.pdf>
 for which the answer appears today, it was no surprise to see one of those 
long clues that takes up a quarter of the column. First, you had to solve this 
one ...

7d/22d Writer of plays last Monday having second thoughts (5,6) 


[ anagram (“plays”) of “last Monday” and the second letter of “thoughts”]

... for DYLAN THOMAS and then you could get stuck into the one that made up 
nine separate entries in the grid:

19d/9ac/12ac/17d/15ac/15ac/8d/27ac/16ac Desperately, I got to get high and 
tight – going to arrange aged sonnet to fight lonely death of 7, 22 
(2,3,2,6,4,4,9,4,4,7,3,5,2,3,5)

[ anagram (“desperately”) of “I got to get high and tight going to arrange 
aged sonnet to fight lonely death”]

Such a short definition (“of Dylan Thomas”) and such a long answer. Two lines 
from the villanelle in question: DO NOT GO GENTLE INTO THAT GOOD NIGHT / RAGE, 
RAGE AGAINST THE DYING OF THE LIGHT. And such fun to see that the repeated 
reference to 15 across in the clue is not a mistake, but mere economy in 
including that repeated RAGE. The Long Anagram is tricky to pull off; the Long 
Apposite Anagram is something to treasure.

Latter patter

Some audacious clueing from Donk in the Independent. I was tickled by this 
clue ...

25ac Overseas delivery secured by rubber band (6,9)

[ synonym for “condom” + name of a music group ]

... for JOHNNY FOREIGNER. The Oxford Dictionary of Modern Slang 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/oxford-dictionary-of-modern-slang.html> 
tantalises by noting that the phrase was “first recorded in 1990 but in use 
earlier”. Much earlier, my instinct says.

Happily, we don’t have to rely on my instinct: the man who knows is Eric 
Partridge 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-partridge-dictionary-of-slang-and-unconventional-english.html>
, who reckons the whole JOHNNY SQUAREHEAD, JOHNNY CRAPAUD, JOHNNY GURK thing 
began with JOHNNY TURK. Until recently, I might have said that JOHNNY FOREIGNER 
is used predominantly with an attempt at irony, possibly with aGeneral Melchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2014/jun/25/blackadder-namesakes-bbc-first-world-war>
 inflection, but since politicians fromapparently serious parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/06/ukip-godfrey-bloom-bongo-bongo-land>
 have been tossing around phrases such as “bongo-bongo land”, I’m not so sure.

We’ve looked before at the various Billys of slang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/08/crossword-roundup-silly-billies>
 and there are at least as many Johnnys: the startling JOHNNYBAIT (“a sexually 
attractive girl”, says Partridge), the rhyming-slang JOHNNY CASH (“an act of 
urination”) and the nineteenth-century American subject of our next challenge. 
Reader, how would you clue JOHNNY-COME-LATELY?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for PHANTASMAGORIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/27/crossword-roundup-ghosts-in-the-marketplace#show-all>
. There were plenty of seasonally spooky surfaces, such as alberyalbery’s 
“Panorama – a sight arising from magic lantern show” and ID2155366’s 
“a”-embracing “Hallowe’en hordes stomp in – Aaaargh! Spooky”, though jimdubya’s 
“Igor’s panama hat? Absurd! A bizarre sight!” and robinjohnson’s evocation of a 
hotel lounge “Graham’s at piano, playing a haunting medley” were delightfully 
unexpected.

And the mathematics was pleasingly misleading in harlobarlo’s “Pythagoras’ 
mania: work out missing variable for set of imaginary shapes” and steveran’s
“Shifting figures confuse a maths pro again”. 

I was intrigued by artemiswolf’s “Phi? Santa is gone ... Zero’s right in jumpy 
Sigma’s grasp! A staged supernatural horror” without having identified the 
“puzzle/virtual-novel video game with a twinge of horror” to which the clue 
apparently alludes.

The runners-up are HipsterPriest’s anthropological-sounding “Form of paganism 
Torah accepts, albeit initially, as a creation of fantasy” and Truth101’sSleeper
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/04/the-10-best-woody-allen-films>
-like “Treating pain with ‘orgasm hat’ is an unusual sight”; the winner is 
Middlebro for recalling the old days of indicated anagrams, and indeed for 
using “anagram” as part of an anagram in “Frightening images formed when I shot 
Pa (anagram)”.

Kudos to Middlebro; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the Fortnight

Though I still haven’t read the Tolkien breezeblock (I got sidelined by a 
companion volume about runes), I’ve picked up enough to identify the monster 
that Imogen was asking for inthis clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26411> ...

22d He held the greatest ring not to be enough (5)

[opposite of “to” + word meaning “to be enough”]

... for FRODO, with the devious-but-fair wordplay proving more of a challenge 
than a book I hadn’t read. Almién!
 