
When we talked to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/31/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-philistine#>
 the sparkling setterPhilistine <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/philistine> 
here as part of ourMeet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/meet-the-setter> series, the 
full-time surgeon and part-time writer told us: “I like to keep my ‘careers’ 
separate, hence the feeble attempt at preserving some anonymity.”

Having previously read his prose, Philistine fans (philistiniphiles?) can now 
hear the setter’s euphonious voice talking to Aasmah Mir and Richard Coles on 
Radio 4’s Saturday Live (iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05zzwpj> or 
mp3 
<http://open.live.bbc.co.uk/mediaselector/5/redir/version/2.0/mediaset/audio-nondrm-download/proto/http/vpid/p02vqylh.mp3>
), accompanied bythe puzzle he set for the programme 
<http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/radio4/saturday-live/samer_nashef_saturday_live_crossword.pdf>
, which operates as a taster for the curious:

Some of the clues are national-newspaper standard, others a little bit easier. 
Some of them were actually designed by other people – I thought they were 
lovely as a way of giving people a taste of what can happen.

Thirteen across, accordingly, is a lovely introduction to the “& lit.” by 
Rufus (Meet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
), while 10 across is described by Philistine as “a genius clue” from Arachne (
Meet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
):

10ac Primarily, inflammation in mother’s breasts (8)


The solution will appear on the Saturday Live programme page 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qgj4> today. We also heard some of 
Philistine’s history, including what he describes as “the stupidest reason to 
choose a career” (surgery, not setting) and how he pioneered a risk-assessment 
system for surgeons. There is, it turns out, more on this sort of thing, and on 
Philistine’s view of heart surgery as “like plumbing”, in his bookNaked Surgeon 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/298374/>, which is 
under his day-job name Samer Nashef.

Finally, after discussing with Boris Becker why the German language, in its 
lack of laxity, does not lend itself to cryptic clueing, Philistine says he has 
assembled some “beautiful German words” into a puzzle that will be appearing on 
these pages soon.Ich kann es kaum erwarten.


Following this, listener Petra Bijsterveld contacted the show with tales of 
Dutch cryptics.

Petra Bijsterveld (@petrabijs) 
@BBCRadio4 <https://twitter.com/BBCRadio4> #saturdaylive 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/saturdaylive?src=hash> cryptic crosswords were big 
features of my Dutch childhood. Father did the NRC newspaper crossword every 
weekend
 <https://twitter.com/petrabijs/status/614722860347731968> June 27, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/petrabijs/status/614722860347731968> 
Crosswords, we know, get everywhere, but the cryptic variant is a rarer beast. 
Do any readers know more of a Netherlandic wordplay tradition?
 