
Bletchley biopic The Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game> has been out for three 
days, and the recriminations and retellings of history have already begun.

It started when Keira Knightley (Joan Clarke 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-29840654>) related 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/oct/8/imitation-game-opens-london-film-festival/>
 how the cast would gather and, as actors are wont to do, tackle puzzles on set:

One day we decided we should all really do the crossword. So we got the quick 
crossword, there were five of us, it took us five days, and we still didn’t 
finish it. We were really bad at all of it.

Leaving unfilled squares in a concise crossword 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> is undoubtedly traumatic, 
and now that the story is out, it seems that nobody wants to take the blame. 
Allen Leech (John Cairncross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2003/may/15/features11.g2>) puts his 
side of the story 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/arts-ents/film/crossword-fan-leech-has-the-right-answers-in-war-drama.25791594>
:

Knightley said recently that bad as she was, it was some consolation that 
Leech was worse. Unfair, laughs Leech. ‘Keira was by far the worst. I’m 
actually not that bad at crosswords. I just wasn’t that great on those ones.’

And Matthew Goode (Hugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jun/27/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/nov/22/ann-cunningham-obituary>) 
goes further, putting some distance between himself and the quick-crossword 
crew byrelating how 
<http://primetime.unrealitytv.co.uk/imitation-game-benedict-cumberbatch-got-alan-turing-role-times-crosswords/>
 Benedict Cumberbatch (Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>) and he preferred a different 
stripe of puzzle (and, indeed, discussed cryptanalysis):

Between takes, Ben and I would do the Times crossword and try to work out some 
of the theories [involved].

The irony, of course, is that the people they were portraying were crack 
solvers to a man and a woman. Clarke herself was able to dash off the cruellest 
cryptic in moments, and Turing was faster still.


Or were they?


The real-life recruitment puzzle

The film’s website <http://theimitationgamemovie.com/> has a special puzzle, 
once used to recruit for Bletchley, which unlocks access to a crossword-related 
clip from the movie. (“This video is unlisted,” the resulting YouTube page 
warns. “Be considerate and think twice before sharing.”)

As we’ve discussed here before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/aug/25/crossword-blog-saving-the-world>
, it is hard to resist the lure of this historic puzzle. And the real incentive 
is entertaining the idea, while solving, that you might have ended up in one of 
Bletchley’s huts yourself. I’d like to add two warnings, though.

First, if you fancy that challenge, you’re directed to the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/history/world-war-two/11151478/Could-you-have-been-a-codebreaker-at-Bletchley-Park.html>
, which has all 36 clues from the original puzzle; the movie site has 10 in a 
Flash interface which makes for a giddying user-experience: 1940s clues in a 
1990s medium.

And second, it is necessary to completely ignore the blurb.

Reviews of The Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game> tell us that it is a true 
story of how Clarke solved a super-fiendish puzzle set by Turing and found 
herself fighting Hitler. The publicity puzzle, correspondingly, announces that 
it is …

Taken from the actual crossword puzzle Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> created

If you’re going to solve the puzzle, it’s worth knowing that two people who 
had nothing to do with the puzzle were Clarke (who was already at Bletchley) 
and Turing (who didn’t set it).

The real-life real-life recruitment puzzle

In a piece for the National Security Agency newsletter 
<http://fas.org/irp/nsa/2000-07.pdf>, former signals operative and Bletchley 
historianMichael Smith 
<http://www.bletchleypark.org.uk/content/about/BPTrust/MichaelSmith.rhtm> 
relates how Churchill, who had been convinced from the start of Bletchley’s 
importance, received a letter telling him that the Foreign Office and the 
service ministries were not fully committed to the funding and staffing of 
code-breaking:

Churchill’s immediate response was a minute to his chief of staff. ‘Make sure 
they have all they want extreme priority and report to me that this has been 
done,’ he wrote, scrawling across it the warning: ‘Action this day.’

Around this time, the Daily Telegraph had printed its 5,000th puzzle and the 
lively discussion on the letters pages gave MI8 chiefs an idea for a novel kind 
of recruitment: that puzzle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossword-blog-alan-turing-no-crossword-fiend-imitation-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F16%2F1416152950419%2Fca7cda82-1882-43f7-a988-b77e4f024a12-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossword%20blog%3A%20Alan%20Turing%20was%20no%20crossword%20fiend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossword-blog-alan-turing-no-crossword-fiend-imitation-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossword%20blog%3A%20Alan%20Turing%20was%20no%20crossword%20fiend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fcrossword-blog-alan-turing-no-crossword-fiend-imitation-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F16%2F1416152950419%2Fca7cda82-1882-43f7-a988-b77e4f024a12-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The real Alan Turing, reading a book (probably not of crosswords). Photograph: 
REX 
Real life, however, does not fictionalise itself, or make for a good movie. 
For the purposes of a portrait of Turing, having him and Clarke brought 
together by crosswords is a smart device – andas Peter Bradshaw writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/13/the-imitation-game-review-cumberbatch-turing>
, “There is an irresistible romance in the idea that people who are good at 
crossword puzzles can defeat evil.”Cumberbatch adds 
<http://www.scotsman.com/what-s-on/film/benedict-cumberbatch-on-portraying-alan-turing-1-3598681>
 that “fictionalised truth” is a medium that most audiences “are canny enough 
to understand”.

The marketing folk can perhaps be forgiven for eating their own dog food 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/michaeldefranco/2014/03/04/not-eating-your-own-dog-food-you-probably-should-be-2/>
, but it would be a small shame if anyone approached the 1942 puzzle imaging 
that it came from Turing’s colossal imagination – or, indeed, that it required 
anything at all resembling cryptography or pattern recognition.

Nor should it be surprising that Turing was not a genius crossword setter. 
Here he is, quoted in Andrew Hodge’s definitive biography:

Maurice and Francis Price arranged a party with a treasure hunt last Sunday. 
There were 13 clues of various kinds, cryptograms, anagrams, and others 
completely obscure to me. It was all very ingenious, but I am not much use at 
them.

Not that it matters, but he wasn’t much of a solver either.
 