
The news in clues

Seldom does the solver find the same word appearing twice in a completed grid. 
Not so withHob’s recent Saturday Independent prize puzzle 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_040715.bin>:

15ac More interested in bric-a-brac addict? (9)
[ synonym for ‘bric-a-brac’ + synonym for ‘addict’ ]

17d Stranger wrecked our cruise (9)
[ anagram of ‘our cruise’ ]

The first CURIOUSER might have passed without notice; the second made the 
solver recall Alice’s slip-up ...

‘Curiouser and curiouser!’ cried Alice (she was so much surprised, that for 
the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English).

... in Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, and indeed in Martin Gardner’s 
Annotated Alice <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/oct/21/lewiscarroll>, 
set to reappear in ‘deluxe edition’ for the 150th birthday of the original 
alongsidevarious Carroll biographies 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n14/matthew-bevis/i-can-bite-anything-i-want>. 

Hob’s puzzle has all the extra material and playfulness you would hope for in 
a tribute to Carroll, who is my nomination for The Person Who Would Have Been 
The Greatest Cryptic Setter Had He Or She Not Predated The Crossword. (Who is 
yours?)

Latter patter

Carroll’s coinages are not limited to Jabberwocky. There was no SNARK before 
the 1876 nonsense epic The Hunting of the Snark, and the word went on to prove 
a useful way of describing a kind of unnerving movement, as in Kenneth 
Grahame’s “sinuous and snarklike conflict”, and a useful alternative to 
“wild-goose chase” in “Snark-hunting”.

Independently of Carroll, SNARK had a separate life in Dutch and German 
corners, where SNORK imitates the sound of snoring and SNARK the sound of 
snorting – and so became a verb for derision.

In turn, we have a new word to describe a critical appraisal: I may be 
satirical, and rabelaisian on a good day; you, my friend, might be mordant or 
even at times a tad sarcastic – but him over there, with his snide online 
comments? The only word for him is the subject of our next challenge. Reader, 
how would you clue SNARKY?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for WOMBLE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/jul/07/crossword-roundup-did-anyone-say-tennis-anyone#show-all>
, a word which seemed to inspire wit and adroitness across the board. From the 
pleasingly terse corner, we had ID2155366’s “Toy collector” and, among other 
splendid clues from alberyalbery, “Commonplace character”.

Middlebro slipped an actual tennis player into the acrostical “Wimbledon 
groundsman’s top tips of winners overlooked Mike Bryan’s latest encounter” 
while thebrasselephant misdirected effectively with “Like Wellington, with old 
muddy breetches laundered expensively on the Western Front”.

My favourite surfaces included JollySwagman’s “It’s where we started to go 
against the French but we do have this in common”, schroduck’s 
“Environmentalist rolled joint containing marijauna bud” and MaleficOpus’s 
supremely topical “Brown-noser who’s spineless with no resistance: Tory cuts 
acceptable”.

The runners-up are steveran’s gorgeous “One environmentally-centred below 
ground” and robinjohnson’s eminently plausible “Beastly Australian the French 
ousted at Adelaide?”; the winner is jonemm’s ingenious “‘Bother!’ (‘Blow me!’ 
for a commoner)”, which merits repeat solving.

Kudos to jonemm; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the Fortnight

Tramp (Meet the Setter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
) used Alfred Hitchcock as the theme for one of those puzzles where you’re not 
hobbled if you miss the theme. Indeed,the clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26620> for one key word seemed 
so much to be about crosswords themselves that Hitch might never enter the 
solver’s mind:

19d The Guardian writers mostly set without expectation (8)
[ synonym for ‘The Guardian’ + example of ‘writers’, surrounded by most of 
‘set’ ]
[ US + PENS, inside SE ]

A masterful SUSPENSE. Expectations high, and met.
 