
The Times <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/> on Saturday has long 
offered some more demanding crosswording challenges: it has its23x23-cell Jumbo 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/>, and since 1991 has 
hosted the extraordinaryListener <http://www.listenercrossword.com/>. Now it 
has addeda Latin crossword 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/mindgames/latin/>.

Latin was once a fixture of the daily puzzle. When crosswords first crossed 
the Atlantic,the broadsheet press was initially hostile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/15/crosswords-meow-meow-1920s>
 to the apparent frivolity before realising how lucrative puzzles might be. And 
so we got a new strain of the crossword, suitable for Top People who had, in 
the words of former Times nabob Richard Browne, “graduated from governess to 
public school to Oxford and Cambridge”, whose intelligence could not be 
insulted by anything so simple as a game based on mere definitions.

Among the cryptic clues, solvers were expected to fill in the gaps in quotes 
from Roman lyric poets or to recall the odd first conjugation. The pioneering 
setters, too, included Ximenes, Custos and Afrit, all classics teachers who 
applied the rigours of parsing to the construction of wordplay. One strain of 
British cryptics, in fact, owes much of its flavour and its sense of 
fun-within-rules to the classics class.

Outright, in-your-face puzzles of barely adulterated Latin have also appeared 
from time to time.Listener number 29 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/PDF/Archive/List0029.pdf>, published in 1929 
in the magazine of the same name, was a “Virgil Bi-Millenary Crossword” with 
such clues as ...

60 & 27d Lucentemque globum junae Titaniaque astra , totamque infusa per artus 
mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet

... and, as if to prove that Latin words (especially those drawn from a single 
author) aren’t as helpful as English ones when you ask them to interlock in a 
grid, many of the clues are followed with extra instructions such as “(last two 
letters missing)” and “(reversed and last three letters missing)”.

The Times, too, published a Latin puzzle in 1930 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/medianews/article4581933.ece>, and since 
then the dead language has been occasionally revived, such as inthe appearance 
last year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30054497> of Hebdomada 
Aenigmatum <http://www.mylatinlover.it/>, which billed itself as the first 
weekly magazine of Latin puzzles.

The overall crosswording trend, though, has been to shift the governess and 
the prep from their position at the centre of the puzzling universe, and for 
cryptics to focus almost exclusively on wordplay within the English language. 
Much more of that language is used, too: slang,once forbidden in broadsheet 
puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/15/crossword-blog-meet-setter-gordius>
, is now a valuable arm in the weaponry of setter and solver, and when it comes 
to subject matter you have as much chance of encountering J-LO or SANTANA as 
you have the other kind of Latin.

The new Times puzzle is a hybrid: clues “may be straight or mildly cryptic”, 
its rubric announces, and always “lead to answers in Latin”; they range from 
those which shouldn’t trouble anyone who’s seen a sentimental US war movie ...

1d Always: ‘______ fidelis’ motto of US Marine Corps (6) 


... to those which would leave even some Top People befuddled:

7ac To hold: pres. act. ind. 3rd pl. (6)

Those who don’t do crosswords in any language tend to assume that the point is 
to improve the solver’s word power, but of course the cryptic is really an 
abstract exercise that provides nothing more than the little matter of 
pleasure. For a crossword in a classical language (let us not forget all those 
Greek puzzles set for the Listener byCastor 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/Setters/C/Castor.html> and Janus 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/Setters/J/Janus.html>), that applies more so 
– as long, of course, as the setter finds it pleasurable. Do you?
 