
The news in clues

How to imagine crosswords in an independent Scotland? No longer can the 
Sassenach setter expect to get away with,for example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/23993> ...

8d Madam is jaded, so some say (4)

... suggesting that BAWD is a soundalike for “bored” in cryptics for 
consumption north of the border.

Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
 got ahead of the game witha referendum-themed puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26363>. Two of the finest among 
its many references were to yes campaigners, with a pen portrait of ...

21ac Scottish Nationalist in street to press rejection of No (8)

... Nicola STURGEON (via ST, URGE and ON), and to her colleague in a clue in 
which, provocatively ...

23d/12ac Go Salmond in tatters! Alex gutted — no backing to enter race (5-8)

... (via GO, SALMOND, AX and ON) yielded, well, ANGLO-SAXONDOM. 

More provocative still was the Telegraph setter 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=23619> ...

14ac Liberty’s desire for some Scotch? (12)

... who seemed to be alluding to something like “Scotch INDEPENDENCE”. 
Chambers Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781473602250>
 – and it should know – gently reminds us that:

Scotch is nowadays mainly reserved for produce, as in Scotch beef and Scotch 
whisky, being unacceptable to many Scottish people as a label of nationality.

The word Scots as an adjective can be used to describe someone’s nationality. 
Otherwise, it is restricted toScots law, the Scots language, Scots pine, and 
the names of certain army regiments, such as theScots Guards.

This is, of course, why Stewart Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stewart-lee> has insisted on using 
“Scotch”, as when telling a Glasgow audience thatScotland itself 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571254811>
 ...

... was actually invented, as you all know, in 1911, by the McGowan sweet 
company as a way of marketing Highland toffee.

Latter patter

Talking of Chambers, what would independence further mean for English, Welsh 
and Northern Irish solvers? Currently, they get the occasional piece of 
Caledonian vocabulary, likeOtterden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jun/13/crossword-blog-meet-setter-otterden>
’suse <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26354> ...

14d Overmodest up north at the end of the last century (3)

... of MIM, and Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
’srecipe <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26362> ...

23d Scottish vegetables observed being uprooted, including a pea, we hear (5)

... (take a reverse of SEEN and add one P) for NEEPS. If Gordon Brown is to be 
believed, no more shall any phrases be allowed to cross the armed border of 
Hadrian’s Wall and all those fine Scots words hiding in Chambers will find 
themselves excised from the non-Scots editions.

This would mean no more CLAMJAMPHRIE (nonsense), NIPPERTY-TIPPERTY (foppish) 
or WAG-AT-THE-WA’ (a kind of clock) for those in the economic unionthe name of 
which is unclear <http:>, but which gives us our next challenge.

Reader, how would you clue RUK?


Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for TRIGGER WARNING 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/aug/11/crossword-roundup-michael-gove-out-of-the-cabinet-but-not-off-grid#show-all>
.


I enjoyed all those set in Peckham and the 100 Aker Wood, especially 
robinjohnson’s “In which Pooh’s pal overwhelms Roo at first, looking scary - 
read on if you dare”.


There were some pleasingly involved approaches, including schroduck’s 
scholastic “Mathematics, German, Welsh, Needlework – Head’s missing 
introduction to difficult subjects” and harlobarlo’s acrostic “To reader: if 
gruesome gore engenders revulsion, we advise relaxing newsletters instead – 
newest Guardian preamble”.

HipsterPriest was primly quaint in “Used to indicate drunken garter wringing?” 
and singinggardener sly with “The following may push your buttons; 
precipitating event forecast”.

The runners-up both nattily avoid outright definition: mrmgmg’s “Set off 
alarm?” and JollySwagman’s “Let off with a caution?”; the winner is 
alberyalbery’s plausible “Arsenal character’s yellow card might prompt stoppage 
time”.

Kudos to Albery – please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

No matter how vigilant we solvers may be in checking that we’re not tricked 
into seeing a verb when an adjective is meant, an adverb for a noun – “supply”, 
“lower” and all the rest – the sly setter will always have another trick up his 
or her sleeve. Takethis from the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/b6649b0546be286301480c63e117009d/print_solution/3>
 ...


13d Pennsylvania meaning to introduce racing event: moped, for one, is in it 
(4,5)

... where it takes some mental sweat before “moped” reveals itself as, not as a
spoilery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/aug/11/crossword-roundup-michael-gove-out-of-the-cabinet-but-not-off-grid>
 competitive vehicle but, via PA, SENSE and TT, as an example of something in 
the PAST TENSE.Funky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/26/peaky-blinders-west-midlands-tv-birmingham>
.

 