
You’ve met A 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/24/crossword-blog-letter-a>
,B 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/19/crossword-blog-what-does-b-mean>
,C 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/16/crossword-blog-letter-c>
,D 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/12/crossword-blog-meet-letter-d>
,E 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/21/crossword-blog-meet-letter-e>
,F 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/sep/27/crossword-blog-meet-letter-f>
,G 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/25/crossword-blog-meet-letter-g>
,H 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/24/crossword-blog-meet-letter-h>
 andI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/24/crossword-blog-meet-letter-i>
. Now it’s time for the new kid on the printer’s block.

Hello to you there, you scamp! Would you like a J2O or something?

You don’t have to treat me differently because you think I’m young, you know. 

But you are, young fellow-me-lad. Everyone else we’ve met ...

... yes, goes back to like Phoenician or Babylonian times. I know, alright? 

I’m not that young – you can find me in medieval manuscripts if you can be 
bothered to look.


Kinda. The things shaped like ‘j’s there – they aren’t ‘j’s, though, are they? 
They’re ‘i’s.

You’d only say that if you think that a consonant is the same as a vowel, 
which is prettystupid for a so-called crossword “expert”. Go back to King James 
Bible, or Shakespeare’s First Folio.

I have. I’ve looked at the title pages of the King Iames Bible, also King Iohn 
and Romeo and Iuliet.

Yes, but those “I”s aren’t “I”s, are they? They’re “J”s.

They look like ‘I’s to me, sonny.

Yes, but... you’re just not listening. They look like “I”s, but no-one said 
“Yames”. I mean, sure, the Romans did that kind of thing: Yupiter, Yulius and 
...

Yes, you can say it. Go on.

... Yanus. 

Where was I? Oh yes. The “jay” sound had been on everyone’s lips since Middle 
English,actually. And even though I was called “I”, I – by which I mean J – had 
a different shape and a different sound.

And then later, the printers already had me in their little boxes of letters, 
even if they still called me “I”, and pretty darn soon everyone realised it 
made sense for me to be my own grown-up letter. It’s the same in lots of 
different languages.


And that’s why, if you’re solving a crossword and you know a name begins with 
“J”, you should try out lots of different sounds in your head in case it’s a 
foreign word, like JUNTA, or JE NE SAIS QUOI, or my favourite, JÄGERBOMBS.

Mm. You say ‘pretty darn soon’, but Samuel Johnson’s dictionary wasn’t until 
1755, and it only had 24 letters.

It had 26! Twenty-six letters! Look, here’s JEALOUS.
 From ID EST straight to JEALOUS in Dr Johnson’s Dictionary. Photograph: 
Internet Archive 
Interesting choice of example. Yep, there you are. All mixed in with the words 
under ‘I’.

... I know.

That chubby chump’s even got a J right there at the start of his name. It’s so 
unfair. And G has taken loads of words that should be mine. When the Romans 
said “gem”, they pronounced it with a hard G. Itshould be spelled JEM. 

That leaves hardly any words which mean a J in a crossword clue. I’m surprised 
G didn’t try and stealjournal and judge. 

It’s true. You don’t even get much in the way of science.

I get joule, and mathematicians use me for the square root of minus one, and 
doctors sometimes use me in their abbreviations.
 Prescription Writing: Designed for the Use of Medical Students Who Have Never 
Studied Latin, by Frederic Henry Gerrish (1888). Photograph: Internet Archive 
I’m not being funny, but how often do those come up in crosswords?

Virtually never. Not even in the Listener <http://listenercrossword.com/>. No, 
Jack and Japan is about it. It’s a joyless jeu d’esprit, this, isn’t it? 

Although ... I did notice when you were talking to C 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/16/crossword-blog-letter-c>
 andE 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/21/crossword-blog-meet-letter-e>
, andH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/24/crossword-blog-meet-letter-h>
 ...

Go on, you can say that too.

Really? I’m a joint.

But, listen: what’s wrong with being used less than the other letters? Some 
letters would kill for that aura of exclusivity. A ‘J’ in a crossword can be an 
event – the setter wonders if there’s a pangram. It’s like in Scrabble: J is 
kind of a big deal. Look, here’s what Robert Graves had to say about you:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fcrossword-blog-meet-the-letter-j%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429281657478%2F1b47b495-9080-405d-8d9d-95783849be86-bestSizeAvailable.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossword%20blog%3A%20meet%20the%20letter%20J&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fcrossword-blog-meet-the-letter-j%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossword%20blog%3A%20meet%20the%20letter%20J&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fcrossword-blog-meet-the-letter-j%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429281657478%2F1b47b495-9080-405d-8d9d-95783849be86-bestSizeAvailable.png>
 from The White Goddess: a Historical Grammar of Poetic Myth by Robert Graves 
(1948). Photograph: Google Books 
Wow. “Royal”. “Exclusive”. That kind of luxe is for us. Thanks, Alan. I’m 
sorry if I was a little, you know, earlier.

It’s forgotten. Would you like that juice now?

I really would, actually. I get so cranky without it. Don’t tell my mum about 
the joint and the Jägerbomb.
 