
I do sudoku and crossword puzzles, play patience and FreeCell (a computerised 
form of solitaire).

Sepp Blatter <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sepp-blatter>, there, 
talking toSouth Africa’s Sunday Times <http://www.timeslive.co.za/sundaytimes/> 
in 2007. We recently asked the question:is it OK to solve crosswords at work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/may/18/is-it-ok-to-solve-crosswords-at-work>
? The answer, of course, depends on the work.

If you’re not paid a lot, or if your working hours far exceed the time 
necessary, the feeling seems to be that your spare brain cycles are yours to 
use as you wish. But sometimes, the image of someone looking at a crossword 
puzzle in their workplace can provoke the reddest of mists.

In a 2006 CNN profile, Sepp Blatter Revealed 
<http://edition.cnn.com/CNNI/Programs/revealed/blatter/>, we learned that 
Blatter’s “constant companion”, in his office and in his jets, is a collection 
called The Ultimate Crossword Book.

The reason this revelation is infuriating varies from person to person. For 
you, it might be one of these:

The title of the book

Stephen Sondheim and Leonard Bernstein used to take a break from their own 
work to tackle the Listener crossword. “Thursday afternoons no work got done on 
West Side Story,” remembered Sondheim. “We were doing the puzzle.”

The Listener is a baroque, demanding affair. Who knows: maybe some of its 
structural and linguistic ingenuity may have borne upon the musical? And if 
not, who would deny the pair their wordplay?

It is harder to imagine The Ultimate Crossword Book making an impression on 
Blatter’s work. Partly because elegant crosswords don’t tend to be bundled 
under such titles, but partly too because it is so very hard to imagine what 
that work consists of. Put another way, the image of Blatter solving crosswords 
at work leads inevitably to the exigent question:What does Sepp Blatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sepp-blatter> actually do?

The nature of a ‘break’

We discussed here earlier the Glasgow steelworkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/may/18/is-it-ok-to-solve-crosswords-at-work>
 who, faced with the sack, argued that it was OK to solve while the dock’s 
power supply was down. And for clerical workers, break times have their own 
time and space, where crosswords join coffee cups for 15 minutes. Who could 
begrudge them that?

With Blatter, though, it’s different. It is fair to say that, in his response 
to the CNN programme, the Daily Mail’s Alan Fraser did begrudge Blatter his 
puzzles. His piece begins …

Sepp Blatter is such an underemployed simpleton that he spends much of his 
time in his palatial office filling in crosswords, playing patience on a 
computer, smoking expensive cigars and talking to a battered old teddy bear 
called Frederick.

… and continues with unabated ferocity. In his own way, Fraser is asking the 
same, urgent question:What does Sepp Blatter actually do?

The solo solving

Blatter, it seems, has no boss: no line manager or superior to hide his 
solving from. His addiction to the computer game Freecell is a blunt reminder 
of this. It is also in invidious contrast to the solving of other people in the 
world of sport. Let’s take New York Yankees starting pitcher Mike Mussina.

Mussina’s is as good as any description of workplace collaborative solving. In 
the 2006 documentary Wordplay, he said:

Sometimes we’ll sit down as a group and try to plough through it as fast as we 
can. Whoever’s doing the writing doesn’t even get to look at the clues. They’re 
writing so fast because of the people leaning over their shoulder firing out 
answers.

Mussina and his mates, presumably, earn a tidy sum each, and his description 
of team crosswording evokes nothing but warm feelings. So it is not Blatter’s 
reported salary of$1m-plus-various-extras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/06/sepp-blatter-king-fifa-land-corruption-claims-world-cup>
 that makes his solving stick in the craw.

No: the problem is that we know what Mussina does for his money. He throws a 
ball very well, in a way that most people could never do. You can probably 
guess precisely what question, by analogy, we reach when considering Blatter.

In conclusion: the comments under the previous post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/may/18/is-it-ok-to-solve-crosswords-at-work?commentpage=1>
 suggest that we don’t mind a spot of shirking, so long as you have something 
to shirk. It is when your working day looks indistinguishable from a typical 
pensioner’s Friday that your crosswords cause consternation.

Or perhaps it is that we like to believe that only the virtuous share our 
hobby?
 