
2010: the truncated spy series Rubicon gave us a plot with secret messages 
hidden in crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/12/top-10-crosswords-fiction-rubicon>
. Great stuff, and it even hadan accompanying puzzle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/ref/crosswords/rubicon.html>, although sadly a one-off, 
rather than one disguised as your regular ink-on-newsprint challenge.

2008: Lisa Simpson solved a crossword with a hidden message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/04/top-10-crosswords-fiction-simpsons>
, which was also that day’s real-lifeNew York Times puzzle 
<http://select.nytimes.com/premium/xword/Nov1608.puz>. Astonishing stuff, 
although without the frisson of spycraft that leaves the solver with the sense 
that they’rein on a conspiracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/apr/11/crossword-roundup-covert-spies-and-cats-whiskers>
.

Happily, the pieces of this implicit jigsaw are now in place. Blindspot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/24/blindspot-tv-hit-tattoo-television>
 is an NBC series that mixes intelligence operatives with amnesia, tattoos and 
the solving of puzzles. In the show, the federal agent Patterson is contacted 
from beyond the grave by her boyfriend – and his medium is crosswords.

Successive down clues right up in the top-left of a puzzle read GOT, ONE and 
PATTERSON. In plainer language: “I may well be dead, Patterson, but do pay 
attention here – I have deciphered one of the clues to sundry crimes indicated 
by those tattoos on that mysterious Jane Doe character who is obligingly 
driving our storylines. Yes, we’ve taken a woman’s body and made it into a 
puzzle grid. What of it?”

Those clues appeared in the real-world NYT puzzle 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/04/03/rural-area/>, thanks to the 
ingenuity of setterDavid Kwong <http://davidkwongmagic.com/>, who has the 
enviable day job of providing puzzles and mysteries to such enterprises asNow 
You See Me <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155486/now-you-see-me>. GOT 
and ONE were straightforward enough to clue (“Understood” and the pleasingly 
precise “Result of dividing any non-zero number by itself”) anda philanthropic 
crime novelist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/11/james-patterson-donates-10000-to-flood-hit-uk-bookshops>
 made it possible to offer “James whose books have sold over three million 
copies” in a way that hit the sweet spot of raising only the eyebrows of the 
show’s devotees.

(For those who are wondering, the corresponding across entries were likewise 
inconspicuous in that GOPcan be clued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/apr/15/us-election-campaign-live-sanders-clinton-trump-cruz-kasich>
 as “Republican grp”, “Lunar New Year in Vietnam” isa fair way of indicating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jan/26/usa.iraq> TET and 
American crosswording convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/24/crossword-blog-merl-reagle>
 allows such fragments as the unpromising ONA to be given by, say, “Cat ___ Hot 
Tin Roof”.)

Now, then. Assuming that the exacting criteria 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/04/03/rural-area/> laid down to Kwong by
NYT puzzle editor Will Shortz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/07/crosswords-in-fiction-west-wing>
 ...

Of course, he reminded me, these stunts always have to preserve the integrity 
of the puzzle for all solvers, whether they watch the show or not. So I set out 
on making a crossword that both operated as a Monday puzzle and contained a 
message that we could feature on the show.

... were met, what might be your dream conspiracy between a British broadsheet 
puzzle and a fictional world? TheTelegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/crossword_puzzles_toughie> and a Martin 
Amis novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/14/top-ten-crosswords-in-fiction-lionel-asbo>
? TheFT <http://www.ft.com/life-arts/crossword> and some financial 
skullduggery? Or perhaps theGuardian’s cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> and something of a Le 
Carré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/19/crossword-roundup>
 flavour? If this exciting precedent proves anything, it’s that fictional 
fancies can become flesh.
 