
The news in clues

As the sun makes a habit of disappearing earlier, that other kind of setter is 
evoking timely images. On a single short day,Redshank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jun/23/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-crucible>
asked us in a Financial Times puzzle 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/4f5b6d68-4d65-11e4-8f75-00144feab7de.pdf>
 to harvest …

1d Barnum & Bailey’s first and last autumn production (6)

[start of ‘Barnum’ + end of ‘Bailey’]

… BARLEY via a pleasingly pointless trip to the circus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/04/nine-acrobats-seriously-injured-providence-circus-fall>
, and – using his localnom de guerre Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jun/23/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-crucible>
 –took us even deeper into darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26393> …

26ac In season, I wonder about binman in restaurant (4,6)

[name of a season containing, backwards, I + a word for ‘wonder’]

[I + AWE, reversed, inside WINTER]

… at least leaving us with a WINE WAITER to offer succour.

Because they can

Solvers of Phi’s Independent puzzles come to appreciate that filling in the 
answers can be merely a prelude to an amusing endgame.A Friday afternoon 
<http://independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_171014.bin> found 
me plodding, through uninspired force of habit, through his diagonals and 
perimeter, kidding myself into thinking I could discern some occult communiqué.

But it wasn’t there. Phi had, instead, set himself the idiosyncratic challenge 
of ensuring that the across entries would fit a fabulously arbitrary pattern, 
with the letters CA waltzing through them, midway performing a kind of 
open-reverse turn. To wit –

CATTLE 
SCAMPI
VOCALS
OUTCASTS
DELICATE
SCENIC
AGORAPHOBIA 
COWARD
ACT OF GOD
LACTIFIC
REACTS
LUNACY
￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼￼MANIAC

Lest you wonder whether LUNACY and MANIAC are the mots justes here, Phi 
explains at the solvers’ blog Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/2014/10/17/independent-8739-by-phi/#comment-259583>
 that such challenges can actually make life easier for the setter, and that 
this device is …

… just something I put in to get over the ever-recurring dread of having to 
fill a new grid.

Of course, a lesser setter might only have been able to achieve this outré 
effect withrecherché words. If, like me, you don’t always remember precisely 
which letters go where in AGORAPHOBIA, it helps to remember that the AGORA bit 
comes from, well, the Greek word “agora” – the marketplace or assembly. I 
remind myself of my own aversion to visiting aWestfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/29/70bn-westfield-carve-up-on-hold-chaotic-meeting>
.

“Agora” creeps around in the etymologies of other words: you might spout some 
ALLEGORIES in the agora, as part of yourPANEGYRIC 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/panegyric.html>, and if this were taking place 
on Halloween, it might all be in the service of the subject of our next clueing 
challenge.

Agoraphobics in the London of 1802 steered well clear of the latest spectacle: 
optical illusions and spooky magic lanterns. Some anonymous soul came up with a 
new word to describe the sensation and may have cannibalised “phantom”, 
“allegory” and “agora” itself in the coinage. Reader, how would you clue 
PHANTASMAGORIA?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for SYLPHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/13/crossword-roundup-gnomes-gnomic-cryptic-clues#show-all>
. The booze proved irresistible to many, and I savoured especially jonemm’s 
“Drain sherry, begin liberally pouring hefty shot of spirits” and 
hammyhamster’s gentle admonition “Finally, whereas they all sip scotch yes, 
there are other spirits too”.

Alberyalbery went down the unexpected-subtractive-anagram route to “Broken 
stylophone’s not one to produce spiritual airs” and ousgg made the universe a 
better place by taking The Da Vinci Code and making something worthwhile from 
it: “A Pope prevents fornication by using these”.

Equally unexpected: I did not anticipate learning as much as I did about 
lungless salamanders before encountering schroduck’s “Primarily, Plethodontinae 
and Hemidactyliinae placed among extremely slimy lungless creatures related to 
salamanders”, and JollySwagman’s “Seychelles and Sweden have record hospital 
admissions for thin people” is practically a headline.

ID2155366 gave us a new wordplay device in the “nested pairs” of “Models: 
shapeless youth. Limp, hollow and all into themselves”. And for slyness, 
kerfufflepuff’s “Immaterial girls?” vied with Middlebro’s “Airwomen?”

The runners-up, then, are Neijygof’s “Débutantes – slender young ladies 
personifying high spirits!” and MaleficOpus’s wonderful “Narrow misses?”; the 
winner is mrmgmg’s appropriately lyrical:

Nymphs of the sky are heading for shade,
As mystical glyphs beginning to fade (6)

Kudos to Mr Mgmg; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

A double definition can on occasion be a thing of beauty; a quintuple 
definition invariably is. From, I presume, the setter known locally as Brendan,
a Sunday Telegraph puzzle 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=23860> provided us 
with, in one clue, five different ways …

6d Don’t allow sequence of notes, except for local lawyers (3)

… of getting to the BAR. Really, five? Check!
 