
The news in clues

Spies and setters; setters and spies. From Bletchley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/17/crossword-blog-alan-turing-no-crossword-fiend-imitation-game>
 to007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/nov/09/james-bond-the-spy-who-crosswords-love>
 viaD-Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/may/12/crossword-unsolved-mystery-d-day-puzzles-leonard-dawe>
, these two types of intelligence have swapped notes for the last century. So 
the solver is forgiven a little speculation.

For example, a recent Independent puzzle 
<http://puzzles.independent.co.uk/games/cryptic-crossword-independent/?puzzleDate=20160328#!201604>
 by Punk (read our Q&A with him here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
) appeared to be themeless until ... if you want to find out for yourself, 
solve the puzzle now.

There was a theme, and it was in neither the clues nor their answers. Hidden 
around the edge of the completed grid could be seen some familiar names: 
BURGESS, MACLEAN, PHILBY and BLUNT. And for a few days, it seemed that this 
might be all there was to it: a little bonus that might help the solver by 
giving him or her some free letters if they spotted the spies mid-solve.

Then, with the ink barely dry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/15/crossword-blog-what-next-for-the-independent-crossword>
, a recording seeped into the public domain: one of those perimetric agents 
telling the Stasi in 1981 how he had managed to remain hidden because he had 
been “born into the British governing class”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fkim-philby-credits-his-upper-class-status-for-preventing-detection-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kim%20Philby%20credits%20his%20%E2%80%98upper%20class%20status%E2%80%99%20for%20preventing%20detection%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fkim-philby-credits-his-upper-class-status-for-preventing-detection-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kim%20Philby%20credits%20his%20%E2%80%98upper%20class%20status%E2%80%99%20for%20preventing%20detection%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fkim-philby-credits-his-upper-class-status-for-preventing-detection-video&media=>
Coincidence? Ah, surely we know by now that in crosswords and in espionage, 
there are no coincidences. If I were Smiley, I’d have a look throughthe recent 
Guardian puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26846> set by 
Punk under another of his codenames and ask myself just why it begins with so 
many colourful entries ...

Latter patter

Our Cryptics for Beginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners>
 series has a collection of excellentdouble definitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/17/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-double-definitions>
; here’sanother one 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/e8a6e17a-ece0-11e5-888e-2eadd5fbc4a4.pdf>
, seamlessly presented, by Dante (Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
) in the FT:

 17ac The best parts of old wireless sets (4,8)

Both halves of the clue yield the CAT’S WHISKERS, originally a fine adjustable 
wire of copper or gold, later an expression for the acme of excellence. The 
latter sense has been used byWodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/24/crosswords-in-fiction-pg-wodehouse>
, but it was inspired by an expression preferred byDorothy L Sayers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/23/top-10-crosswords-fiction-lord-peter-wimsey>
: the CAT’S PYJAMAS. And it wasn’t Sayers who coined it, but the sports 
cartoonist “Tad” Dorgan. In his excellent bookLanguage!: Five Hundred Years of 
the Vulgar Tongue <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/language-8.html>, Jonathon 
Green describes Dorgan as someone ...

to whom slang coinages are (mis-)attributed just as one-liners are to Wilde or 
Dorothy Parker

... but Britannica is confident 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Thomas-Aloysius-Dorgan> in giving him the 
credit for “hard-boiled” (in the noirish sense) and “for crying out loud”. 
(They also give him “hot dog”, but the cat seems better justified than the 
dog.) And Oxford tentatively associates Dorgan with another word: a fictitious 
place name that became a synonym for humbug and the subject of our next 
challenge. Reader, how would you clue MALARKEY?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for BEELZEBUB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/mar/28/crossword-roundup-wb-yeats-and-a-homeless-beelzebub>
. A tricky set of letters and a wide range of devices, such as harlobarlo’s 
wickedspoonerism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/mar/01/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-spoonerisms>
: “Spooner’s insect will stand in for devil”, and of surfaces, such as 
DameSweeneyEggblast taking us fiendishly back to the bad old days ofthe Britpop 
wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/03/crossword-roundup-blur-oasis>
 with: “He hated Beetlebum – featuring Blur’s first jazz ending – but without 
finding them heartless”.

In a closely fought battle, the audacity award goes to cmiall for the 
diabolical “Progressively add KY data? Fiendish!”


The runners-up are schroduck’s devilish acrostic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
: “Chiefly because entrepreneur Evgeny Lebedev’s zillions evaporated, 
bamboozler’s unemployed? Boo!” and ixioned’s heinous “A gentle wind runs 
forward, changing direction, boy it’s hot in his place!”. The winner? Of 
harlobarlo’s longer and shorter versions of a clue, I preferred the way that 
“Member of Hell’s Angels?” wickedly condenses one of the biggest stories ever 
told into four words.

Kudos to Harlo; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

A medley of different terms and a spot of ecclesiastical lingo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/may/04/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-revving-it-up>
 inOsmosis’s Telegraph Toughie clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=28700> ...

8d Two private rooms churchman’s done up for singer (4,6)
[ (American) word for a loo (one ‘private room’) + a word for a study (another 
‘private room’) + reversed (‘up’) abbreviation for a churchman ]
[ JOHN + DEN + VER ]

... for JOHN DENVER. Here’s to Deutschendorf Jr!
 