
Ten weeks ago, we said goodbye to American setter Merl Reagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/24/crossword-blog-merl-reagle>
; now Henry Hook has died.

Reagle was an approachable, loveable ambassador for crosswording; Hook was 
equally inventive, but physically and intellectually much less cuddly.

In 1969, when Hook was 14, his grandmother gave him a jigsaw made by Hallmark 
which took the form of a crossword. It was constructed by the future New York 
Times puzzle editor Eugene T Maleska and its endgame revealed a hidden message: 
YOU HAVE JUST FINISHED THE WORLD’S MOST REMARKABLE CROSSWORD.

Days after Hook received the gift, Maleska received a puzzle, written by Hook, 
with the nina WHAT MAKES YOU THINK YOUR PUZZLE IS MORE REMARKABLE THAN MINE?

A combative rebuttal, but Maleska was intrigued enough to call the number Hook 
had supplied, expecting to speak to a professor or seasoned setter. When Hook’s 
mother explained that the package had been sent by a teenager who had begun 
assembling puzzles using his letter-blocks at the age of four, Maleska offered 
to mentor the boy.

It was a promising start and an entry to professional setting, but Hook was 
never going to fit in. For one thing, he didn’t much like the traditional 
American crossword: too easy and too full ofcrosswordy words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/08/crossword-blog-word-puzzle-setters-love>
. This is the kind of clue he preferred to write:

Puzzle that makes you weep softly and twitch (7)
[ synonym for ‘weep’ + musical abbrev. for piano (‘softly’) + synonym for 
‘twitch’ ]
[ CRY + P + TIC ]

Hook indeed preferred cryptics and “variety puzzles” (acrostics, diagramless 
and so on), but that clue also expresses his personality. “I got into this 
business to torment people,”he told the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/03/04/the-riddler>. “On that line on 
the tax form where they ask for your occupation, I’d like to put ‘grand 
inquisitor’. ”

This is reminiscent of the tradition of Observer setters taking their noms de 
guerre from the torturers of the Spanish Inquisition – Torquemada, Ximenes and 
Azed <https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed> – but British broadsheets are 
unusual in offering daily or weekly work to torturers.

Hook’s puzzles initially appeared in collections by Simon and Schuster and 
occasionally in the New York Times. Latterly, he had a fortnightly challenge in
the Boston Globe <http://www.crookedcrosswords.com/about.htm>; he also 
published his own collections, such as Twisted Crosswords and Terribly Twisted 
Crosswords, and popped up in places like Herbert Resnicow’s whodunnit Murder 
Across and Down, in which the killer of a setter is revealed by a series of 
dastardly puzzles.


At the 1982 US Open Crossword Puzzle championship, solvers were already full 
of trepidation for the Hook-set puzzle “Sound Thinking”, and flummoxed further 
when it transpired that they would be hearing audio clues over a microphone 
rather than reading them.

It was a career of relentless ingenuity which reshaped expectations of what a 
crossword might do, but failed to find a stable home. In the 2006 overview of 
the American crossword world, Gridlock, Matt Gaffney said of Hook:

He wants his puzzles to speak for themselves, but in puzzles, as in other 
fields, contacts matter.

As a result, said Gaffney, Hook struggled financially. And his life was often 
solitary.

His father died while Hook was still a teenager, and he went on to support his 
mother. In 1984, he fell in love with another puzzler, Stephanie Abrams; they 
married, but Abrams died in 1988 and Hook continued for years to set puzzles 
with hidden themes devoted to her. More recently, he lost a foot to diabetes.

He eschewed friendships, but he was a hero to many. Gaffney recalled his first 
encounter with Hook as like “meeting Elvis”. In indie-setter Ben Tausig’s 
anniversary book The Curious History of the Crossword, he described Hook as:

an under-recognised, polarising genius with a sometimes tense relationship 
with audiences.

And in a eulogy at the Wordplay blog 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/10/28/remembering-henry-hook/?module=BlogPost-ReadMore&version=Blog+Main&action=Click&contentCollection=Crosswords%2FGames&pgtype=Blogs&region=Body#more-103569>
, New York Times puzzle editor Will Shortz sighs: “Man, he was good.”

If you haven’t solved any Hook puzzles, the Crossword Solver software 
<http://www.crosswordsolver.info/> will let you load up something older 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/u5lzc96s7vxgpvp/Aug89%20Something%20Different.puz?dl=0>
 orsomething newer <http://www.crookedcrosswords.com/samples/bg121111.puz>.
 