
The news in clues

A Telegraph clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=25679> that I took 
to be current-affairs topical ...

1ac/10ac Dodgy fee I’m to arrange somehow for conciliatory political initiative
 (4,6,9)
[ anagram of ‘Dodgy fee I’m to arrange’ ]

... but which the setter – who I took to be Giovanni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
 – had made it calendar-date topical: GOOD FRIDAY AGREEMENT. For a moment 
there, I thought I’d missed anotherepisode of Dispatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/23/tory-minister-benefits-claimants-joke-channel-4-dispatches-hugo-swire>
.

Latter patter

By contrast, that puzzle’s predecessor 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=25676> demanded a 
term as current-affairs as they come ...

13d Making cross a subject in this study? (10)

... with a cryptic definition for PSEPHOLOGY. This is a rare jewel for 
word-watchers. We know what it means: someone like Dr David Butler, whose 
studies of elections have defined the discipline to the extent that,as this 
paper noted <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/nov/25/comment.comment> 
after the 2005 poll:

connoisseurs know that the process is never complete until David Butler has 
spoken

We know why it means what it means: Athenians used to vote by placing a pebble 
in a ballot box, so we combine “ψῆϕος” (“pebble”) with “-logist” (“expert”) and 
get the new word. But often, we don’t quite know why some word came out the way 
it did, much less whose idea the coinage was. Not so with PSEPHOLOGY, as a 
pioneer told the New York Herald Tribune in 1952:

... the word was coined purely in jest. I was helping out in some statistical 
matters in the preparation of a book on the 1945 general elections in Britain 
that was written by RB McCallum. I became so fascinated on the subject of 
elections I decided to specialize in it. So he suggested I call myself a 
psephologist.

The butt of that jest? David Butler. One of the tools of the psephologist’s 
trade, the SWING, seems to date from the same period; Oxford’s earliest use for 
a UK election is from a 1945 edition of the Times:

When the votes were counted... it was revealed that the Government formed by 
Mr Churchill on the break-up of the Coalition had been decisively beaten by a 
surging swing of opinion to the Left.

And as we consider the relevance of a gewgaw which assumes a two-party 
stranglehold on the life of our votes, let’s also make it the subject of our 
next challenge. Reader, how would you clue SWINGOMETER?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for HORSE CHESTNUT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/mar/23/crossword-roundup-geese-crows-and-other-creatures#show-all>
.

ID2155366 was among the few to allude to the sense of chestnut usually 
employed by crossworders in “Spiked fruit punch: same old story”, while Cmiall 
gets the audacity award for the first death threat hosted in the Guardian’s 
crossword pages: “A Colt to the head of Connor. About time! He’s a loon. A 
nut.” Crikey.

On the pleasingly terse front, we had Middlebro’s “Tree trunk in southern 
scrub” and, indeed, Middlebro’s “Why the long face?”

A couple of unexpectedly medical surfaces: Neijygof’s “Swingeing cuts to NHS 
here produce growth at grass-roots level” and MaleficOpus’ “Growth of thrush 
treated with Canesten Duo, and you finally are relieved”. Robinjohnson was more 
poetic, perhaps, with “Unrest in south trenches creates the seeds of 
destruction”.

The runners-up are Machiajelly’s amusing “Her ‘so delirious’ stale joke gives 
me the pip!” and Ketmando’s plausible and delighful “Highly strung seed on 
court, then she’s out”; the winner is Harlobarlo with the strongest conker of 
all: “Che stuns other revolutionary with small, stringed weapon?”

Kudos again to Harlo; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of 
the broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

Regular readers will know that this award tends to reward clues which work in 
more than one language at once, with bonus points if you don’t really have to 
know the non-English language all that well. Criteria met byRufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
’spert clue <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26532> ...

14ac Is she French? (7)
[ French for ‘Is she’ ]

... for ESTELLE. Santé!
 