
The news in clues

How best to remember the first world war? If you’re David Cameron, it’s to 
insist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/04/david-cameron-first-world-war-defended-british-values>
 that the years of destruction were not “pointless, or fought by people who 
didn’t know why they were fighting”. If you’re the British Legion, it’s to
refurbish an anti-war song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/nov/12/eric-bogle-responds-to-joss-stones-cover-of-his-song-no-mans-land>
, without the anti-war bits. But if you’re the Telegraph’s Enigmatic Variations 
crossword series … well, it’s fittingly complicated and, as such, a more 
meaningful tribute.

The solution has now been published for EV 1,147 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=24081>. Some clues 
had an extra stage, whereby the actual grid entry was not the word clued, but 
another that could be paired with it. For example, this clue …

15d Smooth tree surface (5)

[ synonym for “smooth”; a kind of tree; synonym for “surface”]

… required you to enter not PLANE but PRIVATE (as in PRIVATE PLANE). Likewise, 
the clue for COOK led to the entry CAPTAIN, and HOSPITAL to GENERAL.

PRIVATE, CAPTAIN and GENERAL are all, of course, army ranks. This being the 
Enigmatic Variations, the wordplay in various clues also indicated superfluous 
letters, and these in turn spelled out some fictional holders of those ranks: 
DARLING, MELCHETT and BALDRICK.

Yes, we were in Blackadder Goes Forth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/sep/12/firstworldwar.uk> territory 
here, and the solver’s final task was to highlight the word GOODBYEEE, the 
title of the final episode in which Darling, Blackadder and Baldrick go over 
the top. The power of that scene is only slightly diminished by the knowledge 
that the actors were originally filmed in the throes of apparent death, 
unpersuasively enough that it was deemed less embarrassing to freeze and cut to 
poppies and birdsong.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhbR9-etyN6I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhbR9-etyN6I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhbR9-etyN6I&media=>
Latter patter

Blackadder’s appearances in English dictionaries are, every one, a treat. Some 
of the Oxford citations are the first for a century or so: those of the 
ROISTER-DOISTER or the NONNY-NONNY stripe. Others are perfect sentences in any 
context:

social realist, n and adj
 Art and Literary Theory 
 A n 
 An adherent or practitioner of social realism. 
 [...]
 1985 R Curtis & B Elton Blackadder II in R Curtis et al. Black-Adder (1998) 
141/2 Mistress Ploppy’s a bit of a social realist, sir.

It’s also big of any dictionary to include this under DO THE HONOURS …

 1987 R Curtis & B Elton Blackadder Third in R. Curtis et al. Black-Adder 
(1998) 269/2 Nothing a nice roaring fire can’t solve. Baldrick – do the 
honours, will you?

… since within a second of the line being uttered, Dr Johnson’s Dictionary 
found itself in the Prince Regent’s hearth. Not that this lexicon was 
unimpeachable: it omitted SAUSAGE and the subject of our next challenge. 
Reader, how would you clue AARDVARK?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for JOHNNY-COME-LATELY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/10/crossword-roundup-johnny-middle-earth#show-all>
. Of the many prophylactic clues, my favourites are the relatively coy 
submission from alberyalbery (“French letter requesting one to arrive after the 
appointed time”) and schroduck’s provocative “Two contraception methods for 
old-fashioned bloke?”

Phitonelly has a seedy image but some, well, gorgeous construction in “New kid 
on the block from the city follows client with gorgeous round behind” and 
robinjohnson was equally startling with: “New gang member joy-riding with no 
helmet around two American cities.”

The audacity award is taken by Middlebro for trying to make the solver say 
“Jaune est comme l’Italie” in “Cagney film, ‘Yellow is like Italy’ broadcast in 
French”, while mrmgmg managed to sustain sense over the course of “Successful 
new project for Beatle Lennon, where he finished what his band did together and 
his current status with Paul McCartney ends”.

The runners-up are HipsterPriest’s domestically upbeat “Jolly home tenancy 
arrangement for new arrival on the scene” and steveran’s enigmatic “New product 
wobblier than economy jelly?”; the winner is Middlebro’s plausible imagery of 
an Eagles cover in crosswording’s favourite bishopric: “Ely YMCA: Elton John 
plays The New Kid in Town”.

Kudos to Middlebro again; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick 
of the broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

Staying with bishops (and maybe even with prophylaxis 
<http://www.chesscademy.com/courses/strategic-prophylaxis>), here’s a piece of 
advice <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26423> you might 
plausibly hear whispered in the ear of a chess player, possibly alfresco and 
uninvited:

16ac Keep an eye on bishop’s position, ever so precarious on king’s file (7)

[ a way of describing a bishop’s relationship to a diocese ]

[ an anagram of “ever so” + chess notation for the kings’ column ]

Here Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 (no stranger to the ways of Caïssa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/dec/17/crossword-roundup-merry-kissmas>
) gives us two sets of wordplay for OVERSEE when we were only expecting one, 
and a simple answer that has nothing to do with the beautiful game. Crush!

• This article was amended on 24 November 2014. It originally stated in error 
that General Melchett also went “over the top” at the end of Blackadder IV.

 