
Every so often, a story comes along which reminds us that crosswords are not 
just for elbow-patched bookworms.

This time, it’s the Capitals, the Washington DC ice-hockey team of burly 
jocks, who have been describing their devotion to the grid ina smashing 
Washington Post piece 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/capitals-use-crossword-club-to-keep-their-minds-as-sharp-as-their-blades/2016/01/13/51f454c4-ba27-11e5-b682-4bb4dd403c7d_story.html>
.

It also kind of takes your mind away from hockey, but also keeps it mentally 
engaged and in the moment. You’ve got to get away from the game every once in a 
while, but you don’t want to completely shut off.

Yes – like anyone else whose job involves what Rolling Stone Charlie Watts 
described as “work five years and 20 years of hanging around 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6_RSNUZXMg>” – wings, defensemen and centers 
find crosswords an invaluable way of not being bored.

For the Capitals, discussing each other’s solve is a way of building team 
spirit – so long, that is, as everyone plays ball (or, if you’ll forgive me, 
plays puck).

The piece begins with a spot of unsporting solving that may be too much for 
some readers’ sensitivities. It describes how, in 2014, defenseman Nate Schmidt 
found a partially-solved grid and filled in some entries himself. This was no 
group-solve. He knew it wassomeone else’s puzzle. He even knew whose: former 
Nashville Predator Jack Hillen’s.

... Then he got an earful from Hillen.

‘He lost it on me,’ Schmidt said. ‘Thought it was the worst thing I could’ve 
done.’

Well, quite. This behaviour is frankly odious. Say what you like about the 
pampered ponies of the Premier League, but you can’t imagine even John Terry 
meddling with Wayne Rooney’s work-in-progress ona Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=28241>.

The politics of workplace crosswords are many and contestable. Some disregard 
them altogether. John Gielgud gained a reputation in the acting world for the 
ferocious speed with which he tackledthe Times 
<http://crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/>, until the day a co-star 
peered at his grid and asked: “Excuse me, John – what are Diddybums?” Gielgud 
airily replied that he had no idea, “but it does fit awfully well”.

So what about you? Would you add to a co-worker’s grid without permission? How 
about when the paper is nobody’s: that is, when it is provided in the coffee 
room by the employer? Is it first come, first solve?

I have heard, though I haven’t been able to substantiate, stories of someone 
actuallystarting a puzzle in someone else’s newspaper, on the specious grounds 
that they liked crosswords and the paper’s owner did not.

 And then there’s pure mischief. Twenty years ago, in the refectory of Oxford 
University Press, I nonchalantly picked upa Guardian quick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> and filled it at barely 
credible speed before glancing up at my lunchmate. I had already solved another 
copy that morning. It’s good to get that finally out in the open.

If you have any crossword confessions of your own, consider this an amnesty. 
Likewise, any peeves or grudges would be useful in helping us to establish a 
more rigorous etiquette for crosswords-in-the-workplace than currently exists. 
Name names if you have to.
 