
Welcome to the first post in the year that marks the centenary of the 
crossword. We have, as usual, been spoiled for jumbos and themes over the 
festive break – here are some of my favourite crosswording moments sincewe last 
met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/dec/17/crossword-roundup-merry-kissmas>
; your choice clues have doubtless ended up as my emergency wrapping paper so 
please celebrate any omissions below.

The news in clues

Deft inclusion of topical material is a treat in crosswords; an entire puzzle 
about the events of 2012 is a thing to treasure. And one was provided by Mick 
Hodgkin,who we met here last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/17/crossword-blog-meet-setter-micawber-morph>
, asan astonishing Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=19033> in which 
every clue had a news flavour either in its surface meaning, or in its answer – 
or in the case of …

16d Grant-aided body cut back (6,3)

… HACKED OFF, both, with the definition alluding to the austerity which may 
some day reduce the deficit 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v35/n01/john-lanchester/lets-call-it-failure> and the 
wordplay to the Hugh Grant-supportedcampaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/hacked-off-campaign>. If you haven't solved 
this puzzle yet, do so quickly before the events of 2013 make you forget those 
of 2012.Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 also squeezed a few of the names of last year intoThursday's Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25835>, most pleasingly a 
concise summary …

3d Putin not entirely sorry, not right when subversive girls ultimately jailed 
-them? (5,4)

… of the sorry PUSSY RIOT saga. By the way, if you're interested in Paul's 
inaugural Crossword Awards,the details are over at Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/2013/01/02/2013-crossword-centenary/>.

And on Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25836>, 
Picaroon's puzzle had a ring of prophecy …

25ac Judge needs a long time to go over close votes (9)

… about the outcome of any Scottish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence-essential-guide> 
REFERENDA. Autumn 2014 will see only one question asked, but what is the plural 
of "referendum"? Guardian house style goes for REFERENDUMS and is not alone.

Some of those who prefer REFERENDUMS do so in the interest of clarity; others 
point out that "referendum" is not one of those Latin -UM words such as 
"stadium" which becomes an -A; it never, they insist, existed in Latin as that 
kind of noun, which means that it's fussy and inaccurate to pluralise it as you 
would have done when in Rome.

So which is right? REFERENDUMS or REFERENDA? They both are, of course, and the 
Independent's Andy McSmith points out this week 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2013/01/03/if-you-want-to-be-a-total-pedant-write-referenda-not-referendums/>
 that you can out-pedant the REFERENDA-haters with an even pernicketier angle:

Although we use referendum as a noun in English, in Latin it was an adjective. 
The adjectival form of a verb is not a gerund, but a gerundive, which unlike 
the gerund has a plural form. The commonest Latin gerundive to have passed into 
regular use English is 'agenda'. This is only used in the plural form, and as 
you can see, it ends in -a. So, if you want to be a super superior pedant, you 
can argue that the plural of referendum is referenda, and if anyone tries to 
contradict you, blind them with your knowledge of the distinction between a 
gerund and a gerundive.

Lovely. I'll stick for the mo with REFERENDUMS in the interests of both 
simplicity and compliance with this paper's style, and our cluing challenge 
this week relates to another questionable plural. The style guide contains no 
advice on how to refer to two or more Italian toasties; Collins is the 
reference for Guardian writers in such cases, and that dictionary gives:

panini (pæ'niːni)
noun
(plural) -ni, -nis
a type of Italian bread, usually served grilled with a variety of fillings

So Collins and in effect the Guardian accepts the Italian plural as an English 
singular. Since "a panino" risks sounding overly fastidious and "a panini" 
risks irritating Romantics, it remains a tricky word – not just because of the 
potential for confusion with football stickers and/orrude slang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/12/radio-station-grilled>. The most 
pressing question, though, is: reader, how would you clue PANINIS?

Culture clue

If you have a few gaps remaining in Araucaria's stately Christmas puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/25826> themed around The Winter's 
Tale (as clued at 7 down and 16 across),the annotated solution is now available 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/jan/04/prize-crossword-annotated-solution-25826>
, including the ursine fun of …

31ac Direction of the 7 16 with one extra variant, including nearly clean baby 
dressed in leather (4,7,2,1,4)

… EXIT PURSUED BY A BEAR.

Blue clues

A cunning route from Falcon in the FT 
<http://media.ft.com/cms/64b71b9c-485f-11e2-8aae-00144feab49a.pdf> …

2d Love very small round ring? (7)

… to the 19th-century word WHOOPEE which has, since the 1928 Eddie Cantor song 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANRPmTZRqkg>, also suggested "love" when 
preceded by "makin'".

Latter patter

Unless you know better, a first siting from Phi in Friday's Independent …

18d Net wire, tangled, black – it's one view of the net (8)

… of INTERWEB, suggesting the jocose variant is en route to acceptability.

Cluing competition

Thanks for your clues for DEOSCULATION 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/dec/17/crossword-roundup-merry-kissmas#show-all>
. There were some inventively misleading definitions, including pecking, 
necking and tongue-twisting, and even those that straightforwardly used 
"kissing" often had a charming surface reading, such as HipsterPriest's 
"Naughty location used for kissing" and the near-simultaneous 
Robifrom15squared's "Abandoned location used for old plonker".

Among the saucier entries were Thomas99's "Kiss and canoodle with suit off", 
gleety's "Action with lips undoes coital manoeuvre" and steveran's "Ace duo 
tonsil activity".

The runner-up is GeoScanner's helpful acrostic "Primarily dynamic expression 
of social connection (usually lips arranged touchingly), is obsolete now" and 
the winner is the smooth medical misdirection of MickinEly's "Inoculated, so 
prepared to do mouth-to-mouth work".

Kudos to Mick – please leave this week's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the week

If you're partaking of the disputed Janupause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/03/pass-notes-the-lull>, you 
may have felt a pang atThursday's Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c963542eb0a013bae9cea8e049c/print_solution/3>
 clue …

14d Who may serve out a white and a red (4,6)

… for HEAD WAITER. Santé!
 