
The silly season isn’t peremptorily asinine. Amid the non-news, stories about 
language tend to get more of a shout than they do when parliament and the law 
courts are sitting. It’s cheering to look at the otherwise grimly prurient 
summer versions of newspapers’ most-read widgets and see that language can outdo
sideboob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/us-news-blog/2012/jun/06/huffington-post-sideboob-news>
 in terms ofeyeballs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/mar/31/pressandpublishing.business>. 

Self v Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/01/will-self-george-orwell-supreme-mediocrity>
, for example. Orwell’s injunction …



Never use a long word where a short one will do.


... has never been knowingly heeded by Self, he of the brobdingnagian lexicon. 
Self has finally said as much <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-28971276>, 
the Orwell-likers are appalled 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/11078041/George-Orwell-no-wonder-the-mere-ordinary-dont-like-him.html>
 (or perhaps “aghast”, for two fewer letters), and a broadly fruitful 
conversation has ensued.The Orwell essay 
<http://theorwellprize.co.uk/george-orwell/by-orwell/essays-and-other-works/politics-and-the-english-language>
 under discussion is part of a fight against devious evasion and deliberate 
linguistic obfuscation, and so seems like a good thing.

Yet most people, when they first read Orwell’s decree above, find something 
curious about it: can you really rank the value of words using their 
letter-count?

In some contexts, sure. Broadly. Ceefax, say. Also tweets, and any other 
medium with a maximum character count. Straight reporting of news, of course 
(broadly); likewise instruction manuals and tax and census forms. But in 
oratory, narration – and, indeed, essays about language – your choice of 
word-length is up to you. Where do crosswords fit in?

Well, short clues tend to be better than long ones – if not for space 
restrictions alone, then because the solver has more chance of finding a 
foothold in the wordplay. (Though sometimes –“President taking circuitous line 
in consultation with me, I’m stretched out, tired and exhausted (7,11,9)” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/celebrating-100-years-crossword> 
– the extensiveness of a clue is a pleasure in itself.)

And then there are the answers. A setter who refused to fill a Guardian grid 
with any word for which a shorter alternative were available would struggle to 
have a puzzle to submit at all. Even if one were possible, solving the thing 
would be a wretched torment.

It would also be missing the point. 

Crossword setters and solvers are among the happiest beneficiaries of the 
redundancy of English – for any short word in a clue, there may well be a much 
longer synonym that will do very well to fill the10-plus white squares, and 
that may bring more pleasure than the shorter one could ever have done. And in 
terms of the words’ meanings, the setter, like the demagogue, sets out to hide 
his or her intentions in a miasma of tergiversation.

Even the stiffest-necked devotee of Orwell can get pleasure from this. The 
very nature of cryptic clues is a celebration of the elusiveness of our messy 
language. The ambiguities, the semantic slippery slopes, the possibility of 
saying one thing while meaning quite another – these are the meat and potatoes 
of crosswords, and a good clue is a reminder that you can eschew brute clarity 
in the name of diversion, wit and enlightenment as much as of propaganda and 
corporate euphemism. And a little-used many-lettered word can – if fairly clued 
– be the highlight of a puzzle.

If fun is not enough in itself, then maybe cryptics can be regarded as 
training. Perhaps – you tell me – you could even argue that solvers are better 
equipped to spot when longer, more questionable words are being used for ill?
 