
Picaroon <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/picaroon> 
has been setting for the Guardian since March 2012.


His first puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25585> 
arrived so fully formed that some solvers thought this must be a new pseudonym 
for an old hand, but no: Picaroon is James Brydon, who also sets as Lavatch in 
the Spectator, and with the same nom de guerre in some astonishing Listener 
puzzles.

When we spoke to the Spectator puzzle editor Tom Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jul/11/crossword-blog-meet-setter-otterden>
 last year, he declared himself proud to have “‘discovered’ Lavatch about 10 
years ago when he submitted a few unsolicited cryptic puzzles to 1 Across 
magazine”, adding that “his smooth and elegant clueing style mark him as the 
doyen of the younger British setters”.

Among my favourites of his clues is from that first Guardian puzzle: “It’s 
coming to a point where a Liberal is propping up right-winger in charge (7)” 
for CONICAL.

So let’s meet this setter ...

When/where do you create your puzzles?

I tend to scribble clues everywhere, often surreptitiously when I should be 
doing something else. Being busy withreal life and a small child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/18/crossword-blog-3d-calendar-2013>
 means taking advantage of whatever spare minutes I can find.


When did you get the crossword bug?

In my early teens. My parents solved the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> and Everyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/everyman> puzzles and that 
taught me the basics.Araucaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/nov/27/crossword-blog-araucaria-john-graham>
 andBunthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/aug/03/guardianobituaries.pressandpublishing>
 got me hooked but they gave me an education too.

They didn’t just set riddles: their puzzles were full of fascinating cultural 
references to things that I would never have found out about in school.


What’s your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I tend to remember puzzles longer than clues – especially Listener puzzles 
<http://listenercrossword.com/> – because of the days of maddening seclusion 
trying to construct them.

I’m still quite partial to a puzzle of mine 
<http://listenwithothers.com/2010/04/09/the-fragmentation-of-reality-by-lavatch/>
 based onKurosawa’s Rashomon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rashomon>, where 
there were 65,536 possible different grid fills that could be generated from 
the clues.

I also like the visual effect of a circular puzzle 
<http://listenwithothers.com/2013/01/11/in-season-by-lavatch/> which, after 
cutting, ended up as a lacy snowflake inscribed with “[the] frolic architecture 
of [the] snow” from Emerson’s poem The Snowstorm.

Since my memory of clues doesn’t extend too far, I’ll just mention a recent 
clue <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26177> that I did like: 

2d/10ac New ref took latitude, playing advantage for Eden Hazard (4,2,9)


I’ll give the answer below. I remember being so engrossed in that Rashomon 
puzzle that I had to pop into shop doorways to fill in letters whenever 
inspiration struck. Where else have you been tempted to take the concept of 
multiple solutions?


Having wrestled with the folly of it once, I’ve vowed never to try it again. 

Wherever the idea might go, it’s probably just a detour on the way to what a 
crossword ultimately needs to be satisfying: a unique solution.


Right-o. Which other setters do you admire?

At the Guardian, I always enjoy Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/brendan>’s thematic 
dexterity andArachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
’s mixture of erudition and espièglerie.

I find that my Spectator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jul/11/crossword-blog-meet-setter-otterden>
 colleaguesDumpynose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/12/sportandleisure.features> and Mr 
Magoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/20/crossword-blog-watching-a-champion-solver-at-work>
 combine ingenious thematic ideas with stylish clues. Ferret, as a newer 
arrival on the scene, has produced some dazzling grid constructions and elegant 
clues.

 What makes a successful clue?

Precision. Misdirection. An amusing surface reading. But more than that, some 
spark of inspiration that’s hard to quantify.

The following <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/22947>, from Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
, has lingered in my mind for years:

20ac If you want ‘thick’, get this: right lot of racists admitted to their 
‘problem’? (9)

The concept is brilliant, totally unobvious, and the whole thing is realised, 
for no apparent reason, in a fantastic pastiche of “yoofspeak”.


And what makes an unsuccessful one?

A nonsensical, “crosswordy” surface reading or lots of first, last, or middle 
letters.

How did you choose your pseudonyms? 

I chose Lavatch, the clown in All’s Well That Ends Well, when I was an 
undergraduate studying for a paper on Shakespeare and was struck by how much 
crossword-type wordplay appears in his work (especially in Love’s Labour’s 
Lost).

I think the name reflects my understanding of clue-writing: half subtle, 
linguistic play and half buffoonery.

For similar reasons, I like the meaning of Picaroon as a rogue or someone who 
lives by his wits, and the reference to the rascally heroes of picaresque 
literature.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

Perplexed at first, but diverted by the entertaining surfaces and then, as the 
answers start to fall, emitting contented “ah”s and admiring chuckles until the 
last answer settles into place with an intellectually satisfying snap.

Well, you did say “imagine”, right?

What’s the future for cryptic crosswords?

There are certainly plenty of excellent setters emerging like Rorschach, 
eXternal and Shark. As far as production goes, technology is allowing 
incredible grid constructions that would have been impossible until recently.

And as for distribution, the internet should be key. I’d like to see more 
publications likeThe Magpie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/oct/21/crossword-blog-times-championship-record>
 which aims its content purely at crossworders and caters for interests that 
some of the mainstream publications wouldn’t.

I understand that you’re a solver of French and Serbian puzzles. What are the 
most interesting differences as compared to English-language cryptics?

For starters, they aren’t cryptic. Good French crosswords have a sort of Rufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/shortcuts/2012/feb/21/guardian-crossword-setter-rufus-80>
-esque, ludic quality, such as “Déjeuner sur l’herbe” to define BROUTER.

Serbian crosswords are just definition and answer (and some tempestuous 
debates about whether the words used actually exist or whether the compiler has 
just made them up to fit the spaces).

Grammatically speaking, English is an amazingly flexible language with no 
genders, adjective agreements or case endings and minimal verb conjugations. 
This, I think, rather than any supposed “English mentality”, is what makes 
cryptic clue writing possible and explains why it can’t easily be replicated in 
most other languages.

And I would bet a large sum that you have read Landscape Painted with Tea 
<http://www.khazars.com/en/catalog/landscape-painted-with-tea> in both English 
and the vernacular. For those of us who can only read it in English, what are 
we missing?

Great Slavic runs of consonants like in “strpljenje” and “Ävrst”.

Ooh. Now, is setting art or craft?

Both. Basically, it’s a craft, but a great deal of “art” is just mastery of 
craft and there’s much artistry in the best examples of many banal everyday 
objects such as crossword puzzles.

It’s amazing how a simple square with words in it has evolved, over the last 
hundred years, to become much more than just a “game”: the best crosswords can 
be witty reflections of their authors’ personalities; they communicate 
political and social messages; they play with complex ideas likeKlein bottles 
<http://listenwithothers.com/2011/11/25/carte-blanche-with-a-twist-by-mash/>, 
recreate historical events likethe Dambusters raids 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/Solutions/S2013/Notes_4241.html> and echo the 
structures of artistic works by constructing clues in verse. Long may this 
adventurous spirit endure!

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

I think that solving “Like Venus de Milo, wouldn’t ’urt a fly (7)” at the age 
of about 10 was my first success.

My earliest attempts to write clues have been mercifully destroyed and all 
memories of them systematically repressed.

A pity. How do people respond if and when you tell them you’re a crossword 
setter?

They often seem genuinely interested and then say something bizarre like “you 
must have a really good general knowledge”.

Is a propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

It’s thoroughly aggravating when you’re trying to read something engrossing 
and can’t stop spotting potential anagrams or wordplay breakdowns.

And if you weren’t a crossword setter, what would you be?

A little less busy and a lot more bored.

Many thanks to Picaroon for another engrossing encounter. The answers to the 
clues above are: for the ‘Eden Hazard’ clue (not as recent as when I first 
spoke to Picaroon), TREE OF KNOWLEDGE; for ‘If you want thick’, CORNFLOUR and, 
for the Venus de Milo, surely, ARMLESS.
 