
Devotees of British broadsheet cryptics sometimes give the impression that 
theirs are the only crosswords worth solving. But there are a few names from 
around the world that the curious should know.

I have enjoyed, from Ireland, Crossheir 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/blogs/thecrosaireblog/>; from India, Gridman 
<http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/r.html#C-G-Rishikesh>; and from the US, 
setters includingBrendan Emmett Quigley <http://www.brendanemmettquigley.com/>, 
Anna Shechtman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/aug/18/crossword-blog-where-are-female-setters>
,Henry Hook <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/03/04/the-riddler>, Trazom 
and Hot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/19/crossword-blog-cryptics-america>
,Cox and Rathvon <http://www.crookedcrosswords.com/>, Stanley Newman 
<http://www.stanxwords.com/>, Ben Tausig <http://inkwellxwords.com/> and, until 
last week,Merl Reagle <http://www.sundaycrosswords.com/puzzlearticle.htm>.

Reagle, who died aged 65 on Saturday, talked crosswords as deftly as he set 
them. “The three-toed sloths, the Malaysian canoes,” he said of the 
overfamiliar words thatseem to exist only in crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/08/crossword-blog-word-puzzle-setters-love>
, “who cares?”

This from a setter who worked with those American grids, which have far more 
interlocking and a concomitant greater need for certain kinds of entry. Filling 
them doesn’t look fun, but solving them certainly can be.

Reagle, who set for papers including the Washington Post, the San Francisco 
Chronicle and the Los Angeles Times, was loved by solvers for the relentless 
invention and wit with which he avoided providing just another puzzle.

There were some useful crosswordy words, though, that he wished he could use. 
Inthe 2006 documentary Wordplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/jul/05/wordonthestreet>, he 
sighs:

You can’t use bodily functions in puzzles, you know. ‘Urine’ would bail me out 
of a corner a million times a year. Same with ‘enema’. ‘Enema’: talk about 
great letters. But you’ve got to keep those words out of puzzles, because it 
doesn’t pass the Sunday Morning Breakfast Test. I mean, there are people 
solving the big Sunday puzzle. They’ve waited all week for this. They’re 
sitting there relaxing, and here comes, you know, ‘rectal’? I don’t think so.

In a film that features Bill Clinton among myriad compelling solvers, the 
hirsute and genial Reagle is the star: a spirit of intellectual fun fills the 
screen each time he talks. As such, he was part of an American movement: the 
“new wave” of the early 1980s, which felt that the crossword had ossified into 
a joyless chore that smelled of the schoolrooms of the previous generation.

The preposterous New York Times puzzle editor of the era, Eugene T Maleska, 
told the young Reagle that he had no talent 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/08/22/will-shortz-on-merl-reagle/?_r=0> 
– but in time, the likes of Reagle and the editorWill Shortz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/07/crosswords-in-fiction-west-wing>
 were proved right as they took over the puzzles: humour, slang and allusion 
were, in fact, precisely what millions of solvers wanted.

That documentary led to the puzzle that I deem the greatest clueing coup in 
the first century of crosswording. Welooked at it in greater detail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/04/top-10-crosswords-fiction-simpsons>
 in our Top 10 Crosswords in Fiction series. In short, Wordplay inspired the 
creators of The Simpsons to afflict Lisa with a love of crosswords. The 
resulting episode ends with Lisa solving a New York Times Sunday puzzle set by 
Reagle, which she then realises is rammed with hidden messages from her dad: a 
baroque accomplishment of such devious construction that it threatens the 
bounds of credibility.
 Lisa Simpson solves Merl Reagle’s puzzle in The Simpsons’ episode Homer and 
Lisa Exchange Cross Words. Photograph: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment 
Easy to do in fiction, but it wasn’t just a fictional crossword: it was the 
actual puzzle published in that Sunday’s New York Times, although its solvers 
could have had no idea what narrative depths were concealed in its grid and 
clues – or its other treats. How could they be expected to notice, until 
prompted, that the diagonal that read ...

F A B D C A F D B B B C B B B C E F F F F 

... was giving the final 21 notes of the Simpsons theme? (The E is in fact an 
E-flat, but Reagle had naturally ensured that the answer containing the E was 
... E FLAT.)

The puzzle is touching, funny and dazzling, and the episode – Homer and Lisa 
Exchange Cross Words – in which Reagle has a cameo, is a fine tribute to a 
setter who has stopped setting unexpectedly early. Another is A Loss for Words, 
a valedictory puzzle turned around at speed by Quigley (in .puz format 
<http://www.brendanemmettquigley.com/files/ALossForWords.puz> for software such 
asCrossword Solver <http://www.crosswordsolver.info/>, or as a PDF 
<http://www.brendanemmettquigley.com/files/ALossForWords.pdf>).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgqGvDVQ8WaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgqGvDVQ8WaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgqGvDVQ8WaI&media=>
 Merl Reagle at the 2014 Tucson Festival of Books 
Finally, this post by solver-blogger Rex Parker 
<http://rexwordpuzzle.blogspot.co.uk/2015/08/city-between-turin-genoa-sun-8-23-15.html>
 has links to further testimonials, includingWill Shortz’s 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/08/22/will-shortz-on-merl-reagle/>.

 * The Crossword Blog will resume on Monday 14 September.  