
The news in clues

There's no silly season on the puzzle pages. Following the reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/conservative-backlash-begins-cameron-cabinet-reshuffle>
,Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
'sGuardian puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26332> seemed 
to have been composed under large portraits of cabinet tables past, present and 
future, if you care to imagine such a thing. We had one of those who stayed ...

2d Home secretary's border chaos (6)

... in a four-word political biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/21/theresa-may-farce-border-control>
 which makes you wonder why she is not known as Theresa MAYHEM; we had one of 
those who went ...

10ac Thinks too much of Gove (prat) — he's sacked heads about reading? (9)

... one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/05/how-gove-reforms-drove-me-out-teaching>
 who, it's thought, OVERRATES his own skill, and we had one who was in the news 
that very day ...

6d Writer cut Boris off (4)

... the one described by Ian Hislop 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/episode/vwgwc/boris-johnson-the-irresistible-rise> 
as "our Berlusconi", in a clue for BIRO.

Meanwhile in the Independent, eXternal gave us a blast from the past in the 
form ...

8d Power nap for bed-hopping politician (8)

... of John PRESCOTT. 

Latter patter

SPOILER is a word with ambitions. Unhappy with meaning merely "one who spoils" 
(or indeed depoils), it has taken on some wonderfully specific senses: a boxer 
who is destined to lose but still makes his opponent look bad; various flaps 
and doodads on planes, automobiles and, for all I know, trains; and a tactic 
from the business of journalism described by the Guardian in 1985:

What we have there is a classic Fleet Street spoiling operation aimed at 
sinking the Bogdanovitch story ... The spoiler is designed to neutralise the 
enemy's razzmatazz by running the same story, preferably bigger, better and 
sooner.

Other modern uses include an device to stop, for example, a MiniDisc player 
from copying a CD, back from the days when the recording industry thought that 
the DAT was the biggest threat it would ever face, and those used by Quixote 
(known locally asPasquale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
):

3ac No-hope candidates giving messages better not received? (8)

The first half gives us a political contender who does much the same job as 
the pathetic pugilist above; the second is the kind of spoiler seen in phrases 
like SPOILER ALERT: the revelation of a plot point which, if you encounter it 
before you watch or read the story in question, may spoil your enjoyment.

That sense was given a boost by the enthusiasm of geekdom: a considerate 1982 
Usenet poster typed SPOILER ALERT beforewriting this about The Wrath of Khan 
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/net.movies/c09z1_ob--M> (spoiler 
alert):

regarding Spock's parting gesture to McCoy, it wouldn't surprize me if that's 
how they bring him back (if they do); but then, i have a low opinion of ST's 
script(s). Spock's farewell to Kirk sounded pretty final to me.

The "plot" kind of spoiler, though, goes back at least to 1971 and a piece in 
the satirical magazine National Lampoon 
<https://archive.org/stream/National_Lampoon_v1n13_1971-04_Adventure/National_Lampoon_v1n13_1971-04_Adventure_djvu.txt>
 which noted that "the average American has more excitement in his daily life 
than he can healthily handle" and, as a public service, offered "a selection of 
'spoilers' guaranteed to reduce the risk of unsettling and possibly dangerous 
suspense" (spoiler alert):

JANE EYRE (Charlotte Bronte): The madwoman upstairs is Rochester's wife.

GREAT EXPECTATIONS (Charles Dickens): Pip's secret benefactor is 
Magwitch, the criminal.

[...]

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT (Fyodor Dostoevsky): Raskolnikov did it.

I have a dim memory of Stephen Fry doing something similar behind a desk on a 
televised charity gala, but YouTube has not refreshed - perhaps you can help?

The New York Times' style blog has a startling graph 
<http://afterdeadline.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/11/spoiler-alert-this-phrase-is-overused/>
 showing the rise of the phrase "spoiler alert". This is not just to mere 
increased consideration on the part of the paper's reviewers; the standards 
editor writes ...

The expression has spread far beyond its original purpose, and now often seems 
like an all-purpose plea for attention:Hey! I'm about to tell you something 
interesting! In most cases it does nothing to actually alert the reader, since 
the 'spoiler' is often the very next phrase.

... and suggests: "Let's raise the bar for this overused quirk." Our next 
challenge concerns another parenthetical siren,also subject to semantic creep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/05/trigger-warnings-can-be-counterproductive>
: reader, how would you clue TRIGGER WARNING?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for CONUNDRUM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jul/28/crossword-sport-commonwealth-games-clues#show-all>
.

I enjoyed the Countdown references, especially kerfufflepuff's "Puzzle an 
introduction to Carol and Richard? Um, dunno!"

singinggardener asks whether "Swindle odd round German, and puzzling" is "too 
easy?" Simplicity is no sin here, and a clue ending in "puzzle" rather than 
"puzzling" would be both easier and more delightful. Meanwhile, robinjohnson 
gets the audacity award for the non-instrument the "un-drum" in the bold "Trick 
that can't be beaten? It's frustrating" and yungylek's "What one might do 
having got head around new, round cryptic puzzle" may be the bluest entry yet.

Among the pleasing constructions were JollySwagman's unexpected compound 
anagram "Problem Blair's posturing has given us. Nil carborundum!" and the 
enigmatic D2155366's "Fundamental scone blunder – crumb in jam".

The runners-up are HipsterPriest's inside-baseball "Unusual noun in cryptic 
definition - odd puzzle this" and harlobarlo's "Unfathomable opening for A. 
Conan Doyle's first strange mystery"; the winner is the Spätburgunde sangria of 
Truth101's "The problem with Spanish and German booze".

Kudos to Truth - please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

An unnamed Times setter decided to begin – to begin, mind you – a puzzle with 
...

1ac Wait, rear on jet, here? (5)

... this clue for BIDET. I was thrown by the "wait" but I sensed this was one 
I'd get to crack in the end.
 