
There is much cause to be anxious in today’s world – so much so that you’ve 
probably been uneasily wondering what happened to “Hannelore K”, the
nonagenarian former dentist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jul/18/crossword-blog-when-solving-a-crossword-is-a-criminal-act>
 who recently visited a Nuremberg art gallery. In the gallery was 
Reading-work-piece by Arthur Köpcke, a £67,000 avant-garde collage that 
incorporates (a) a crossword and (b) the English-language instruction: “Insert 
words!”

She did insert words. Hannelore K filled in the crossword. The curators have 
filed a criminal complaint, though Hannelore K can relax: one theory is that 
the insurance on a museum’s collection remains valid only if future vandals 
know there’s threat of prosecution. It may all be a show.

Now, apparently in the same spirit of law-as-theatre, Hannelore K’s lawyer has 
gone hardcore. Aseven-page rebuttal 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/bayern/nuernberg-seniorin-beansprucht-urheberrecht-an-zerstoertem-kunstwerk-1.3104463>
 insists she was collaborating with the original artist; that she created a new 
work when she got out her ballpoint pen, and that the new work is more valuable 
than the old because of the international press surrounding the incident. The 
restoration the museum has carried out was itself an act of vandalism, which 
infringes Hannelore K’s copyright – one for which they should perhaps be 
prosecuted.

Very nicely done. Very Fluxus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/dec/10/art>.

We have looked at crosswords in narrative fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/oct/04/top-10-crosswords-fiction-simpsons>
 before; crosswords are less often spotted in visual art. Here is my top five: 
they are all pieces from galleries or museums, so there’s literally no room 
for, say,the 100-foot puzzle on the side of a tower block in Lvov, Ukraine 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/4206226/Worlds-biggest-crossword-on-tower-block.html>
.

(5) William Turnbull’s Figures and Signs 

A 1950s print from the Scottish artist: a pair of simple, cave-men-like 
figures on a sheet of real newspaper 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/images/work/P/P77/P77468_10.jpg>, cluttered with 
personal announcements, property ads and ... a crossword.

(4) Ryan Gander’s Robbed Us with the Sight of What We Should Have Known

An installation from 2005 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/gander-robbed-us-with-the-sight-of-what-we-should-have-known-t12413>
 that includes a stack of newspapers. The newspaper at the top shows a 
crossword created by the artist which is unsolvable because one of the words 
(MITIM) is a made-up palindrome.

(3) Paulina Olowska’s Au Bonheur des Dames

Includes a gouache painting 
<http://www.stedelijk.nl/en/exhibitions/paulina-olowska> of a woman dwarfed by 
an enormous crossword.

(2) David Hockney’s The Crossword Puzzle, Minneapolis, January 1983

Collage of photos 
<http://www.artnet.com/artists/david-hockney/the-crossword-puzzle-minneapolis-january-1983-V59AQoTMEaSSJoyFm8Fu2g2>
 of a group solve.

(1) Lady Ottoline Morrell’s Crossword Puzzles

From the National Portrait Gallery, a vintage snapshot print 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portraitLarge/mw91204/Crossword-puzzles>
 of some solving in 1925, when crosswords had only just appeared in this 
country (they include an Earl of Arran, a lieutenant-colonel and a governing 
director of W.H. Smith & Son Ltd.

So, kudos to Lady Ottoline. What else? There’s some crossword art that isn’t 
in galleries ina post from last year 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2015/05/works-of-art-inspired-by-crosswords.html>
 at Shuchismita Upadhyay’s excellent Crossword Unclued. What other instances of 
crosswords on canvases have I missed?
 