
The news in clues

If you want to avoid spoilers, a deeply satisfying solve from the FT awaits 
you here 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/6f95b52a-6b5b-11e4-9337-00144feabdc0.pdf>
.

Last week, we spoke to Philistine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/31/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-philistine>
 about thepuzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26427> he 
finished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/27/araucarias-final-crossword-the-handwritten-solution>
 forAraucaria, who died a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/27/araucarias-final-crossword-the-handwritten-solution>
.

John Graham was of course known under another nom de guerre when setting in 
the Financial Times: Cinephile, an anagram of Chile pine, which is another name 
for the monkey puzzle tree, in Latin … Araucaria araucana.

So it was that the FT had a tribute 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/6f95b52a-6b5b-11e4-9337-00144feabdc0.pdf>
, albeit one that revealed itself gradually. Any solvers familiar with one of 
the legends of crosswording won’t have needed to know which sad anniversary was 
falling in order to twig after a couple of clues, such as …

15 Very possibly secure a metal set in a bummer of an activity? The reverse 
(10)

[abbreviation for “very” + abbreviation for “possibly” with a synonym for 
“secure” and “a metal” set inside them]

[V + EG surrounding GET + A TIN]


… for VEGETATING, not to mention …

11 Not entirely certain one’s included in image management alone, strange to 
hear (12)

[most of a word for “certain” + synonym for “one” inside an abbreviation 
meaning “image management” and a synonym for “alone” ]

[SUR + I inside PR and SINGLY]

… for SURPRISINGLY, that this was an entire puzzle constructed in tribute to a 
single clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/celebrating-100-years-crossword>.

3ac Poetical scene with surprisingly chaste Lord Archer vegetating (3, 3, 8, 
12)

[anagram of “chaste Lord Archer vegetating”]

Thusly did Araucaria reprimand Jeffrey Archer in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/22103>.

It’s remarkable to see all the words from the original clue and answer (THE 
OLD VICARAGE GRANTCHESTER) included in the down entries. Also remarkable, and 
downright spooky, is how well they lend themselves to the symmetry of a 
crossword grid.

Io – known locally as Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 – graciously showed me his setting notes for the puzzle. They read:

In a typical 15x15 grid, 8s pair with 6s & 10s with 4s; 12s occupy single 
rows/columns.

So I have POETICAL and VICARAGE pairing (in whichever order) with CHASTE and 
THE OLD; LORD ARCHER and VEGETATING pairing (in whichever order) with WITH and 
another 4; SURPRISINGLY and GRANTCHESTER occupying (?) symmetrical opposite 
spaces.

Astonishing; really. For the grid chosen by Io, all these theme words are the 
answers to down clues; the five-letter SCENE had to go into the middle, leaving 
three four-letter entries duly filled with BEST, CLUE and EVER. Araucaria would 
be rightly proud of his one-time protege, not least for the choice of across 
entries with such little elbow room. Three down is beautiful.

Because they can

Guardian setters including Arachne, Enigmatist, Everyman, Nutmeg, Pasquale, 
Puck, Rufus and Tramp can be found in the 2015 calendar of three-dimensional 
puzzles. This is the latest in a bewilderingly immersive collection of puzzles,
which we discussed here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/10/three-dimensional-cryptic-crosswords>
, and which raise funds for Children in Need and the RNIB.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcrossword-roundup-an-astonishing-lord-archer-themed-tribute-to-araucaria-and-the-best-3d-puzzles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418032989818%2Fcaec91b8-5b79-45bb-96eb-6c045fcb21d7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossword%20roundup%3A%20an%20astonishing%20Lord%20Archer-themed%20tribute%20to%20Araucaria%2C%20and%20the%20best%203D%20puzzles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcrossword-roundup-an-astonishing-lord-archer-themed-tribute-to-araucaria-and-the-best-3d-puzzles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossword%20roundup%3A%20an%20astonishing%20Lord%20Archer-themed%20tribute%20to%20Araucaria%2C%20and%20the%20best%203D%20puzzles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fcrossword-roundup-an-astonishing-lord-archer-themed-tribute-to-araucaria-and-the-best-3d-puzzles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418032989818%2Fcaec91b8-5b79-45bb-96eb-6c045fcb21d7-1020x612.jpeg>
 The 2015 3D Crossword Calendar. Photograph: Calendarpuzzles 
You can order it here 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/calendar_puzzle_2015.html> and, 
coincidentally, fans of one of the contributors, Pasquale, can be foundin 
conversation at the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/games/11267921/Fleet-Streets-most-fiendish-crossword-compiler-hits-100.html>
. The calendar also leads us to our next clueing challenge. Reader, how would 
you clue PHILANTHROPY?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for AARDVARK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/24/crossword-roundup-baldrick-oxford-bbc-blackadder#show-all>
. JollySwagman and alberyalbery wisely stayed on the topic of dictionaries with 
“I really dig this – it’s where Baldrick got stuck” and “First from Oxford 
perhaps”.

For surprising surfaces, I enjoyed Robi23’s subtractive anagram “One digging 
the dark way, Darth Vader (Anakin) avoids initial nasty death in explosion”, 
and machiajelly’s imagery of unwelcome ergonomic improvements in “‘A Dvorak 
keyboard’s crazy! Not English!! Not OK!!! Nobody’s hybrid!!!!’ scoffed the 
workers”.

Colin Maher gets chutzpah points this week for insisting that “Varadkar” is 
more than plausible in “Doctor Varadkar preys on the lowly workers”.

The runners-up are Middlebro’s acrostic “For this animal, heads of ants are 
really delicious, vegetables are rarely known” and harlobarlo’s enigmatic “This 
animal is, in a way, a very old means of transport”; the winner is steveran’s 
plausible and pleasing “Its soldiers should stick to the African tongue”.

Clue of the Fortnight

Returning to the tribute, Io told solvers’ blog Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/2014/11/26/financial-times-14789-by-io/> that 
one of his clues might have an Araucarian quality of refusing to be pinned down.
Here it is 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/6f95b52a-6b5b-11e4-9337-00144feabdc0.pdf>
:

13d View children should be heard? No . . . . yes! (5) 

… without parsing, though I think the answer’s being SCENE is fairly easily 
seen.
 