
Scan the menu from a Guardian crossword page, from the appetisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quiptic> to richer fare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/genius>, and you’ll find a 
tradition that goes back to the birth of British crosswording.

The Observer’s toughest puzzle has only had three regular setters: Torquemada, 
Ximenes and now the splendidAzed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/azed>. It’s a community as well 
as a crossword: since 1945, solvers have taken part in a clue-writing 
competition. Andfrom the beginning 
<http://www.andlit.org.uk/azed/by_cluer.php?series=X&cluer_id=22>, entrants 
knew that they would have to come up with something special to match the 
wordplay of C J Morse.

When Sir Jeremy Morse died last week, the obituaries focused on the 
non-crosswording aspects of his life: his chairmanship of Lloyds Bank, his 
missing out on the governorship of the Bank of England (perhaps because 
Margaret Thatcher suspected him of “Keynesian sympathies 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/12140770/Sir-Jeremy-Morse-banker-obituary.html>
”), and his concerns about the credit boom of the 1980s.

In the crosswording world, though, Morse was known for two things. 

First, there were the clues – elegant, economical and witty – that made him so 
much a part of the Azed series that Azed – Jonathan Crowther – marked Morse’s 
80th birthday witha tribute puzzle 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2008/12/04/1906dec7.pdf>
:

C J (Jeremy) Morse will be 80 on 10 December. Over the course of the Azed 
series, and the Ximenes series before that, he has established himself as the 
most brilliant and successful competitive clue writer of all, with a long 
string of outstanding clues to his credit, many of which have won prizes.

The second was related to puzzles of a different kind. Among the solvers who 
had to contend with Morse as a rival was N C Dexter. His competition entries 
stopped appearing in the mid-1970s, asAzed explained 
<http://www.andlit.org.uk/azed/slip.php?comp_no=221> in the puzzle’s newsletter:

And while we’re on the subject of fiction and clues, some of you may have 
wondered at the disappearance from these lists for some time of N C (Colin) 
Dexter, for many years a redoubtable competitor. I’m delighted to report that 
he’s alive and well and a close neighbour of mine in Oxford ... He forswore 
crosswords for a spell to devote his leisure hours to clues of another kind, 
writing detective novels. Solvers who may care to read Last Bus to Woodstock or 
Last Seen Wearing (just published) will be amused to find many familiar names 
among his characters.

Dexter and Morse had been friends since the early 1960s: Dexter, pruning his 
garden one day, saw an unfamiliar head appearing over the top of the hedge. It 
was Morse, who introduced himself: “Your name has been appearing in the list of 
Ximenes winners almost as regularly as mine, so I thought we had better get 
acquainted.”

And Morse’s was one of the amusing “familiar names” mentioned by Azed. Everyone
except the murderer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/sep/19/theobserver.uknews2> in that first 
whodunnit,Last Bus to Woodstock 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/last-bus-to-woodstock.html>, is named after 
someone from the crosswording world, but Dexter saved for his detective the 
name of “the cleverest man I had ever met 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2010/sep/26/azed-giant-among-crosswords-2000>
”: and so the world was introduced to Inspector Morse.


The real-life Morse was far more amicable and popular than his morose 
namesake: the connection was cerebral only. And one can only wish that other 
senior bankers had spent the last few decades applying their spare brainpower 
to crosswords rather than to innovative and world-damaging new forms of banking.

Examples of Morse’s clues are incorporated in that tribute puzzle mentioned 
above 
<http://image.guardian.co.uk/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2008/12/04/1906dec7.pdf>
; here is a selection of my favourites, starting with one from 1952, and 
another from 1953 which remains true today:

1 With me about, it’s wrong to hinder love (9)

2 It’s difficult for the liberal to save money in the bank! (7)

3 Wild love affair like this could give you coronary (7)

4 To lie still is not enough here; both sides of the sheet must be tucked in 
(8)

5 You’ll find Australia’s opening bats reformed at the wicket — it’s all to be 
very sober (7)

6 Stiff collaring: that’s my trade — shows what can be done by starch (12)

Answers below, and the follow-up to the David Bowie post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jan/25/crossword-roundup-cryptic-world-says-bye-to-david-bowie-tributes>
 will now appear next week.

 * MISTLETOE (anag. + let + 0, all in me, & lit)

 * DEPOSIT (2 mngs.; ref. Liberals’ poor 1950 and 1951 election results and 
lost d.)

 * CARRY-ON (anag. incl. 0, & lit.)

 * BEDSTEAD (be + s(hee)t in dead, & lit.)

 * ABSTAIN (A + anag. + in)

 * BODY-SNATCHER (misleading def. + anag.)  