
A year ago, we looked at an uncanny image of crosswording from the successful 
bits-and-bobs website BuzzFeed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/09/crossword-blog-hungarian-crossword-suicide-note>
.

Since then, BuzzFeed’s place in the landscape has changed. Then, you said of 
it, cynically: “Ha ha, lists of cats”; now, you say, superciliously: “Ah, but 
there’s actually someaward-winning 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/gregorydjohnsen/60-words-and-a-war-without-end-the-untold-story-of-the-most>
long-form <http://www.buzzfeed.com/tools/email/longform?=buzzreads> journalism 
on there.” And good for them – with one exception.

Here it is: a spokes-investor for BuzzFeed defending the site against the 
dumbing-down charge 
<http://qz.com/310104/buzzfeed-is-killing-it-and-its-older-rivals-are-rattled/>
, insisting that it’s not allclickbait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/in-defence-of-clickbait>.


For decades, he points out, newspapers mixed lowbrow content like horoscopes 
and crosswords with more serious reporting.

Really? Come on. This is a dodgy syllogism which breaks down to: “People say 
they want serious news, but aproportion of that used to come from serious 
newspapers, andthose are the same medium as bad newspapers, and those also had 
astrology, so back off.”

Dodgy, but it helps us work out what the future might be for the crossword. 
The spokesuit is right insofar as crosswords are not important chronicling or 
investigation – moreover, like clickbait, they’re compulsive, and often give 
more pleasure to the reader (or solver, or user) than a slab of cold, hard news.

Now, reader, you and I know that this does not make crosswords “lowbrow”, and 
that features in general can be composed with care, intelligence and a sense of 
responsibility … in some publications.

But in a clickbait world, it’s clicks that count. It is hard to name a print 
publication that (a) wants to be taken seriously and (b) has no cryptic 
crossword: the London Review of Books comes to mind after a struggle. And the 
tone of the puzzle is as reflective of the ethos of the publication as its 
columnists and masthead.


That sentiment and that tradition don’t wash online. After all, one of the 
reasons that crosswords are not “lowbrow” is that they have often – by 
definition and for reasons of deadlines – had more care and time, sweat and 
love, put into their every word than any other part of the paper.

Ask yourself: if you were running a website where every click counts, would 
you bother with a crossword – and the solvers’ complaints that come with it – 
or would you stick tolisticle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/12/listicles-articles-written-lists-steven-poole>
s? Why would you privilege the most elegant puzzle fromEnigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 orPasquale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
 over any other blob of content?

Worrying, isn’t it? And what about the next-but-one generation of editors and 
proprietors of those publications that do have have crosswords, and have long 
since given up ink-on-paper form? It is time for puzzlers to take stock.

Crosswording need not become the vinyl of intellectual pastimes – especially 
not if it spends some time shouting about its achievements, however unnatural 
that might feel.

I commissioned a survey last year for the centenary of the crossword and found 
that 72% of British adults consider themselves solvers, and around three in 10 
try a puzzle at least once a week.

The stat I would be trumpeting loudest, though, if I were a setter or puzzle 
editor, is that for more than one in five people, their choice of newspaper is 
influenced by its crossword (7.3 million people’s paper money, in other words).

Now is the hour for crosswords to make their presence felt, if they’re not to 
be regarded as some optional extra, horoscope-like fluff.As Lindsay Anderson 
put it <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/dec/05/film>: Stand up! Stand up!

The polling data is from a YouGov online survey of 2,045 adults for the book 
Two Girls, One on Each Knee 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/two-girls-one-on-each-knee.html>; it was 
conducted between 22 and 24 May 2013; the figures have been weighted and are 
representative of all GB adults (aged 18+).
 