
Puck has been setting for the Guardian since 2006 - not a long time in 
crossword years, but he is a firmly established favourite of many. As happy 
being blue as he is waxing literate, Puck would be incapable of producing a 
workaday crossword. Many ofhis puzzles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/puck> 
have featured here -a hidden armadillo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/23/crossword-roundup-ed-lights>
, for instance and better stillthe old-school euphemism "the other" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/21/1>, and he's 
been in two of our For Beginners features, in the form of aconcealed lech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/06/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-hidden-answers>
 and the audacious soundalike of"he-whore" for HEE-HAW 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
.

When/where do you create your puzzles?

In the land of Puck, wherever and whenever inspiration strikes. If it doesn't, 
I'll root through my notes and ideas or my reference materials until it does. 
Or else,as Fred (almost) said <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r5XX9LX2es4>, 
I'll 'ave another cuppa tea. And that usually helps.

When did you get the crossword bug?

My maternal grandfather introduced me to crosswords when I was about seven or 
eight. When I stayed with my grandparents, I took his breakfast tray up to him 
in bed, along with the daily papers. I began by helping with the Daily Express 
Make You Very Cross-Word, which was barred and non-cryptic apart from some 
signalled anagrams. Soon I was pretending I hadn't got the answers in order to 
give my granddad a chance to solve some first.

It wasn't long before I graduated to the daily cryptics in the Scotsman 
<http://www.scotsman.com/the-scotsman/games/crosswords> with my granddad and to 
those in the Guardian <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/cryptic> 
with my mum, also a keen solver.Chambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 was the dictionary of choice in both households, so I was brought up well!

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

I have a few favourite puzzles. There was the April Fool's Day puzzle in 2009 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24662> which reminded people of 
the great San Serriffe hoax 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2009/apr/03/guardian-letter-twitter>; 
the SpongeBob SquarePants puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24938>, which was a lot of fun to 
set while attempting to appeal to a younger audience; andthe Groundhog Day 
puzzle <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/24301>, where I got to clue 
GOBBLER'S KNOB!

Favourite clues are less easy to recall, since I am more puzzle- than 
clue-orientated. I do however like my clue for ESSES (13d inthe Groundhog Day 
puzzle <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/24301>) for the way it 
epitomises the theme. I also fondly remember the clues for MEGACEPHALOUS (8d in
24,779 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/24779>), FLUSHING MEADOWS 
(24ac in24,727 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24727>) and 
SLIPWAYS (21/6d in25,340 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25340>).

Before I morph into Paul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 in front of your very eyes, I must add that I am fond of the clues for AILING 
(9ac in24,616 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24616>), 
DEPARTMENTAL (4/22d in25,178 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25178>), GOING (26ac in 24,575 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24575>), THIEVERY (26ac in 25,131 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25131>) and THOREAU (19d in 24,727 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24727>).

Which other setters do you admire?

There are so many good setters around, all with their own individual styles, 
it seems unfair to pick out individuals. Having said that, the setter who first 
really inspired me wasAraucaria <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/araucaria>. 
Even before he assumed the pseudonym, I loved his bank holiday specials and my 
first attempt at setting - some time in my teens - was a Christmas double 
puzzle themed around my family.

I admire Araucaria's cheek and ingenuity, his ability to retain a freshness 
after so many years of quality puzzles, and his penchant for often quite 
outrageously breaking the rules in new and challenging but cruciverbally fair 
ways. I also love and have been influenced byPaul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
's irrepressible sense of wordplay fun, and I admireRufus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
's ability to produce the sheer volume of puzzles he has set at a consistent 
"beginner's cryptic" level - I have used them as examples when teaching people 
How to Solve Cryptic Crosswords.

What makes a successful clue?

I must admit I really think more in terms of the crossword as a whole, and 
whether that is successful or not. I see each clue in that context.

Setting crosswords is very different from a clue-writing competition where one 
clue and solution exist in isolation. I'm always looking to produce a set of 
fair fun clues using a wide range of devices rather than outstanding clues in 
their own right. I hope that the crossword ends up as more than the sum of its 
parts.

And what makes an unsuccessful clue?

I'm not happy myself with a clue that has a poor or clunky surface reading, 
one with more than one possible solution, or one where a solver cannot fairly 
deduce the answer within a libertarian approach to theXimenean 
<http://home.freeuk.net/dharrison/ximenes/xwords.htm> "rules" of cryptic 
crosswords.

How did you learn?

I taught myself, improving gradually through practice and perseverance. 
Looking back, my first efforts were overambitious and inconsistent. This was 
certainly the opinion of the then Guardian crossword editorJohn Perkin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2002/feb/14/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
, who kindly indicated where and how I needed to improve on my first submission 
to the paper.

He suggested I got experience elsewhere, so after lots more practice I 
answered an ad in the Times and began setting a weekly puzzle for a medical 
magazine. I learned quickly on the job. All the puzzles had to be medically 
themed, soBlack's Medical Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713689020>
,Gray's Anatomy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780443069529>
 andMims <http://www.mims.co.uk/go/AboutMIMS/> soon joined my reference library 
and I had fun interweaving other themes and compiling special puzzles for bank 
holidays and other occasions.

I was especially pleased with managing to incorporate the longest word in 
Chambers, pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis, into a 15x15 grid by 
splitting it into seven parts clued individually, together with a clue for the 
whole word based on Macbeth's "way to dusty death". Eventually I reluctantly 
had to retire gracefully; work and other commitments meant I was too often 
burning the midnight oil to get puzzles in by the deadline.

Your themes are wide-ranging: Flann O'Brien, pianos, large animals, odd wines. 
Whataren't you interested in?

My themes are not necessarily based on a personal area of interest. They just 
have to appeal to me as providing good material for a puzzle that will be fun 
to set and solve.

I like to approach themes from a quirky, left-field sense where possible, 
though, rather than resorting to a straightforward list of related items. 
Sometimes the themes appear during, rather than before, the setting process. 
The large-animals puzzle began from the idea of a "hippo campus" - suddenly I 
had "rhinos cope" and it developed organically from there.

One theme I've not used for a while is medicine - probably because I've set so 
many medically-related clues and maybe overdosed on it.

What do you think goes through a solver's mind when she sees that it's a Puck 
puzzle?

I can only guess that there is a wide range of reactions, from "Oh good, 
that'll be fun" to "Oh Puck!"

This was beautifully illustrated in two letters to the editor in response to 
the puzzle where I was a wee bit liberal with sexual references 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24883>, ranging from consensual 
sex with nurses through soixante-neuf to studs and STDs.One correspondent 
suggested I went on the bromide 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2009/dec/17/toffs-cheques-crosswords-saddle-height>
;another took some days to write in 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2009/dec/23/snow-grit-spurs-scenario> 
having "had to go back to bed for some 5,2 and 22 down".

How did you choose your pseudonym?

I was looking for a name that would suggest a lot of mischief going down in my 
puzzles. My first thought was Loki, and it was only by a last-minute piece of 
good fortune that I decided on Puck instead for his lighter sense of 
mischievous playfulness.

The page of your Guardian puzzles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/puck> 
says that you've written for Doctor Who and Danger Mouse. Which Doctor?

I wrote stories and features for children's annuals rather than for the TV 
programmes themselves. The BBC sent us advance scripts of Doctor Who for source 
material and vetted our contributions, and it was at the time of the fourth 
Doctor (Tom Baker) with his assistants Sarah Jane and Leela.

I also wrote for annuals on such diverse topics as Basil Brush, Blake's 7, 
Danger Mouse, Danger UXB!, Question of Sport and Tiswas. The latter involved a 
visit to the ITV studios when the show was on live - luckily I escaped the cage 
and any randomly flung custard pies, but didn't escape having a drink 
afterwards with Chris Tarrant and the lovely Sally James.

Your profile also says you're inspired by 'Fiery Fred' Trueman, Scarborough 
FC, the Incredible String Band and the Kerry coastline. Could you describe what 
you see in each of them?

They are all things or people that I have been passionate about at one time or 
another. Fred Trueman - wild and untameable, and from God's own country; 
Scarborough FC - with a motto "No Battle No Victory", but going bust in 2007 
due to rogue owners and huge debts;the Incredible String Band 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/13/incredible-string-band-hedgehog-song>
 - eclectic and unpredictable, with an almost childlike magic; and the Kerry 
coastline - wild and untameable, on the very edge of Europe and partly 
inspiring the beautifulSong For Ireland 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oRdDnpkR3AQ>.

For me they all seem to have had a sense of drama and inimitable spirit about 
them that have defied convention while taking their own road less travelled. 
Spirited and unpredictable, perhaps - like Puck?

What are the tools of your trade?

Many moons ago, I used mainly Chambers Dictionary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550102379>
 and the brilliantLongman Crossword Key 
<http://www.crosswordunclued.com/2010/12/books-crossword-setters-used-in-days.html>
 for finding words to fit a grid, and then pencil and eraser for word insertion 
followed by a typewriter with carbon paper for writing the clues. Until fairly 
recently I swore I'd never go all technological, but now I useCrossword Compiler
 <http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html> software along with a 
few reference books and the internet.

I also had little notebooks for ideas for clues and themes, but when one got 
full I just started using Word documents instead. And I also carry ideas and 
themes around in my head, gestating for days, weeks or even sometimes years 
before the time is right for that particular creation to appear.

Paper or screen?

I usually solve Guardian puzzles online <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords> 
now except forthe Genius puzzles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/genius/>, 
which I print out.

I solve the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/extras/puzzles/crosswords/> online except for 
Saturdays, sometimes print outthe FT puzzles 
<http://www.ft.com/life-arts/crossword> and occasionally solve the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/> in the paper itself. I 
used to solve barred puzzles such asAzed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/azed> and the Listener 
<http://www.listenercrossword.com/> but rarely do so now.

Pencil or pen?

I nearly always use pen when solving on paper, but pencil for more complex 
cryptics such as the Genius.

I also always used pencil when competing in the Times Crossword Championship 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/27/crossword-blog-need-for-speed>
 but I've not managed to take part for some years. I think my fastest solve in 
those championships was in York in 1980 when the first puzzle had lots of 
medical references and I was the first to finish, in under six minutes. I was 
so shocked I had a quick whisky while waiting for others to finish (those were 
the days when there were four puzzles with breaks in between) - I couldn't 
think straight for the rest of the afternoon and ended up nowhere!

What do you do when you're not writing crosswords?

I'm a musician involved with community music in Cork in various ways including 
performance and music education. I've recently played piano in a jazz band and 
sung in a community choir that performs in hospitals, care homes and other 
situations where people may not otherwise get to hear live music.

I am currently enjoying learning to play pieces from a collection of 
Twenty-Four Negro Melodies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2003/jan/03/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures>
 transcribed for the piano by the black British composer Samuel 
Coleridge-Taylor (who also appeared inone of my puzzles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25053>).

Anything else you want to say?

My first Guardian puzzle appeared in December 2006, and this happened to be 
around the same time asFifteen Squared <http://fifteensquared.net/about-2/> 
began blogging. The almost-instant feedback to puzzles is great because it is 
really valuable to see how puzzles are received by solvers and to feel that 
there is a crossword community of sorts to which we all belong, solvers and 
setters alike.

Now having the additional comments facility on the puzzles themselves and also 
your posts, it is so much more rewarding than when the only feedback would be 
the occasional letter sent via the editor. Although of course it is always nice 
to receive them as well!

Many thanks to Puck - for the hat-tip to this blog and for the eclectic 
playlist, and chiefly for taking part and giving such insight into his 
mysterious mind.
 