
Anna Shechtman <http://www.openingceremony.us/entry.asp?pid=9699> is one of 
the most interesting figures on the American puzzle scene. She sets; she's also 
assistant to the New York Times puzzle editor Will Shortz. Since she may well 
be in charge of some fiefdom of wordplay before long, she's as good a (young) 
person as any to ask about where crosswording may be headed in its second 
century.

In a piece for The American Reader 
<http://theamericanreader.com/puzzle-trouble-women-and-crosswords-in-the-age-of-autofill/>
, Shechtman relates a talk given at this year'sAmerican Crossword Puzzle 
Tournament <http://www.crosswordtournament.com/>. David Steinberg, a teenage 
setter who is digitisingthose NYT puzzles that predate Shortz's tenure 
<http://www.preshortzianpuzzleproject.com/>, had some data to share. Women 
produce 19% of the NYT's crosswords: this is a lower proportion than in 
previous generations, and their puzzles are much more likely to appear on the 
"easier" days, Monday and Tuesday.

Steinberg suggests that the increasing importance of technology in crossword 
construction might be part of the explanation. None ofthe female setters I've 
spoken to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog+series/meet-the-setter> 
have cited the baffling experience of using a computer as an impediment to 
getting more puzzles done; indeed, there is an alternative history of 
programming in which female-operated looms make computers seem like abacuses – 
a thread connecting the crossword-solving women of Bletchley Park to the mother 
of the modern crossword,Margaret Farrar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/dec/03/1>. 

But if not because of technology, then why? The same imbalance seems to hold 
on this side of the Atlantic, despite the Telegraph's long history of female 
editors – and even, though decreasingly so, in the Guardian. The solving of 
crosswords skews towards female, according to a YouGov survey I commissioned 
last year; the setting doesn't.

A good explanation begins with some speculative mechanisms: there are some in 
Shechtman's article 
<http://theamericanreader.com/puzzle-trouble-women-and-crosswords-in-the-age-of-autofill/>
, and inanother comment piece by Ben Tausig 
<http://thehairpin.com/2013/08/the-crossword-puzzle>, author of The Curious 
History of the Crossword 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/dec/16/crossword-blog-centenary-celebrations>
, but I'm sure we can add our own.

Where are the "XXword constructors", to use the term coined by Shechtman? What 
about the solvers among you? Are you aware of the gender of your setter? And, 
if so, does that happen only when that gender is the underrepresented one?

• Alan Connor will return on 8 September.
 