
Across and down, out and about

You can hear Guardian crossword editor Hugh Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update> talking 
to Lynne Truss about the paper's setters - and solvers - and previously 
unbroadcast sections of an interview withCrispa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/crispa> in a Radio 4 crossword documentary 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01p2wd0> that's available until the weekend. 
Hurry!

The news in clues

"The world desperately needs a better way of coping with countries that owe 
more than they could ever repay,"wrote the Observer's economics editor yesterday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/25/writedown-stop-vultures-feasting-greece>
. Ever keen to help, Dac had a suggestion in Wednesday's Independent, disguised 
as a clue...

19d Greece should receive payment, Germany conceded (7)

...for another word, GRANTED. On Thursday, Radian was more locally topical...

16ac Bucket contains rags Dad folded (4,4,3,4)

...with RAIN CATS AND DOGS across the middle and words like PELT, POUR and 
NIMBUS sprinkled elsewhere.

Culture clue

Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
 rocked out earlier this year witha Pink Floyd puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25693>; this time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25798> the lightly worn theme 
was another heavy behemoth. No knowledge of the band's oeuvre beyond STAIRWAY 
TO HEAVEN was necessary, with "Led Zeppelin IV" providing part of an anagram 
for REPONDEZ S'IL VOUS PLAIT and the front men doing similar duty...

4d/5ac Composition of Page/Plant - disc in an artwork (9,8)

...for LANDSCAPE PAINTING. Hats off, as the Zep so nearly said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/13/roy-harper-songs-of-love-and-loss>
, to Tramp.

Latter patter

Once you'd cracked the Sunday Times's seven down 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c8b3542ecd3013aad833c59033a/print_solution/3>
...

7d Fifty nuts in a cut fruitcake (7)

...for LUNATIC and twigged that Dean Mayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
 was up to his unconventional tricks with his clue...

4d Island? Oops! (1,5,9)

...for I STAND CORRECTED, you could get to work on combining them...

21d 4 by turning into 7 (2,3)

...for MY BAD, given in Chambers as "a phrase used to acknowledge that one has 
made a mistake".Random House 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/wotd/index.pperl?date=20000111> says that the 
expression is thought to have first been used as a quick way of apologising in 
American inner-city basketball andEdinburgh professor Geoffrey Pullum 
<http://www.lel.ed.ac.uk/~gpullum/> reports that some think it's traceable to a 
single player <http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/002693.html>
: the 2.31-metre (7ft 7in) Sudanese centreManute Bol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feedarticle/9702173>. 

The Austen adaptation Clueless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/59257/clueless> certainly didn't harm 
the spread of MY BAD, which unapologetically takes "bad" from adjective to 
noun, but MY BAD itself has not yet achieved noun status, unlike its venerable 
cousin that is the subject this week's challenge. Reader, how would you clue 
MEA CULPA?

Cluing competition

Thanks for your clues for NICE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/19/crossword-roundup-remarkably-egregious-clues?commentpage=all>
, especially Thomas99 for acknowledging the old sense of the word with "Silly 
old dear".

A nice short word prompted some nice short clues, like harlobarlo's 
"Attractive bikini - cellulite showing?", JollySwagman's "Kind of Ulster 
protestant" and mojoseeker's "Fine rock we hear".

Natjim and ixioned went the other way, with the Cannes reference of "Endings 
revealed of The Third Man, Il Caso Mattei, Union Pacific and Sex, Lies and 
Videotape, down the road from where they won" and the impossibly lettered 
"Understanding Nietzsche as rediscovered when the reworked final letters are 
discounted".

I also enjoyed jonemm's use of "cookie" to indicate a container 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 in "Picnic expression - 'Cookie or biscuit?'" (and wondered whether"easter egg"
 
<http://www.digitpress.com/forum/showthread.php?587-origin-of-the-quot-easter-egg-quot>
 could do the same job), and drawfull's only-works-as-a-down "Might I be seen 
in the south of France?"

The runners-up are steveran's Brucie allusion in "Attractive holding to see 
you doubled, strictly speaking" and ravenrider'sacrostic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
 "Nothing is completely evil in the beginning - that's pleasant"; the winner is 
jazbang's terse "Peachy cordial". Kudos to Jaz - please leave this week's 
entries and your pick of the broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the week

Nominated by reader Gleety, two pop-culture references in one Dac clue...

26ac Dusty town of Flanders (11)

...for SPRINGFIELD. Absotively posilutely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2012/sep/22/the-simpsons-best-supporting-characters#/?picture=396368749&index=3>
 charming.
 