
Ten years ago this week, champion solver Peter Biddlecombe 
<http://www.biddlecombe.demon.co.uk/puzzles.html> began a blog called Times for 
the Times <http://petebiddlecombe.livejournal.com/2005/12/02/>:

This blog, if I keep it going, will tell you how long it took me to do the 
Times crossword, and include brief notes about some of the clues.

He didn’t merely keep it going: it’s now a group blog 
<http://times-xwd-times.livejournal.com/profile> and inspired Fifteen Squared 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/about-2/>, which launched in 2006 covering most 
of the other broadsheet puzzles, andBig Dave’s Crossword Blog 
<http://bigdave44.com/introduction/about/>, which started in 2009 to cover the 
Telegraph’s.

These blogs ended the decades of isolation between solvers and setters, and 
between solvers and each other. They break down the cryptic devices used; I see 
them helping newcomers get their heads around wordplay, and seasoned solvers to 
understand those stray clues that have refused to yield. They have also brought 
setters, solvers and editors together in the real world, in a succession of 
weekend pub meet-ups.

Nowadays, Peter is the crossword editor of the Sunday Times and the scene he 
begat iscelebrating its own rude health 
<http://times-xwd-times.livejournal.com/1413514.html> in Southwark and in New 
York. I asked Peter about the decade of crosswording collaboration.

What were your ambitions for Times for the Times in 2005?

The blog started after I saw something similar for the New York Times 
crossword. I can’t remember what it was called or who ran it, but it’s long 
gone. My thought was just “Could this be done for UK cryptics?” followed by 
“Yes, let’s give it a try.” Worthier ideas – such as “Can we end up with 
something similar for all the broadsheet cryptics?” – came later. So, just like
crosswords in the 1920s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/15/crosswords-meow-meow-1920s>
, the Brits saw an American idea, tried it, and it evolved into something a bit 
different.

I had no idea whether it would take off, and as you can tell from the first 
few posts <http://petebiddlecombe.livejournal.com/2005/12/02/>, initial 
coverage of each puzzle was very brief and it took a while to build up an 
audience interested enough to comment. At the time, some other crossword 
discussion forums had descended into fairly infantile debates or spent lots of 
time discussing things other than crosswords, and I had some hope of providing 
something more constructive, given the clear focus on an individual puzzle.

Although some professional setters now seem sceptical about the blogs, I think 
this aim was achieved.


For the uninitiated, the community is about a lot more than solving times. Do 
you, Peter, personally time every solve?

Not now. When the blog started, I was the last winner of the Times Crossword 
Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/20/crossword-blog-watching-a-champion-solver-at-work>
, then in a five-year pause. I hoped that it would come back, so I solved a 
couple of cryptics against the clock every day. Now I don’t compete in the 
championship and because crosswords are my day job, my main hobby needs to be 
something else. Trombone-playing has taken that role, and I don’t routinely 
solve quite as quickly as I used to.

When I started editing Sunday Times crosswords 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/crossword/>, I recorded times and passed 
them on to setters, but don’t do that nearly so often now, mainly because a 
sample of one isn’t much of a guide. I also know how much individual solving 
times can vary between championship solvers of equal ability, and that once you 
change any clues, the time doesn’t apply to the puzzle that will be printed.

All the broadsheet puzzles are now served by a solvers’ blog. What do you 
think the role of blogging is in crosswords?

The role I’m happiest about is helping new solvers to understand cryptic 
clues. When I started solving in the mid-to-late 1970s, there were a few “how 
to solve” books around, but I don’t think I found any until the first edition of
Don Manley’s one 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/chambers-crossword-manual.html> in about 1987.

I didn’t have solving parents so I had to work things out for myself – 
although an honorary uncle who taught maths at Brunel and didthe Guardian puzzle
 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic> played a small part. 
Without fully understanding how precise the clues were and therefore how to 
solve efficiently, it took me about five years to become reasonably competent 
and I’ve seen the same kind of progress reported by readers of TftT in 
something like one year.

Some use crossword blogs to express opinions about the quality of puzzles or 
clues, but there are plenty of solvers who never read the blogs (or never post 
a comment) and when people write letters to the paper about crosswords, they 
often seem to have different concerns.


I think that the overall online material about crosswords (not just the blogs) 
has encouraged new setters, and the “amateur setter” puzzles that have appeared 
on blogs and elsewhere have given people a chance to try their hand.

And how has your crosswording life changed in the past 10 years?

Hugely, because I’m now on the “dark side”, as some people called it when I 
got this job. As it turned out, TftT helped me to get it, because posts 
collecting feedback about online crosswords meant communicating with a few 
people at the paper. This led to a visit for testing of a new version, at a 
time when I was unemployed; shortly after that I was told about Barbara Hall’s 
retirement. It turned out that the paper wanted a crossword editor who wasn’t a 
setter, and a combination of the blog and other crossword and work experience, 
plus some support behind the scenes fromTim Moorey <http://www.timmoorey.info/>
, got me the job.

There have been ups and downs, but it’s still a job I love doing. It’s a 
strange mix of routine tasks done for every puzzle and dealing with good and 
bad unexpected events, only some of which the solvers know about.

It has also used my past experience in unexpected ways. My first job after 
university was in the actuarial department of a small insurance company, where 
some quotations were still done with life tables, electronic calculators and 
Biros of various colours. The methods they used to ensure that the rest of the 
company thought that “Actuarial never make a mistake” are imitated every 
Thursday when I proof-check the crossword content for Sunday.

Many thanks to Peter, and long may Times for the Times and its votaries 
continue!
 