
It’s time to follow up on some pleasing developments in the world of 
crosswording.

Practice does not (alone) make perfect

Back in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/may/09/crossword-blog-how-clever-are-cryptic-solvers>
, we looked at a paper investigating what it takes to make a super-solver. That 
post linked tothe relevant research 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00567/full>, in the 
open-access journal Frontiers.

Now, if you still haven’t got round to reading that article: (a) what on earth 
have you been doing? and (b) you’re in luck: the authors have summarised their 
findingsin less formal register at the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/study-reveals-what-it-takes-to-become-a-cryptic-crossword-expert-and-its-more-than-just-practice-64508>
. Think of it like a dress-down Friday in the psychology lab. The new piece 
contains two splendid clues, this one ...

Speciality of the Cornish side that’s perfect with new wingers (5,4)

... from a recent Times crossword championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/20/crossword-blog-watching-a-champion-solver-at-work>
 and this one ...

Active women iron some skirts and shirts (9)

... quoted from another excellent read, Arthur Schulman 
<https://news.virginia.edu/content/retired-uva-professor-still-building-solving-puzzles>
’sThe Art of the Puzzler 
<https://news.virginia.edu/content/retired-uva-professor-still-building-solving-puzzles>
.Answers here 
<https://theconversation.com/study-reveals-what-it-takes-to-become-a-cryptic-crossword-expert-and-its-more-than-just-practice-64508>
.

Who pays the pipers?

Last year, we paid tribute to Merl Reagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/24/crossword-blog-merl-reagle>
, a pioneer of a strain of American crosswording that’s playful, slangy and 
allusive. Reagle was an inspiration to what’s known in the US as the “indie 
crossword” scene, where a couple of recent changes are worth noting – 
especially as, sincethe end of the print Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/feb/15/crossword-blog-what-next-for-the-independent-crossword>
, they offer clues as to possible futures for crosswording in general.

First, the American Values Club crossword <http://www.avxword.com/> (here are 
somesample puzzles <http://www.avxword.com/faq.htm>) – formerly associated with 
the satirical magazine the Onion but more recently independent – is extending 
its reach by appearing at Slate magazine, starting with a special puzzle
available here 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/crossword_1/2016/09/a_slate_crossword_for_the_magazine_s_20th_anniversary.html>
. And in terms of publisher-support, it’s one in, one out.BuzzFeed 
<http://www.avxword.com/faq.htm> has stopped publishing crosswords; its 
“ginormous themeless” valedictory puzzle ishere 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/calebmadison/can-you-solve-the-huge-final-buzzfeed-crossword>
, and its setter, Caleb Madison, has now launched the intriguingly namedSolve 
the Internet <http://solvetheinternet.com/>, which I have signed up for with no 
sense of what might happen next.

Much like with the future of the crossword.

Because they can

Finally, and also in America, if you enjoyed the audacious referendum puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jun/24/crossword-blog-boatmans-referendum-puzzle>
 assembled by Boatman and crew, the New York Times recently published something 
in a similar spirit. If you don’t have a subscription that gives you access to
Ben Tausig’s soul-warming puzzle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/crosswords/game/daily/2016/09/01>, you can at least 
read all 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/gaming/2016/09/ben_tausig_s_new_york_times_puzzle_is_one_of_history_s_most_important_crosswords.html>
about it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/01/crosswords/having-a-variable-identity.html>. 
Major kludos.
 