
Leaving aside the question of what we call cryptic crossword puzzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/mar/30/crossword-blog-what-do-you-call-crosswords>
, I’ve been prompted to reflect on our relationship with them. They constantly 
challenge us, lie to us and demand our full attention. But they do this as 
friends, really. That’s why it’s surprising when they call us names.


Reading through the letters in the chessboard black and white at the top and 
bottom ofDac’s grid last Wednesday 
<http://independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_010415.bin>, I 
couldn’t help notice the hidden jibes. JACKASS taunted the top; PLONKER baited 
the bottom. Then at the sides, FATHEAD and BUFFOON.


Dac doesn’t tend to leave hidden messages, let alone hurtful ones, but then 
puzzles published on 1 April tend to confound your expectations. And if you 
solved that one but didn’t notice the other, ingeniousEaster egg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/02/12-greatest-video-game-easter-eggs>
, it’s well worth popping back for another look.


Atë’s Guardian puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26534> 
had not dissimilar architecture, with four 13-letter synonyms for trickery at 
the borders and sundry other foolery, including this clue …


21ac Fools students over mass reductions in population, we hear (9)
[ abbrev. for student union surrounding abbrev. for “mass”, then soundalike 
for “reductions in population”]
[NUS surrounding M, then soundalike for “culls”]

… for NUMSKULLS, with a surface reading suggesting quite the bloodthirsty 
prank. Further investigation reveals a baffling range of alternate spellings, 
including the extraordinary NUMSCAL.

Pseudonym-watching Guardian solvers may still be wondering, though: who is 
behind this new name, Atë? Given the date of posting, it won’t be a surprise 
that it is (a) a composite of (b) setters we all know. Despite where the 
logical thoughts of any wordplay devotee might lead, Atë is not Ateles, the 
setter ofa 2013 FT puzzle 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/6488dff4-30f6-11e3-b478-00144feab7de.pdf>
 which containeda hidden message 
<http://www1.maths.leeds.ac.uk/~mark/crosswords/ft/xwd14453s.png>; Ateles is a 
“spider monkey”, and that setter was a collaboration betweenArachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
 andMonk <http://www1.maths.leeds.ac.uk/~mark/crosswords/ft/xwd14453.html>.

No, Atë is a kind of pioneering social experiment to explore whether solvers 
who have convinced themselves that they are not enamoured of certain setters 
feel the same way when they are unaware of who is compiling the clues. As with 
theBiggles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/dec/04/araucaria-john-graham-crossword>
 nom de guerre, Atë’s grid was assembled byEnigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
; as with Ateles, some of the clues are Arachne’s; others areTramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
’s.

So far as I can see, there have been no other avant-garde exercises this year 
– unless you dip your nib in American puzzles. TheLos Angeles Times 
<http://games.latimes.com/gamedetails/daily-crossword/> presented a grid with 
distinctive circles in some of the cells, some of which read DEYO, others KESO, 
still others IDDI. And then, brutally, the letters crossing revealed the answer 
to this clue …


51a Significance of this puzzle’s circled letters (gotcha again!)

… to be THERE IS NONE. That isn’t at all to say that there wasn’t something 
extra that I missed in theTimes 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/b6649b05495163d1014c330546c0020d/print_solution/3>
 or either of theTelegraph 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=25674> puzzles 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=25681>. Put 
another way, I hope you point me at something unusual in at least one of them.


I should admit, though, to the cerebral tailspin that Io 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 caused me withhis FT clue 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/e9363b1a-cd7c-11e4-a15a-00144feab7de.pdf>
 …


11ac This is a sham grid with block misplaced (4,5) 
[anagram of “grid” + “block”]

… for GOLD BRICK, a clue which either notified the solver of an April Fool, or 
was a poisson rouge in itself. I’m still pretty sure it was the latter.


The clueing competition will return next week.
 