
The news in clues

The FT puzzle last Thursday 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/f221d2ac-edc5-11e4-90d2-00144feab7de.pdf>
 had DEVIL towards the bottom left and DEEP BLUE SEA bottom right. Lest you 
wonder whetherthe eternally topical Gaff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/10/puzzles> had 
the election on his mind, there was this long cryptic definition …

26ac/15ac/18ac/7d Curse from one dying to visit holiday home owner with 
affliction?(1,6,2,4,4,6)

… for A PLAGUE ON BOTH YOUR HOUSES. In case you think this means that Gaff was 
echoing the sentiments of Russell Brand (apart from betweenthe morning of bank 
holiday Monday 
<http://labourlist.org/2015/05/youve-gotta-vote-labour-russell-brand-endorses-ed-miliband/>
 andFriday afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/08/russell-brand-stages-climbdown-over-support-for-ed-miliband-labour-comedian>
), the clues kicked off with ...

1ac/1d Smaller of pair of beetles’ sound choice (3,6,2,3,5)
[soundalike for ‘the lesser of two weevils’]

… THE LESSER OF TWO EVILS. Guardian readers may judge whether that came to 
pass. The FT was not the only paper to dispatch a crack theme-specialist on 
polling day.In the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26565>, Boatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/05/crosswords-meet-the-setter-boatman>
 had a clue which, on the surface, lambasted the Tories for the rise of the 
demagogicpoujadist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/aug/28/guardianobituaries1> right …

6ac/18d UKIP notches up gains: a sign of economic failure (4,7) 
 anagram (‘up’) of ‘ukipnotches’]

… and which, in its answer of SOUP KITCHEN, criticised the Tories for driving 
its electorate tofood banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/dec/09/uk-food-banks-waste-charity-resource-lisa-nandy>
. If you’d asked a pollster who was likely to be settingThursday’s Independent 
<http://independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_070515.bin>, we 
can be fairly sure that they would have saidMorph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/17/crossword-blog-meet-setter-micawber-morph>
, since it was Eimi, with splendid clues such as this one ...

17ac Make more enlightened sign about last of Conservative lies disseminated 
(10)
[zodiac sign around last letter of ‘conservative’, then anagram of ‘lies’]
[LIBRA around E, then LISE]

... for LIBERALISE. Most of what was published on 7 May is now obsolete, but 
these three puzzles are still well worth your time.

Latter patter

Having said that, here’s a further spoiler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/aug/11/crossword-roundup-michael-gove-out-of-the-cabinet-but-not-off-grid>
 from Eimi’s puzzle: a delightful definition-plus-cryptic-definition ...

1/11ac Taken advantage of: made to wear purple and yellow (4,2,4,1,6)
[facetious description of a Ukip-supporter’s appearance]

… for DONE UP LIKE A KIPPER. “Kipper” for a Ukip-supporter goes back at least 
as far as this letter to the Torquay Herald Express from 12 May 2004:

First we had Garry Bushell, loud-mouthed bigot that he is, standing as Ukip’s 
London mayoral candidate. Now we have ex-chatshow host Robert Kilroy-Silk, 
guilty of the most stupid and prejudicial remarks concerning our planet’s Arab 
population, standing for the protest party. Who next: ex-football pundit Ron 
Atkinson? Exactly what impression are the ‘kippers’ trying to give?

Such abuse is not new. The Lib Dems were once the “Whigs”, which seems to come 
from a Scottish word for aturncoat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/nov/12/lib-dems-tuition-fees-clegg>. 
The Whigs’ enemies had their own abusive tag, which probably comes from the 
Irishtóraidhe, meaning a brigand who will take your possessions and keep them 
for himself and his mates. So, reader, how would you clue TORY?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for URQUHART 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/apr/27/crossword-roundup-election-heroes-and-villains#show-all>
. “Let’s face it,” said ID2155366, “this is a toughie.” ID2155366 might very 
well think that … and the quote is completed in ixioned’s “Burqa not British? 
Associated with hurt? You might very well think that; I couldn’t possibly 
comment.”

And so I can only salute your courage, your strength and indeed your 
indefatigability – especially the elaborate subtractive compound whatnots in 
Neijygof’s “Scottish ‘safe seat’ quarrel? Incongruous that Nicola Sturgeon 
should be left out of the melee!” and Robi23’s ingenious “He treats 
misrepresentation deviously as quarter-truth”. I also enjoyed thehomophones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/08/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-soundalikes>
, especially JollySwagman’s “Richardson’s playing upset Simon’s partner, so we 
heard?”

The runners-up are Clueso’s grim “When pressed I’m a pushover?” and ketmando’s 
sly “Literally he was leader of the pack”; the winner is schroduck’s “Like 
early version of Hamlet, hinted first in incomplete quarto, which Ian 
Richardson acted.”

Kudos to schroduck; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

One more from Boatman <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26565>, 
lovely in its topicality …

22d Today you can be awkward — revolt, ejecting head of legislature (5)
[anagram of ‘revolt’ without first letter of ‘legislature’]

… and its sneaky definition of VOTER, but in retrospect insupportably poignant.
 