
A recent puzzle by Radian 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/2015/05/05/independent-8909-radian/> had this 
down its middle:

9d A quarter past eight, time to recall some lights here (6,7)
[“A quarter past eight” in the 24-hour clock]

“Lights” is another way of referring to some of a puzzle’s answers, and so the 
significance of TWENTY FIFTEEN became apparent, as the clues yielded events 
such as ...

28ac It quelled unrest in port, thanks to court (4,3)
[Name of a port + slang for ‘thanks’ + abbrev. for “court”]

... 1715’s RIOT ACT, which can be recalled 300 years later – that is, in nine 
down’s 2015. Worthier of recall, especially today, is ...

16ac/25d Charter catamaran to be deployed around Gulf (5,5)
[Anagram of “catamaran” surrounding abbrev. for “Gulf”]
[MANACARTA around G]

... 1215’s MAGNA CARTA. Solvers, especially of certain papers and setters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/10/puzzles>, 
are advised to bear big anniversaries in mind in case the puzzle they’re 
tackling has a topical theme – unless, of course, they prefer such material to 
reveal itself ‘organically’ (if this is you, we’re avoidingspoilers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/aug/11/crossword-roundup-michael-gove-out-of-the-cabinet-but-not-off-grid>
 above the line, but you may still prefer to look away now).

Today, MAGNA CARTA is the big one: ‘one of the great glories of our common 
history’,in the words of Peter Oborne 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/peter-oborne/hypocrites-have-jumped-aboard-magna-carta-bandwagon>
. I’ve already spotted it in one puzzle, completely unclued but occupying both 
the left and right of the completed grid, which lends a delightful political 
potency to some of the actual clues.

I’m also expecting the document to appear in at least one of the, um, more 
demanding puzzles that pop up at weekends, but I’m keeping in mind that the 
devious brains behind those puzzles are prone to a red herring or two.

It would be a shame to miss any, so if you’ve spotted anything, from ROBBER 
BARONS to DID SHE DIE IN VAIN, in clues or answers, or hidden backwards in 
diagonals, please share in the comments. Spoiler-avoiders should steer clear 
altogether, and please remember our house rule thatwe don’t discuss prize 
puzzles until the answers have been published.


If you’re thinking of doing your solving at the spot where it all happened, 
I’d give RUNNYMEDE a miss for a while. It’s the least Magna Carta-y spot you 
could imagine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcrossword-blog-hunt-magna-carta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434361044780%2F838455a9-4c4e-43ae-bfdf-33e90005d1e2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossword%20blog%3A%20On%20the%20hunt%20for%20Magna%20Carta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcrossword-blog-hunt-magna-carta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossword%20blog%3A%20On%20the%20hunt%20for%20Magna%20Carta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcrosswords%2Fcrossword-blog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcrossword-blog-hunt-magna-carta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434361044780%2F838455a9-4c4e-43ae-bfdf-33e90005d1e2-1020x612.jpeg>
 A four-metre-high statue of the Queen in full garter robes was unveiled at 
Runnymede Pleasure Ground on 14 June to commemorate the charter. Photograph: 
Neil Lancefield/PA 
In apparent celebration of the humbling of a monarch and chapter 39’s 
assertion of freedom, the meadow is a wreathe of spikes, fencing and sundry 
thou-shalt-nots, all of which is still easier on the eye than the ghastly new 
statue of the current monarch.

I was there on Saturday, and the needle on my irony meter tipped into the red 
“heartbreaking” section when I twigged that the police gathered from around the 
south of England were there toblock access to the democracy festival 
<http://occupydemocracy.org.uk/2015/06/14/magna-carta-vs-runnymede-eco-village-eco-villagers-call-on-police-to-stop-over-reaching-powers-and-respect-the-law/>
 atRunnymede’s eco-village 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2015/jun/15/runnymede-eco-village-in-pictures>
.

There’s an eviction order 
<http://www.occupy.com/article/freer-ive-ever-been-squatted-eco-village-overshadows-royals-magna-carta-celebrations>
 on the village, andthe hearing is today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/in-pictures-33077599>: 

The date for the court hearing to settle eviction is set for 15 June at 
Guildford county court, the same day that the Queen and other dignitaries will 
be celebrating the anniversary ofMagna Carta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/magna-carta> a short distance from the 
village.

Great – now I need a new irony meter. This one is broken.
 