
A reader – actually, the setter David Stickley 
<http://www.australiancrosswords.com.au/WPblog/category/the-stickler/>, known 
in the Financial Times as Styx – writes regardingour most recent Clue of the 
Fortnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/mar/14/crossword-roundup-emigres-and-emigrants-immigrants-and-migrants>
. This wasPicaroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/nov/03/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-picaroon>
’s ...

11ac Street crossing through radio village, where blues will be playing (8,6)

... where the “radio village” of AMBRIDGE was preceded by an abbreviation for 
“Street” (ST) and interrupted (“through”) by a word for “crossing” (FORD), 
yielding STAMFORD BRIDGE – which iswhere “the blues” play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/15/chelsea-homeless-two-seasons-stamford-bridge>
.

Or, perhaps, the Blues.

David notes: “I searched through the Guardian website for Chelsea references 
and without fail ‘blues’ is referred to as Blues, with a capital.”

Put another way, are the words “the blues” a fair way of getting the solver to 
think of Chelsea FC? Disclosure: I’m so ignorant of football grammar that I 
once insisted my erstwhile colleague Robert Peston should treat team names as 
singular nouns (“Arsenal is”, I fancied, rather than “Arsenal are”). You don’t 
make that gaffe twice.

Closer inspection tells me that Chelsea play their (not “Chelsea plays its”) 
home games wearing both shorts and shirts in blue, though few of them appear to 
have learned their craft in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. How 
any supporter knows which team to support is probably better dealt with 
elsewhere.

More importantly, then: how sporting is that lower-case “b”? Certainly, there 
are setters for whom “blues will be playing” is not cricket, let alone 
football: redolent too much ofSonny Terry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/mar/01/old-music-sonny-and-terry-people-get-ready>
 and not enough ofJohn Terry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/feb/01/david-squires-on-john-terry-leaving-chelsea>
. They don’t think that would be to play fair, and fair play to them.

For others, fancy capitalisation footwork is part of the beautiful cryptic 
game. A couple of examples:here’s a cheeky capital C from Nutmeg in the Guardian
 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26224#22-down>:

22d Cheer as Chronicle leader’s cut (5)

The apparent sense of this clue depends on that capital “C”. The solver, at 
first, takes “Chronicle leader” to be a newspaper editorial and imagines the 
newsroom jubilation as this piece of journalism is, well, cut. For the purposes 
of wordplay, though, we need to imagine a synonym for a lower-case-c 
“chronicle”, then remove its leading letter. And so RELATE becomes ELATE, 
indicated by the definition at the beginning (“Cheer” is really a verb here, 
though it looks like a noun).

That clue sports a capital where there should have been none; for the inverse, 
here’sBoatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/05/crosswords-meet-the-setter-boatman>
, ina Guardian puzzle themed around many and various interpretations of “sweet” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26272#1-down>:

1d Type of rock, typically sweet (4)

The lower-case “s” diverts us towards fairground rock; if the “s” were 
upper-case, the solver might get more quickly – via the glam-rock band known as 
the Sweet and,when they wanted to be taken more seriously, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2015/aug/17/crossword-roundup-corbynmania-and-trump-fever>
 known as Sweet – to the kind of rock needed: GLAM.

As I said, some setters wouldn’t allow themselves to shrink the Sweet’s “S” to 
a “s”. You, though – the novice solver – have no way of knowing on any 
particular day whether you’re dealing with someone who delights in or someone 
who eschews playing around with capitals. My only advice to a devotee of the 
Guardian crossword is: be wary. If you’re stuck, imagine the lower-case letters 
in your clue as upper-case and vice versa.

And, seasoned solvers and setters – playing the ball and not the man – do you 
have any favourite clues which cunningly respect or disregard case?
 