
In this series, I hope that newcomers can equip themselves with the tools of 
the solver's trade, while aficionados can enjoy some prime examples of the art 
of setting.

Last time, we looked at hidden answers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/06/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-hidden-answers>
; today is all about the double definition.

"Huh," some of you are saying. "I kinda expected anagrams." All in good time. 
All of us love an anagram - and it seems from talking to setters that jumbling 
can creep from habit to compulsion - but the double definition is the cryptic 
clue at its cleanest and clearest.

How does it work?

For the beginner, the double definition can be a fast, effective gateway drug 
from thequick crossword <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/quick> to 
theserious stuff <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/cryptic>. 

If you're thinking of making that leap, what I'm about to claim may sound 
deranged, but hear me out: cryptic clues are easier than quick ones. Consider 
this, froma Guardian quick <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12451>:

10ac Flat (4)

Until you have some of the letters from other answers, this could be any of 
many four-letter words: WEAK, perhaps, or DULL. Or EVEN. Oh, or DEAD.

Here's a cryptic clue from a puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24618> by Rufus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/rufus> with the same answer:

24ac Quits flat (4)

Okay, so this time we want a four-letter word that means "flat" and can also 
mean "quits". It's not likely to be "quits" as in "Brooks quits as chief exec", 
but it could be quits as in "let's call it quits" - and there's only one answer 
that fits both criteria. You can write in EVEN without even waiting for any of 
the letters from other answers. So. Easier.

Again, one from a quick <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12425>...

14ac Disposition (6)

...which might be TEMPER or TALENT or SPIRIT or LAYOUT (it's none of those) - 
and nowanother from Rufus <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25377>
...

9ac Kind disposition (6)

... which can only be NATURE.

The fun, of course, is that at the same time as making things easier, putting 
together the two hints like this creates a distraction. You read "kind 
disposition" and you think of Richard Briers or Peppy, the Fox's Glacier Mint 
bear; you read "quits flat" and you think ofLiam Fox packing up his belongings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/gallery/2011/oct/14/liam-fox-resigned-in-pictures#/?picture=380449661&index=17>
.

That's cryptic crosswording right there: a misleading image which hides the 
fact that it contains two fair indicators.

Some examples

The double-definition clues above have only two words; others have more. 
Here's one fromDante in the FT 
<http://media.ft.com/cms/74d9f5ae-ddbd-11de-9f8b-00144feabdc0.pdf>:

16ac Religious experience necessary to achieve a goal (10)

The two definitions are "religious experience" and "necessary to achieve a 
goal"; the goal is the rugby kind and the answer is CONVERSION.

Now, there's a reason we kicked off with Rufus and Dante: they're the same 
setter, and one I associate with an especially nifty double definition. He and 
other setters, though, won't always put descriptions of two nouns next to each 
other, or of two adjectives or of whatever. Here'sa Sunday Telegraph clue by 
Virgilius <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=14393>, 
known locally asBrendan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crosswords+profile/brendan>:

7d Boat put in water (6)

First as a noun, then as a verb, both times LAUNCH. And from Paul 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 inthe Guardian <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25097>:

3d Very exciting, filthy habit (4-6)

NAIL-BITING or NAIL BITING, the entry is the same. For the purposes of this 
post, a "definition" isn't necessarily what you might find in the dictionary. 
Here's a couple that work that way, onefrom the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/23022d6f9fe2485a8be013f8c56146a4/print_solution/3>
 ...

3d Prepare to break from shell and start flying (3,8)

... and another from Orlando <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/orlando> in a 
Guardian Quiptic <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quiptic/622>:

13d Jack Sprat wouldn't talk (4,3,3)

So let's GET CRACKING and CHEW THE FAT about when it gets a little trickier.

It's not always that simple

This is a clue based on the principle we've been talking about, but it's not a 
double definition:

16ac Break one's nose, like Gill (8)

Once you read "break" as a noun and forget the capital "G", you see BREATHER 
three times:from Rufus again 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25449>, it's a triple definition! 
Any more?

Here's one from the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/4028e731322fb29a013317c4041c0108/print_solution/3>
:

18ac Hand over identity card while away (4)

It takes a while to see all three senses of PASS, but they're all fair and 
familiar. And a more gnomic triple froma Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=13245> by Elgar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
:

5d Lassie's outstanding heavenly body? Watch paparazzo do this! (7)

So that would be DOGSTAR. Who's up for a quadruple? Alberich in the FT 
<http://media.ft.com/cms/cff8c274-c963-11e0-9eb8-00144feabdc0.pdf>:

26ac Offer sensitive carer money (6)

That's TENDER, and let's do one quintuple from a Times Jumbo 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/4028efec2279b769012338332bc100ef/print_solution/3>
 ...

30ac Do quickly stop, take away and kill pirate (5,3)

... before we KNOCK OFF and hand over to you for your favourite definition 
pile-ups.

How to spot them

If I see a two-word clue, I tend to start by trying to see if it's a double 
definition. If it's a couple of words linked by a little one - likeRufus's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25371> "Love of fiction (7)" for 
ROMANCE, I do the same. And a question mark at the end of the cluemight 
indicate that the setter has combined a straight definition with a more 
allusive one, but I wouldn't count on it. Any tell-tale signs I've missed?

How to enjoy them

The pleasure of a double definition usually lies in its simplicity. If you've 
just been sweating and chewing over a convoluted clue involving an anagram 
inside the initial letters of some other words, all of them reversed, a 
short-clued double definition is like a cool, refreshing sorbet.

When they're wordy, though, there's a different kind of enjoyment - that of 
being led up the garden path by the setter, fusing the phrases together in such 
a way that it doesn't occur to you for a while that they might be nothing more 
devious than one definition after another.

And in both cases, you have the fun of seeing two disparate concepts suddenly 
become one. Some, likePaul's 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/1999/oct/30/books.guardianreview8> "Potty 
train (4)" [answer below], have the same nerve and logic as a joke.

The double definition can be the hardest kind of clue to crack, or the easiest 
- often at the same time.My favourite for now 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/24947> is from Orlando 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/orlando> ...

8d Still together (2,3,4,4)

... and not merely because it shows off how both parts work AT THE SAME TIME.

Over to you

To the beginners: any other questions? To the addicts: any much-loved examples 
to share? And to everyone: "Potty train" is ... well, it's LOCO.
 