
Guardian Sport has been named website of the year at the British Sports 
Journalists’ Association awards for the second year in a row, with the Guardian 
and Observer’s chief football writer,Daniel Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/danieltaylor>, winning the football 
journalist of the year prize.

“Taylor’s work is exceptional. It’s deep, it’s well-informed, and it’s easy to 
read,” said the judges, while Tom Clarke, the chairman of the judges of the 
writing awards, said: “It is a sign of the talent in the ever-changing nature 
of our business that we have new names on the podium. But the judges have also 
recognised the continuing excellence of the journalists who, year in, year out, 
delight us.”

The Guardian won the Laureus Sports Website award at the prestigious awards 
run by the SJA 
<http://www.sportsjournalists.co.uk/awards-news/hayward-is-sports-writer-of-the-year-for-third-time/>
, which is the world’s largest national organisation for professional sports 
journalists.

A number of Guardian journalists were also highly commended for their work, 
withOwen Gibson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/owengibson> named in the 
investigative sports reporter category, while our rugby union correspondent
Robert Kitson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robertkitson> was 
acknowledged for his writing.

The Guardian and Observer sport photographer Tom Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomjenkins> was also highly commended for 
the best sports picture for his shot of Rafael Nadal during Wimbledon.
 Sweat drops off Rafael Nadal as he struggles in his match with Thomas 
Bellucci during day two of Wimbledon 2015. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the 
Guardian 
The Daily Telegraph’s Paul Hayward was named sports writer of the year for the 
third time and the Daily Mail was awarded newspaper of the year. Richard 
Conway, of BBC Sport, was named broadcast journalist of the year.

The Independent filmmakers Sam Collins and Jarrod Kimber were named ahead of 
their rivals in the best television documentary category for the feature-length
Death of a Gentleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/28/the-spin-death-of-a-gentleman-icc-ecb>
, which addressed the impact of T20 cricket on Test cricket.
 