
David Vine, who has died of a heart attack at the age of 74, was a 
multi-purpose sports presenter and commentator for theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for 35 years, long associated with 
snooker and Ski Sunday. Known for his distinctive West Country tones, he always 
had the assured self-confidence to weather jokes about his middle-of-the-road 
spectacles and jumpers.

In the 1970s, so often was he targeted that he began to seem like a resident 
character in Clive James's Observer television column. Once, commenting on the 
return of one programme with which Vine was instantly identifiable, James 
wrote: "Back came Ski Sunday, bringing David Vine with it. 'Just watch the way 
this man has the rhythm through the gates ... ooh, and he's gone! Stenmark has 
gone!' By now even David must be falling prey to the suspicion that he has the 
evil eye. All he has to do is start praising a skier for his rhythm and you 
know the stretcher-bearers are already moving in."

Vine's star status was confirmed when a puppet of the snooker player Steve 
Davis was seen on Spitting Image boasting: "I'm a mate of David Vine." Later, 
his popularity led to cameo appearances in French and Saunders (1987) and as a 
skating commentator alongside the bungling sleuths played by Jasper Carrott and 
Robert Powell in The Detectives (1993).

Born in Newton Abbot, Devon, Vine was brought up in Barnstaple, where he 
attended the local grammar school before becoming a reporter on the North Devon 
Journal Herald. A keen rugby player, he played for South Molton and often 
covered matches in which he was taking part. After national service in the 
army's Intelligence Corps, he joined the Western Morning News in Plymouth and 
rose to be sports editor. Moving to the ITV regional company WestwardTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> (1962-66), he set up its 
sports department and was seen on screen as a reporter.

In 1966, the BBC hired Vine as a presenter of the national magazine show 
Sportscene and he was soon a familiar face in sports coverage on both BBC1 and 
BBC2. He was a stand-in presenter on the Saturday afternoon programme 
Grandstand, became a reporter on Rugby Special and hosted the first colour 
broadcasts from Wimbledon in 1967, remaining presenter of the tennis 
tournament's highlights programmes until 1982. Any viewers who thought of him 
as bland had to revise their opinions when he confronted John McEnroe following 
the US player's "you're the pits" jibe to a Wimbledon umpire in 1981. "What 
right have you got to call anyone an incompetent fool?" Vine asked McEnroe. "He 
told me he'd never talk to me again after that," the presenter recalled, "but 
he did, the following day."

Vine's face was also synonymous with snooker and skiing. Snooker had already 
built up a television following with Pot Black, which featured the BBC's own 
knockout snooker competition, when, in 1977, Vine started presenting its 
coverage of all the major tournaments. Eight years later, 18 million viewers 
saw Dennis Taylor take the World Championship title with the final black ball 
of the final frame against the then world No 1, Steve Davis.

"I have been delighted to have been part of one of the most successful and 
most watched sports on television and to have seen 'unknowns' like Steve Davis, 
Jimmy White, Stephen Hendry and many others become some of the most famous 
names in the sport," said Vine after presenting his final tournament in 2000.

Ski Sunday was launched in 1978 after public interest in Franz Klammer's 
dramatic downhill win at the 1976 Innsbruck Winter Olympic Games, and Vine 
continued with it for 18 years.

Throughout his time at the BBC, Vine proved adept at hosting sports 
entertainment programmes. He was a presenter and commentator for the first few 
years of It's a Knockout (1967-71), whose absurd games between amateur 
athletics teams in crazy costumes were described by one critic as "a 
competition to perform the pointless in the quickest possible time".

He will also be remembered by many as the first presenter (1970-78) of the 
quiz show A Question of Sport, in which two panels of stars - originally 
captained by the boxer Henry Cooper and the former Welsh rugby international 
Cliff Morgan - had their sports knowledge put to the test. The busy Vine was 
succeeded by David Coleman in the chair.

Then came The Superstars (1974-84), in which Vine and Ron Pickering challenged 
sportsmen and women, past and present, to compete against each other in 
running, swimming, shooting, canoeing and cycling events, as well as showing 
their strengths in the gym.

Vine also hosted showjumping events, including The Horse of the Year Show, 
commentated on bowls and gymnastics, and covered the return to Britain of the 
round-the-world yachtsman Robin Knox-Johnston. Away from sport, he commentated 
on the 1974 Eurovision Song Contest and, a year later, presented Miss World.

He underwent triple heart bypass surgery in 2001, the year after he retired 
from the BBC following his final Olympics, in Sydney, as a weightlifting 
commentator - a specialism he had developed over many games.

Vine's first wife, Shirley, died in 1970; he is survived by his second wife, 
Mandy, along with their son, Christian, and the son and two daughters of his 
first marriage, Martin, Kim and Katherine.

â€¢ David Martin Vine, television sports presenter, born 3 January 1935; died 11 
January 2009

Clive Everton writes: 
David Vine was a leading figure in presenting snooker properly to the massive 
new audience for the sport that was attracted when the BBC took the seminal 
decision to cover the 1978 World Championship in its entirety.

Combining a lightness of touch with willingness to ask hard questions if 
appropriate, his presenting and interviewing techniques provided templates for 
how the job should be done.

Nor was he afraid of making the occasional quirky criticism of his employers. 
One protest against excessively late scheduling of the highlights programme saw 
him appear on screen covered in a white sheet, sporting an artificial white 
beard, with the set lit only by candles.

Backstage, he was cheerful company and very supportive of me in the various 
battles I have had within the sport. It can now be revealed that, in 1985, it 
was he who tipped me off that the World Professional Billiards and Snooker 
Association had prevailed upon the BBC to sack me. I received a letter to this 
effect two days later but David's intervention had given my agent time to 
contact BBC's head of sport, who promptly reinstated me.
 