
When the Earth has stopped shaking and the waters have receded, when the wind 
has blown out and the bodies have been taken to the makeshift morgue (for 
natural-disaster morgues are always makeshift), what then? Where do you start? 
How do you rebuild a city?

Do you even rebuild at all, or start from scratch with something new? Do you 
move the entire urban centre? Can you? Do you knock up something quick, bearing 
in mind the urgent need, or something lasting, bearing in mind the mistakes of 
the past?

Do you consider the catastrophic event that brought you to the brink, or chalk 
it up as a once in a 1,000-year event? Who decides what to reconstruct, where, 
when and in what order? A single top-down unit or myriad grass-roots locals?

The last decade has witnessed a surprising number of cities brought to the 
brink by the pernicious forces of water, wind, earth and fire, or in some 
cases, combinations of these. To mark today's launch ofGuardian Cities 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/cities>, our new website devoted to urban living and the 
future of cities all over the world, Guardian correspondents have spent time in 
six of them – New Orleans, Ishinomaki, Port-au-Prince, Banda Aceh, Christchurch 
and Galle – to investigate how our cities are reinvented after disaster strikes.

Experts talk of "building back better", of concepts like "resilience" and 
"sustainability", of crisis being opportunity in the way that it was for the 
devastated cities of Germany and Japan in 1945.

The practice, as Guardian writers have found out, can be very different; 
piecemeal, dilatory, bureaucratic, venal even. Urban planners, it seems, never 
miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity. But occasionally, just 
occasionally, they surprise on the upside too, and reimagine the city in ways 
that might have been impossible had disaster not struck.
 