
The major powers – with the exception of Britain – sent out a warning to 
Israel andDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on 
Sunday not to abandon the hope of a two-state solution to end the Arab-Israeli 
conflict and urged all parties to disassociate themselves from voices that 
reject such a diplomatic solution to the deepest conflict in the Middle East.


Related: UK signals closeness to Trump with snub to French Middle East summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/uk-snubs-middle-east-peace-summit-in-paris-to-keep-trump-onside>

Britain refused to sign the communique and attended only at observer level, 
unlike most EU states. It said it had “reservations about an international 
conference intended to advance peace between the parties that does not involve 
them – indeed, which is taking place against the wishes of the Israelis – and 
which is taking place just days before the transition to a new American 
president when the US will be the ultimate guarantor of any agreement. There 
are risks therefore that this conference hardens positions at a time when we 
need to be encouraging the conditions for peace”.

The British government probably fears that the conference risks becoming an 
attempt to circumscribe US policy on Israel before the Trump team has decided 
this. It is a primary tenet of UK foreign policy that the “special 
relationship” with the US iscritical to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/concerns-over-special-relationship-allayed-as-may-speaks-to-trump>
. With Britain expected to leave the EU within two years, the government may 
feel an even greater need not to alienate Trump.

The French-convened Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> conference 
on the Middle East on Sunday was attended by 70 nations, including the outgoing 
US secretary of state, John Kerry. It declared it will not recognise 
“unilateral steps that prejudge the outcome of negotiations on final status 
issues including Jerusalem, borders, security and refugees”.

It called for for a reversal of the “current negative trends on the ground 
including continued acts of violence and ongoing settlement activity”.

The French said the conference, which has been derided by Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, was not designed for detailed peace 
talks but to broadly set out the parameters of an agreement and lay out the 
economic incentives available for each side if they re-engaged in talks.

Jean-Marc Ayrault, the French foreign minister, said “the talks process had 
come to a grinding halt. There is no peace possible if we do not reaffirm the 
the two-state solution. There is no other option.” Any solution, the communique 
said, would have to fully end the occupation that began in 1967 and satisfy 
Israel’s security needs.

The reference in the communique does not explicitly extend to any steps the 
incoming US administration might take to move its embassy to Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/us-embassy-jerusalem-palestine-donald-trump-tel-aviv>
 from Tel-Aviv, a step that would be seen as a symbolic acceptance that 
Jerusalem is the capital of Israel.

Donald Trump’s choice as US ambassador to Israel, David Friedman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
, opposes the two-state solution and has said he could move some of his offices 
to Jerusalem. Other Trump administration figures have been less clear cut.

Kerry said a direct reference to Trump’s possible embassy plans “does not 
belong with international fora at the moment”. But Ayrualt said he will tell 
the incoming US secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, that such unilateral moves 
would be treated as a provocation, adding that there would be extremely serious 
consequences. “When you are president of the United States, you cannot take 
such a stubborn and such a unilateral view on this issue. You have to try to 
create the conditions for peace,” he toldFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> 3 TV.

Kerry said the Paris meeting showed “a constructive readiness to engage with 
Israel that has not really been put on the table” in recent years.


The wording of the final communique includes some softening from the draft, 
which highlighted a distinction between products from illegally occupied 
Israeli territories and the rest of Israel, wording that had been included in 
the controversial UN security council resolution passed without a US veto in 
December.

Over recent weeks the Paris conference has gradually transformed from an 
attempt to reopen talks between Israel and Palestine into a defensive operation 
to protect the possibility of a two-state solution. The French have repeatedly 
warned that more illegal Israeli settlements would end the chance of a 
Palestinian state.

The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, refused to attend the talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/netanyahu-middle-east-peace-conference-rigged-move-against-israel-paris-trump>
, saying he will only hold direct bilateral talks with the Palestinian leader, 
Mahmoud Abbas.

Ayrault accepted that Netanyahu had changed his mind about the conference, 
adding that “at present the two sides seem far far removed from coming to the 
negotiating table”.

But the Palestinian leader, Mahmound Abbas, approved of the conference, saying 
he will meet the French shortly to discuss the next steps. Netanyahu dismissed 
the talks as rigged and the “last twitches of yesterday,” a reference to the 
changing of the political guard in Washington and Paris. “These are the death 
throes of yesterday’s world. Tomorrow will look different.”

Most senior EU foreign ministers attended, underlining the extent to which 
Britain may steer a different foreign policy course outside the EU.

François Hollande, the French president, defended the conference from those 
who said it was worthless, saying his efforts were not naïve and adding “there 
would be nothing more cynical than to do nothing to bring two parties together 
to end the region’s oldest conflict”.

In a bid to assuage Israel, Kerry also personally rang Netanyahu to promise 
that the communique will not be used as a basis to launch a second round of 
criticism of Israel at the security council this week. However the issue is 
likely to be taken up at the EU foreign affairs council in Brussels.
 