
Michael Edwards, AKA Eddie Edwards, AKA Eddie the Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-the-eagle>, admits the movie about his 
life had him in tears before the opening credits were finished. It could not 
have been a more accurate portrayal of the heart and soul of Britain’s first 
Olympic ski jumper, he says – even if, factually, it was only about 5% accurate.

It is 28 years since Edwards competed at Calgary in Canada, finishing last in 
both the 70m and 90m jumps, and getting about half the points of the man who 
finished second last. It was impossible not to laugh with, and at, Edwards. He 
was so warm and affable that he touched our hearts. And yet, with his borrowed 
skis, helmet tied on with string and his supersized specs, he looked as if he 
was straight out of a sitcom – imagine if Jim Royle shed a few pounds and ended 
up at theWinter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics>, 
and you’ve got Eddie the Eagle.

Eddie the Eagle review: plucky no-hope ski-jumper melts hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/23/eddie-the-eagle-review-plucky-no-hope-ski-jumper-melts-hearts>
There was always something heroic about Edwards. He was self-taught, the jumps 
were terrifying, he had been jumping for less than two years while his rivals 
had been at it since they were toddlers, and he was a working-class lad 
competing in a world of privileged poshos. The establishment hated him; the 
rest of us loved him.

We meet at Claridge’s in London, where he is promoting the film. The irony is 
not lost on him – when he is not plugging the life story of Eddie the Eagle, he 
works as builder and plasterer Michael Edwards. There is another irony about 
his story – while few Britons can remember the names of the world-class jumpers 
he competed against, he is still a household name. “When I plummeted into 
infamy in the Calgary Olympics, I never thought that a film would be made about 
my life,” he says.

Edwards is unrecognisable today. At 52, he looks fit and lithe. The thick rug 
of hair and tache have gone, the specs have gone, even the ski-slope chin has 
gone. But there is still something ineffably Eddie about him – whether it is 
the guilelessness, white socks or ever-ready giggle.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840ee58aa07e260af5d26a0408325538571f3263%2F0_2068_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840ee58aa07e260af5d26a0408325538571f3263%2F0_2068_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Michael Edwards today. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
Eddie the Eagle is a feelgood film about that classic British stereotype – the 
plucky loser. From the first scene, we see the hapless, hopeless Edwards, 
determined to make a sporting success of himself but destined to trip up over 
his laces at every finishing line. The young Eddie of the film wears callipers, 
and is constantly discouraged from sports by his plasterer father.

The reality was somewhat different. Young Eddie was an able sportsman – 
football, cricket, rugby, volleyball, he dabbled in everything. He even had 
trials as a goalkeeper for his local team, Cheltenham. “There is a certain 
amount of poetic licence in the film,” he says with a smile. “If they showed me 
as a superb athlete, it wouldn’t fit in with the story. I was actually quite a 
good athlete, but it’s true I still had these mishaps, and they wanted to focus 
on the mishaps.”

As a kid he was fearless, frequently jumping off the top of scaffolding at 
building sites. Then, at the age of 12, he suffered a terrible cartilage injury 
when playing football, was plastered from ankle to thigh, and was in and out of 
hospital for two years.

That was the end of Edwards’ football dreams. But he didn’t give up on sport. 
He would watch athletes in the Olympics and tell himself that it could still be 
him one day, walking round with his head held high in a Great Britain 
tracksuit. If only he could find a sport to truly excel in.

In his teens, he started skiing at the slope in Gloucester, and fell in love 
with the sport. Before long, he was at the ski slope every day.

Did his father really discourage him? In the film, Edwards senior regards his 
son as a wayward loser and wants him to settle down to a sensible life of 
plastering. Ah, no, he says, that is simply more poetic licence. “My dad was 
the opposite to how he was portrayed in the film. He was just as supportive as 
my mum, but for the film it was better that my dad was against me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ae49bab82dfec1082f3bfef4779cb1e5e2122b%2F0_38_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96ae49bab82dfec1082f3bfef4779cb1e5e2122b%2F0_38_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Taron Egerton as Eddie the Eagle in the 2016 film. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
His parents attended the premiere, and he says they couldn’t have been more 
proud. “We had a special screening in January and I was worried. I warned Dad 
and said you might not like the way they portray you in the film. But when we 
came out, he just came and gave me a big hug and said: ‘That was fantastic!’”

Another inconvenient truth is that he was actually a brilliant downhill speed 
skier, becoming the ninth-fastest amateur in the world, so the movie omitted 
that. Did he ever say to the film-makers, you’re doing me down here? “I can see 
why they did it the way they did,” he says with perfect equanimity. “I thought 
the skiers skiing down that slope in the film are not very good, whereas in 
actual fact I’m a hell of a lot better. But that didn’t matter to me because I 
know I’m a good skier, and people who know me know that.”

In many ways, the real story of Eddie Edwards is darker and more dramatic than 
that portrayed in the biopic; more Eddie the Revenant than Carry On Jumping. He 
would travel through Europe, broke, starving and without a roof over his head, 
desperate to ski wherever he could. He slept in his caravanette when it was 
-25C, he scraped food out of bins and he stayed in a mental hospital in Finland 
because that was all he could afford.

Rather than being the clown that he was portrayed as (and, to be fair, he 
portrayed himself as), Edwards was a man of astonishing resilience and 
initiative. After being called up to the England skiing squad, he was sent home 
on day one. “One selector said I shouldn’t be there because I’d been abusing 
the friendship and privileges at Gloucester ski club. He didn’t like me; he 
just didn’t like me at all.”

How could anybody not like the Eagle? He giggles. “Well, I used to ski there a 
lot and people would come up to me and say, I’m having a problem here, turning 
here or there. I’d watch them and say, if you do this you’ll overcome that 
problem, and he said, you should be sending them to the ski school and then 
they can make money through giving them lessons.”

He resented your generosity? “Yes. And I said, if somebody asks me I’m going 
to tell them, I’m not going to say I can’t talk to you, you’re going to have to 
talk to the ski school.’ But he took offence to that, and got me kicked off the 
England squad. I was absolutely gutted.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42638105555658d3acd228ac1a473ab56df9497c%2F0_282_2640_1584%2F2640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20probably%20closer%20to%20an%20ostrich%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Feddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42638105555658d3acd228ac1a473ab56df9497c%2F0_282_2640_1584%2F2640.jpg>
 Eddie at an Olympic press conference. Photograph: Colorsport/Rex/Shutterstock 
Edwards wasn’t going to be beaten. He decided he would bypass the England 
squad, and win himself a call-up to the Great Britain squad. Which is what 
happened. He was in his early 20s, caravanetting through Europe, giving it his 
all, still dreaming of Olympic glory. In the end, it was money that did for 
him. He couldn’t afford to continue Alpine skiing. Again, he was devastated, 
and again he was determined he wouldn’t be beaten.

He might not be able to get into the British squad as a sprinter, but he could 
possibly get in as a jumper. After all, there was no competition … Britain had 
never had an Olympic ski jumper, and he would only have to jump 70m to qualify 
for the Winter Olympics (the 1988 gold medal winner Matti Nykanen jumped 118.5m 
in the 90m final). There was only one problem: he had never jumped before. 
Actually, there were two problems: it was also a fantastically dangerous sport.

But Edwards was not to be deterred. He scraped into the Calgary Olympics with 
a jump just short of 70m, and in the process upset many of the toffs heading up 
the British Olympic Association. They regarded Edwards as an embarrassment, an 
exhibitionist, a clown, a loser.

Other countries looked on him more kindly, as a phenomenon: how could anybody 
qualify from a country that didn’t jump? His backstory fascinated the rest of 
the world. When he flew into Calgary, he discovered he had a new moniker; 
emblazoned across the airport wall was a huge banner welcoming Eddie the Eagle. 
“I said, oh, who’s that? And they said, it’s you!”

For the BOA, things went from bad to worse. The world’s press didn’t have time 
for any British athlete apart from Eddie. Edwards, who has always been a good 
talker, captivated them. One press conference lasted four hours. Drambuie, 
which sponsored the British team, was furious. “I was getting all this 
publicity but I wasn’t under that Drambuie umbrella, so Drambuie went apeshit 
at the BOA, and the BOA didn’t know what to do. They put an embargo on the 
press talking to me, and that just poured fuel on the fire. So the media tried 
to get at me in any way, shape or form to get a story off me.”

Did it upset him that the officials didn’t like him? “No! I thought it was 
funny. I’ve never really liked officials anyway. I’ve always had problems with 
the National Ski Federation [now British Ski and Snowboard]; they were bad 
enough being snobby. But the BOA were another level. Full of old boys’ clubs.”
 Eddie in the 90m Olympic ski jump competition. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
In the film, we see his team-mates deliberately get him drunk so that he 
misses the opening ceremony. Was that true? He shakes his head, and laughs. No; 
more poetic licence. But, he says, it was true in spirit. “Some of them were 
pissed off with me.” How did they show that? “Just by ignoring me, looking down 
their nose at me. Part of it was class-based. With skiing, especially with the 
Alpine, it wasn’t so much your ability as what sponsorship you could bring to 
the table or whether or not your mum and dad were rich. Also, it was partly 
because here was a guy who was a beginner in ski jumping, I wasn’t going to set 
the world alight, I’d only been jumping for 20 months, and these guys had been 
training all their life. They were better at their sport than me, and maybe 
there was a bit of jealousy. They were saying: ‘He shouldn’t even be here, he’s 
not an athlete, send him home, he’s not on our level.’”

He knew his limitations (“I’d like to say I flew like an eagle, but I was 
probably closer to the ostrich”) and, sure enough, he finished last – but he 
hardly disgraced himself. He completed his jumps, displayed humour throughout, 
and for many became the living embodiment of the Olympic adage, first expressed 
by the founder of the games, Pierre de Coubertin: “The most important thing in 
the Olympic Games is not winning but taking part; the essential thing in life 
is not conquering but fighting well.”

The British squad’s resentment only grew on their return from Canada. They 
were instantly forgotten, but Eddie the Eagle was in huge demand. Edwards had 
gone out to Calgary as the amateur’s amateur and returned home a star.

“In 1988, I earned something like £700,000. Yeah! I was earning 10 grand an 
hour opening shopping centres. Yeah! The most I earned in one day was 65 grand. 
I opened the Alton Towers fun ride in the morning, did a commercial in the 
afternoon and an appearance at a nightclub in the evening. Sixty-five grand in 
one day!” Even now, he can’t believe it. He wrote a book called On the Piste, 
he released records and tabloids wrote stories saying that he was going to have 
cosmetic surgery and morph into Robert Redford (he did eventually have his jaws 
realigned to save his teeth). And when the bookings fell away, he just returned 
to the plastering job, which he still does part-time today.

After Calgary, the International Olympic Committee introduced an Eddie the 
Eagle rule to ensure that the likes of Edwards would not be able to qualify for 
future competitions. It requires Olympic hopefuls to compete in international 
events and be placed in the top 30% or the top 50 competitors, whichever is 
fewer. Edwards tried to qualify for the next three Winter Olympics but failed, 
often hurting himself in the process. Over the course of his career, he 
fractured his skull twice and broke his jaw, collarbone, ribs, knee, fingers, 
thumbs, toes, back and neck. “I think the only bones I haven’t broken are my 
shoulder, hip and thigh,” he says.

He retired at the age of 34 in 1998.
 Recovering in hospital after a 1988 crash. Photograph: Getty Images 
After Calgary, he had a trust set up for him, but it failed and by 1992 he was 
declared bankrupt. He was fascinated by the way his lawyers handled the case, 
and preferred to see it as a new opportunity rather than a major setback. So he 
went back to school and did GCSEs, A-levels and finally a law degree at 
university. In the end, he didn’t practise as a lawyer, partly because of the 
cost of the final exams and partly because he realised he would be stymied by a 
career in law. “The next stage was the bar, the LPC [Legal Practice Course, for 
solicitors] or a master’s, but each one was 18 grand and there was no guarantee 
of a job. I thought, well, I was still doing cruises, after-dinner speaking, 
the odd TV show. If I became a lawyer I’d have to knock all that on the head.”

Nothing has come easy in Eddie Edwards’ life. Even the movie took an eternity 
to get made. It was first mooted 17 years ago, when it was suggested that Steve 
Coogan would play him. Since then, producers, directors, scripts and stars 
(from Robbie Williams to Rupert Grint) have come and gone. Edwards was anxious 
about how he would be portrayed – first he feared that Coogan would turn him 
into a buffoon, then he worried that if a world-class performer did the jumps 
for him, he would look too good. (“I thought even if he jumps badly, he’ll 
still jump well.”)

Eighteen months ago, he was approached by producer Matthew Vaughn and director 
Dexter Fletcher, who told him they had bought the rights to his story. They had 
seen himwin the diving reality show Splash! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN-D8x2VeNM>. Edwards had never dived before, 
and they were amazed by his athleticism. Like so many of us, they had always 
assumed Edwards was a talentless chancer. Vaughn and Fletcher told him they 
were going to start filming in a few weeks’ time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Feddie-the-eagle-trailer-sky-jumper-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450183016645%2FKP_782310_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20trailer%20for%20the%20biopic%20of%20the%20British%20ski-jumper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Feddie-the-eagle-trailer-sky-jumper-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20the%20Eagle%3A%20trailer%20for%20the%20biopic%20of%20the%20British%20ski-jumper%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Feddie-the-eagle-trailer-sky-jumper-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450183016645%2FKP_782310_crop_640x480.jpg>
Watch the trailer for the biopic of Eddie the Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/15/eddie-the-eagle-trailer-sky-jumper-video>
After so many setbacks, he didn’t have much faith. But they were as good as 
their word, paid him “a couple of hundred grand” for the story, and he loves 
the end result. Not because it is literally true to his life, but because, 
largely thanks to Taron Egerton’s uncanny impersonation, it captures his 
essential Eddie-ness.

Edwards is expecting to be busy for the next few months with personal 
appearances to promote the film, but he is not banking on it being a 
life-changer. Sooner or later, he’ll be back plastering, he says. (His 
customers know him as Michael; it helps him make a clear divide between his 
different worlds.) He understands how life rolls, and for every positive there 
tends to be a negative. While he is enjoying the current attention, he is also 
coming to terms with his recent divorce. And with that rare openness, he makes 
it clear just how much pain it is causing him. “It’s been a very difficult 
couple of years since my ex-wife announced she wanted a divorce. Lots of 
tears.” He talks about his two daughters, 11-year-old Ottilie and nine-year-old 
Honey. “I miss them dreadfully. I used to love reading them bedside stories and 
putting them to bed.”

But at least the movie is keeping him busy, and making people reassess his 
legacy. “The press portrayed me as a joke and a clown. So this is nice because 
it shows people just what it took for me to get to those Olympic Games. For me, 
just getting there was my gold medal. I’m hoping I’ll get a newfound respect. A 
lot of people loved me being there, but they said it with a smile on their 
face. I’m hoping now they’ll think, ‘He did bloody good.’”
 