
Few works of fiction have captured the sultry grittiness of southern Italy 
like Elena Ferrante’s wildly successful Neapolitan quartet, which concluded 
this month with the English translation ofThe Story of the Lost Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/20/story-of-the-lost-child-elena-ferrante-neapolitan-quartet-review>
. Ferrante’s 1950s Naples is a chaotic mire of sweat and stymied ambition – a 
place her characters all struggle to escape. But with a hop across the Gulf of 
Naples, Ferrante transports readers to paradise.

A one-hour ferry ride from the city, Ischia is a 17-square-mile island of 
parched tufa and bougainvillea that has hardly changed since the languid 
summers when Ferrante’s teenage protagonists – fleeing Naples’ stultifying heat 
and poverty – discover their respective sexualities on the thermal beach at
Maronti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jun/19/south-italy-top-10-budget-beach-hotels>
. Even today, the majority of visitors to Ischia are Italians; many, like 
Ferrante’s Elena and Lila, are Neapolitans from across the bay, often returning 
to the same guesthouses and rental apartments every year, each summer a chance 
to catch up with old friends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934065143%2F43c4d226-5df7-4fbe-9d90-01f3058a01f0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934065143%2F43c4d226-5df7-4fbe-9d90-01f3058a01f0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The town of Lacco Ameno, with Monte Epomeo in the background. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
And although the island’s larger towns – Ischia Porto, Forio, and Lacco Ameno 
– have turned into an even more rarefied imitation of nearby Capri (rooms at the
Albergo della Regina Isabella <https://www.facebook.com/Regina.Isabella>, 
beloved by Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, can cost £384 a night), its 
villages still evoke the languid days of Ferrante’s heroines.

Mules may no longer hoist suitcases up the steep hills of Sant’Angelo – a 
white-washed village of gelaterias and ceramic shops, a 20-minute walk from 
where Ferrante’s Elena lost her virginity on a moonlit beach – but the village 
is still car-free: only the odd miniature luggage truck is allowed through the 
narrow streets. On the hilltop is theCasa Garibaldi 
<http://www.casagaribaldi.it/> B&B (doubles from £55), a sprawling family-run 
garden complex of mosaicked terraces and thermal pools. Owner Luisa Iacono 
saves the same rooms for the same regulars every year, while her mother, 
Giuseppina, has been making the same special brioche for weekend breakfasts 
since the 1990s. Along the Maronti seafront, tables atRistorante Emmanuela 
<http://www.ristorantemanuela.com/indexENG.html> are fully booked by 10am. 
While Emmanuela herself has retired from the kitchen – replaced by various 
children and eager in-laws, she still maintains tasting rights over her 
signaturespaghetti all’Emmanuela – fresh rock-caught shellfish tossed in a 
tomato sauce that, as with most sauces in Italy’s south, betrays a hint of 
piquantpeperoncino (chilli).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934515532%2F6e4fb876-e724-42cd-aa0e-9bd31d687653-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934515532%2F6e4fb876-e724-42cd-aa0e-9bd31d687653-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The beach at Maronti. Photograph: Maremagnum/Getty Images 
A few minutes’ walk up a hillside path dotted with darting lizards, the 
sea-facing thermal pool complex atAphrodite Apollon 
<http://www.aphroditeapollon.it/terme/> evokes an extended classical ruin: the 
flower-draped pools – each named after a Greco-Roman deity – are all but 
dissolving into the cliffside. But for those in search of a more organic spa 
experience, a 40-minute hike through volcanic gorges leads toCavascura 
<http://www.visitischia.com/en/terme-di-cavascura.html>, a tiny shack-like spa 
over thermal springs whose use dates back to Roman times. Massages here are 
still done withfango (therapeutic mud), the saunas are built into the cave, and 
the water for the showers is warmed by the springs themselves.

That’s not to say Sant’Angelo is excessively traditionalist. At dusk, visitors 
and locals fill the town square, and bars such as the eclectic if pricey
Tavernetta del Pirata 
<https://www.facebook.com/La-TAVERNETTA-del-PIRATA-113478032069042/timeline/> – 
something between a ceramic shop and a 1950s-style American piano bar – 
overflow with revellers seeking chilled limoncello and genial raucousness.

A few diners and yachting daytrippers in search of a more formal evening head 
to the elegantly minimalistNeptunus <http://www.ristoranteneptunus.com/> along 
the coast, but everybody else heads to the gregariously crowded pizzerias. 
Regulars swear by intimateDa Pasquale <http://www.dapasquale.it/>. The narrow 
isthmus that connects the old town to a marina beneath a gargantuan stone 
outcrop becomes a kind of bar of its own, as teenagers share gelatos (locals go 
toPasticceria Dolce è la Vita <http://www.pasticceriadolceelavita.it/> just 
behind the main square) and cigarettes under the stars.
 Casa Garibaldi 
But Ischia’s greatest enchantment lies not in its villages, nor even in the 
shimmering of its seaside – but in its hills, where few tourists venture. 
Around the 789-metre Monte Epomeo, Ischia’s landscape changes dramatically. 
Dusty cliffs and flowers give way to brambles, white lava and darkly green 
vineyards.

Most visitors to Ischia’s mountain tend to do as Ferrante’s Elena and her 
unworthy beloved Nino did and make straight for the top of Epomeo – an 
hour-long scramble from the village of Fontana, to be rewarded not just by sea 
views but by lunch atLa Grotta da Fiore 
<http://www.epomeolagrotta.com/index.php?lang=it>, which is carved into the 
soft volcanic rock. But a longer stay – wandering the many narrow lanes that 
wind off the island’s single ring road – yields more of Ischia’s secrets. The 
hamlets between Sant’Angelo and Epomeo – Serrara, Fontana, Noia – are simple, 
geometric villages: each with pale painted houses, a 19th-century church with 
painted statues of Mary and the archangels and one or two bars for espressos 
and freshspremuta d’arancia (orange juice). 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934190375%2F16000cc6-5dd9-46d8-b530-5711ef90b961-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elena%20Ferrante%E2%80%99s%20Ischia%3A%20an%20Italian%20island%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Felena-ferrante-ischia-italy-island-paradise-naples%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442934190375%2F16000cc6-5dd9-46d8-b530-5711ef90b961-2060x1236.jpeg>
 View from the top of Monte Epomeo. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Up here the food is different, too: not seafood but fresh mountain rabbit, 
preparedall’ischitana, with fresh herbs and fresher tomatoes. The vine-strewn 
restaurants here are often deserted – for lunch, it can be necessary to call 
(and secure a rabbit) in advance. At the best of these,Il Comignolo 
<http://www.ristorantealcomignolo.it/>, such a telephone call procures a 
whole-day affair: rabbit transformed first into an earthysugo (sauce) for chewy 
bucatini (spaghetti with a hole through the middle,) then served for main 
course in a still-sizzling stew (dessert is grapes, fresh-picked from the 
terrace).

Moments before embarking on her first affair, Ferrante’s narrator, Elena 
Greco, contemplates the sensual idleness of the island. “Now the moon was 
visible amid scattered pale-edged clouds; the evening was very fragrant, and 
you could hear the hypnotic rhythm of the waves.”

Nothing much has changed.

• EasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/> and Thompson 
<http://flights.thomson.co.uk/en/index.html> fly to Naples from several UK 
airports.Ferry crossings from Naples to Ischia 
<http://www.traghettilines.it/en/Default.aspx> take around an hour, adult 
return from €37

 