
What if? It is a hypothetical that haunts us all, in various ways. The inkling 
that life could have somehow been better, with just a small twist, is a 
haunting idea.What if my life hadn’t turned out like this? What if?

Eric Beck Rubin’s compact, claustrophobic novel The School of Velocity 
revolves such a what if: classical pianist Jan de Vries is increasingly 
obsessed with Dirk, a charismatic childhood friend with whom he lost touch 
years before. Jan and Dirk met at high school in a tiny Dutch town and 
immediately hit it off. But in between all the hallmarks of a laddish 
friendship – headlocks, shared girlfriends, dabbling with drugs – something 
darker lurks. They’re too aware of each other, too codependent. The 
relationship is sporadically sexual until graduation, when Jan leaves to study 
music in Maastricht and Dirk heads to the US to do something undefined and 
grand. Decades later, Jan obsesses over how life might have been different if 
Dirk had stayed in touch.

“Everyone has a Dirk,” Rubin says. “Almost everyone has that best friend. And 
I don’t know too many that survive into adulthood. I have a Dirk, a friend who 
left my life, and I never figured out why. It is the favourite thing I hear 
from readers: ‘I knew someone like Dirk’, ‘I know that friendship personally’, 
‘I’ve had a brush with that.’ That makes you realise you’ve conveyed something 
fairly universal.”

Older Jan’s life is, in many ways, attractive: he is a renowned musician, 
subsidised by his lawyer wife’s career, living a comfortable life in 
Maastricht. But as he becomes increasingly haunted by Dirk – who is a mostly 
absent figure in the narrative – Jan is plagued by auditory hallucinations, an 
overwhelming cacophony that constantly plays in his head.

In the striking opening scene, Jan sits at a piano in front of an audience and 
realises the music in his head is too loud for him to play under. But part of 
him rejoices at this punishment: “And though I am suffering as badly as I ever 
had, a small part of me dances in a kind of ecstasy.”

Rubin, 37, lives with his wife in Toronto, where he works as a professor of 
architecture and design at the University of Toronto. He didn’t follow the 
usual path of modern novelists – he didn’t do an MFA and avoided English at 
school – but he is a prolific reader and wrote the novel over three years, 
during which he was working on his dissertation at Goldsmiths in London. The 
project was a pleasant distraction from the horrors of academic life. “I saw 
everything I despise about academia in one space, around one table. I couldn’t 
live that life.”

He looks embarrassed when I ask who his favourite writers are. “I am very 
hesitant of sounding pompous – no,more pompous,” he smiles, before listing 
Nietzsche, Georges Perec, Hannah Arendt, Imre Kertész. “The funny thing is, the 
more I think about writing, the less I’m up with contemporaries. I find myself 
going back in time. It’s not like all past work is great or that all great 
works survive – but these survived because they still have something to tell 
us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Feric-beck-rubin-school-velocity-first-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F283c63ae404037b641d3a030face5c1865be36e2%2F1136_0_2943_3679%2F2943.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20Beck%20Rubin%3A%20'Were%20my%20characters%20enemies%3F%20Lovers%3F%20I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20answer'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Feric-beck-rubin-school-velocity-first-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20Beck%20Rubin%3A%20%27Were%20my%20characters%20enemies%3F%20Lovers%3F%20I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20want%20to%20answer%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Feric-beck-rubin-school-velocity-first-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F283c63ae404037b641d3a030face5c1865be36e2%2F1136_0_2943_3679%2F2943.jpg>
 ‘I wanted a reader to always feel like they needed to know more’ ... author 
Eric Beck Rubin. Photograph: Scott Norsworthy 
Named after a series of repetitive exercises for practising scales, the 
narrative is as precise and methodical as its title. The School of Velocity is 
a taut novel that builds tension to thriller level. Tellingly, Rubin says he 
focused less on plot and more on drive. “I wanted a reader to always feel like 
they needed to know more,” he says.

From the very beginning, the reader knows Jan will see Dirk again, decades 
later, but the outcome of this reunion becomes all the more ambiguous as the 
end comes closer. “This may sound naive but I never thought of either of them 
as gay or in a same-sex relationship. Were they best friends? Enemies? Lovers? 
I didn’t want to answer any of these questions.” Instead, they tread a 
dangerous middle ground between all of them: you begin to suspect both men are 
torn between kissing and killing each other.

“What I wanted was to talk about a relationship between two men that did not 
have defined limits. I didn’t want them ever to clarify what their friendship 
was,” Rubin says. “They love each other in every way possible – physically, 
intellectually, socially. And I didn’t want to narrow it and label it in any 
respect.”

When it came to the final scene, Rubin physically shook as he wrote. “I was so 
with Jan, I was no longer in control. I’m not calm enough to look at this book 
with the requisite distance.” Is that a good quality for an author? He thinks 
it over. “Well, it gave it a certain energy that I think transfers to the 
reader. But, my God, there was a lot of redrafting.”

When he submitted the manuscript, people didn’t get it. One editor called it a 
novel about a “closeted male”, which Rubin disagreed with, while some agents 
told him to add 100 pages or that readers would not read “a hopeless book”. “It 
is facile to suggest people won’t read a book without hope,” he says. “This is 
not a hopeless book. No matter how dark it is, I don’t think any work of art 
that is not cynical can be called hopeless. But that was the attitude.” He 
makes a bewildered face. “But you know what? People will have gotten to page 
whatever by that point.”

Only a little over 200 pages, Rubin’s book is relatively short, a tradition he 
admires – he names The Following Story by Cees Noteboom and Dream Story by 
Arthur Schnitzler as favourites. “Conversely, I also like a big piece of meat,” 
he says, listing Shadow Country, A Suitable Boy and A Fine Balance as well. His 
next book, a multi-generational family epic, “is going to be a beast.”

He also occasionally toys with writing a sequel from Dirk’s perspective, but 
for now he is enjoying talking to people who read the book. He even quite likes 
it when people get angry with Dirk. “Let’s be frank, I thought people would say 
‘This is too weird, I can’t relate,’ because of the sexual dimension between 
the two characters,” he says. “But everyone that says something to me – that is 
gratifying because it means they’ve engaged with my book. It’s not strange, 
it’s wonderful.”

 * The School of Velocity by Eric Beck Rubin is published by One (£12.99). It 
is available from the Guardian Bookshop for £10.65. 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/school-of-velocity.html>  