
The world’s most-visited country, France, boasts a little over 30 percent more 
tourists than its 65 million population. In Malta, where capitalising on the 
advantages of being small but beautiful is almost an art form, the equivalent 
of four times the entire population travel to the island each year. The figure 
for 2014 was around 1.7 million visitors descending on 423,000 inhabitants. And 
the tourism number, larger than the average for Europe as a whole, is still 
rising.

Yet the principal pillars of the sector are sustainability and return on 
investment rather than pure visitor numbers. The strategy for the next 15 years 
is to extend the busy vacation period to longer than seven months a year, to 
spread the appeal geographically vis-à-vis source markets and in the variety of 
attractions offered, and to concentrate on quality over quantity. The 
authorities are swift to point out that to them, quality and high prices are 
not synonymous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea550c2c93e030a8b8d59bdee24af2606d79b7f%2F0_0_12430_3686%2F12430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faea550c2c93e030a8b8d59bdee24af2606d79b7f%2F0_0_12430_3686%2F12430.jpg>
 Malta’s waters offer a wide variety of activities for tourists. Photograph: 
Malta Tourism Authority 
According to Malta Tourism Authority (MTA), around 80 percent of tourists come 
from Europe. Paul Bugeja, the authority’s CEO, said, “Malta is seeking to 
increase established markets such as North America and Japan while also tapping 
newer markets such as China, South Korea, the Arabian Gulf, India and Brazil.”

China’s tourist “exports” surpassed the much-forecast 100 million target in 
the first 11 months of 2014 and Europe’s share is rising rapidly. Given the 
distances involved in long-haul flights, Malta’s slice is more likely to come 
from multi-destination holidays than from direct single resort bookings.

A third of visitors stay outside the system of “collective accommodation”, 
registered hotel rooms, leaving spare capacity. So hotel modernisation is based 
on upgrading existing facilities, adding floors or rebuilding. The other third 
stay in private houses. The tourism minister, Edward Zammit Lewis, said a €400 
million luxury hotel project is being developed on the site of San Gorg 
Corinthia, the Corinthia Marina and Radisson Blu hotels. As well as improving 
hotel standards, Zammit Lewis sees this kind of exercise as providing a good 
return on investment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef613b0cde0560ac2b73e6eb883f77293e38d154%2F0_0_3998_6000%2F3998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef613b0cde0560ac2b73e6eb883f77293e38d154%2F0_0_3998_6000%2F3998.jpg>
 The shoreline and marina as seen from above. Photograph: Malta Tourism 
Authority 
Central to sustaining the sector is integrating the activities of the national 
carrier, Air Malta, into tourism planning, much as is done in Turkey and Dubai. 
A mutually-beneficial relationship between the MTA and Air Malta should favour 
routes that benefit tourism, as well as Air Malta itself and the economy 
generally. Meanwhile, low-cost carrier market share has grown from 13 percent 
in 2007 to 39 percent in 2014. The effect has been a greater number of younger 
visitors, shorter lead times between booking and arriving, briefer stays and 
increased internet use in making arrangements.

Although ferries from Sicily bring in 45,000 visitors annually, the cost of 
instituting services elsewhere in Europe is probably prohibitive. Of greater 
marine potential is expanding the cruise business, including possible “home 
port” voyages. The half-million people who disembark from cruise ships annually 
are on top of the tourism figures because technically they do not sleep on the 
island. Malta-based services may encourage passengers to stay briefly in local 
hotels before or after the cruise.

The accent on marketing Malta will be gradually be switched from sun and sand 
to segments including culture as exhibited in Maltese lifestyle as well as 
museums, weddings, sports, ecology, and wellness. Once enough of the smaller 
parts are in place, the MTA will rebrand the sector to ensure harmony of image. 
Harmony on the ground will come from coordinating the island’s assets, planning 
saleable activities throughout the whole year and monitoring visitor numbers to 
avoid stress on the infrastructure.

Revitalising Valletta

As millions of euros are poured into restoring the spectacular historical 
sites, such as the St Elmo and St Angelo forts, so too a modern face is being 
fashioned for the city of Valletta itself. As part of a new approach to 
expanding tourism from sun and sea to culture and modern amenities, not to 
mention showcasing Valletta’s status as European City of Culture 2018, private 
initiatives and public works are joining forces to breathe life into the 
capital. A down-at-heel government printing press, St James’ Cavalier, is 
becoming a ‘centre for creativity’ with an art-house cinema, performance spaces 
and exhibition halls. Equally crumbling smaller areas, such as the music halls 
once frequented by British service personnel, have been converted into designer 
wine bars or posh retail outlets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15277f5cf7133ac3a53fb3e3c6d1bc093c7f101c%2F0_168_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15277f5cf7133ac3a53fb3e3c6d1bc093c7f101c%2F0_168_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 Looking out onto the harbour from Fort St Angelo. Photograph: Malta Tourism 
Authority 
In fact, a whole derelict area is now a prestigious commercial waterfront with 
cafes, restaurants and cruise liner facilities in a regeneration process that 
started around two decades ago. Karsten Xuereb, executive director of the 
Valletta 2018 Foundation, recognises the ironic difficulties of harnessing so 
much enthusiasm and so many ideas for change when he says, “For every bone 
there are 100 dogs.” Although forging cooperation among the extensive private 
sector has not been easy, Xuereb is determined that the individual developments 
will harmonise with all the other city plans for upgrades.

And conversion of the area behind Auberge de Bavière, known as the Old 
Abattoir, into the Valletta Design Cluster shows it is possible to take blood 
out of stone.

Interview: Edward Zammit Lewis, minister for tourism
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59df7cf9d9b3170b1ddb3df4f59f79fec7a52b2b%2F0_0_980_588%2F980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59df7cf9d9b3170b1ddb3df4f59f79fec7a52b2b%2F0_0_980_588%2F980.jpg>
 Dr. Edward Zammit Lewis. 
Strategies for tourism are geared to diversifying the emphasis on sun and sea 
in favour of culture and other pursuits in the winter months. As well as 
broadening the seasons and reasons to travel, the government wants to increase 
revenue faster than visitor numbers. Edward Zammit Lewis, minister for tourism, 
explains.
Bio 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/report-company/malta/boxouts/lewis.html>
Do plans for a six-star hotel signal a shift towards attracting wealthy Asian 
and Middle Eastern tourists?
We can get higher value-added tourists from our traditional markets, such as 
the UK and Germany. If we want to diversify and pursue an important market like 
Asia, we need a product that will appeal to high-spending Asians.

We should increase activity to Scandinavia, and we have added Finnair 
services. However, we cannot in any sense disrupt the other markets. We have to 
gradually position ourselves. It is a sort of balancing act.

The main important places for us to tap are China and India. But these are 
very specific markets and you have the right hotels to cater for them.

What current developments are in hand?
We need to increase air connectivity, not only in summer, but also in winter, 
so we are gradually convincing airlines to set up a year-round operation. We 
are also using our culture to create quality tourism to bring in tourists who 
are not just attracted to good weather. This requires repositioning ourselves 
as a cultural destination in certain markets where we are already prominent, 
like the UK. To this end, we are working on a better winter events calendar. 
These initiatives are bearing fruit. In the first five months of 2015, tourism 
rose by almost six percent year on year, and the expenditure increase is even 
higher.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff64eef3e9a12abc87e2b0455a21bb5f458b441a8%2F236_0_4019_2412%2F4019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Every%20month%20counts%20for%20tourism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fevery-month-counts-for-tourism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff64eef3e9a12abc87e2b0455a21bb5f458b441a8%2F236_0_4019_2412%2F4019.jpg>
 Valetta from the sea. Photograph: Malta Tourism Authority 
How is Malta leveraging Valletta’s position as European Capital of Culture 
2018?
We are working on developing Valletta as a city destination like Florence, 
Venice or Paris. The capital has changed in the past four years from basically 
a dead city to a vibrant place where we have entertainment, high quality 
restaurants, and boutique eateries opening every week. The expectations of the 
impact of the European Capital of Culture have already created this 
transformation. Valletta will not be associated with the sun and sea concept.

What plans are there for Gozo?
After discussions with the private sector, we have created a vision of where 
we want to be in 2030. We have also dedicated a micro policy for Gozo, which is 
very important, because Gozo’s tourism product is totally different. There are 
niches that are better than in Malta, for example, diving. We have to help them 
develop different types of tourism. This allies with initiatives to increase 
accessibility. It is unacceptable that it takes longer to get from Malta to 
Gozo than it does for tourists to arrive in Malta from their home country. Gozo 
has big potential, if developed in the right way.
 