
A group of high-profile men, including singer Sir Cliff Richard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard> and broadcaster Paul 
Gambaccini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/sep/15/paul-gambaccini-tougher-action-false-claims-sexual-abuse>
, havelaunched a campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/ban-on-naming-sexual-suspects-cliff-richard-paul-gambaccini>
 to change the law so that people accused of sex crimes would not be named 
unless they are charged. It is impossible to discuss such a campaign without 
setting it in the wider context of misconceptions about sexual violence and 
those who report it; misconceptions that have been particularly widely aired in 
the aftermath of therecent Ched Evans not-guilty verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/footballer-ched-evans-cleared-of-in-retrial>
, which saw many make similar calls for anonymity on social media.

Entwined with such demands is the public perception that false rape 
allegations are common. While there are some allegations which prove false, 
there are misconceptions about the extent of them. There are widespread 
stereotypes: of “promiscuous” women who regret sexual activity and “cry rape”, 
or vindictive women who set out to ruin men’s lives with false accusations, 
either for money or revenge. Whether intentionally or not, any conversation 
about anonymity in the judicial process raises the spectre of these figures. In 
the wake of the Evans verdict, they could clearly be seen intweets such as 
<https://twitter.com/futboyadam/status/786945986580983808>: “This confirms that 
80% of rape ‘victims’ are just drunk sluts who regret being a whore on a night 
out,” as well as in the complainant repeatedly being branded a “money-grabbing 
whore” online.

This betrays a confusion about our legal system: a not-guilty verdict does not 
mean a complainant lied, but that the alleged offence could not be proven 
beyond reasonable doubt.

The waters are further muddied by calls for complainants to be stripped of 
their anonymity to “level the playing field”, an argument that saw thename of 
Evans’s accuser shared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/14/social-media-naming-of-ched-evans-accuser-raises-questions-law>
 thousands of times on social media both in the aftermath of the initial case, 
and after the recent verdict.
EverydaySexism (@EverydaySexism) 
Those who claim this is about the verdict should remember near identical abuse 
after previous trial found Ched Evans guilty#RapeCulture 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RapeCulture?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/0wSr1NF96Y 
<https://t.co/0wSr1NF96Y>
 <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/786967988205449216> October 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/EverydaySexism/status/786967988205449216> 
But such responses completely misunderstand the nature of sexual violence. 
Since our society heaps shame, stigma and blame on victims, anonymity for 
complainants is vital to enable people to come forward and report – the most 
serious sexual offences are alreadyonly reported to police in 15% of cases 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
.

When those accused of offences are named, it gives other previously silenced 
victims the opportunity to come forward. This is particularly pertinent in 
sexual offence cases, where survivors may often have been groomed, abused and 
coerced into believing that nobody would believe them – into feeling isolated 
or blaming themselves.

Pressure grows for ban on naming of sexual crime suspects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/ban-on-naming-sexual-suspects-cliff-richard-paul-gambaccini>
It would also set a strange precedent to extend anonymity to those accused of 
sexual offences, while no such anonymity exists for those accused of other 
crimes, such as murder. It could risk damaging open justice, as anopen letter 
published by the End Violence Against Women Coalition (Evaw) 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/news/260/evaw-calls-on-cliff-richard-paul-gambaccini-and-nigel-evans-to-drop-anonymity-campaign>
 has explained, and asother legal experts concluded 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/data/files/Rape_Defendant_Anonymity_and_Human_Rights.pdf>
 after calls for anonymity were last rejected by the government in 2010.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fextending-anonymity-to-sexual-suspects-is-a-bad-idea-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F281e801b5fe1c302553f8900ae086f8dc4fe1724%2F345_231_3038_1823%2F3038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giving%20anonymity%20to%20sexual%20crime%20suspects%20won't%20bring%20justice%20%7C%20Laura%20Bates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fextending-anonymity-to-sexual-suspects-is-a-bad-idea-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giving%20anonymity%20to%20sexual%20crime%20suspects%20won%27t%20bring%20justice%20%7C%20Laura%20Bates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fextending-anonymity-to-sexual-suspects-is-a-bad-idea-heres-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F281e801b5fe1c302553f8900ae086f8dc4fe1724%2F345_231_3038_1823%2F3038.jpg>
 Ched Evans was found not guilty of rape in a retrial. Photograph: Mark 
Hawkins/Barcroft Images 
A false allegation of rape is a terrible offence with a devastating impact. 
But those cases are few and far between 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/13/false-allegations-rape-domestic-violence-rare>
. A Crown Prosecution Service review found that in a 17-month period, there 
were 5,651 prosecutions for rape and 111,891 for domestic violence. During the 
same period there were 35 prosecutions for making false allegations of rape. 
Even among that small number of cases, the complainants were often young and 
vulnerable, including some with mental health difficulties and, in some cases, 
the person alleged to have made the false report had – in the words of 
then-director of public prosecutionsKeir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/13/false-allegations-rape-domestic-violence-rare>
 – “undoubtedly been the victim of some kind of offence, even if not the one 
that he or she had reported”.

Now compare those numbers to the 85,000 women raped every year, according to 
government statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/an-overview-of-sexual-offending-in-england-and-wales>
, roughly 70,000 who don’t feel able to report, and aconviction rate of just 
1,070 rapists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/jan/11/male-female-rape-statistics-graphic>
. Simply put, the number of people whose lives are impacted by false 
allegations is dwarfed by the number who might be prevented from accessing 
justice if anonymity were granted to the accused (or denied to the accuser) in 
such cases.

This doesn’t mean we should shrug our shoulders and ignore the experiences of 
those such as Richard and Gambaccini. Rather, as Evaw urges, we should focus on 
the true cause of distress and harm in such cases, which is not our legal 
system, with its principle of innocent until proven guilty, but a 
sensationalist media producing deeply unsatisfactory reporting on sexual 
violence.

This sees those accused of sex offences painted as evil “monsters”; a response 
that does nothing to help the struggle against sexual violence. Coverage does 
victims no favours either, from thedescription of rape in inappropriate and 
mitigating terms 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/rape-not-romp-it-time-end-titillating-portrayal-sexual-violence-1548176>
 to the portrayal of survivors as either perfect victims or flawed women who 
brought offences upon themselves. This should be thoroughly investigated and 
action should be taken to try to resolve these problems. But extending 
anonymity to those accused of sexual offences is not the answer, and could do 
great harm to survivors in an area where it is already very hard to achieve 
justice.
 