
There is no minimum age at which a person must pay income tax. What matters is 
your income: if it is below a certain level during a given tax year you won’t 
have to hand anything over to the taxman. If it is higher, you will face a bill.

How income tax works

Income tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/incometax> is a “progressive 
tax” – in other words, the rate rises with your income. Everyone has a personal 
allowance, which is tax-free. You only pay tax on the income you earn above 
this level. If you are employed you will usually have most or all of your 
income tax deducted by your employer before you are paid, but the 
self-employer, pensioners and those on the higher tax rat may need to fill in a 
self-assessment form and pay some income tax to the taxman directly.

Personal allowance

In the 2014/2015 tax year, the personal allowance is set at £10,000. This 
means you do not pay any tax until you earn over £10,000.

However, there are currently two exceptions to this rule:

• If you were born before 6 April 1948 and you earn less than £28,000. In this 
situation, you get up to £500 of extra personal allowance. The amount of extra 
personal allowance you receive depends on your income. So if you £27,000 or 
less, you only pay tax on earnings over £10,500. If you earn between £27,000 
and £27,999, your personal allowance of £10,500 will reduce gradually by £1 for 
every £2 you earn net, until it hits £10,000. If your income is £28,000 or 
more, no matter how old you are, your personal allowance is the same as 
everyone else’s: £10,000.

• If you earn over £100,000. In this situation, your personal allowance goes 
down by £1 for every £2 of net income you earn above £100,000. If your income 
is £120,000 or more, your personal allowance is reduced to zero.

In the 2015/2016 tax year, the personal allowance will rise to £10,500 for 
everyone.

Tax bands

In the 2014/2015 tax year, income over your personal allowance is subject to 
taxation at the following rates:

• Basic rate (20%): this is payable on the first £31,865 of income above your 
personal allowance. So, if you earn up to £41,865 (i.e £31,685 over your the 
personal allowance of £10,000), you’re a basic rate taxpayer.

• Higher rate (40%): this is payable on all taxable income that is between 
£31,866 and £150,000 above your personal allowance. But bear in mind that, if 
you earn more than £120,000, your personal allowance reduces to zero. So you’re 
a higher rate taxpayer if you earn between £41,866 and £150,000 a year.

• Highest or additional rate (45%): this is payable on all taxable income that 
is over £150,000.

This means a person earning £45,000 a year would pay no tax on the first 
£10,000, 20% on the next £31,865 (£6,373) and 40% on the remaining £3,135 
(£1,254), adding up to a total tax payment of £7,627.

From 6 April 2015, the higher rate income tax threshold will increase from 
£41,866 to £42,286.

Paying income tax

If you are an employee, your employer will deduct the tax you owe at source – 
that is before your pay packet is handed over.

Your employer will tax you according to your tax code, which is based on your 
employment circumstances. If you have already worked, your previous employer 
should have given you a P45 when you left. Your P45 will tell your present 
employer how much you have earned in the current year (if anything) and how 
much tax (if any) you have paid so far in that tax year.

If you have no P45, ask your new employer for a P46. In due course you will 
receive a form from the tax office asking for details of your income and 
employment history. Complete this form and return it promptly – if you do not, 
you may end up paying more tax than necessary. When the tax office has received 
your completed form it will issue you with a tax code, a copy of which will be 
sent to your employer automatically.

Self-employed people

If you work for yourself you must register for self-assessment with HM Revenue 
& Customs within three months of becoming self-employed, or you risk a fine of 
£100.

After that you will be sent a tax return each April for the previous 12 
months. Although you can work out your own tax bill, HMRC will do it for you if 
you fill in the form online before 31 January.

You will need to settle your tax bill by 31 January, otherwise you will face a 
fine.

Employees who receive a second income on top of their main salary, and 
pensioners who receive a private pension or other income, will also need to 
fill in a self-assessment form and settle their tax bill in this way.

If you are self-employed you may be able to offset some of your expenses 
against your tax bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/11/self-assessment-what-can-claim-for>
 and reduce the amount you owe. Travel, rent on office space and stationery 
costs may all be offset. It can get complicated so you may benefit from hiring 
an accountant who will ensure you maximise the allowances and reliefs available 
to you.

Your tax code

The tax code is the total figure you are allowed to earn in any tax year 
before you start paying tax, without the final digit. For example, a code of 
512H means that you start paying tax after you have earned £5,120.

The letter shown after your code defines your status. L represents a basic 
personal allowance entitlement, H a personal allowance plus married couple’s 
allowance or additional personal allowance at basic rate, while D represents a 
higher-rate taxpayer. The letters OT mean no allowances have been given; this 
code might apply when you have overdue tax returns or your tax affairs are very 
complicated.

Sometimes your taxable benefits will exceed your allowances, an example being 
if you are taxed on a company car or you owe money to HMRC from previous tax 
years. In these cases, a K code enables your employer to recoup tax on behalf 
of HMRC.

Make sure you check your tax code if you change jobs or your circumstances 
otherwise change. If you think the code is wrong, speak to your employer and to 
the tax office.

Savings

Unless held in an Isa, any interest you earn on your savings will be subject 
to income tax. If your income is below the tax allowance, and your savings 
interest won’t push you over it, you should fill in form R85 to receive it 
without the tax being taken off. Otherwise, your savings provider will deduct 
20% of your interest for the taxman.

If you are a higher-rate taxpayer you will need to contact your tax office. It 
will ask you to fill in a tax return, or form P810, and arrange to deduct the 
extra tax through your employer’s payroll.

Your P60

This piece of paperwork is sent out after the end of the tax year. It details 
your earnings and tax deductions for the past tax year and is provided by your 
employer each April.

If you fill in a tax return you should keep records of your taxable income for 
at least 22 months after the end of the current tax year. Make sure you keep 
your P60s in a safe place as duplicates are not always easy to obtain.

Self-employed people must keep records for six years after the relevant tax 
year.
 