
Seventy years after the most daring attempt of Jewish Holocaust survivors to 
seek revenge, the leader of the plot has only one simple regret – that to his 
knowledge he didn’t actually kill any Nazis.


Joseph Harmatz is one of the few remaining Jewish “Avengers” who carried out a 
mass poisoning of former SS men in an American-run prisoner-of-war camp in 1946 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/26/second.world.war> that sickened 
more than 2,200 Germans but ultimately caused no known deaths. A recently 
declassified US military report obtained by the Associated Press has only added 
to the mystery of why the brazen operation did not kill Nazis, because it shows 
the amount of arsenic used should have been fatal to tens of thousands.

Still, the 91-year-old Harmatz says the message echoed into a rallying cry for 
the new state of Israel, established in 1948 – that the days when attacks on 
Jews went unanswered were over.

“We didn’t want to come back [to Palestine] without having done something, and 
that is why we were keen,” Harmatz said in a hoarse, whispery voice from his 
apartment in north Tel Aviv. He lost most of his family in the Holocaust.

Despite a visceral desire for vengeance after the second world war, most 
Holocaust survivors were too weary or devastated to seriously consider it. But 
a group of some 50, most young men and women who had already fought in the 
resistance could not let the crimes go unpunished. While there were some 
isolated acts of Jews harming individual Nazis after the war, the group, 
codenamed Nakam, Hebrew for vengeance, sought a more comprehensive form of 
punishment.

Secrecy and firing squads: Britain’s ruthless war on Nazi spies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/britain-nazi-spies-mi5-second-world-war-german-executed>
The mission was simple.

“Kill Germans,” Harmatz said flatly.

How many?

“As many as possible,” he quickly replied.

The first idea described by Harmatz was initiated by the resistance fighter 
and poet Abba Kovner: to poison the water supply of Nuremberg. But there were 
deep reservations even among the Avengers that such an operation would bring 
mass death to innocent Germans and undermine international support for the 
eventual creation of the state of Israel. Either way, when Kovner sailed for
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> with the poison, he drew 
suspicion from British authorities and was forced to toss it overboard.

So attention shifted toward Plan B, a more limited operation that specifically 
targeted the worst Nazi perpetrators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjewish-holocaust-survivor-kill-nazis-poison-arsenic-nuremburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48067745c1cd8da6b99cd54a4fb9a7d404013d23%2F0_183_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Failed%20Jewish%20Holocaust%20survivor%20plot%20to%20kill%20Nazis%20still%20a%20mystery%20after%2070%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjewish-holocaust-survivor-kill-nazis-poison-arsenic-nuremburg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Failed%20Jewish%20Holocaust%20survivor%20plot%20to%20kill%20Nazis%20still%20a%20mystery%20after%2070%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjewish-holocaust-survivor-kill-nazis-poison-arsenic-nuremburg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48067745c1cd8da6b99cd54a4fb9a7d404013d23%2F0_183_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 The bakery in Nuremberg, Germany, which supplied bread to Stalag 13, seven 
miles away. Photograph: AP 
Undercover members of the group found work at a bakery that supplied the 
Stalag 13 POW camp at Langwasser, near Nuremberg. On 13 April 1946, using 
poison procured from one of Kovner’s associates, three members spent two hours 
coating some 3,000 loaves of bread with arsenic. The goal was to kill 12,000 SS 
personnel, and Harmatz oversaw the operation from outside the bakery.

“The terrible tragedy was about to be forgotten, and if you don’t punish for 
one crime, you will get another,” explained Dina Porat, the chief historian at 
Israel’s Yad Vashem memorial, who is about to publish a book on the Avengers. 
“This is what was driving them, not only justice but a warning, a warning to 
the world that you cannot hurt Jews in such a manner and get away with it.”

Under German regulations, authorities in Nuremberg later investigated Harmatz 
and Leipke Distal, who worked undercover in the bakery for months, after they 
revealed details of the operation in a 1999 television documentary. The 
prosecutors eventually concluded that even though there was an attempted murder 
they would not file charges because of the “extraordinary circumstances”.

According to previously classified files from the US military’s 
counter-intelligence corps, the amount of arsenic used should have been enough 
to cause a massive number of deaths. The files were obtained by the AP through 
a Freedom of Information Act request to the National Archives.

In one memo from 1947 stamped “confidential”, investigators write that at the 
bakery they found “three empty hot water bottles and a burlap bag containing 
four full hot water bottles”. An analysis of the contents “revealed that they 
contained enough arsenic mixed with glue and water to kill approximately 60,000 
persons”.

Another confidential report said a chemist called in to help in the 
investigation had determined “10 kilo of pure arsenic was present, mixed with 
water and glue for adhesive purposes”.

Laboratory investigators found arsenic on the bottom, top and sides of the 
bread, and reported that doctors said the SS men exhibited symptoms “similar to 
cholera and included vomiting, diarrhea and skin rashes”. The report added that 
the most amount of arsenic found on a loaf was 0.2 grams – which fell well 
within the range of 0.1-0.3 grams that would be “in most cases lethal”.

To this day, it remains a mystery as to why the poison failed to kill Nazis. 
The prevailing theory is that the plotters in their haste spread the poison too 
thinly. Another is that the Nazi prisoners immediately sensed something was off 
with the bread and therefore no one ingested enough of it to die.

After the attack, Harmatz, Distal and others had to flee quickly. At the 
border of Czechoslovakia they were met by Yehuda Maimon, an Auschwitz survivor 
from Poland who lost his parents in the camps. He smuggled the group out 
safely, and they ended up in Palestine.

From a retirement home outside Tel Aviv, the 92-year-old Maimon looks back 
with satisfaction at carrying out his “duty” for revenge.

“It was imperative to form this group. If I am proud of something it is that I 
belonged to this group,” he said. “Heaven forbid if after the war we had just 
gone back to the routine without thinking about paying those bastards back. It 
would have been awful not to respond to those animals.”
 