
When Dina Gold began searching for the Berlin property seized from her family 
by the Nazis in the 1930s, she had little idea she would unearth a dark secret 
– how the SS paid millions in premiums to insure a key part ofAuschwitz and 
other death camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/27/auschwitz-short-history-liberation-concentration-camp-holocaust>
 to what is still one of Germany’s top insurance companies.

Gold, a former BBC reporter now living in Washington, wrote earlier this year 
about her quest to find the massive Berlin building that had housed the 
headquarters of fur traders H Wolff, owned by her grandparents, which was taken 
over by the Nazis in 1937, four years after Adolf Hitler came to power.

Stolen Legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/29/dina-gold-family-property-nazi-berlin-stolen-legacy-krausenstrasse>
 related how her search was prompted by the stories her grandmother, Nellie 
Wolff, told of her family’s life in pre-Nazi Germany and how they had owned a 
huge building in the centre of Berlin, which served as the headquarters of 
their successful business. Nellie died in 1977, leaving nothing to help locate 
the property or prove its ownership. When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, Gold 
set out to find the truth.

Some in the family were sceptical, but Gold had listened to Nellie, who had 
enthused: “Dina, when the Wall comes down and we get back our building in 
Berlin, we’ll be rich.” She began a trawl of documents andidentified the 
building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/29/dina-gold-family-property-nazi-berlin-stolen-legacy-krausenstrasse>
 – Krausenstrasse 17/18 – by unearthing a 1920 trade directory. Built by Gold’s 
great-grandfather in 1910, it was foreclosed upon by the Victoria Insurance 
Company in 1937 and transferred to theDeutsche Reichsbahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/23/secondworldwar.germany>, 
Hitler’s railways that later transported millions of Jews to death camps.

After Gold’s book was published, an executive of Ergo, the company that now 
owns the insurer, allowed her to see the archive recording the activities of 
the firm during the Nazi era. They revealed that the SS, which ran factories in 
the camps at Auschwitz, Buchenwald and Stutthof, close to what is now Gdansk, 
paid a consortium of firms, including the Victoria, premiums of 3.7m 
reichsmarks a year (£320,000 at 1939 exchange rates) to insure the factories.

“They didn’t insure the workers,” says Gold. “They were too easily replaced.”

The death camp factories – described as “German equipment works” – were run by 
the Deutsche Ausrüstungswerke, wholly owned by the SS. The archive showed the 
close link between the factories and the concentration camps. One read: 
“Special security patrols are not taking place because the workshop is located 
in the grounds of the concentration camp, which is under permanent military 
guard.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffamily-search-for-truth-reveals-nazi-secret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3afd70a28a2847fb4c47eb196bb217d276b57148%2F0_339_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%E2%80%99s%20quest%20for%20truth%20reveals%20top%20insurer%E2%80%99s%20link%20to%20SS%20death%20camps%20%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffamily-search-for-truth-reveals-nazi-secret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%E2%80%99s%20quest%20for%20truth%20reveals%20top%20insurer%E2%80%99s%20link%20to%20SS%20death%20camps%20%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Ffamily-search-for-truth-reveals-nazi-secret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3afd70a28a2847fb4c47eb196bb217d276b57148%2F0_339_2126_1275%2F2126.jpg>
 The Wolff family’s former Berlin headquarters on Krausenstrasse. Photograph: 
Heinrich Hermes/Heinrich hermes 
The Victoria’s head, Kurt Hamann, was awarded Germany’s highest civilian 
honour, the Federal Cross of Merit, after the war and had a foundation named 
after him at Mannheim University. Gold discovered documents linking him to the 
forced sale of the Wolff building, and Hamann was listed in a book by the War 
Office in London in 1944 calledWho’s Who in Nazi Germany.

The archive revealed how the Victoria held a mortgage on Krausenstrasse 17/18. 
Once the Victoria foreclosed on the mortgage – the Wolffs had paid their 
premiums, but the Nazis decreed all businesses had to be taken out of Jewish 
hands – the insurer sold the building to the German state railways. Herbert 
Wolff came away with the sterling equivalent of £100. He leftGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, emigrated to British-mandated 
Palestine and divorced his wife. His children (including Gold’s mother, Aviva, 
who would be sent to Britain by Nellie at the age of 14) followed.

At the end of the war, the building was taken over by the East German 
railways. When the Wall fell, the new German railway became the owners and 20 
years ago a deal was struck giving the Wolff family £8m.

Gold quotes Rudolf Vrba, who escaped from one of the factories, who wrote: “My 
job was painting ski boards [it was the time of the severest winter fighting on 
the Russian front]. We had to finish a minimum of 110 pieces a day. Anyone who 
could not complete that amount was flogged in the evening. We had to work very 
hard to avoid the evening punishment. Another group manufactured boxes for 
shells. On one occasion 15,000 such boxes ... were found to be a few 
centimetres shorter than ordered. Thereupon several Jewish prisoners ... were 
shot for sabotage.”

Alexander Becker from Ergo said: “We are very open about this. This is nothing 
to be proud of. We have known about the link between the Victoria and the camps 
for several years.”

Hamann’s honour has yet to be rescinded, and the University fellowship still 
exists. But a plaque at the family building now records that Krausenstrasse 
17/18 used to be the HQ of “H Wolff fur company, one of Berlin’s oldest Jewish 
fashion firms”.

Gold said: “You can call it a granddaughter’s revenge.”

Stolen Legacy: Nazi Theft and the Quest for Justice at Krausenstrasse 17/18, 
Berlin <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stolen-legacy-449719.html>, by Dina 
Gold, is available from the Guardian bookshop

 * This article was amended on 27 November 2016 to remove incorrect references 
to Kurt Hamann’s honour and fellowship having been rescinded.
 