
The family of Ali Amin Abdullah make unlikely Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> supporters – not least because they 
are from the Shia sect, despised and persecuted by the jihadi militants. In 
order to survive for two years under the self-proclaimed caliphate in Mosul, 
however, they did what it took to avoid persecution and likely death at the 
hands of Isis fighters: they pretended to be Sunni.

For Abdullah, who was repeatedly threatened by gun-wielding militants who were 
suspicious about his true denomination, this meant more than just words: he 
signed on for classes at a local Isis-linked religious institute. But his 
subterfuge proved so successful that, when newly arrived Iraqi government 
troops came to the family’s home in early November, they accused him and his 
relatives of collaboration.

“When I opened the door, a soldier said: ‘He is Daesh,’ and detained me and 
then took my brother, Abbas, too and asked about my father,” said Mustafa Ali, 
one of Abdullah’s sons, using a common Arabic acronym for the group. His father 
shouted: “I am not Daesh,” but the three men were taken to a nearby base.
 Ali Amin Abdullah being interrogated by an Iraqi army officer in Gogjali, 
Mosul, in November. Photograph: Handout 
Though his sons were eventually freed, Abdullah was taken away. His family, 
who insist there is no evidence he ever supported Isis, much less took up arms, 
have had no news since of what charges he might face. Their anger is growing by 
the day, the initial joy of freedom inspired by the anticipated removal of Isis 
fromMosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> transmuted into fear.

“If my father was Daesh,” said Ali, “he would be fighting the army in the 
battlefield, not sitting in his house waiting to be detained by the army.”

The family’s struggle underlines the huge challenges ahead for the Iraqi 
authorities, even if they manage to win thedifficult military battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/battle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq>
 to fully wrest control of Mosul from the group.

Sinjar still gripped by fear a year after liberation from Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/fear-and-suspicion-haunt-sinjar-a-year-after-liberation-from-isis-mosul>
When the fighting is done they must reassert control over a city of more than 
1 million people, while weeding out Isis members and supporters trying to go 
underground as the core of a future insurgency.

Allowing militants to slip through the net to form sleeper cells or work as 
covert recruiters could put the city at risk in years to come. But too harsh a 
crackdown, among citizens who have beenwary of the central government for years 
<http://www.the-american-interest.com/2016/09/26/the-once-and-future-mosul/>, 
carries serious risks of its own.

As it tries to rebuild the city, Baghdad needs support, not resentment, from 
Mosul’s residents. But the story of Ali’s family suggests the Shia-dominated 
government is alienating even people who should be natural allies.

Hailing from the tight-knit Shabak minority, which has lived for generations 
in the Nineveh plains, a traditional haven of diversity, the family thought 
they had become inured to bloodshed after surviving the descent into vicious 
sectarianism that followed the US-led invasion in 2003.

So despite grim reports of life under Isis rule, most decided to risk staying 
on rather than flee to an overcrowded, underfunded refugee camp, relying on 
passing as Sunni Shabaks.

But then Isis arrived, and Ali realised nothing had prepared him for its 
twisted dedication to murder and cruelty, the markets full of Yazidi women sold 
to be raped, or the vicious, bizarre executions on trumped-up or trivial 
charges.


“We have seen too many beheadings, people being drowned in cages, thrown from 
the top of buildings,” he said. “I myself saw a man thrown off a building near 
the governor’s office around three months ago. I couldn’t sleep for a week 
afterwards.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c2a57ac484bd8be2a976a534631597a74e290f3%2F0_3_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c2a57ac484bd8be2a976a534631597a74e290f3%2F0_3_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 An Iraqi special forces soldier fighting Isis militants in Mosul. Photograph: 
Hussein Malla/AP 
In the first days after the militants swept into town in 2014, his family 
feared they had made a terrible mistake, after Abdullah was arrested twice and 
threatened at gunpoint by militants convinced that the family were Shias.

“They placed a gun on my father’s head four times but he insisted that he was 
a Sunni,” Ali said. Increasingly fearful for his family after his second brush 
with Isis, Abdullah decided to sign up for a sharia law course in a school 
linked to the group.

He hoped the relatively innocuous cover of extreme devotion would provide some 
protection if attacks escalated. And when Isis came to arrest him for the third 
time at the end of 2014, it was the head of the sharia school, Sheikh Hammadi, 
who secured his release by vouching for his Sunni credentials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4680b3ae508e3e5a95fc42f86db946bcde299606%2F0_284_960_996%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4680b3ae508e3e5a95fc42f86db946bcde299606%2F0_284_960_996%2F960.jpg>
 Mustafa Ali. Photograph: Handout 
Even Hammadi’s word could not put suspicions to rest, and Isis rounded him up 
again in 2015. By then his protector had been killed in a US airstrike, but his 
fellow students came to the rescue instead. He could not be Shia if he was 
studying Sunni texts in an Isis school, they argued.

The head of the local neighbourhood committee, who stayed through Isis rule, 
confirmed key details of the family’s story to the Guardian. “I can tell you 
with certainty that the family of Ali Amin [Abdullah] is Shia,” said Mohammad 
Sulayman Yunis, 65.

“Isis forced him to study sharia because they suspected him of being Shia, and 
he would have been killed if they proved he was Shia.They destroyed many Shia 
houses in Gogjali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/mosul-iraq-civilians-flee-isis> 
[a neighbourhood in Mosul]. I was there and saw it myself.”

'Anyone who flees is shot dead': Mosul locals trapped as Isis digs in for fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/anyone-who-flees-is-shot-dead-mosul-locals-trapped-as-isis-digs-in-for-fight>
Ali, a tall, inquisitive man, was well aware of the threat. 

When the Guardian first contacted him through two intermediaries to ask about 
life in Mosul, Ali agreed to speak about the Isis horrors he was witnessing as 
the Iraqi battle to reclaim the city began – even though possession of a sim 
card could mean a death penalty.

Most nights in October he would walk up to the roof of his cement block house, 
look around for informers who might be tempted to turn him in, then slide under 
a blanket and take out his phone.


“All we need to do is to get rid of this threat. We will not need anything 
after that. Mosul has become a prison,” Ali whispered into the handset one 
night. Sometimes he was with his brother-in-law, who had been whipped by Isis 
for keeping his beard too short and for smoking.

The city became even more dangerous as the fighting closed in and Isis seized 
civilians to serve as human shields. Food ran low but people stayed home and 
went hungry, hoping to be spared. “No one knows where the next mortar will 
hit,” said Ali, who used to drive a truck before Isis came and cut off most 
trade along with his livelihood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea22da9c988c491c33a353be2d38185e5723c64d%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20survived%20under%20Isis%20for%20two%20years%20by%20pretending%20to%20be%20Sunni&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ffamily-survived-isis-pretending-to-be-sunni-mosul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea22da9c988c491c33a353be2d38185e5723c64d%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Displaced Iraqi people, who fled the Islamic State stronghold of Mosul, gather 
at Khazer camp in Iraq. Photograph: Ammar Awad/Reuters 
Then in late October, a couple of weeks after the launch of the offensive to 
oust Isis, there was a glimmer of hope, as the militants began retreating. “I 
was in Mosul market yesterday for an hour; people are busy collecting food 
stores. I did not see any Hasba [morality police] in the market. We were around 
15 people who did not go to pray and no one told us to go,” he told the 
Guardian at the time.

When government soldiers arrived in their corner of the eastern suburbs of 
Mosul on 2 November, Ali thought freedom was in sight. The nightmare of life 
under Isis, he thought, could be drawing to a close. But it was then that the 
cover that had kept their family alive – the pretence of being Sunni – turned 
into a liability and soldiers took Ali, Abbas and Abdullah away.

The family finally fled Mosul on 13 November, deciding in the unbearable 
calculus of war that the risks of the road were less than the risks of staying 
under attack. They could do more for their father alive than dead, they 
decided, and were told he had been moved to the capital.

Iraqi forces breach eastern districts of Mosul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/iraqi-forces-approaching-eastern-districts-of-mosul-reports-say>
“They have taken my father to Baghdad and we don’t know what has happened to 
him. He is innocent,” Ali said, before leaving for the capital to look for him. 
There is no more news on where Abdullah is being held, but Ali has vowed to 
keep searching as long as he can afford to.

His Facebook page is filled with the search. One picture shows Ali’s toddler 
son holding a mobile phone to his ear, above the caption: “He is waiting for 
you to return.” Another simply shows a young man screaming into the sky. “Oh 
Allah, I am tired, please return my father.”

In Guardian stories previously quoting Ali, he was given the pseudonym Abu 
Mohammed and his name was altered. This was to protect him given Isis penalties 
for owning a mobile phone and criticising the group’s rule.
 