
This week is the 80th anniversary of the commencement of the Spanish civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/jul/18/survivors-of-the-spanish-civil-war-80-years-on-in-pictures>
, in which 4,000 British volunteers enlisted and several hundred died. Men with 
leftwing sympathies, motivated by the Europe-wide threat of fascism, signed up 
to fight against Franco’s nationalist forces.

Among them are the familiar names of famous writers and poets: George Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>, WH Auden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/whauden> and Laurie Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/laurie-lee> – men whose work now informs our 
understanding of the war and British participation in it. Also among them is 
one artist you may not have heard of: Felicia Browne.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ceeec491437cbca3da544f2bbbabb98ff1245b%2F557_567_1839_2576%2F1839.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Felicia%20Browne%3A%20the%20only%20known%20British%20woman%20to%20die%20in%20the%20Spanish%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Felicia%20Browne%3A%20the%20only%20known%20British%20woman%20to%20die%20in%20the%20Spanish%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ceeec491437cbca3da544f2bbbabb98ff1245b%2F557_567_1839_2576%2F1839.jpg>
 Felicia Browne 1904–1936. Photograph: Joe Humphrys/Oli Cowling/Tate Photography
Born in 1904, Browne was the first British volunteer to die in the war. One of 
many female volunteers to fight – there were mixed-gender Spanish combat 
battalions on the front line and women-only rear guard battalions – she was the 
only known British woman.

Her involvement in the conflict was not directly planned. While many of the 
other fighters had to travel from Britain in secret after the British 
government declared it illegal to go toSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> to fight, Browne had, in fact, 
arrived just before the war broke out. On a driving holiday with her leftwing 
photographer friend Edith Bone, she had travelled to Barcelona to attend the 
international People’s Olympiad, organised in protest of the 1936 Olympics in 
Berlin. But it did not go ahead – on 17 July, two days before the event’s 
scheduled date, the fascist military rose up against the Spanish republic. 
Athletes either fled or were stranded; Browne decided to stay and fight.

She had a history of involvement in politics, having joined the Communist 
Party of Great Britain in 1933. She was also a member of the leftwing, 
London-based Artists’ International Association, which would later raise funds 
for the Spanish Republican forces.

Curious, intrepid and brave, Browne had earlier travelled to Soviet Russia to 
see how people lived and worked under a communist regime, and from 1929 she had 
lived in Berlin, where she trained as a stone mason and metal worker. From the 
1930s onwards, her work had become increasingly political – a year after she 
joined the Communist party, she won a prize for her design of a TUC medal 
commemorating the centenary of theTolpuddle Martyrs 
<http://www.tolpuddlemartyrs.org.uk/>.

In Spain, it was only after several frustrated attempts to enlist that she was 
finally able to join a communist militia on 3 August 1936, having declared: “I 
am a member of the London communists and I can fight as well as any man.”

Not long afterwards, on 25 August, in a failed attempt to dynamite a fascist 
munitions train, Browne was fatally shot while assisting an injured Italian 
comrade. A sketchbook, retrieved from her possessions, was filled with drawings 
of her fellow fighters: these stoic men and women have been captured in 
Browne’s lyrical, romantic modernist style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd78a917df1adb00b8e1a9db032972e6859f9ec%2F0_0_2953_4142%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Felicia%20Browne%3A%20the%20only%20known%20British%20woman%20to%20die%20in%20the%20Spanish%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Felicia%20Browne%3A%20the%20only%20known%20British%20woman%20to%20die%20in%20the%20Spanish%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fmeet-the-only-known-british-woman-to-die-in-the-spanish-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd78a917df1adb00b8e1a9db032972e6859f9ec%2F0_0_2953_4142%2F2953.jpg>
 A sketchbook, retrieved from her possessions, was filled with drawings of 
Brown’s fellow fighters. Photograph: Joe Humphrys/Tate Photography 
Now, Browne’s collection of drawings, prints, book designs, sketchbooks and 
correspondence, purchased by the Tate in 2010, has beenfully digitalised and 
can be viewed on its website <http://www.tate.org.uk/who-was-felicia-browne>. 
One photograph, taken the year Browne died, shows her holding someone’s child. 
Her pudding-bowl haircut and round spectacles give her a startling resemblance 
to theartist Stanley Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/04/stanley-spencer-earliest-sketchbook-exhibition-hepworth-wakefield>
.

“If painting or sculpture were more valid or urgent to me than the earthquake 
which is happening in the revolution,” she once told a friend who questioned 
why she didn’t simply concentrate on her art, “if these two were reconciled so 
that the demands of the one didn’t conflict … with the demands of the other, I 
should paint or make sculpture.”

Even in death she continued to help the cause she died for: her final drawings 
were exhibited in London to raise funds for Spanish relief campaigns. Now, with 
the new Tate archive – as well as a special Tate Britain display of her work – 
we can at last get a fuller picture of the only known British woman to give her 
life to the Spanish civil war.

 * Felicia Browne is on display at Tate Britain until 14 August 


 