
There is, quite simply, nothing to touch it. The hardest fought sports rivalry 
of my lifetime has been that between the International Olympic Committee and 
Fifa. It is theReichenbach Falls 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reichenbach_Falls> of scumbaggery – a site of 
titanic struggle between worthy foes, a struggle in which I have frequently 
called the winner too early.

Athletes’ Olympic spirit is only hope of redeeming the sullied Rio 2016 Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/olympic-spirit-rio-games-russian-doping>
One year ago, while watching Fifa bigwigs being escorted to police cars by 
hotel staff literally shielding them with their own dirty linen, I remember 
thinking that the IOC couldn’t have matched this. There were $29m (£22m)Amex 
bills <http://www.cbsnews.com/news/fifa-60-minutes-steve-kroft/>, there was the 
hilariously timed release of avanity movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jun/04/united-passions-the-fifa-vanity-movie-thats-never-offside>
, there was the stop-motion implosion ofSepp Blatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/sepp-blater-to-challenge-six-year-ban-from-football-at-court-of-arbitration-for-sport-25-august-fifa>
. The IOC, for all their baroque scandals and malevolence down the years, were 
at least not this bad.

My apologies. Once again I hear Michael Corleone 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Corleone> just managing to keep a lid on 
his frustration as he asks me: “Who’s being naive, Kay?” I mean, really … at 
least you could believe the football, even if it was happening in Qatar. 
Spectators effectively now have to be doping to believe the Olympics.

Nobody can hate sport as much as the IOC – not even your average UK government 
sports minister. Not even the World Anti-Doping Agency (Wada), whose president 
Craig Reedie took so much troublereassuring the Russian sports minister 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/16/sports/olympics/world-anti-doping-agency-russia-cheating.html?_r=0>
 that “there is no intention in Wada to do anything to affect [our] 
relationship.” So the revelations of the past few weeks that centred on (but 
are far from limited to) the Russian state doping programme are not, in one 
sense, a shock. Wada’s budget is $27m, making it marginally more expensive than 
the IOC’s bar tab in an Olympic cycle, but dwarfed, perhaps, by its prostitute 
bill.

That the IOC want athletes to cheat is, in light of their handling of the 
Russian situation, abundantly and tragically clear. The only debate is over 
whether they know that this is what they want, or whether it’s some 
subconscious thing that might emerge if IOC president Thomas Bach spent 12 
minutes with a therapist who had obtained their qualification from a 
correspondence course . To adapt the old saying about Italian traffic lights, 
anti-doping laws are now really just a suggestion.

This week the former chief investigator for Wada detailed how his efforts to 
investigate Russian doping were frustrated 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/olympics-top-investigator-secret-efforts-undermine-russian-doping-probe>
 – frequently by Wada, he alleges – and offered his take on the fact that 
despite all the revelations and all the IOC’s power, 271 Russian athletes will 
be competing in Rio. “The action the IOC took has forever set a bar for how the 
most outrageous doping and cover-up and corruption possible will be treated in 
the future.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Folympic-torch-reaches-rios-christ-statue-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20torch%20reaches%20Rio's%20Christ%20statue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Folympic-torch-reaches-rios-christ-statue-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20torch%20reaches%20Rio%27s%20Christ%20statue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Folympic-torch-reaches-rios-christ-statue-video&media=>
Olympic torch reaches Rio’s Christ statue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/05/olympic-torch-reaches-rios-christ-statue-video>
As that verdict makes clear, this catastrophic moment in the pursuit of 
sporting integrity must not be conveniently confined to Russia. It is much 
bigger than Russia, though it must be said Russia is, at least to my knowledge, 
the only country where the sudden death of the first head of its anti-doping 
unit was followed two weeks later by that of his successor. It’s often said 
that sudden heart attacks are no respecters of class or wealth, but they do 
arguably show a certain deference to the Russian security services.

Either way, the IOC has come right off the ropes in its eternal showdown – or 
rather, shitshowdown – with Fifa. Perhaps the first whiff of the fightback came 
from Bach, who preposterously opted to lecture Fifa on morality on several 
occasions last year, even as he was enjoying his regular chats with Vladimir 
Putin. “Enough is enough,” ran one of these addresses. “We hope that now, 
finally, everyone at Fifa has at last understood that they cannot continue to 
remain passive. They must act swiftly to regain credibility because you cannot 
forever dissociate the credibility ofFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> from the credibility of football.” 
In terms of getting his organisation back into the game, this was Ali’s 
whispered inquiry into Foreman’s ear: “That all you got, George?”

Now Bach is preparing to take his throne for an Olympics that increasingly 
provides its own metaphors. The Rio games are beset by pestilence and a human 
effluence problem. Never hasthe statue of Christ the Redeemer 
<http://www.newsday.com/sports/olympics/rio-olympics-2016-christ-the-redeemer-cristo-redentor-statue-fun-facts-1.12122616>
 looked more openly sarcastic. He towers over the IOC’s latest production, arms 
outstretched in the international gesture of exasperation, as if he is asking: 
“Could I make it any clearer, morons?”

He has certainly been assisted by many Brazilians in this inquiry. At the 
lighting of the Olympic torch in April,Bach blathered 
<https://www.oximity.com/article/IOC-President-addresses-SportAccord-Co-1>: 
“This message of hope is perhaps the most important legacy that the Olympic 
Games will bring Rio de Janeiro.” The Rio organising committee chair could only 
concur: “The Olympic flame means hope to us all.” Except maybe to thosewho 
stoned the torch relay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/28/olympic-flame-extinguished-rio-de-janeiro-protesters>
 as it arrived in Rio last week.

Richard McLaren accuses IOC of misrepresenting doping findings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/richard-mclaren-ioc-wada-russia-rio-2016->
Before we conclude, I should say that I love the Olympics, which up until now 
have always ended up being rescued by the athletes once competition begins. 
Their fortnight of feats and fables eradicate the months and years of 
government overspending, martial displays, human rights abuses, neighbourhood 
cleansing, and all the other adorable fascist quirks that are an essential part 
of the undercard to any modern sporting mega-event. Once the games themselves 
started, you still had the sport. With a good few exceptions, of course, and a 
good few more suspicions – yet still not sufficient enough to wreck it.

But this time round? Typing this hours from the opening ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/olympics-2016-daily-briefing-rio-analogue-opening-ceremony>
 of Rio 2016, I’d love to be proved wrong. I want my fortnight of unbridled 
delight, I want my unforgettable victories, I want my backstories, I want the 
usual two-week obsession with something like handball or archery to develop. 
But I fear the IOC and their pathetic satellites finally gone and done it. To 
deploy the official language of the Olympic movement:les jeux sont faits.

I’ll watch it, of course, and I’m sure there will still be plenty of 
marvellous moments – though I expect to develop RSI from all the eye-rolling. I 
can’t say precisely when the fatal tipping point came. I know that 10 years 
ago, I would have speculative discussions about which top athletes might be 
doping. Now I have discussions about which might conceivably not be.
 