
Fighting around Mosul  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>has cut off 
water supplies for about 650,000 people in the Islamic State stronghold, as the 
UN warned that a siege-like situation was developing with food stocks running 
low after weeks of clashes.

A broad coalition of anti-Isis troops is closing in on Iraq’s second largest 
city, but progress is slow in urban areas because militants have dug in and are 
hiding among up to a million civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mosul-refuse-to-abandon-homes-isis-iraqi-army>
, using them as human shields.

UK commander in Iraq calls for patience over retaking Mosul from Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/top-uk-commander-calls-for-patience-retaking-mosul-isis-donald-trump-us-strategy-islamic-state>
A key water pipeline was hit in fighting on Tuesday, local officials said. 
“The maintenance team cannot reach the pipeline because it lies in an area 
being fought over,” Hussam al-Abar, a member of the local council, told 
Reuters. “We are facing a humanitarian catastrophe.”

Iraq’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, said Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> was completely surrounded and that 
the speed of the advance had been faster than he expected.

 Giving an optimistic forecast for a battle that has been raging for six weeks 
and most observers expect to last into next year, Abadi claimed Isis morale was 
fading and that the US president-elect, Donald Trump, had promised extra 
support for his government.

“In my telephone call with President-elect Trump, he assured me that the US 
support will not only continue, but it is going to be increased,” he told 
Associated Press.

Yet poor families in Mosul are already struggling to feed themselves as the 
battle intensifies, and others are hoarding and hiding food, a top UN envoy 
warned.

“Key informants are telling us that poor families are struggling to put 
sufficient food on their tables,” Lise Grande, UN humanitarian coordinator in
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, told Reuters. “This is very 
worrying.”

The fighting has disrupted both markets and supply lines, making food hard to 
come by and pushing up prices. Costs soared after militia fighters last week 
severed the route into Syria, the last reliable supply line into the Iraqi 
centre of Isis’s self-styled caliphate.

“In a worst case, we envision that families who are already in trouble in 
Mosul will find themselves in even more acute need.” Grande said. “The longer 
it takes to liberate Mosul, the harder conditions become for families.”

Isis are also worried about food costs, and on Sunday militants arrested about 
30 shop owners accused of price gouging, to try to suppress discontent, 
witnesses told Reuters.

The group has tried to prevent civilians leaving areas under its control, 
herding thousands deeper into Mosul toserve as human shields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/islamic-state-uses-hostages-as-human-shields-mosul-says-un>
 while government and other forces advanced.
 