
On the face of it, 2016 hasn’t started out as a good news year for gender 
equality. First, we learned that gender inequality could cost the global 
economy a potential$12tn by 2025 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/how-advancing-womens-equality-can-add-12-trillion-to-global-growth>
 unless rectified. Then, on the first anniversary of Shared Parental Leave 
launching, we discovered that take-up has floundered at 1%.

The good news is that leaders can improve equality at their business and reap 
the manifold rewards of diversity, if they are willing to walk the talk. Here 
are some practical tactics to consider, as well as specific programmes we’ve 
implemented at media agency Maxus.


Is there a glass ceiling where you work? 

Taking the temperature of your own organisation starts with gathering the data.

We investigated our own global network and found a healthy number of women in 
senior roles – 40% at head of and director level. However, the story changes at 
board level: only 24% of our executive board members are women.

Sadly, this isn’t just a Maxus issue – it reflects the bigger picture 
<http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-ceos-sp-500> whereby only 12% of board 
seats globally are held by women and just 4% are CEOs leading the world’s 500 
top corporations. Seeing the figures in black and white was stark motivation 
for me to look at what I can do within my own business.

Mind the gap: when will women finally be able to celebrate equal pay?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/22/women-inequality-gender-pay-gap-workplace>
Look at your gender pay gap (and come clean)

The gender pay gap can only persist within a culture of secrecy. We need to 
instil a new culture of transparency – something that David Cameron is 
promoting with a call to every business with 250 or more employees to make their
pay data transparent from April 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/22/women-inequality-gender-pay-gap-workplace>
.

Challenged to investigate the gap within our company, we learned that in the 
UK the gap is 0.5% in favour of women and globally, our men are paid 4% more. 
In senior positions the gap is less significant: middle and entry level roles 
are where we need to focus our efforts to ensure equal pay.

Importantly, now I know what and where our gap is, we can take positive steps 
to improve it and have since launched Mind the Gap – a global data driven 
project to investigate basics of pay, policies and procedures to ensure we 
deliver on equality.


Challenge the barriers that prevent women progressing

Certain irrefutable facts, such as breastfeeding and childbirth, obviously 
impact women’s role in parenting. But many women definitely do want to return 
to work following maternity leave, and just as many men would love to be more 
involved with hands-on parenting, despite cultural misperceptions around this. 
We need to implement policies that support parents’ choices, whatever they may 
be.

At Maxus UK, we’ve launched a new commitment ensuring equality of choice for 
parents. The policy features 26 weeks paid leave for both mums and dads 
(whoever is a Maxus employee) – this actively encourages parents to take up 
shared leave with a partner.

We’ve also introduced agile working, which recognises that people can be just 
as productive whether they work at the office or elsewhere. Any initial 
investment in the requisite tech and communicating the ethos has been swiftly 
paid back. Many non- parents also value this way of working and we’ve already 
noticed a reduction in churn.

Another major barrier to women succeeding is their own limiting self-beliefs, 
as well as the unconscious bias that exists within most organisations. 
Coaching, mentoring and introducing new training initiatives will help overcome 
these hurdles.

Why don’t more women ask for a pay rise?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/20/why-dont-more-women-ask-for-pay-rise>
Grow the next tier of female leaders

There are real gender incongruities to overcome; sometimes it will require 
empathy and sometimes women will need gender-specific programmes to bring out 
their best self. We launched Walk the Talk, an intensive two-day experience in 
three regions to equip our senior female talent with the confidence they need 
to thrive in their careers. Mentoring, helping other women up the ladder and 
making women more visible are high on the agenda.

Feedback has already been resoundingly positive, and we hope to see a ripple 
effect as participants extend the learning and attitude to colleagues.

Don’t forget about men 

This is about everyone having an equal chance. The aim with any equality 
initiative shouldn’t be to create an undue advantage for women, but simply to 
remove barriers to a level playing field. Nobody would want to be promoted just 
because they are female. This isn’t about declaring war on men, quite the 
opposite. It’s about amplifying female talent while they stand side by side 
with their male colleagues to drive business success together, equally.

Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 