
A new survey from the Chartered Institute of Personnel Development (CIPD) 
tells us what anyone sitting on a crowded commuter train on a rainy morning 
already knows,most of us hate our jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/09/trails-of-2016-job-low-satisfaction-company-short-termism>
. Work dissatisfaction has hit a two year low and it doesn’t look like it’s 
going to go up any time soon.

This isn’t hugely surprising, we all know that the cost of living has risen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/09/inflation-rate-three-times-higher-uk-millennials-pensioners>
 and wages haven’t kept up. Job security is a term that your parents use but 
which means nothing in today’s “gig economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-economy>
”, and work has become some deathly dull that one man is funding his retirement 
through suing his company for “bore-out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shortcuts/2016/may/03/bore-out-burnout-frederic-desnard-job-isnt-stimulating>
”. Add it all together and it’s no wonder that employee satisfaction is so low.


If you’re an employer who cast an eye over the CIPD report and then forgot 
about it, you probably want to stop reading now. But if you suspect that at a 
happy workforce might be a more productive workforce then we have some 
suggestions for simple things you can do to bring about business bliss.

Pay everyone fairly. Yes, even the women. While undertaking a pay audit of 
your company might seem like a fast-track to internal squabbling and law-suits, 
it could in fact buy you a lot ofgoodwill with your employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/nov/23/salesforce-and-equal-pay-the-tech-giant-is-putting-its-money-where-its-mouth-is>
, and some very nice PR. However, don’t just stop at the gender pay gap. Have a 
look at how big the gap between the most senior and junior staff is. Thispay 
gap has been on the increase 
<http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/article-details/pay-gap-between-levels-increasing-globally-finds-hay-group>
 for a while now but when it continues to rise even in times of trouble, you’re 
just encouraging a disgruntled staff. Just ask Philip Green.

Embrace flexible working. If you believe the government, it’s the future 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/more-time-with-the-family-and-flexible-working-the-future-for-men-in-the-uk>
. But even if you don’t research shows that employees who have some level of 
control over how and where they workare happier 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/adigaskell/2016/01/15/why-a-flexible-worker-is-a-happy-and-productive-worker/#695495d43e99>
 than those crammed into the same office from nine till five every day. As 
Peter Fleming puts it, “human beings thrive on mastery and self-development”. 
When we’re in charge of our own performance we’re likely to want more from 
ourselves than when we’re working to someone else’s standards.

Stop mistreating contractors. We know that more and more companies are 
abandoning traditional permanent jobs in favour ofshort-term or zero hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/21/temporary-and-part-time-jobs-surge-promotes-inequality-says-oecd>
 contracts. If you expect your staff to remain resilient and productive despite 
a lack of security then you need to think about what you can give them in 
return. A proper contract is one thing, but so are training, decent pay and 
opportunities for promotion. You can also realise that if we are moving into a 
gig-economy then decent references, using your networks to help those who’ve 
worked hard for you, and transparency around length of contract is important, 
decent behaviour.

Stop ignoring part-timers. As the bulk of childcare still sits with women, 
more of them opt to work part-time than men. Strangely we then start to see 
people who work part-time hours as uncommitted and off the career ladder. We 
don’t give them stretch projects, we expect them to do as much work in three 
days as they did in five, and we overlook them for pay-rises and promotions. 
And then companies wonder why their female employees leave.

Start to look at what people really want. Clue: it’s not a bigger office or a 
better title. More often than not what people really want is the ability to 
change things for the better, to spend more time with their families or doing 
the things they really love, to feel like they’re appreciated and rewarded 
appropriately. It’s straight-forward stuff, so why are so many companies so bad 
at it? We all know that if you pay peanuts you get monkeys, but if you start 
treating staff like robots you’re going to get an organisation that very 
quickly short-circuits.
 