
The Foreign Office has relaxed its travel advice over Iran following the 
historicnuclear deal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/irans-nuclear-programme>
 agreed earlier this month.

Philip Hammond, the foreign secretary, said that in certain areas of Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> the risks had changed because of 
“decreasing hostility”.

Previous advice said there was an unacceptably high risk to those visiting the 
country. But although the government was still urging UK nationals not to go to 
the regions bordering Iraq, Afghanistan and Pakistan, it has downgraded its 
guidance for other areas.

Hammond said: “Our policy is to recommend against travel to an area when we 
judge that the risk is unacceptably high. We consider that continues to be the 
case for specific areas of Iran, notably along Iran’s borders with Iraq, 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. But we believe that in other areas of Iran the risk 
to British nationals has changed, in part due to decreasing hostility under 
President Rouhani’s government.”

The nuclear deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-expected-to-be-announced-in-vienna>
 struck in Vienna was greeted with street parties in Iran, as Rouhani hailed 
the start of a new phase in international relations. “This is a new opportunity 
both for Iran and the world,” he said. “The world can now find a new partner in 
restoring the peace and security of our region. Iran will also find an 
opportunity to take tangible steps to resolve its economic problems resulting 
from sanctions.”


‘It’s not like Argo’: the trials of a tour guide in Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/07/its-not-like-argo-tour-guide-in-iran>
Iran’s vice-president for tourism, Masoud Soltanifar, said at the time: “No 
other industry in Iran will see a bigger boost than tourism as the result of 
this deal. The news about the nuclear agreement and lifting of economic 
sanctions has delighted our tourism industry.”

Hammond has told the Commons he expects to reopen Britain’s embassy in Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/15/uk-hopes-reopen-embassy-iran-by-end-of-year-philip-hammond>
 before the end of the year. “There is a very clear will to do it and I will be 
working directly with my Iranian counterpart to ensure that we clear away those 
obstacles over the next few months,” he said.

While relaxing its travel advice, the Foreign Office reiterated that people 
should carefully consider the risks of travelling to Iran. Because the embassy 
is still closed, it said it could only offer limited consular support, although 
in urgent cases British nationals can use the embassy of any other EU member 
state in Tehran.
 