
Four Yemenis released from the US prison at Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> have arrived in Saudi 
Arabia to a tearful reunion with relatives, after the White House rejected a 
freeze on transfers.

The four were among 59 prisoners who were still being held in the detention 
centre in Cuba.

In the Saudi capital, an AFP reporter saw the four prisoners after they landed 
at a terminal normally reserved for royals at the Riyadh international airport.

Prisoners and family members wept as they saw each other for the first time in 
years.

One of the released inmates, Salim Ahmed bin Kanad, told reporters he felt 
“born again” after seeing his relatives.

Another, Mohammed Bawazir, said he hoped to move on and forget the past.

“I want to give back to my family the 15 years I lost,” he said.

Officials identified the other former prisoners as Mohammed Rajab Abu Ghanim 
and Abdullah Yahya al-Shalabi.

On Tuesday, US President-elect Donald Trump tweeted: “There should be no 
further releases from Gitmo. These are extremely dangerous people and should 
not be allowed back onto the battlefield.”

'No one but himself to blame': how Obama's Guantánamo plans fell through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/24/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans>
Hours later, Barack Obama’s spokesman, Josh Earnest, said he would expect 
“additional transfers” before Obama hands power to Trump on 20 January.

Saudi King Salman has said the four Yemenis who arrived Thursday will live in 
the kingdom, where they will take part in a rehabilitation and 
de-radicalisation programme, the interior ministry said in a statement.

The bearded ex-prisoners appeared healthy and were all dressed in two-piece 
Pakistani-style tunics.

One prisoner was welcomed by 21 relatives, including children, but only a 
handful greeted the others.

A lone woman waited for one of the inmates.

Reporters were kept in the terminal and could not see what type of aircraft 
had transported them.

Obama came to office eight years ago vowing to shutter the Guantánamo facility 
because, he said, detention without trial did not reflect American values.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fguantanamo-bay-yemen-prisoners-free-saudi-arabia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62560f52027b2fd804442e19d559d05726f8da76%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20Yemenis%20freed%20from%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20Bay%20and%20transferred%20to%20Saudi%20Arabia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fguantanamo-bay-yemen-prisoners-free-saudi-arabia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20Yemenis%20freed%20from%20Guant%C3%A1namo%20Bay%20and%20transferred%20to%20Saudi%20Arabia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fguantanamo-bay-yemen-prisoners-free-saudi-arabia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62560f52027b2fd804442e19d559d05726f8da76%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 The Camp Delta detention compound at the Guantánamo Bay naval base in Cuba. 
Photograph: Brennan Linsley/AP 
But he has run up against political and legal hurdles, Pentagon foot-dragging 
and stubborn Republican opposition in Congress.

With Guantánamo’s closure blocked, Obama’s White House has focused on 
whittling down the number of inmates.

Before Thursday’s transfer, around 20 of the remaining prisoners had been 
cleared for removal. But finding countries to take them has often proven 
time-consuming.

Only a handful of those who remain have started moving through military 
tribunals, including the alleged plotters of the 9/11 attacks.

‘Here I have nobody’: life in a strange country may be worse than Guantánamo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/worse-than-guantanamo-ex-prisoner-struggles-with-new-life-in-kazakhstan>
Many of the others are in legal limbo – not charged but deemed too dangerous 
to release.

Fifteen of the 19 al-Qaida hijackers who carried out the attacks against the 
United States on 11 September 2001 were Saudi. But Riyadh denies any ties to 
the plotters who killed nearly 3,000 people.

In recent months, Obama has authorised a flurry of transfers of prisoners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/15/guantanamo-bay-inmates-transferred-obama>
 to other countries including Yemen and Saudi Arabia – prompting outrage from 
Republicans each time.

In April, nine Yemeni inmates were transferred from Guantanamo Bay to Saudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, the first time the 
kingdom received any inmates from the facility.

The move followed years of negotiations with the Saudi government. 

Yemen’s civil war meant those inmates could not be sent to their home country.

Because the Guantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>
 naval base is on Cuban and not US soil, it is not subject to the same federal 
laws and legal processes as the United States.

Obama’s predecessor George W Bush released or transferred around 500 inmates 
before leaving office. Obama had released or transferred more than 180.
 