
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> will attempt to reanimate 
the moribund Israeli-Palestinian peace process by holding a meeting of foreign 
ministers in Paris at the end of May, to set the stage for a peace conference 
later in the summer.


The intervention by France comes following months of deeply pessimistic noises 
from Washington – which has long been the key mediator in the peace process – 
and most recently fromJoe Biden, the vice-president, who voiced concerns last 
week. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/joe-biden-us-overwhelming-frustration-israeli-government>
 It also followssix months of worsening violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/at-least-10-israelis-stabbed-tel-aviv-israel>
 between the two sides. Previously the White House had said it saw no prospect 
of advancing negotiations during the remainder of Barack Obama’s term in office.

Invitations for the preparatory summit are expected to be sent out on Friday 
to foreign ministers from key states and organisations with an interest, but 
not toIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> or the Palestinian 
Authority in the first instance.

Amid the bloodshed, Palestinians and Israelis are giving up on themselves | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/09/bloodshed-palestinians-israelis-conflict>
According to reports in the Israeli media, the French foreign minister, 
Jean-Marc Ayrault, will visit Israel in mid-May to brief Israel’s prime 
minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, on plans for the conference.

The initiative, outlined three days ago by Paris’s ambassador to the UN, 
François Delattre, gained Fresh momentum on Thursday following a French 
briefing to Netanyahu, who is reportedly deeply sceptical of the initiative.


Delattre told the UN security council that in view of the “wave of violence 
with increasing intensity that has persisted for six months and has led to 
hundreds of deaths and thousands of wounded”, hopes for a solution would recede 
unless “a credible political horizon to save the two-state solution” emerged.

Delattre continued: “Given the rift between the parties it would be illusory 
to think there would be an immediate resumption of negotiations. Our goal is 
therefore based on the priority of halting the negative spiral and taking the 
necessary decisions so as to safeguard the two-state solution, to recreate on 
that basis a positive political dynamic.

“As was announced by the president of the Republic in Cairo, France itself 
proposes to organise in Paris in early June a ministerial meeting, notably by 
gathering the members of the Quartet, the permanent members of the security 
council and the Arab League, as well as other regional and European 
stakeholders.”

Confirming a planned date of 30 May, a Palestinian official described the 
meeting as preparatory to an anticipated full conference later in the year.

While Palestinians are enthusiastic about the conference, Netanyahu is less 
so, telling reporters this week that he doesn’t understand the French 
initiative. “Can anyone explain what this initiative is about? Even the French 
don’t know,” he said.
 