
For 19 years, my father, Frank Wagland, who has died 83, was musical director 
of the Unity theatre, in Mornington Crescent, Camden, north London. He worked 
closely with the composer Lionel Bart, who recognised Frank's talent for 
composing and arranging. They first collaborated on the show Peacemeal in 1955. 
This was the first of many shows, plays and revues for which Frank was composer 
or musical director.

He composed the music for Brecht's The Exception and the Rule, which was 
performed at Unity in 1956 and later produced by the BBC with Ben Kingsley and 
Patrick Troughton. One of Frank's most successful Unity shows was They Made Me 
a Present of Mornington Crescent (1971), for which he was both director and 
pianist. It told the story of the local music halls and was mounted with a cast 
of 40 as part of the Camden festival, running for two and a half months. Roy 
Hudd liked it so much that he offered to appear in it.

After the demise of the Unity in 1975, he continued to tour, with Mr Frank 
Wagland's Celebrated Music Hall, including a run at the Hackney Empire in 1991. 
He was a prolific composer of choral compositions as well as musicals. His St 
Paul's Cantata was performed for the Lord Mayor of London at St Paul's 
Cathedral in 1974, and a recording was released.

Frank was born in Hendon, north London, and after studying music and art at 
Cheltenham teacher training college, he became the music teacher at Tottenham 
grammar (later called Somerset school), where he remained until retirement in 
1985. Frank joined Unity theatre in 1955 and the following year became musical 
director, a position he held until 1975, when the theatre burned down.

He met his wife, Rita Shaer, at the Unity; she survives him, along with two 
sons, Simon and me.
 