
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has hosted senior diplomats 
from the west and the Arab world to work on organising a peace conference by 
the end of the year that would launch long-dormant Israeli-Palestinian 
negotiations, despite slim chances of success.

France has said it felt compelled to act because the opportunities for setting 
up a Palestinian state alongsideIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> are slipping away while the 
situation in the region is deteriorating.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, and UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, 
attended, along with representatives from the Arab League, the European Union 
and key Arab states. Israeli and Palestinian representatives were absent.

The participants called on the two sides to genuinely commit to the two-state 
solution. They “are alarmed that actions on the ground, in particular continued 
acts of violence and ongoing settlement activity, are dangerously imperilling 
the prospects for a two-state solution”, a joint statement said.

The diplomats also reaffirmed “their support for a just, lasting and enduring 
peace, with two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and 
security” and welcomed “the prospect of convening before the end of the year an 
international conference”.

The French president, François Hollande, acknowledged that “we cannot 
substitute for the parties”. He told the gathering that “our initiative aims at 
giving them guarantees that the peace will be solid, sustainable and under 
international supervision”.

Participants decided to set up teams by the end of the month to work on 
economic and security incentives for the Israelis and Palestinians reaching a 
deal, the French foreign minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, said at a news conference.

Israeli prime minister rejects French peace conference initiative
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/israeli-prime-minister-binyamin-netanyahu-rejects-french-peace-conference-initiative-palestinians>
Asked if he would support an international conference later this year with the 
Israelis and Palestinians attending, Kerry told reporters: “We’re just 
starting; let’s get into the conversations.”

The Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, has rebuffed the French 
initiative and said a deal can only be reached in direct negotiations.

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, has welcomed France’s efforts, in 
part because it could potentially end a two-decade-old US monopoly on 
mediation. Palestinians have long complained that the US heavily favours Israel 
and cannot be an honest broker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fmiddle-east-peace-talks-paris-israel-palestinians-john-kerry-ban-ki-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a35a1899dc3889d6db87a096a3296bd1624077%2F0_71_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20felt%20'compelled%20to%20act'%20on%20Middle%20East%20peace%20talks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fmiddle-east-peace-talks-paris-israel-palestinians-john-kerry-ban-ki-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20felt%20%27compelled%20to%20act%27%20on%20Middle%20East%20peace%20talks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fmiddle-east-peace-talks-paris-israel-palestinians-john-kerry-ban-ki-moon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a35a1899dc3889d6db87a096a3296bd1624077%2F0_71_5760_3459%2F5760.jpg>
 Mahmoud Abbas. Photograph: Majdi Mohammed/AP 
The Palestinians seek to establish a state in the West Bank, Gaza Strip and 
east Jerusalem, lands Israel captured in 1967. In 2012, the UN general assembly 
overwhelmingly recognised a state of Palestine in these boundaries, though 
setting up an actual state requires a deal with Israel.

For now, chances of reviving negotiations appear remote because of a lack of 
common ground.

Unlike his predecessors, Netanyahu refuses to recognise the pre-1967 lines as 
a starting point for border talks, with agreed land swaps the internationally 
backed formula for a peace deal.

Abbas says there is no point going back to talks without ground rules and a 
timeline for a deal.

Continued Israeli settlement expansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/ban-ki-moon-calls-israeli-settlement-expansion-affront-to-world>
 on occupied lands and several months ofrenewed Israeli-Palestinian violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/israel-palestine-violence-knife-attacks-west-bank-gaza>
 have also undermined trust.

It is not clear how the French efforts would overcome those hurdles.

The last high-level Israeli-Palestinian negotiations were held in 2008 between 
Abbas and then-prime minister Ehud Olmert. Subsequent efforts to restart 
meaningful talks have failed, most recently in 2014 when Kerry aborted a 
mediation mission following a year of low-level Israeli-Palestinian meetings.

Gaza fence jumpers looking for work find prison instead – but keep trying 
anyway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/gaza-fence-jumpers-palestinians-israel>
Abbas aides have said they want other world powers to get involved, like in 
last year’s deal on Iran’s nuclear programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-talks-deal-historic-vienna-live-updates>
. The existing model of Israeli-Palestinian talks brokered by the US has failed 
because of the power imbalance between an occupying power and those it 
occupies, they have said.

Israel has rejected the French initiative.

Dore Gold, the director general of Israel’s foreign ministry, predicted on 
Thursday that the Paris conference would “completely fail” and that the “only 
way to make peace” was through direct talks.

Israel has indicated an openness recently to some elements of an Arab peace 
proposal from 2002, which promised peace and recognition of Israel by the Arab 
and Muslim world in exchange for the creation of a Palestinian state. Gold gave 
no indication of any movement on that proposal.
 