
Boxing authorities in America today stripped Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> (Cassius Clay) of his world 
heavyweight title and suspended his boxing licence after he had refused to be 
inducted into the United States Army.

Clay had stood in line with 11 other men being called up in a room in the old 
Post Office building in Houston, Texas, and heard his Black Muslim name called 
by the officer administering the oath. Clay did not move. Another officer 
walked up to him and said: "Mr Ali, will you accompany me, please ?" Clay did 
not speak, but followed him out of the room to be given a warning of the 
consequences of his refusal.

He was taken back into the room and given a second chance to take the oath, 
but he again refused. He then signed a statement to that effect.

Soon after he left the centre, to be mobbed by well-wishers, the New York 
Boxing Commission, the World Boxing Association, and the TexasBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Commission withdrew their 
recognition of him as champion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwUmHAktuu-8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwUmHAktuu-8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwUmHAktuu-8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUmHAktuu-8>

At the same time a spokesman for the Justice Department said it would decide 
whether to ask a federal grand jury for an indictment. If an indictment were 
returned, Clay would have to go for trial. He could face a long prison sentence.

Clay issued a statement saying: "It is in the light of my consciousness as a 
Muslim minister and my own personal convictions that I take my stand in 
rejecting the call to be inducted. I do so with the full realisation of its 
implications. I have searched my conscience.

"I had the world heavyweight title not because it was given to me, not because 
of my race or religion, but because I won it in the ring. Those who want to 
take it and start a series of auction-type bouts not only do me a disservice, 
but actually disgrace themselves... Sports fans and fair-minded people 
throughout America would never accept such a title-holder."

The New York Boxing Commission, which suspended his licence, said his refusal 
to enter the service was detrimental to the best interests of boxing.

[Muhammad Ali was sentenced to five years in prison and a $10,000 fine, though 
he remained out on bail while he appealed. He was stripped of his passport and 
his heavyweight title and banned from fighting in the US. Ali returned to 
boxing in 1970 and his conviction was reversed in 1971]
 