
The one thing people tend to know about G is that when it won the Booker in 
1972, John Berger˚pledged half his prize money to the Black Panthers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/09/lookingbackatthebookerjoh>
 in order to "turn the prize against itself" (a reference to the Caribbean 
sugar, or slave labour, that had fed the sponsor's wealth). This all but 
guaranteed the novel's place in literary history, if not actual readers: Tom 
McCarthy'sC (2010) could advertise a heavy debt to its structure and themes yet 
still be hailed as a breakthrough.

We're not invited to care about the philandering hero so much as grapple with 
the historical and philosophical reflections that Berger pegs to his 
pan-European escapades. Giovanni – G – is the product of an Italian merchant's 
adulterous fling with a footloose Anglo-American fresh from ditching her 
millionaire mineral-baron husband at 19. She sends the boy to cousins on a farm 
in England, where a piano-playing governess awakens the lust that proves the 
keynote in a series of fragmented episodes set during the years before the 
first world war – a prospect G relishes on account of all the women it will 
widow.

"Why does writing about sexual experience reveal so strikingly what may be a 
general limitation of literature in relation to aspects of all experience?" he 
asks; an 11-page essay on the problem draws an analogy with blackberries before 
resorting to the kind of sketch you might find in a public toilet. It isn't for 
sniggerers: you can't enjoyG without taking it as seriously as Berger does, but 
the sense of a writer giving everything he's got makes that easier than you'd 
think.
 