
Another year, another season of Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
 on television. If only the books arrived at such a steady pace. The first book 
in George RR Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire series, A Game of Thrones, came 
out 20 years ago this September. The succeeding volumes have each taken five 
years or so to produce,to the ire of fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/10/game-of-thrones-george-rr-martin-rebuffs-fretting-fans-finger-f-word>
. “People yell at you and say: ‘We want the next book right away.’ They’re like 
babies,”Stephen King said to Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/23/stephen-king-and-george-rr-martin-talk-gun-control-game-of-thrones>
 in a public interview last week. I don’t mind settling for a new instalment 
every five years – they’re meaty, good to reread, and frankly, too damn 
time-consuming to pick up every 12 months.

But I must admit I was less happy when Martin announced in January that he had 
missed the deadline of 31 December 2015, which would have allowed book six, The 
Winds of Winter, to come out before the TV show embarked on storylines not yet 
reached in the books. The HBO series thus became a weird mishmash of new and 
old news, with the vast majority of events coming from book five, A Dance With 
Dragons, but with some sudden leaps into the unknown, possibly from The Winds 
of Winter – or even book seven, A Dream of Spring. In the books, Jon is still 
lying stabbed on the floor in the Black Keep, Cersei hasn’t gone all Godfather 
on King’s Landing yet, and Arya is still training with the Faceless Men – all 
of which is in the distant past now for the TV characters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-regain-the-suspense-stolen-by-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7601ad845721f16905da6398c7a10991a6766091%2F0_92_4018_2411%2F4018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%3A%20how%20will%20Winds%20of%20Winter%20regain%20the%20suspense%20stolen%20by%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-regain-the-suspense-stolen-by-the-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%3A%20how%20will%20Winds%20of%20Winter%20regain%20the%20suspense%20stolen%20by%20the%20show%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fgame-of-thrones-winds-of-winter-regain-the-suspense-stolen-by-the-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7601ad845721f16905da6398c7a10991a6766091%2F0_92_4018_2411%2F4018.jpg>
 Sansa and Petyr: living a Ramsay-less life in the Vale. Photograph: Helen 
Sloan/AP 
Until now, there was always a sense that Martin’s plots were improved somehow 
in translation to the screen: stories were streamlined, unnecessary characters 
removed. But certain characters are currently frozen in completely different 
storylines in the books: Sansa, for example, is still in the Vale with Petyr 
Baelish and was never married off to Ramsay (that “honour” goes to poor Jeyne 
Poole, a character who is barely in the show). Catelyn Stark has yet to be 
bought back to life in the TV show. Jon Connington and Daenerys’s cousin Aegon 
Targaryen have yet to appear outside the book (but Jorah Mormont seems to be 
taking on certain plot points from Connington’s story) and Theon and his sister 
never went to Meereen to pledge fealty to Daenerys – that was Victarion 
Greyjoy, who is not in the show either.

Certain characters in the books now feel dispensable – and no one wants to be 
dispensable in a George RR Martin novel

This new season has irrevocably changed how I read the books, because for all 
the promises that the books and show will do different things, I honestly don’t 
know how Martin is going to maintain suspense. The idea that the biggest 
reveals have been taken out of the hands of their creator really saddens me. 
When I first read the books and reached chapters where, say, Joffrey dies, I 
loved the feeling that Martin was somewhere gleefully pulling a party popper 
and shouting “Surprise!” I am predicting something more perfunctory for The 
Winds of Winter, where quite a few events (read: deaths) have already happened. 
As a reader, watching it with non-readers for the past five seasons, I lost the 
wonderful sense of superior wisdom, where I could hint at coming events to 
unsettle those watching with me. This season, they’d turn to me and I had to 
say: “I have no idea.”

The characters that have yet to appear or have been written out of the show 
are starting to feel pointless in the books: Victarion, for example – the TV 
show bypassed him straight to his brother Aeron – seems like unnecessary filler 
now. Various Martells have yet to even be mentioned in the show, so I care less 
about them. And I can’t but feel Catelyn Stark’s storyline, while so 
interesting in the books, looks as if it is entirely unimportant to the overall 
plot. Certain characters in the books now feel more dispensable – and no 
character wants to be dispensable in aGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin> novel.

There may be some good things that come from the show. Martin could use the 
show in the same way the producers use his books, to streamline a few 
storylines that dragged in season six. Jon’s inevitable Christlike resurrection 
could be done in one chapter (not multiple episodes). Arya’s storyline had a 
great climax in the final episode, but her wavering allegiance to the Faceless 
Men became boring very quickly.

Game of Thrones fans review season six: 'Misogyny has been replaced by 
breakneck storytelling'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/28/game-of-thrones-fans-review-season-six>
So far, Martin has revealed 11 chapters from The Winds of Winter, in public 
readings and blogposts, and has promised to start the book with a bang – or 
two: The Winds of Winter willbegin with the battle for Meereen 
<https://www.smartertravel.com/2012/04/01/game-of-thrones-exclusive-george-r-r-martin-talks-season-two-the-winds-of-winter-and-real-world-influences-for-a-song-of-ice-and-fire/>
 (handled very nicely in season six of the TV show) and the battle in the north 
between Ramsay Bolton and presumably a living Jon Snow (a twist I would have 
liked to have read first, if I am being picky). So far, so familiar now. But 
will Martin make any changes to the major plots to reintroduce suspense again? 
Will Arya turn up in Westeros to get revenge on Walder Frey? Is Jon the son of 
Lyanna Stark and Rhaegar Targaryen (again, a twist that readers of the books 
have been musing over for years)? Will Cersei kill absolutely everyone? If he 
does keep these storylines, I hope Martin bashes through them quickly, with the 
awareness that we’re treading an already beaten path. Then, maybe, readers can 
get ahead of TV again.
 