
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> will in effect work for 
free for the rest of the year because of the gender pay gap, which will take 60 
years to close at the current rate of progress, campaigners say.

The Fawcett Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/06/fawcett-society-gender-pay-gap-sam-smethers-uk-economy>
 called for more action from the government and employers to tackle pay 
discrimination, job “segregation” and help women into senior posts.

Dispelling the myths: why the gender pay gap does not reflect the 'choices' 
women make
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/08/dispelling-the-myths-why-the-gender-pay-gap-does-not-reflect-the-choices-women-make>
Thursday has been labelled equal pay day (EPD), with the society saying the 
13.9% pay gap means women are in effect working for nothing from now until the 
end of the year.

Gender pay gap is a worldwide issue | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/gender-pay-gap-is-a-worldwide-issue>
The Fawcett Society chief executive, Sam Smethers, said: “A root cause of the 
gender pay gap is that we don’t value the work done by women. As we mark EPD 
this year, we are focusing on the fundamental question of who and what we value 
and asking why it is that we don’t value women and the work they do – paid or 
unpaid.

“Equal value goes to the heart of the fight for pay equality, because the 
reality is that if it is a sector dominated by women the pay will be lower. As 
we look ahead to a UK outside the EU and possibly the single market, we have to 
guard against the risk of going backwards and losing some of the rights that 
women have fought for over many years.”

The society says in a report that the jobs women do are more likely to be low 
paid. They are also less likely to receive a bonus or progress to the highest 
position in their organisation.

Equal pay day sounds great - but women will work for free to the end of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/09/equal-pay-day-women-public-private-sector-work-free-equality>
More than 50,000 women leave their jobs early every year after having a baby 
or becoming pregnant, the report says. Men are being encouraged to get involved 
in the campaign for pay parity, especially if they have jobs in areas 
traditionally dominated by women.

A separate report says one in five mothers have been overlooked for a pay rise 
or a bonus because they have had children.

A survey of 850 mothers by The Start Up Loans Company revealed that more than 
a third believed they had been overlooked for promotion by spending more time 
at home than in the office. Two-thirds said they would have a higher paid job 
if they did not have children.

Another study, by Totaljobs, found that men were twice as likely as women to 
feel comfortable asking for a pay rise. A study of more than 4,700 employees 
and 145 employers showed that women typically expect to get paid a salary of 
£25,468, compared with £32,030 for men.

John Salt, director of Totaljobs, said: “It is disheartening that our research 
has revealed that, despite efforts, gender pay equality remains a prominent 
issue. The application and interview process is a fantastic opportunity for 
both men and women to negotiate a fair benefits package, including a salary 
that meets their expectations.

Equal pay is still far-off for Britain, where the gender gap narrows at a 
glacial pace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/equal-pay-gender-gap-britain-women-earnings-men>
“I would urge all female candidates to aim high and feel confident in 
demanding the same figure as their male counterparts.”

Rebecca Hilsenrath, chief executive of the Equality and Human Rights Commission
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality-and-human-rights-commission-ehrc>
, said: “After more than 40 years since the enactment of legislation banning 
sex discrimination at work and in pay, it is shameful that women continue to 
face barriers that hold them back. We simply cannot ignore the scale of the 
disadvantages that working women face.

“Girls and women outperform men at every stage in education, but time after 
time this success is not translated into rewards at work. Women are a vital 
part of the workforce and any proposals to tackle the gender pay gap must be 
strong enough to deliver the change everyone wants to see.”
 