
Comments can sometimes get a bad rep. But look at the comments on one of the 
Guardian’s quick crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> and you’ll see something 
out of the ordinary.


Alongside comments about the crosswords themselves, you’ll find conversations 
between users about that day’s news or their lives. Perhaps you’ll see a poem 
or two.

The “never read the comments” line doesn’t apply to the Quick Crossword 
Community, or QCC for short. You may have seen them mentioned on Twitter and 
elsewhere last week:
james crobag (@EnvGen) 
there's a community of old men who have conversations every morning in the 
comments section of guardian crosswordspic.twitter.com/wACmiVTLFi 
<http://t.co/wACmiVTLFi>
 <https://twitter.com/EnvGen/status/629007382513885184> August 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EnvGen/status/629007382513885184> 
It’s a community which may be new to some of you – but, in fact, it’s been 
going for years. As one commenter told us: “We’re a bit like an iceberg.”

First things first: contrary to what you may have seen on Twitter, they are 
not all old men. The QCCers, who come from all over the world, have been 
chatting to each other for years. Outside of Guardian comments, they speak to 
each other on Facebook, Skype or FaceTime. So, unsurprisingly, they know each 
other extremely well.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4420635> spanishscot  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4420635> 07 August 2015 10:22am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/57082993> 
Having started as usual with the comments I haven't even got to the crossword, 
due to the excitement of our exposure in Twitter. I never joined Twitter 
because I like to have a life so that was the longest Twitter feed I've read. 
I'm still not tempted to join. Yes, it's a bit flattering, but... Cute, 
adorable, delightful, sweet..... a bit patronising innit?

And what's this about old men? Well, dear Twitters, if any of you are lurking 
around , have a look atour website <http://qcckaff.weebly.com/> and you might 
get a better idea of the contributors to this forum and the glamour, wit, 
erudition, fun and yes, empathy and caring for others that is the hallmark of 
this page. I have to warn you, though, it will take more than a few seconds, 
because we are not restricted to 150 character thoughts and opinions and we 
tend to go on a bit.

Anyway, let's hope that as they say, any publicity is good publicity and this 
may attract some likeminded people to join us here. We are in the habit of 
welcoming newcomers to our virtual caff with a drink and some comestibles, so,
Bienvenidos, or Ceud Mìle Faìlte, to live up to my name. 

PS. I'm not al old man, I'm an extremely glamorous woman d'un certain âge.

Dieca Cummings, or spanishscot, has been doing the crossword for years and 
began contributing below the line in 2011 – a decision she says has changed her 
life.

She told us:

I had become a widow in 2009 and this place has given me a whole new lot of 
friends who are likeminded and share the same interests and ideas, something I 
think is priceless at this stage of my life. I have travelled to many places 
that I didn’t know and had a wonderful time, so I can only say thank you to the 
Guardian for providing the platform that keeps us all going. We always start 
with the crossword, but you never know where it will lead you.

Last year, Cummings set up a website to collate the best of their posts 
<http://qcckaff.weebly.com/>. It’s a treasure trove of content including short 
stories <http://qcckaff.weebly.com/-prose.html>, poetry 
<http://qcckaff.weebly.com/-poetry.html> and music 
<http://qcckaff.weebly.com/-music.html>. There’s one member who knits socks, 
another who sends books to anyone who wants them.

One QCCer, Onorea, told us a story about a kind gesture from one of the other 
commenters:

There are so many quixotic and surreal aspects to the community that you would 
need a whole Guardian to do it justice! Just one example: I made a birthday 
card and posted it for BackstageBear - I added that my 3 year-old 
granddaughter, who was visiting from Hong Kong, had helped design it and had 
chosen a pink elephant for her. Soon after, a beautiful knitted elephant 
arrived here for me to forward to HK.

After their first meetup in Edinburgh, where they “got on like a house on 
fire”, they’ve met up in real life several times. Their fourth annual meetup 
took place in May. And, of course, they’ll do the crossword together in real 
life.

On top of this? They’ve also got their own song:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1pBwkBnU4xU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1pBwkBnU4xU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1pBwkBnU4xU&media=>
So: there you have it. If you find yourselves below the line on a Guardian 
crossword, you’re going to find a very friendly community indeed.


As a side note, QCC aren’t the only group of our commenters who meet up on a 
regular basis. We’re told the commenters from the Guardian’s cricket section 
meet up for drinks every once in a while and people from Comment Is Free have 
been known to meet up in the past.

In true Guardian community fashion, if you think your section might have the 
best commenters ever, then let us know below the line.
 