
As a woman you could be excused for feeling pretty disheartened about what the 
future holds right now, particularly given global events like the US election 
results.


Closer to home, figures released by the Workplace Gender Equality Agency 
<https://www.wgea.gov.au/media-releases/australia%E2%80%99s-latest-gender-equality-scorecard-released-today>
 that show men in Australia earn on average nearly $27,000 a year more than 
women and that five out of six chief executives are male probably didn’t 
provide much respite from that feeling.

These and other disheartening factors have a compounding, negative effect on a 
woman’s superannuation savings.Superannuation 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/superannuation-australia> is what 
many Australians plan to rely on during retirement, yet the average man retires 
with nearlytwice the balance <> of that of the average woman’s superannuation. 
While women’s participation in the workforce is at itshighest point 
<https://theconversation.com/more-women-than-ever-are-in-the-workforce-but-progress-has-been-glacial-54893>
 since 1978 at 57.9%, it is still 12 percentage points lower than the male 
participation rate.


Consequently too many women are reaching retirement age skirting dangerously 
close to experiencing poverty and homelessness – and they are experiencing this 
inincreasing numbers 
<https://www.mercyfoundation.com.au/_uploads/_cknw/files/FINAL%20Feb%202014%20Petersen%20%20Parsell%20Older%20women’s%20pathways%20out%20of%20homelessness.pdf>
.

Yet while it’s a gloomy picture, there’s much activity under way globally, all 
striving to see these issues addressed.

Many 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/women-and-the-sdgs/sdg-5-gender-equality>
 of the new UN sustainable development goals released last year identify 
recognising women’s equality and empowerment as both an objective, and as part 
of the solution. Goal five is aimed specifically at achieving gender equality 
and empowering all women and girls.

Business can do something about reducing inequality: pay workers more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/18/business-can-do-something-about-reducing-inequality-pay-workers-more>
These goals are a tool to ignite change around the world that addresses some 
of our key challenges like poverty and inequality. But to make that change we 
must start locally and it will take action from everyone.

It will take work from government, from unions, from academics, from 
communities – but most importantly – work from business.

So much of the inequality women experience is attached to the workplace: their 
pay levels, the way caring responsibilities are valued and the representation 
of women in leadership roles.

There’s so much work to be done in this space. For example we know pregnancy- 
and carer-related discrimination canimpact on the labour force participation 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/document/publication/accumulating_poverty.pdf>
 of women. This happens when employers issue demotions, redundancies, or refuse 
to allow flexible work conditions, so that women simply leave rather than fight 
the unfair practices they face.

Similarly we know the disparity between women and men in leadership roles in 
the workplace perpetuates existing stereotypes about the role of women both at 
work and in broader society, and exacerbates gender pay inequity.

But if we start having more women in leadership roles, it operates as an 
encouragement to other women in the workplace. Women’s leadership is so 
important in ensuring that more women are in positions where they have the 
authority to decide and negotiate on issues that affect them.

To achieve this, we need to start ensuring women get the critical experiences 
that are required for advancement in an organisation. At the moment, the 
unfortunate experience is women areroutinely 
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/document/publication/2013_AHRC_MCC_accelerating_advancement_women.pdf>
 – often through unconscious gender-bias – funnelled into less advantageous 
areas of an organisation’s operations. They are less likely to be offered 
“mission-critical roles” or profile-building opportunities that facilitate 
career progression. Similarly, sponsorship is often key to advancement into 
senior roles and women are less likely to have sponsors.

Succession planning in organisations needs to have a gendered lens so that 
barriers to women’s advancement into senior roles are eliminated.

These examples show that without a commitment from business to change, 
attempts to end gender inequality in this country just won’t work.

It’s time to invest in carbon farming on Aboriginal lands | Rowan Foley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/16/its-time-to-invest-in-indigenous-carbon-farming-on-aboriginal-lands>
That’s why the New South Wales Council of Social Service has started working 
not only with business but with the National Women’s Alliances, community 
organisations, unions and academics to chart a plan of how we get there. 
Together.

What is exciting – and what gives me hope – is the willingness we are seeing 
from all these areas to pursue change.

In August this year, 100 representatives from all these sectors came together 
to make a start at the New Year forWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> conference. Representatives 
from superannuation funds, banks, developers, advocacy groups, unions, 
government, community services and universities were there, and we had both men 
and women in the room. We all agreed to pursue better financial literacy 
outcomes for young women, better representation for women at work, better 
superannuation outcomes for all women and to reduce older women’s homelessness.

And this shouldn’t be surprising really. Because it’s not just women that 
benefit from reducing gender inequality, it’s everyone.

Because reducing it is not just about giving us all a warm fuzzy feeling, it 
will significantly boost our economy. Goldman Sachs JBWereestimated 
<http://www.asx.com.au/documents/about/gsjbw_economic_case_for_increasing_female_participation.pdf>
 that closing the gap between male and female employment rates would boost 
Australia’s GDP by 11%. According to the same report, if we channelled women 
into more economically productive – and higher paid – employment, it would 
increase GDP by 20%.

So it’s evident that gender equality is good for the country, good for all 
Australians, good for the world. And it’s work that must be done now.

• Tracy Howe will be speaking on SDG5 (gender equality) at the SDGA16 
conference <http://sdga.org.au/> in Sydney on 29-3o November
 