
When the partition of India and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> began in 1947, my father, Ghulam 
Hussain, who has died aged 81, joined the Muslim exodus from Bombay (now 
Mumbai) in a perilous journey to the north. As part of the largest single 
migration of peoples in history, on his hazardous journey he witnessed many 
atrocities and deaths. He told me that a single handful of raw beans between 
himself and three other villagers was all there was to stave off starvation 
travelling on the back of a truck from Rawalpindi to Peshawar.

Born in the north-west frontier province near the hill cantonment of Cherat, a 
sanatorium for British troops, my father was one of the seven children of 
Sheraz Khan, a contractor supplying food and materials to the army, and Mareeb 
Bibi. From the age of seven he transported goods from village to village, and 
had no formal education, but he later gained some literacy, and in adulthood 
acquired some English.

At the age of 14 or so, through family connections, he managed to get to 
Bombay to work in the fledgling Bollywood as a PA for Nargis, most famous for 
her role in the film Mother India. But the job ended with partition.

In his early 20s, Ghulam joined a family friend in Cyprus working for the 
British Army in an MoD canteen until 1961, when he came back to Pakistan for 
his arranged marriage to Khatam Noora Gul, the daughter of a wealthy government 
contractor.

The couple moved to Britain in 1962. After a short stint in Birmingham, they 
settled in Aylesbury, where they already knew people. As a gregarious and 
outward looking young man, Ghulam made friends very easily and enjoyed his 
evenings with his fellow immigrants, who included Irish and West Indian 
friends. Like the majority of immigrants he wove another fibre in to the fabric 
of British society.

After a short stint as a factory worker my father once again worked for the 
British army, this time in Northern Ireland. Having lived under the British Raj 
and witnessed the division and brutality, it was clear why he supported the 
republicansâ€™ cause, although he was against all violence. However, the travel 
bug did not go away, so that by 1980 he wanted to travel to Pakistan again, by 
road. this was at the time of the Kurdish insurgency in eastern Turkey, the 
Russian invasion of Afghanistan and a fervent, post-revolution Iran, which 
assigned a guard to accompany our journey to its border.

In his spare time Ghulam tended an allotment, fixed up cars and enjoyed DIY.

Ghulam is survived by Khatam, their six children, Niknam, Mumtaz, Ashraf, 
Mohammed, Noora and me, 20 grandchildren, and his brother Faisal.
 