
Halfway up a mountain in Austria, a ferocious blizzard is blowing, though you 
wouldn’t know it from the party going on in the rickety log cabin nearby. 
Inside, Eddie “the Eagle” Edwards is flapping his arms wildly, while Davina 
McCall rings a comically oversized cowbell. Brian McFadden sits at the bar in 
fur-lined Lycra, looking like a cross between Buffalo Bill and Mr Motivator. An 
oompah band parps out the same five-note motif over and over, adding to the 
sense that this is some Alpine-themed purgatory. Welcome to the set of the 
Jump, the celebrity winter sports competition, and one of TV’s stranger reality 
shows.

Olympians, Superman and Sid Owen: meet the contestants of The Jump 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/29/the-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4>
This is The Jump’s third series, which feels remarkable in itself. Even before 
the first series aired, it was assumed to be cursed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/25/the-jump-channel-4>, such 
was the long list of injuries suffered by its competitors. The breaks and 
sprains have scarcely let up since then. To glance atthe show’s Wikipedia page 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Jump> is to witness a bloodbath on a par 
with Kill Bill: Melinda Messenger, withdrawn due to concussion; Steve Redgrave, 
broken hand; Sally Bercow, cracked ribs …

Just as painful have been the critical assaults, with The Jump receiving a 
near universal panning. Chief among reviewer complaints was that the show’s 
titular ski jump – which determines who progresses to the next round, and who 
goes home – wasn’t scary enough. Ratings, meanwhile, were solid though never 
spectacular. It wouldn’t have been a surprise if the show had gone the way of 
ITV’sSplash, another much-mocked celebs-do-sports contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jan/07/splash-tv-so-bad-good>
, which was put out of its misery after two underpowered series.

Instead, Channel 4 has doubled down: this year, The Jump is bigger than ever, 
with 90-minute live shows over six weeks, rather than condensed into a 
fortnight as before. The jump is grander too: a 40 metre-long ramp the height 
of three double-decker buses, covered in lurid fairy lights. Peering up from 
beneath this technicolour monstrosity, it’s difficult to believe that any 
D-lister would favour hurling themselves down it over, say, the gaudy comfort 
of the Big Brother House.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab156f2582fd0716d8055c591f585c9be394576%2F0_0_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giant%20cowbells%20and%20fur-lined%20lycra%3A%20in%20the%20log%20cabin%20with%20The%20Jump's%20sleb%20skiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giant%20cowbells%20and%20fur-lined%20lycra%3A%20in%20the%20log%20cabin%20with%20The%20Jump%27s%20sleb%20skiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ab156f2582fd0716d8055c591f585c9be394576%2F0_0_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
 Don’t break a leg: Sarah Harding finds something to laugh about. Photograph: 
Channel 4 
And yet, a dozen celebs have once again packed their salopettes and headed off 
to the Alps. You may have even heard of a few of them: McFadden, the wild man 
of Westlife; Girls Aloud’s Sarah Harding; Sid Owen, AKA Rickkaaay from 
Eastenders; ubiquitous socialite Tamara Beckwith; actual Superman Dean Cain; 
structured-reality class clowns Arg (Towie) and Mark Francis (Made in Chelsea). 
We’re hardly talking front row at the Oscars, but nor are we plumbing the 
depths of this year’sCelebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Big Brother, where a man 
who came third in the ninth series of The X Factor rubbed shoulders with 
someone who briefly appeared in MTV’s Beauty School Drop Outs.

But it’s when you glance at the “former athletes” subsection that The Jump 
really gets interesting: Linford Christie, 100m gold medallist at the 1992 
Olympics; Beth Tweddle, the most decorated British gymnast of all time; swimmer 
Rebecca Adlington, winner of more gold medals than the entire nation of Cyprus. 
These are people with OBEs and MBEs: why would they risk their reputations on a 
celebrity skiing show?

“I love that feeling of fear [when trying something new],” says Tweddle who, 
despite barely having skied in her life, is being talked up as a dark horse for 
the title. Christie just wants to up his skillset: “By the time I leave here 
I’m going to be a skier,” he tells me proudly.

For others, it’s all about apres-ski. “When you’re working hard and sweating 
all day, and you stare death in the face, you need a fucking drink,” says Owen, 
mock-heroically. Meanwhile, those from a reality background discuss the fact 
that The Jump is meritocratic. “It’s not a popularity contest,” adds Beckwith, 
veteran of such classics of the genre as CelebAir and Dancing On Ice. “You’re 
not going to be booted out just because you don’t have a ginormous GMTV 
fanbase.” Ultimately, it’s the person who masters the winter sports who will 
win, not the one with the most followers on Instagram.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc41f14b1592a6bbf86c3ff87596e2df1dbf2c6ec%2F0_0_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giant%20cowbells%20and%20fur-lined%20lycra%3A%20in%20the%20log%20cabin%20with%20The%20Jump's%20sleb%20skiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giant%20cowbells%20and%20fur-lined%20lycra%3A%20in%20the%20log%20cabin%20with%20The%20Jump%27s%20sleb%20skiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fgiant-cowbells-fur-lined-lycra-in-the-log-cabin-with-the-jumps-rookie-skiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc41f14b1592a6bbf86c3ff87596e2df1dbf2c6ec%2F0_0_2814_1688%2F2814.jpg>
 Towie star Arg: will he be leaving in an ambulance? Photograph: Channel 4 
Who that winner will be is a difficult call to make at this stage. The Jump’s 
line-up is made up both of accomplished skiers – Beckwith, Cain, Owen – and 
complete novices – Arg, Tweddle, Adlington – with the competition rigged to 
ensure the latter aren’t at too much of a disadvantage. In the early weeks they 
focus on sports that aren’t ski-based, to allow newcomers to find their “ski 
legs”. They start with the skeleton, the only event recorded in advance. Arg’s 
attempt results in a gnarly-looking crash, though Tweddle is a natural.

Watching them whizz round the skeleton circuit at an alarming pace, it’s hard 
not to have a grudging respect for their gameness. Yes, the idea of celebrities 
tackling winter sports still seems utterly arbitrary, but these are people 
cheerfully willing to risk life and limb for our entertainment. When Beckwith 
is asked whether she is worried she’s going to die, she breezily replies: 
“We’re not going to die, daaahling. We’re going to jump!”

Miraculously, given the curse, no one has withdrawn yet (though there have 
been several hospital visits). The morning after her skeleton run, Tweddle says 
she felt “like I’d gone 12 rounds with Mike Tyson … I’d go up there again in a 
heartbeat.”

And so the cast limps on to that live show, where the gluhwein is flowing, the 
oompah blaring and Eddie the Eagle is regaling audience members with tales of 
finishing last at Calgary 88. The competitors who lost their skeleton pair-ups 
are readying themselves for this week’s climactic air-jump. (The full-sized 
jump is only used from the second week, when competitors are deemed ready.) But 
then disaster strikes: high winds mean the air jump is a no go. Footage of 
their earlier contingency efforts will determine who is eliminated. It feels 
like a strangely fitting anticlimax: a live event with no live element.

In the pre-recorded air jump, Owen soars, managing the highest leap of the 
lot. Beckwith and Cain impress as well, and Adlington too, until she dislocates 
her shoulder mid-leap (best update the Wikipedia page). In the end, former 
EastEnder Louisa Lytton is the fall guy, losing her footing just before 
take-off. But that isn’t to say that she’s going anywhere: this being The Jump, 
she has to stick around for a week in case someone else gets injured. The show 
must go on, daaahling.

The Jump continues Sunday, 7.30pm, Channel 4
 