
Almost 150 years ago, Gibraltar became a landing station for the very first 
transcontinental telegraph cable, which went underwater and overland from 
England all the way to India and, finally, Australia. Today, amid great 
determination from business and governmental leaders to make the Rock a leader 
in ICT, telecommunications and data services, Gibraltar is yet again making its 
mark internationally.

The key breakthrough came in September 2006, when Spain finally recognised 
Gibraltar’s international direct dialling code (+350). This allowed the 
jurisdiction to expand its telephone numbering plan and develop international 
roaming synergies. These internationally-recognised digits also made 
Gibraltar’s ICT sector more attractive to investors, and the two established 
internet providers, Gibtelecom and Sapphire Networks, swiftly found themselves 
joined in the space by two other firms, which obtained broadband licences in 
2013, spurring yet another wave of innovation.

In recent months, u-mee, part of the same group as Sapphire Networks, has 
embarked upon an ambitious plan to roll out 50Mbps fibre-to-the-home broadband 
around the Rock, while Gibtelecom has started on a project to provide 100 
percent 4G coverage by late 2015 – no mean feat for a place with such 
complicated topography, and far beyond neighbouring Spain’s 45 percent 
coverage. GibTelecom is also well ahead of EU averages with its super-fast 
broadband product, SuperSwift, which provides up to 100Mbps to every household 
and business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fgibraltars-telecommunications-sector-becomes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c5163dd23a9a432bb514a7c2f8cc1aba67330af%2F0_0_2581_3872%2F2581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20telecommunications%20sector%20becomes%20international&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fgibraltars-telecommunications-sector-becomes-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20telecommunications%20sector%20becomes%20international&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fgibraltars-telecommunications-sector-becomes-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c5163dd23a9a432bb514a7c2f8cc1aba67330af%2F0_0_2581_3872%2F2581.jpg>
In December 2014, the government re-acquired a 50 percent share of Gibtelecom 
from Telekom Slovenije. This €47.7 million deal was hailed as a strategic move, 
guaranteeing that Gibraltar would control its own ICT destiny. Soon after the 
buyback, Chief Minister Fabian Picardo revealed that a large number of 
potential investors had stepped forward, indicating considerable private-sector 
confidence regarding Gibtelecom’s future.

Yet more investor buzz has been generated by Gibtelecom’s focus on 
internationalisation. Here, history seems to be repeating itself: in a 
modern-day reincarnation of that grand submarine telegraph project, the firm 
has obtained a four-percent stake in the Europe India Gateway (EIG) consortium, 
an $800 million project linking the UK and India via 15,000km of high-bandwidth 
fibre optic submarine cable.

With numerous landing stations along the route, and demand for data services 
between Europe and Asia set to rise by almost 40 percent annually over the next 
five years, Gibtelecom’s participation will also allow it to sell excess 
capacity to other carriers internationally, and to diversify its networks. 
Complementing the existing land cable routes through Spain, the cable makes 
Gibraltar’s data transfer reliability even stronger than before – a major boon 
for the e-gaming and financial services firms who have made the Rock their home 
and who rely on always-on internet in order to do business.

The revenues generated by Gibtelecom’s international expansion will also help 
it to increase its existing investments in domestic infrastructure, education 
and data centres – another key component of the national ICT strategy. 
Gibraltar’s most famous feature, the Rock itself, also provides ideal 
conditions for totally secure data-storage facilities above sea level and 
within its warren of military tunnels.

The great success of these sectors has allowed the data centre industry to 
diversify both its client base and range of offerings, as well as employment 
opportunities for everyone from local security guards to highly-skilled 
computer technicians and electrical engineers. Today’s sophisticated Gibraltar 
data centres now offer services ranging from virtual desktop solutions to cloud 
storage and applications.

Gibtelecom looks overseas

Gibraltar’s ICT and telecom titan Gibtelecom is known for a strength and 
reliability of service that make it ‘the rock of the Rock’ for the banking and 
e-gaming sectors, which rely on speedy, seamless and secure communications. But 
with a population of barely 30,000, Gibraltar’s internal telecom market is 
saturated, and with no economies of scale, there is little room for further 
growth.

“The core cost is still the same, no matter if you’re serving 30,000 or 30 
million,” points out Tim Bristow, CEO of Gibtelecom. Nevertheless, Gibtelecom 
keeps investing in future-oriented infrastructure. A €10m contract, signed with 
Ericsson in February 2015, will see upgraded networks and 4G LTE (long term 
evolution) services by November, providing customers with super-high-speed 
internet for mobile.

Once you’ve joined the submarine cable world it opens other doors and 
opportunities

While Gibtelecom has grown rapidly since its 2002 merger by local companies 
owned by Verizon and British Telecom, the 2014 stock buyback by the Gibraltar 
government consolidated the company’s future expansion plans, which include 
perfecting local infrastructure and taking a bold new role abroad. Its 
participation, along with 15 other, much larger, global companies in the $800 
million Europe India Gateway (EIG) submarine cable project will expand 
Gibraltar’s communications business across a vast international market, as well 
as providing visibility for the jurisdiction on the global stage.

This new involvement bodes well for potential Gibtelecom investors. “Once 
you’ve joined the submarine cable world,” Bristow notes, “it opens other doors 
and opportunities. Very nearly all of the world’s global data and voice traffic 
travels by submarine cables, and we’ve joined an industry which provides 
exciting opportunities going forward.”
 