
A home birth or a hospital? Birthing pool or bed? Drugs or no drugs?

Membership Event: Guardian Live | How do we pay for NHS we want? 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-how-do-we-pay-for-nhs-we-want-20974145233>

Having a baby is a challenge enough without all the options in this great age 
of choice. So what’s best for you?

Let’s imagine you are a fit and healthy first-time mother. If you have risk 
factors, you will still have choices. “We want all women to have a better birth 
experience,” says Jacque Gerrard, director of the Royal College of Midwives, 
“not just the women who are low-risk.”

But in a way, you have to imagine that you’re low-risk before you can decide 
what sort of birth you want to push for (ahem). If you accept your risk factor 
– age, weight, underlying health condition – as your defining feature, you’ll 
be inclined to defer to authority rather than explore the options.

Where?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0223dfd689c1ca6642bdc11a1449aa81128617a3%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0223dfd689c1ca6642bdc11a1449aa81128617a3%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
If your only consideration were clinical, it is safer for first-time mothers 
not to be on a labour ward (aka obstetric unit), due to cross-infection and 
thromboses (it makes no difference to the baby). Your best option is a 
midwife-led unit alongside an obstetric unit – known as an AMU birth, 
“alongside medical unit” – or an FMU birth, “freestanding midwifery unit”. But 
you can’t get an epidural anywhere other than a labour ward.

Giving birth at home for a first-timer carries higher risks 
<https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/birthplace> of stillbirth or neonatal death for the 
baby, according to figures from theNational Perinatal Epidemiology Unit 
<https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/>.There is also a high transfer rate into labour 
wards. According to the NPEU, 45% of planned home births end up in an obstetric 
unit.

You can see certain things immediately: first, if you get too hung up on 
avoiding a labour ward for clinical reasons, you are likely to be disappointed 
or think you’ve failed should you end up there. Second, home is actually – 
amazingly – as safe as anywhere and safer than a labour ward for second and 
subsequent babies, but for your first time, it’s almost 50:50 that you’ll end 
up in an ambulance. However, as associate professor Jennifer Hollowell, who 
conducted the NPEU research, says, it’s subjective: “I don’t think I would want 
to transfer in labour, but many women feel glad that they did part of the 
labour at home.”



Pain relief
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45de36faa63c00ebbf798f39cd0ee7f42a91a7a%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45de36faa63c00ebbf798f39cd0ee7f42a91a7a%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
The next decision is how far to insulate yourself from the pain that is an 
inevitable part of childbirth. Options include gas and air (a no-brainer) a 
water-birth (the pain relief is surprisingly effective - with the caveat that 
no pain relief really works except being unconscious. But it is warm). 
Pethidine is available in all birth settings, but women are generally advised 
that its pain relief is limited, and it will make both mother and baby drowsy.

The Which? birth tool <http://www.which.co.uk/birth-choice/find-and-compare> 
has it about right: it asks you three questions, do you want a water birth? Do 
you want an epidural? What’s your postcode? And it will give you an answer 
based on that, plus your risk factors. (Warning: if you try this and are over 
40, you will have the rude awakening that women over 40 are inherently 
high-risk.)

There are three kinds of values-based decisions: the anti-medicalised or 
natural or independent mother (sometimes known informally as the Warrior 
Tigress) – she will be on a spectrum from simply wanting to do it without pain 
relief to wanting to give birth at home, alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b872c5818e6b81d44e9e9ca644cf7e13355e09%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b872c5818e6b81d44e9e9ca644cf7e13355e09%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Second is the “I want as much pain relief as possible, I’m a human being” 
value, which essentially means going to a labour ward for an epidural (an 
injection to the dura mater of the spinal cord, producing loss of sensation 
below the waist). Professionals will try to discourage this, since their ideal 
is a vaginal delivery with no interventions. All interventions are more likely 
once you’re already on a labour ward. Many obstetricians and mothers would 
argue that pain relief is a personal choice, and even if it increases the risks 
of other kinds of intervention, that doesn’t of itself make it a bad decision 
(if the alternative is agony). Susan Bewley, who chaired the group that 
developed Nice’s guidelines on childbirth, says: “Ah, but the pain that you 
have will vary according to where you are, how comfortable you are, the kind of 
labour you’re having. The surroundings and context will affect the subjective 
experience of pain.”

Caesarean section

Finally, there is the elective caesarean which, as founder of the Positive 
Birth Movement <http://www.positivebirthmovement.org/>, Milli Hill, says, “is 
another right that a woman has, and it absolutely should be upheld.” 
Clinically, almost everybody tries to talk a woman out of a C-section because 
of its heightened risk and longer recovery time: it is also widely felt that 
only anxious women would choose it, and they should have their anxieties 
assuaged rather than their demands met. But Hill provides some context. “Often 
if people have had lots of miscarriages or lost a baby, the levels of anxiety 
are much higher, they want a certain thing for a certain reason,” she says.


'I'm insisting that things be done my way': readers share their birth stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/21/this-is-the-nhs-readers-share-birth-stories>
“A woman who has lost a breech baby might not want to have an ECV [external 
cephalic version], which is where they try to turn the baby from the outside. 
If you look at the research, it would be safer for her to try and have a 
vaginal birth but if you think about her, you can see why she wants a 
C-section.”

Those are the only interventions that anyone would choose. The others are all 
responses to a given problem:

If you are overdue

You will be offered (very) regular scans from 42 weeks. Nobody can force you 
to be induced but you may well want to be. From 10 days overdue, you’ll be 
offered some variation of the prostaglandin hormone: a “prosto teabag” is 
fashionable.

If your baby is breech or transverse

“This is around 3-5% of pregnancies,” says Hill. “The amount of choices that 
you face in that situation is a minefield, and the thing that’s really hard to 
do is make an evidence-based choice. Even the professionals find that hard.” 
The two main options are an ECV and a planned caesarean.

If you didn’t want a caesarean but it’s the only option

You may be able to have a “woman-centred” C-section, which is partly defined 
by having a more reverent atmosphere in the operating theatre so that everybody 
is more respectful of the fact that a baby is being born and this is a 
significant moment in several people’s lives (midwives are certainly aware of 
this, but it won’t be an option in every hospital). “Sometimes people like to 
have the curtain lowered so they can see the baby coming out. Some people like 
to have a particular piece of music, or immediate skin to skin contact with the 
baby, all of those sorts of things that make the woman feel more part of the 
experience and less objectified,” Hill explains.

Forceps and ventouse delivery 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129ca19aed4cd372490b64b73daaf6d78b60a8ee%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Giving%20birth%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20before%20labour%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fhow-to-plan-your-perfect-birth-all-the-options-you-need-to-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129ca19aed4cd372490b64b73daaf6d78b60a8ee%2F0_0_8333_4999%2F8333.jpg>
These are extraction methods when the second stage of labour is taking too 
long (more than two hours) and there are heightened risks for either mother or 
baby. Use of forceps carries a higher risk of quite a severe tear (a 
not-insignificant 22%, compared with 15% for ventouse and 3% for spontaneous 
vaginal delivery). In a small-scale qualitative study, 28% of forceps mothers 
rated the birth “unbearably” painful as opposed to 17% of ventouse mothers. 
Ventouse use is associated by one large-scale trial in Pakistan with increased 
risk to the baby of query 6cephalhaematoma (a lump caused by a pocket of blood 
underneath the scalp) and retinal haemorrhage.

Episiotomy

This an incision made to the vagina during the final stage of labour, if there 
is a sign of foetal compromise or the medical team are in the middle of an 
instrumental delivery.

Vexingly, nobody will be quite straightforward about what’s a real choice and 
what’s a pretend one

Everybody involved in pregnancy who is not pregnant talks incessantly about 
giving mothers the birth that they want – or rather, enabling mothers to make 
the best choices. To the actually pregnant person, this often sounds like 
complicated language designed to obscure the fact that one’s choices are 
limited, by the professionals and by fate and nature; and yet, vexingly, nobody 
will be quite straightforward about what’s a real choice and what’s a pretend 
one.

My advice: make your plan A based on the kind of pain relief you want; make a 
plan B for the failure of plan A, which is probably that either your first or 
second stage didn’t progress; make a plan C for when you end up somewhere other 
than you wanted to be. This can be as simple as “this isn’t the end of the 
world; at least it’s not forceps”; make a plan D for forceps, which should be 
“epidural first”.

 * This article was amended on 22 January 2016 to correct the name of Susan 
Bewley after a mistake in the editing process.  