
The Guardian's coverage of global development is one of the key ways in which 
we are able to fulfil our purpose of holding power to account and promoting 
social justice around the world.

We are therefore delighted to be launching a new professionals network to 
complement the work already being carried out by theglobal development website 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development>.

The aim of the new network is to offer a space where professionals can network 
as well as share knowledge and expertise. We hope to achieve this through a 
blend of comment, analysis, online discussions and offline events, recognising 
that the day-to-day lives of development professionals are constantly in flux 
as a result of changes in technology, policy and collaborations across the 
public and private sectors.

The global development professional network will be inclusive, covering those 
working for NGOs, bilateral and multilateral agencies, governments, business, 
academia and research, in the field and in the head office; both in the global 
north and south.

We'll be focussing on key debates, ranging from the challenges and 
opportunities of private sector partnerships to effective responses to the 
growing demands for transparency, as well as giving space to niche areas that 
are often neglected.

Like the main Guardian global development website, the professional network is 
supported by theBill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/home.aspx>, as well as by a range of 
sponsors. All our journalism remains independent of sponsorship and follows 
GNM's publishededitorial code. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/info/guardian-editorial-code> Any content produced 
by, or in partnership with our funding partners, will be clearly labelled.

The Guardian is committed to open journalism, recognising that the best 
understanding of the world is achieved when we collaborate, share knowledge, 
encourage debate, welcome challenge and harness the expertise of specialists 
and their communities. That is particularly true of development, where 
professionals working across the world, sometimes in remote locations, hold 
great stories of knowledge and expertise that too often go unheard.

We therefore hope that you engage with the new professional network, 
discussing your challenges and successes, recognising that everyone can gain 
from the sharing of best practice and lessons learned.

By harnessing the appetite among development professionals to critique, 
improve and celebrate their work, we hope to play a small role in improving 
development policy and practice.

Jo Confino is executive editor of the Guardian

To read more about sponsorship and editorial independence at the Guardian, see 
managing editor Elisabeth Ribbans'Comment is free blogpost 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/dec/04/sponsorship-editorial-independence>
.

If you think there's an issue we should be examining which affects 
professionals working in global development, or you'd like to comment on the 
network, please get in touch. You can follow us and contact us on Twitter via
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>, on LinkedIn here 
<http://www.linkedin.com/groups?home=&gid=4729258&trk=anet_ug_hm> and Facebook 
here 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-Global-Development-Professionals-Network/112983875525796>
, or you can email the team atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become a member of the Global 
Development Professionals Network.
 