
The Green party has backed the Liberal Democrat candidate in the Richmond Park 
byelection against former Conservative Zac Goldsmith, whoquit his seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-to-resign-as-tory-mp-after-heathrow-go-ahead>
 in protest at the government’s decision to expand Heathrow airport.

The party said they hoped the decision would put pressure on the local Labour 
party to not stand a candidate of their own and instead swing behind the Lib 
Dems as the best chance of beating Goldsmith, who is standing as an independent 
and has beenendorsed by Ukip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/ukip-backs-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
.

Andree Frieze, who was the Greens’ selected candidate for the seat, told her 
local party she was keen not to contest it, a decision agreed on Thursday night 
with Kingston Greens. “I believe, wholeheartedly, that I am the right person to 
do the right thing – for the people, for the planet,” she said.

Bravo to the Greens of Richmond Park, showing the left how to truly unite | 
John Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/bravo-green-party-richmond-park-byelection-zac-goldsmith>
“Realistically, however, I am not going to win and my standing could allow 
Zac, yet again, to be the wrong person representing our community. Furthermore, 
by not standing and helping a non-Tory win, we have the chance to seriously 
dent the Conservative majority.”

The Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are not 
putting up their own candidate for the byelection on 1 December but Goldsmith 
has been endorsed by the local Tory party and supported by his neighbouring 
Conservative MP Tania Mathias.


The Liberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> 
have already confirmed Sarah Olney, a local accountant who is also 
anti-Heathrow expansion, as their candidate to run against Goldsmith. The 
party, which held the seat until 2010, has put huge resources into winning it 
back and are pinning their hopes for victory on being able switch the 
conversation from Heathrow to Brexit in the pro-remain constituency.

Goldsmith, a keen environmentalist, voted to leave the EU. He was also widely 
criticised for hismayoral campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/top-conservatives-condemn-zac-goldsmiths-disgusting-mayoral-campaign>
, which opponents said used dog-whistle tactics against Labour’s Sadiq Khan.

Jonathan Bartley, the Greens’ co-leader, met local members of the Richmond 
Greens on Wednesday night, where the decision was taken to endorse Olney to 
boost parliamentary opposition to a hard Brexit. Kingston Greens also endorsed 
that decision at a meeting on Thursday.

Anticipation abounds as the Lib Dems begin battle for Richmond Park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/anticipation-abounds-as-the-lib-dems-begin-battle-for-richmond-park>
“This is no normal byelection,” Bartley said. “A regressive alliance of the 
Tories and Ukip are working together to reinstall a pro-Brexit MP who ran a 
racist campaign to be mayor ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

“The decision not to stand has been made because we believe that a win for a 
non-Conservative candidate would be a blow to the Tory’s hard Brexit and dent 
their damaging plans for post-referendum Britain. Ultimately we think Britain 
is better off withoutZac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith> returning to parliament.

“I’d now urge Labour to join us in forming a progressive alliance against the 
forces of Conservatism and narrow-mindedness.”

Chair of Richmond’s Greens, Richard Bennett, said local Liberal Democrats 
recognised that in the 2018 council elections the parties should work together 
in some wards “to ensure people get the best chance both ofGreen party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> representation and of a 
council not controlled by the Conservatives.”

Labour is determined it will contest the seat, however. Alice Perry, who is a 
Labour national executive committee member, said shortlisting interviews to 
choose the party’s candidate for Richmond Park had taken place this week and 
that the candidate will be formally selected by local party members from a 
shortlist on Saturday.

Endorsed by Ukip, backed by the Tories, independent Zac is a fake | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/29/endorsed-by-ukip-backed-by-tories-independent-zac-goldsmith-is-a-fake>
“We are definitely standing a candidate,” she said. “The Tory Lib-Dem 
coalition government made massive cuts to valued public services, including 
huge cuts to council budgets. The Lib Dems’ actions in government proved they 
are not a progressive party.”

Labour’s Sachin Patel, who fought the seat at the last general election, has 
already declared his intention to stand again.

Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, said his party had an environmental record 
that Green voters could support, including pushing for lower emissions targets, 
paving the way for the Paris agreement, renewables investment, the plastic-bag 
charge and opposition to airport expansion.

“You only have to compare that with the destructive Conservative Brexit 
government which is trying to force through Heathrow expansion, release 
polluters from tough EU environmental laws and slash subsidies for renewables, 
which has already led to 12,500 job losses in the solar industry alone,” he 
said.

“It is vital that progressive voters get behind the only credible progressive 
candidate, Sarah Olney.”

• This article was amended on 4 November 2016. An earlier version said Zac 
Goldsmith “received the backing of the Green party’s Jenny Jones in his bid to 
become London’s mayor”. That was based on positive remarks about Goldsmith made 
by Jones that werereported in the Evening Standard in May 2015 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/greens-would-back-tory-zac-to-be-mayor-over-labour-says-peer-10241968.html>
, before he entered the mayoral race. However, Jones has asked us to point out 
that she did not back Goldsmith in the 2016 mayoral election; she voted for the 
Green party’s Sian Berry, with Labour’s Sadiq Khan as her second preference.
 