
“Hello?” Skype blinks across the Atlantic to reveal Greg Jackson in his 
Brooklyn apartment on a boiling afternoon. One of his characters may use the 
video chat app to keep in touch with her “dysphoric” dogs, but the debut author 
confesses he’s unused to such communication himself. And though he’s warm and 
forthcoming, with the air of a slightly worried Buddha, he does seem a little 
cautious.

This is unsurprising for a number of reasons – he’s new to media scrutiny, he 
describes himself (and the other writers he knows) as a “stay-at-home 
introvert”, and Skype is a peculiar way to talk. But caution, qualification and 
a keenness to include nuance seem to be part of his style as a person. And they 
are also characteristic of his striking debut short-story collection,Prodigals 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/prodigals.html>, for which the US National 
Book Foundation last weeknamed him as one of five writers under 35 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/30/national-book-foundation-picks-five-under-35-new-writers-to-watch>
 expected “to make a lasting impression on the literary landsape”.

 Wagner in the Desert begins the collection with one of what must be one of 
the best, and most subtle lists in recent fiction. The story’s characters have 
come toPalm Springs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/29/two-pools-13-bathrooms-and-300-for-dinner-the-modernist-fun-palaces-of-palm-springs>
, invited to join one couple’s orgiastic farewell to youth ahead of dedicating 
themselves to starting a family.

 “First we did molly, lay on the thick carpet touching it, ourselves, one 
another. We did edibles, bathed dumbly in the sun, took naps on suede couches. 
Later, we did blow off the keys to ecologically responsible cars.” This 
voluptuous inventory of sensual pleasures continues through a delicatessen of 
narcotics, past swaps of prescription drugs, and on to high-end gastronomy 
washed down with the finest wines and spirits. “We spent our hot December 
afternoons next to the custom saltwater pool or below the parasols of palm 
fronds, waiting, I suppose, to feel at peace, to baptise our minds in an 
enforced nullity, to return to a place from which we could begin again.”

Greg Jackson's top 10 books to make you a better person
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/01/top-10-books-to-make-you-a-better-person-wg-sebald-roberto-bolano>
 These languid hedonists, like most of Jackson’s characters, have plenty of 
money, and he’s always alert to their vanity and self-indulgence. But he’s keen 
to point out that satire is not the only point of his attention. His characters 
are all, within their ordinary limitations, trying to live a good, socially 
responsible and “sustainable” life.

 “At least in the US press,” he says, “the response I’ve had has indicated the 
book is about either the upper middle class or about drugs. But actually, if I 
were to have to pick one theme, it’s seeking. I don’t necessarily mean anything 
religious, although it could be. I mean the sense that there is a side of life 
that we can’t just reduce to transactional or practical frameworks. It feels 
like this is a big part of our feeling alone.”

Despite the extreme social divisions in the US, Jackson is unapologetic about 
treating the rich with sympathy

 Other stories in the collection address characters in much tighter 
circumstances, but despite the extreme social divisions in the US, Jackson is 
unapologetic about treating the rich with sympathy: “I think money, class 
background is hugely important in the US. What people objected to, especially 
when every other book has a cover illustration of a view over Central Park and 
depicts the follies of the rich, is that I wanted to take the problems of these 
people seriously. Not because I think we need to be especially sympathetic to
them, but because we need to be sympathetic to everybody.”

 Jackson’s own search has taken him on the familiar route through a creative 
writing degree into teaching. It’s now brought him, at 33, to Brooklyn, which 
he describes as “one of the least interesting things I’ve done”, joking that 
his routine in this modern literary Mecca is to go jogging with Paul Auster 
every morning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b62c333cb6ab2cc4f615848cf98e69546a13948%2F343_552_4854_2913%2F4854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greg%20Jackson%3A%20'Writing%20a%20novel%20is%20like%20an%20interminable%20family%20vacation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greg%20Jackson%3A%20%27Writing%20a%20novel%20is%20like%20an%20interminable%20family%20vacation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b62c333cb6ab2cc4f615848cf98e69546a13948%2F343_552_4854_2913%2F4854.jpg>
 Jogging … part of the routine in Brooklyn’s literary Mecca. Photograph: Oli 
Kellett/Getty Images 
 He’s arrived at a literary voice that combines attention to modern minutiae 
(which he confesses owes something toDavid Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/infinite-jest-david-foster-wallace-20th-anniversary-20-things-need-know>
) with an earlier generation’s attention to intense psychological realism. He’s 
reluctant to cite influences, lest people imagine he “very conceitedly” thinks 
he writes like them. But after gentle prodding a long list rolls out, revealing 
an early taste for “maximalist” modernists such as Conrad, before moving on to 
the likes ofRoberto Bolaño <https://www.theguardian.com/books/roberto-bolano>, 
Grace Paley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/aug/24/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
,Donald Barthelme <https://www.theguardian.com/books/donald-barthelme> and WG 
Sebald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/may/13/wg-sebald-legacy>. If 
his stories are concerned to get purchase on true life, they are also very much 
aware of the different literary strategies of approaching it.

 It’s a style that is supersensitive to the contingency and contradiction of 
individual character. In one story, a woman considers her former husband: “It 
did take a certain ballsiness, what he had done, in the middle of their divorce 
no less, and she could see, in fact she couldn’t not see, that the flipside of 
this prickishness was the quality she loved in Zeke, loved best in him perhaps, 
when she did love him – she still did – she just hated him now too.”

 In another story, a man drives south from New York with a woman whom he once 
almost loved. As they head towards their respective families, a dangerous storm 
gathering over the highway, the car crackles with the ambivalence they feel 
towards each other and their apparently settled lives. As mutual attraction 
flickers, the narrator is reminded of the girl he once knew, “that Susan, 
excitable and unformed, spilling slightly beyond herself as people when they 
are at their most beautiful do”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39b28ee8bfe0406aee30526308bb08ca93d6342f%2F0_361_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greg%20Jackson%3A%20'Writing%20a%20novel%20is%20like%20an%20interminable%20family%20vacation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greg%20Jackson%3A%20%27Writing%20a%20novel%20is%20like%20an%20interminable%20family%20vacation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fgreg-jackson-author-prodigals-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39b28ee8bfe0406aee30526308bb08ca93d6342f%2F0_361_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Gathering storm … in his story, the car crackles with feeling. Photograph: 
Ryan McGinnis/Getty Images 
Any easy shorthand to reduce someone into a book character … does not reflect 
their full human dignity

 Such meticulously uncertain characters seem very close to the emotional heart 
of his fiction. “They could all be lots of other people, and they contain other 
people within themselves. Any sort of easy shorthand that’s going to reduce 
someone into a character in a book is a reduction that does not reflect their 
full human dignity.” He frowns reflectively, and adds that although he admires 
heroes of modernism such as Proust “who seemed to think if we can capture every 
single switchback of thought that we can encapsulate full human consciousness”, 
a writer will never reach humans’ authentic complexity. Jackson hopes instead 
to “leave some of the mystery and lacunae there, and let us imagine our way in”.

 Although he enjoys the way a short story can “more or less invent its own 
form”, the expansive ambition of his fiction and the commercial challenges of 
short stories mean he finds himself “under enormous pressure to produce a 
novel”.

 “I love novels,” he adds, “but it’s such a slog to write one. You just feel 
like you’re on an interminable vacation with family members.” Alongside the 
beginnings of a novel, he’s also working on a book about political art which 
started as an essay, but grew and grew.

 This appetite for growth is reflected in his prose, which in its quiet way is 
also a little “maximalist”. A good few carefully modulated sentences stretch 
out euphoniously over half a page or more. There’s something of this tendency 
in the way he speaks as well, though Jackson says he wishes his answers could 
be a bit more compressed. Concision in mind, I offer him a wilfully dumb 
question to pat back, tweet-style: So, Greg, what’s your book about?

 He winces, and pauses for a long time, then seems to pause again. “Spiritual 
longing,” he offers eventually. He winces again, then laughs.
 