
Life is Magic 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381028/> by Meg 
McLaren

Review by Beth, aged 6

This picture book is about a rabbit turning a magician into a rabbit (but the 
magician keeps his moustache even when he is a rabbit). It was really funny and 
I liked the picture. The rabbits were cute.

My favourite bit was when the rabbit turned the magician into a rabbit - 
Shazaam! Anyone who is aged four to eight who likes magic and funny stories 
will love this book. 5/5.


Lottie Potter Wants an Otter 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385475/> by Joanne 
Willis

Review by Kitty, aged 6

This picture book is about a little girl who wants an otter. The otter that 
she gets is a nasty otter. So she tries to take the otter back but the 
shopkeeper isn’t there any more.

I liked it because it was a bit funny and good. (Our librarian note said it 
was a great, well thought out rhyming book that is fun to read aloud. Heartily 
enjoyed by all of KS1!) I think anyone would like it. 4/5

Time Travelling With A Hamster 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/389587/s/time-travelling-with-a-hamster/>
 by Ross Welford

Review by Chloe,aged 9

A boy’s dad has died and on his birthday he gets a letter from his Dad. The 
letter tells him to go to his old house and time travel to when his dad was 
alive and younger. He must save his dad from getting something in his head that 
made him die.

This book was really interesting and a bit sad at the end. I like sad books. 
People who are in year three and like sad and mysterious books would like this 
one. 5/5

Somersaults and Dreams: Rising Star 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/317197/> by Cate 
Shearwater

Review by Annabelle, aged 10

This book is about gymnastics, friendship, fun and dreams. The main character 
is a girl called Ellie and she is a kind thoughtful girl who is extremely good 
at gymnastics. She is facing a big challenge to qualify for the British 
Championships.

I really liked this book. It has quite a bit of drama and I like books like 
that. This books also has a lot in it about real life people and things that 
are important in a gymnast’s career.

Girls who are aged eight to eleven who have an interest in gymnastics would 
love this book. 5/5 because it was amazing.

 