
Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
, Heathrow, and next up High Speed 2. One by one, Theresa May’s government is 
giving the go-ahead to major infrastructure projects that will cost taxpayers 
billions of pounds.


But who was Chris Grayling kidding when he said of Heathrow’s third runway 
that the government had taken a “truly momentous” decision and that he was 
“proud”? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/25/heathrow-approval-business-political-environmental-issues>
 It has taken 50 years for a decision about expanding airport capacity in the 
south-east to be made. That is laughable.

The idea of building new runways in the south-east was first raised in 1968 by 
the Roskill Commission, set up by the Labour government of the day. It 
recommended building a new airport at Cublington in Buckinghamshire.

However, in 1971, the government accepted a rival proposal for a member of the 
committee to build an airport at Maplin Sands in the Thames estuary, a 
forerunner ofBoris Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jan/18/boris-island-airport-what-where>
. Neither project went ahead as costs mounted and the 1970s oil crisis gripped 
Britain. Instead, a redevelopment of Stansted airport – originally rejected by 
the commission – was approved.

Major infrastructure projects require planning, perseverance and patience to 
be successful

This fudging of the issue has basically been on a loop ever since. Successive 
governments have pushed backed the decision as business leaders have claimed 
Britain desperately needs to expand its airport capacity and residents close to
Heathrow <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/heathrow> have said any new 
development at the airport would be damaging for the environment and their 
quality of life.

The debate about airport capacity involves parties with a serious vested 
interest. The businesses that have opposed Boris Island and backed Heathrow 
include British Airways and property company Segro. BA owns more slots – daily 
takeoff and landing rights – than any other airline at Heathrow, while Segro’s 
business is based on owning valuable warehouses around the airport.

It is a government’s job to put these interests to one side and make a 
decision in the long-term interests of the country.David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>’s move to kick the airport 
decision into the long-grass even after commissioning Sir Howard Davies to 
study the issue was shameful. Cameron allowed his own vested interests – 
Conservative party politics – to get in the way of Britain’s long-term 
interests.

It is important to go back over the sorry tale of how the government finally 
came to make a decision, because this is a vital time for Britain. With the 
country voting to leave the EU, interest rates low, and the economy set to 
stagnate according to forecasts, the government has an opportunity to use cheap 
debt to upgrade Britain’s creaking infrastructure. Although these projects 
could cost billions of pounds, a lot of that cash could be pushed back into the 
British companies that build them. Around 98% of the companies who built the 
facilities and provided the materials for the 2012 London Olympics were based 
in Britain.

Major infrastructure projects require planning, perseverance and patience to 
be successful. They should not simply be signed off willy-nilly. But this is 
not the same as indecision.

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, can use the autumn statement to give the green 
light to a series of road, rail and telecommunications improvements in Britain. 
George Osborne, his predecessor, had a habit ofreiterating his commitment to 
infrastructure without actually pushing projects to a position where 
construction could actually start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/30/osborne-launches-national-infrastructure-commission>
. Hammond can signal the start of a new era for British infrastructure projects 
and boost communities across the country.

John Lewis and gender

Another week, another report on shocking gender equality in business. The 
World Economic Forum – best known for organising a high-profile annual 
gathering in Davos, Switzerland – has warned it could take 170 years to 
eradicate the disparity in pay and employment opportunities between men and 
women.

Nickolds has a rare and detailed appreciation of fashion trends and consumer 
behaviour

In the context of this report, the appointment of Paula Nickolds as the new 
managing director of John Lewis stands out. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/john-lewis-paula-nickolds-chief-executive-first-female>

Nickolds is the first woman to lead the department store chain in its 152-year 
history. But what particularly makes the appointment striking is that she has 
spent 22 years at the company after joining as a graduate trainee. In other 
words, she has climbed her way to the top.

There is a significant difference between a business developing a woman into 
an executive role and hiring a woman from outside. Too many talented woman are 
forced to move businesses to climb the career ladder and too many FTSE 100 
companies try to add a female voice to their board simply by bringing in a 
woman who has enjoyed success elsewhere as non-executive director.

When you meet Nickolds, it is quickly clear that she has a rare and detailed 
appreciation of fashion trends and consumer behaviour, and she has long been 
highly regarded at John Lewis. Nonetheless, she andJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> deserve enormous credit for 
her success and appointment. Other British companies should take note.
 