
Harper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee>, whose 1961 novel To 
Kill a Mockingbird became a national institution and the defining text on the 
racial troubles of the American deep south, has died at the age of 89.


Lee, or Nelle as she was known to those close to her, had lived for several 
years in a nursing home less than a mile from the house in which she had grown 
up in Monroeville, Alabama – the setting for the fictional Maycomb of her 
famous book. The town’s mayor, Mike Kennedy, confirmed the author’s death.


Harper Lee – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-a-life-in-pictures>
Until last year, Lee had been something of a one-book literary wonder. To Kill 
a Mockingbird, her 1961 epic narrative about small-town lawyer Atticus Finch’s 
battle to save the life of a black resident threatened by a racist mob, sold 
more than 40m copies around the world and earned her a Pulitzer prize. George W 
Bush awarded her the presidential medal of freedom in 2007.


But from the moment Mockingbird was published to almost instant success the 
author consistently avoided public attention and insisted that she had no 
intention of releasing further works. That self-imposed purdah ended abruptly 
when, amidconsiderable controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/06/harper-lee-home-town-monroeville-surprised-bemused-sceptical>
, it was revealed a year ago that a second novel had been discovered, which was
published as Go Set a Watchman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/14/harper-lee-town-monroeville-alabama-fans-wait-midnight>
 in July 2015.

The house where Lee lived for years with her sister Alice sat quiet and empty 
on Friday. The inside of the house appeared unchanged from when she lived there 
– antique furniture was stacked with books, audio cassettes and gift baskets.

Her neighbor for 40 years, Sue Sellers, said Lee would have appreciated the 
quiet. “She was such a private person,” she said. “All she wanted was privacy, 
but she didn’t get much. There always somebody following her around.”

In recent years Lee’s health had declined. Seller said the last time she spent 
any real time with Lee they went to breakfast together. “The whole way home she 
drove her big car in the turn lane,” she said. “She couldn’t see. I was scared 
to death.”

The last time she saw Lee was a few months ago at the Meadows nursing home. 
Sellers brought flowers. “She just hollered out: ‘I can’t see and I can’t 
hear!’” Sellers said. “So I just told her goodbye.”

Lee was born in Monroeville in 1926 and grew up under the stresses of 
segregation. As a child she shared summers with another aspiring writer, Truman 
Capote, who annually came to stay in the house next door to hers and who later 
invited her to accompany him to Holcomb, Kansas, to help him research his 
groundbreaking 1966 crime book In Cold Blood.


Capote informed the figure of the young boy Dill in Mockingbird, with his 
friend the first-person narrator Scout clearly modelled on the childhood Lee 
herself.


Lee was the youngest child of lawyer Amasa Coleman Lee and Frances Finch Lee. 
Her father acted as the template for Atticus Finch whose resolute courtroom 
dignity as he struggles to represent a black man, Tom Robinson, accused of 
raping a white woman provides the novel’s ethical backbone.

Last year’s publication of Go Set a Watchman obliged bewildered fans of the 
novel to reappraise the character of Finch. In that novel, which was in fact 
the first draft of Mockingbird that had been rejected by her publisher, Finch 
was portrayed as having been a supporter of the South’s Jim Crow laws, saying 
at one point: “Do you want Negroes by the carload in our schools and ­churches 
and theaters?”

Within minutes of the announcement of the novelist’s death, encomiums began to 
flow. Her literary agent Andrew Nurnberg said in a statement: “We have lost a 
great writer, a great friend and a beacon of integrity.”

He added: “Knowing Nelle these past few years has been not just an utter 
delight but an extraordinary privilege. When I saw her just six weeks ago, she 
was full of life, her mind and mischievous wit as sharp as ever. She was 
quoting Thomas More and setting me straight on Tudor history.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fharper-lee-dead-1962-to-kill-a-mocking-bird-premiere-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F19%2F1455900015950%2FKP_1804972_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archive%20footage%20of%20Harper%20Lee%20at%201962%20To%20Kill%20a%20Mockingbird%20premiere%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fharper-lee-dead-1962-to-kill-a-mocking-bird-premiere-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archive%20footage%20of%20Harper%20Lee%20at%201962%20To%20Kill%20a%20Mockingbird%20premiere%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fharper-lee-dead-1962-to-kill-a-mocking-bird-premiere-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F19%2F1455900015950%2FKP_1804972_crop_640x360.jpg>
Harper Lee attends the 1962 premiere of the film version of To Kill a 
Mockingbird. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-dead-1962-to-kill-a-mocking-bird-premiere-video>
Michael Morrison, her publisher at HarperCollins US, said: “The world knows 
Harper Lee was a brilliant writer but what many don’t know is that she was an 
extraordinary woman of great joyfulness, humility and kindness. She lived her 
life the way she wanted to – in private – surrounded by books and the people 
who loved her.”


In Lee’s home state of Alabama, a center of the violent upheavals over civil 
rights that immediately preceded the publication of Mockingbird, literary 
experts reflected on the power of the novel to shift the ingrained assumptions 
of white Alabamans. Jacqueline Trimble, president of the Alabama Writers’ Forum 
that bequeaths the annual Harper Lee award for literary excellence, said that 
the book had a profound effect on white residents of the state.

“She was able to take the politics of the civil rights era and make them 
human. She showed people that this was about their neighbors, their friends, 
someone they knew, not just about the issues,” Trimble said.


Tim Cook, the CEO of Apple, tweeted a quote from Mockingbird: “The one thing 
that doesn’t abide by majority rule is a person’s conscience.”
 