
The carefully weighted pass came in, the crowd cheered, and the puck was swept 
deftly into the goal byVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>. It was a routine repeated 
again and again, as the 62-year-old Russian president took to the ice in Sochi 
to lead an “all-star” team featuring former NHL legends to an 18-6 victory, in 
which Putin himself scored eight of the goals.

It ended a good week for Putin, during which he hosted dozens of non-western 
leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/09/russia-marks-victory-day-red-square-parade-putin>
 in Moscow and received asurprisingly conciliatory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/kerry-holds-talks-with-putin-during-first-visit-to-russia-in-two-years>
 US secretary of state, John Kerry, in Sochi.


The hockey game will dispel any lingering doubts about the health of the 
president, whodisappeared from public view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/12/vladimir-putin-sick-kremlin-cancels-meetings-uses-old-photos>
 for nearly two weeks early this year amid swirling rumours of ill health.


It also suggests the cult of celebrity around the leader, who has always been 
filmed carrying out various macho stunts, could be reaching new levels.

This weekend, a group of Cossacks in a village near St Petersburg unveiled a 
monument to Putin, featuring a bronze bust of the Russian leader stylised as a 
Roman emperor and swathed in a toga.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431867469840%2Fa8351faa-e061-45b2-9d26-571325dfd9c5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=He%20shoots%2C%20he%20scores%3A%20Vladimir%20Putin%20celebrity%20cult%20achieves%20new%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=He%20shoots%2C%20he%20scores%3A%20Vladimir%20Putin%20celebrity%20cult%20achieves%20new%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431867469840%2Fa8351faa-e061-45b2-9d26-571325dfd9c5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cossacks stand next to a bust of Russian President Vladimir Putin which 
depicts him as a Roman emperor Photograph: Maxim Zmeyev/Reuters 
The Putin celebrity cult has swung into a higher gear since the annexation of 
Crimea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/crimea> last year. Across the 
country, shops and kiosks sell T-shirts, mugs and key-rings featuring the 
Russian president in a variety of heroic poses. One favourite shows Putin in 
the boxing ring, knocking out Barack Obama, while others show him riding 
horses, launching rockets or simply looking pleased with himself.

Putin is an avid ice hockey player and plays regular training matches with a 
number of government officials and businessmen. Saturday’s game also featured 
the businessmen Gennady Timchenko as well as Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, all 
three of whom have known Putin since his youth and have risen to become 
billionaires during his rule. The often sidelined prime minister, Dmitry 
Medvedev, was left to watch the game from the stands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431867826569%2Fa8c3bcce-d7bb-4df5-bf55-e7f4d32e70fa-1411x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=He%20shoots%2C%20he%20scores%3A%20Vladimir%20Putin%20celebrity%20cult%20achieves%20new%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=He%20shoots%2C%20he%20scores%3A%20Vladimir%20Putin%20celebrity%20cult%20achieves%20new%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fhe-shoots-he-scores-vladmir-putin-celebrity-cult-achieves-new-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431867826569%2Fa8c3bcce-d7bb-4df5-bf55-e7f4d32e70fa-1411x2040.jpeg>
 Vladimir Putin fishing on the Khemchik river in 2007. Photograph: Dmitry 
Astakhov/EPA 
Every player on the ice wore the number 70, to mark the 70th anniversary of 
victory in the second world war, which was celebrated with pomp on 9 May. The 
defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, oversaw a huge parade on Red Square, featuring 
16,000 soldiers, tanks and aircraft. This weekend, Shoigu also took to the ice, 
playing on Putin’s team and scoring three goals of his own.

Outside Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, however, not 
everybody has such a high opinion of the Russian president. An art installation 
in Riga, Latvia, was unveiled last week that appeared to be an effigy of Putin 
nailed to a cross. The Russian embassy in the country released a statement 
expressing “extreme indignation and disgust” over the installation, which 
appeared in the courtyard of Riga’s old KGB headquarters, now a museum.

RT (@RT_com) 
'Crucified Putin': Latvian artist nails Russian president’s effigy to cross in 
old KGB HQshttp://t.co/N9SKcwaDTd <http://t.co/N9SKcwaDTd> 
pic.twitter.com/DXR5LwHfE7 <http://t.co/DXR5LwHfE7>
 <https://twitter.com/RT_com/status/599225984479580160> May 15, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RT_com/status/599225984479580160>  