
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> insisted there 
would be no holding back in pursuing criminal charges against those responsible 
for the Hillsborough disaster, as MPs demanded a thorough investigation of the 
culture of collusion that allowed the truth to be covered up for decades.

In an emotional session in the House of Commons, MPs sat silently as May read 
out the determinations of the jury in the Hillsborough inquests in full – 
including that the police’s lack of planning and their decisions taken on the 
day contributed to the disaster, while the behaviour of the fans attending the 
match did not.

“Clearly, the jury’s determination that those who died were unlawfully killed 
was of great public importance,” she said. “It overturns in the starkest way 
possible the verdict of accidental death of the first inquest.”

Hillsborough debate: S Yorks police leadership 'rotten to the core' – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/27/pmqs-cameron-corbyn-hillsborough-oecd-cost-britons-a-months-salary-by-2020-says-oecd-politics-live>
The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, who has been a leading figure in the 
long-running campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/16/hillsborough-tragedy-andy-burnham-liverpool-full-disclosure-documents>
 for the truth about Hillsborough to be revealed, responded with a powerful 
speech, greeted with applause by MPs, condemning the culture of South Yorkshire 
police.

Burnham said the finding of the inquests was “simple, clear, powerful and 
emphatic” and “those responsible must be held to account for 96 unlawful deaths 
and a 26-year cover-up”.

“But it begged the question,” he added. “How could something so obvious have 
taken so long? Three reasons. First, a police force which has consistently put 
protecting itself above protecting people harmed by Hillsborough. Second, 
collusion between that force and complicit print media. Third, a flawed 
judicial system that gives the upper hand to those in authority over and above 
ordinary people.”

He demanded the resignation of the chief constable of South Yorkshire police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-families-call-for-south-yorkshire-police-chief-david-crompton-to-quit>
, suggesting the leadership and culture of the force was “rotten to the core”.

Drawing a link with the Orgreave clash during the miners’ strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/12/hillsborough-battle-orgreave>
, and the recentchild grooming cases in Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/26/rotherham-sexual-abuse-children>
, Burnham called for “fundamental reform” of the force. “Orgreave, 
Hillsborough, Rotherham: how much evidence do we need?” he said.

The home secretary said the Crown Prosecution Service would decide later this 
year whether charges should be brought, once two criminal investigations into 
the 1989 football stadium disaster, in which 96 people died, were complete.

“It was this country’s worst disaster at a sporting event. For the families 
and survivors the search to get to the truth of what happened on that day has 
been long and arduous,” May said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%20lambasts%20South%20Yorkshire%20police%20over%20Hillsborough%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%20lambasts%20South%20Yorkshire%20police%20over%20Hillsborough%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video&media=>
Andy Burnham lambasts South Yorkshire police over Hillsborough failings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/27/andy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video>
She said potential charges could include gross negligence, manslaughter, 
misconduct in public office, perverting the course of justice and perjury, as 
well as offences under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the Health and 
Safety at Work Act 1974.

She also paid tribute to the families of the victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-families-27-years>
, who have fought long and hard to see the truth emerge.

Liverpool: share your reaction to the Hillsborough verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/27/liverpool-share-your-reaction-to-the-hillsborough-verdict>
“They suffered the injustices of hearing the victims, their loved ones and 
fellow supporters, being blamed,” she said. “In their search for truth and 
justice I have never failed to be struck by their extraordinary dignity and 
determination.”

As well as demanding an investigation of South Yorkshire police, Burnham said 
more should be done to prevent senior officers escaping the blame for their 
failings by retiring.

He mooted the idea of inserting a “Hillsborough clause” into the forthcoming 
justice bill, which would prevent senior police officers from retiring before 
disciplinary action against them could be taken – a proposal May said she was 
willing to discuss with Labour.

He also called for the government to press ahead with so-called “Leveson II” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/dec/11/will-leveson-part-two-take-place-i-very-much-doubt-it>
, the second part of the investigation into the relationship between the media 
and public figures, saying: “No one in the police or media has ever been held 
to account for the incalculable harm they caused in smearing a whole city in 
its moment of greatest grief.”

MPs on both sides of the House expressed their anger at the struggle the 
Hillsborough families have faced for justice; and paid tribute both to Burnham 
and May.



Asked by Conservative MP Chris Heaton-Harris what she thought of the role of 
the South Yorkshire police, May said they must “recognise the truth”.














 