
So, where?

Bormio is in the Valtellina region of northern Italy, close to the border with 
Switzerland. The nearest airports are Ryanair hub Milan Bergamo (fares from £36 
return but taking your skis will more than double that), Milan Linate and 
Innsbruck, all a three-hour drive to Bormio. Alternatively, catch a train to 
Tirano, then a bus to Bormio.

Why try it?

While not the most conveniently located of ski resorts, the extra travel feels 
worth it as soon as you arrive in the old town, with its medieval buildings, 
cobbled streets and beautiful fountains. It’s about as far removed from a 
modern super-resort as you can get, especially when you factor in the quiet 
pistes. While Bormio’s skiable area isn’t massive, this year the lift pass also 
covers the nearby resorts ofSanta Caterina 
<http://www.santacaterina.it/it_inverno_sci_alpinismo.aspx> and San Colombano 
at no extra charge, and there are regular shuttle buses to both. It’s also only 
an hour’s drive from the famous Swiss resort of St Moritz, should you fancy a 
day trip across the border.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8402fc435c48c3570aeb8a9386e863c3841dfdf2%2F0_0_640_416%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8402fc435c48c3570aeb8a9386e863c3841dfdf2%2F0_0_640_416%2F640.jpg>
 View over the historic Bormio. Photograph: Alamy 
Mountain lowdown

Bormio is better-suited to confident skiers and snowboarders. Most of the long 
runs are classified as red, and the few, shorter, blue runs are only accessible 
via drag lift or steeper sections of piste. The runs are mostly very wide and 
don’t get a lot of traffic, so they remain in great condition well into the 
afternoon. Finish the day with the “peak to creek”, a 1,800-vertical-metre 
leg-burner that includes the famous Pista Stelvio, a regular stop on the World 
Cup skiing circuit. The terrain park is well-stocked with jumps and rails for 
all levels, and is always quiet. It doesn’t have a dedicated lift, though, 
which means a long time between laps. Freeriding is limited, but there are two 
official zones, and if the powder is plentiful there are options both in and 
out of the trees. A guide can show you the goods. On Thursday evenings there’s 
floodlit skiing on the lower runs, Pista Stelvio included. It’s free with a 
six-day lift pass, or €16 for adults and €12 for children otherwise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c1f298e23416eab566c1d1a3d54eb491f1b143%2F1070_0_3922_2705%2F3922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c1f298e23416eab566c1d1a3d54eb491f1b143%2F1070_0_3922_2705%2F3922.jpg>
 Bormio’s Roman thermal spa. Photograph: Alamy 
And apart from skiing?

Bormio has been a famous spa town since the days of the Roman empire. Indeed 
the name “Bormio” refers to the warmth of the natural springs. Both the Bagni 
Vecchi and Bagni Nuovi (“old baths” and “new baths”, respectively) offer 
treatments, and you can buy a pass that covers both the slopes and the spa. 
Other local activities include paragliding, snowshoeing and dog-sledding. Young 
children can have a blast at theGormiti Park 
<http://www.bormioski.eu/it/inverno/family/gormiti-park/> sledging area, €5 for 
up to four hours.

Après any good?

Like Italy as a whole, Bormio isn’t known for the kind of raging après-ski 
options that you can find in France or Austria, but theBeWhite bar 
<http://www.bormioski.eu/en/bewhite-eventi-di-natale/> at the base station gets 
going at 3pm and offers the full dancing-in-your-ski-boots experience. For a 
more relaxed atmosphere there are plenty of great options dotted around the old 
town: be sure to visit the Hotel Nevada to enjoy a beer in the company of the 
resident samoyed dogs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc70efc4f7526506f3fe8bb519281b4a0701cef88%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hit%20the%20slopes%20then%20recover%20in%20the%20waters%20in%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Bormio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fspa-and-ski-resorts-bormio-italy-milan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc70efc4f7526506f3fe8bb519281b4a0701cef88%2F0_0_640_423%2F640.jpg>
 Lunchtime on the slopes. Photograph: Alamy 
Where to eat

Unsurprisingly, there’s terrific pizza and pasta to be had everywhere, and the 
Cima Piazzi <http://www.cimapiazzi.it/> restaurant is worth seeking out for 
simple but delicious fare. For the more adventurous, several restaurants serve 
specialities of the Valtellina, including a version ofbresaola (cured beef), 
and a beer-battered hard cheese known assciatt. Don’t pass up the chance to 
enjoy a meal with a 360-degree view atRistorante Heaven 3000 
<http://www.valdisotto.com/english/mountain-huts/restaurant-heaven-3000-1299.htm>
, at the top of the highest lift.

Where to stay

Hotel accommodation runs the full gamut. There are five-star hotels connected 
to the spa facilities, such as theGrand Hotel Bagni Nuovi 
<http://www.bagnidibormio.it/en/luxury-hotel-italy.page>, but also plenty of 
reasonably priced options, including B&Bs and family-friendly hotels, such as 
central Baita dei Pini <http://www.baitadeipini.com/en/> (doubles from £78B&B). 
Many can issue ski passes from reception, which saves you a trip to the ticket 
office.

The nitty gritty

50km of pistes, two cable cars, five chairlifts, four draglifts, four magic 
carpets. Highest altitude 3,012m

Good for: confident skiers and snowboarders who enjoy quiet, moderately 
challenging, well-maintained pistes


Costs: lift pass adult €169 a week, child €119; beer €3.50

• Green runs 0


• Blue runs 5

• Red runs 6

• Black runs 1

Limitations: not ideal for beginners, and transfers can be slow

 