
More Bond villain’s lair than ski lodge, the imposing Chalet Béranger sits 
atop the village of St Martin, in the snow-capped heart of Les Trois Vallées, 
one of the world’s largest ski resorts. It’s the first architectural project of 
French designerNoé Duchaufour-Lawrance <http://www.noeduchaufourlawrance.com>, 
who clearly has a thing about curves. Instead of the rustic, wall-to-wall pine 
and plaid blankets you’d expect to find round these parts, this mountain-top 
retreat is a sleek, undulating space, where angles are replaced by fluid, 
organic sweeps. “When it comes to design, it’s vital to make a connection 
between inside and out,” the designer says. “It’s important that people can 
make a visual link with nature and the elements, too.” Here, the alpine setting 
is as much a feature as the building materials, the spectacular scenery filling 
the huge windows of the chalet’s three storeys.

Born in the south of France in 1974, Duchaufour-Lawrance came to the design 
world’s attention with his daring interiors for London’sSketch restaurant 
<http://sketch.london> in 2003: a futuristic, Barbarella-meets-Barbie, 
white-and-pink bar, plus egg-shaped toilets, in an 18th-century town house just 
off Regent Street. Since then, he has been prolific, creating everything from 
perfume bottles and accessories tocandelabras for Baccarat 
<http://us.baccarat.com/on/demandware.store/Sites-international-Site/en/HubPage-Designers?cid=Noe%20Duchaufour%20Lawrance>
,furniture for Bernhardt Design 
<http://www.bernhardtdesign.com/designers/noe_duchaufour.html> and Ceccotti 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=noe+duchaufour+furniture+Ceccotti&client=safari&rls=en&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=V5qAVKCDKIfhywOuq4HgAQ&ved=0CCIQsAQ&biw=1549&bih=943>
, and numerous restaurant interiors. He’s heavily influenced by the 
environment, and often incorporates natural forms and structures. “There are 
emotional links woven between people, spaces and objects,” he says.

The owners of Chalet Béranger had been searching for a base in the village for 
years, and when the restaurant on this site came on the market, they snapped it 
up. Collectors of contemporary design, they came across Duchaufour-Lawrance’s 
iconicManta desk for Ceccotti 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Ceccotti+Manta+desk&client=firefox-a&hs=66Y&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=hKOBVK2vJ6faywOfioCAAg&ved=0CCIQsAQ&biw=1920&bih=1023#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=F3f4FzgC6Sw_TM%253A%3BTvUbe7QfG-D7cM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fimg.archiexpo.com%252Fimages_ae%252Fphoto-g%252Fcontemporary-desk-wood-noe-duchaufour-lawrance-4105-1723485.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.archiexpo.com%252Fprod%252Fceccotti-collezioni%252Fcontemporary-desks-wood-noe-duchaufour-lawrance-4105-320516.html%3B518%3B327>
, and started to explore his other work, soon falling in love with his fluid 
aesthetic. “They approached me to design the chalet,” he says. “I refused, 
because I never normally take on private projects. I don’t like to get 
embroiled in all the personal politics involved with working with clients on 
that level.” But they were persistent: “They gave me free rein to create a 
design for the chalet’s main living space. I said if they liked it, I would 
take on the whole project. Luckily, they did.”

This living room on the top floor closely fits with Duchaufour-Lawrance’s 
design ethos. In spite of its modernity, it’s a resolutely natural space. As 
well as curved walls clad in grey fir wood, an enormous tree trunk-like chimney 
and branched work surface rise out of a cast concrete floor. “I like to think 
of it as a domestic landscape,” he says.

The result is a set of lines and organic forms composed around a wooden ribbon 
that functions as seating, surfaces and partitions. Duchaufour-Lawrance’s 
furniture features throughout, alongside pieces from a handful of other 
carefully chosen designers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnoe-duchafour-lawrance-ski-chalet-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421766182887%2Fe22b3dbd-409e-4e5f-961e-d5694d266d72-1945x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homes%3A%20inside%20a%20futuristic%20ski%20chalet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnoe-duchafour-lawrance-ski-chalet-design-architecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homes%3A%20inside%20a%20futuristic%20ski%20chalet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnoe-duchafour-lawrance-ski-chalet-design-architecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421766182887%2Fe22b3dbd-409e-4e5f-961e-d5694d266d72-1945x2040.jpeg>
 The pool is designed to blend into the mountain. Photograph: Gaelle Le 
Boulicaut 
The first floor, though, is perhaps the most breathtaking area in the chalet, 
having been transformed into the kind of spa complex normally found only at 
five-star hotels. A thermal pool combines fir wood with rough-hewn Vals stone, 
giving bathers the impression that it has been carved from the mountain itself.

There is a strength and integrity about Duchaufour-Lawrance’s work that’s 
seemingly untroubled by trends and fads. “Fashion isn’t design,” he says. “I’m 
trying to create something long-term. You can’t create furniture or 
architecture with fashion in mind. It should be timeless, relevant, strong and 
durable. Just like the mountains.”
 