
Barring any last-minute delay, UN-brokered talks on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> are due to get under way in Geneva – 
the third time the Swiss city has played host to diplomatic efforts to end the 
war and tackle the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. But prospects for a 
breakthrough are probably even slimmer than on the previous two attempts.

Staffan de Mistura, the UN envoy, cannot even be sure who will attend on 
Friday – and when. The Syrian opposition announced on Thursday night that its 
officials would not be coming until they received guarantees of an end to 
government airstrikes and sieges. Bashar al-Assad’s representatives are 
expected at the Palais des Nations, though they may not meet their enemies.

“We are serious about taking part ... but what is hindering the start of 
negotiations is the one who is bombing civilians and starving them,” declared 
Salem al-Muslet, the spokesman for opposition negotiators who were meeting in 
the Saudi capital of Riyadh.

The Guardian view on the Syrian peace talks: fake diplomacy is no diplomacy | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/28/the-guardian-view-on-the-syrian-peace-talks-fake-diplomacy-is-no-diplomacy>
The talks had originally been scheduled to start last Monday. Diplomats in 
Geneva said the UN was anxious not to postpone them again. But no formal 
opening of the conference has been arranged.

 While the stakes are high, De Mistura is keeping expectations low and 
preparing for a long haul. The Italian-Swedish UN veteran intends to hold six 
months of “proximity talks” – dealing separately with the two Syrian sides and 
shuttling between them because there is not enough common ground for them to 
sit together without an immediate collapse. Neither has pledged to halt their 
fighting.

 Priorities for the first round are to explore prospects for local ceasefires, 
enhanced efforts to fight Islamic State and improved humanitarian access to 
besieged areas. Significantly, there are no plans to discuss the key questions 
of Assad’s future or forming a transitional governing body that might include 
his opponents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsyria-hopes-for-peace-look-slim-ahead-un-brokered-talks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187f5e146cb9f037914321d48f595374dc862cad%2F0_39_3952_2369%2F3952.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hopes%20for%20peace%20in%20Syria%20look%20slim%20ahead%20of%20UN-brokered%20talks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsyria-hopes-for-peace-look-slim-ahead-un-brokered-talks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hopes%20for%20peace%20in%20Syria%20look%20slim%20ahead%20of%20UN-brokered%20talks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fsyria-hopes-for-peace-look-slim-ahead-un-brokered-talks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187f5e146cb9f037914321d48f595374dc862cad%2F0_39_3952_2369%2F3952.jpg>
 The UN special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, is keeping expectations 
low and preparing for a long haul. Photograph: Salvatore Di Nolfi/AP 
 Those ideas were at the heart of the communique issued in Geneva in June 2012 
and which, until recently, constituted the bedrock of diplomatic efforts to 
secure peace. At the second Geneva session, in January 2014, the Syrians met, 
exchanged abuse and left. That fiasco followed the use of chemical weapons by 
Assad’s forces and preceded the advances by Isis in Iraq the following summer.

 The fact that these talks are taking place at all owes more to international 
desperation and impatience than any readiness by the Syrian protagonists to 
talk to each other about ending a conflict that has cost 250,000-300,000 lives, 
made millions homeless and destabilised the Middle East.

Who backs whom in the Syrian conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/09/who-backs-whom-in-the-syrian-conflict>
 Last autumn’s military intervention by Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/01/the-guardian-view-on-russian-intervention-in-syria-mixed-motives>
, ostensibly to confront the growing menace of Isis but in fact targeting 
mainstream rebel groups fighting Assad, galvanised moves to launch the Vienna 
process – of which this Geneva meeting is the outcome.

 Vienna’s novelty was that Iran and Saudi Arabia, bitter rivals and Assad’s 
main regional supporter and enemy respectively, wereboth at the table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/28/iran-confirms-it-will-attend-international-talks-over-syrias-future>
 for the first time – thoughtheir own relations have worsened dramatically 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/saudi-arabia-v-iran-riyadh-defiant-and-angry-after-turbulent-week>
 since then. The task, in the words of the US secretary of state, John Kerry, 
is to “chart a course out of hell”.

 Nearly five years since the Syrian crisis erupted, the initiative is with 
Russia and Iran, rather than the US, Britain, France and the Gulf states, which 
firstcalled for Assad to step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/14/bashar-al-assad-growing-isolation>
 in the summer of 2011.

 Last Saturday, when Kerry met the opposition negotiations committee in 
Riyadh, he is said to have told them bluntly that they were not a viable 
alternative to Assad and would have to accept proposals emanating from Moscow 
and Tehran, including Assad’s right to stand for re-election, or lose 
Washington’s support. The US complained afterwards of “wilful 
mischaracterisations” of what had transpired. Assad’s future had to be decided 
“by mutual consent”, it recalled.

 Riyad Hijab, who defected while serving as Syrian prime minister and now 
heads the opposition negotiations committee, had a tense meeting with Kerry and 
faced pressure from the Saudis to turn up in Geneva. Armed groups already 
oppose talks by exiled political leaders they think have spent too long in 
luxury hotels far from the frontlines.

UK urges Syrian opposition to attend Geneva peace talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/uk-urges-syrian-opposition-to-attend-geneva-peace-talks>
 “Kerry misjudged the mood of the opposition and he has jeopardised the whole 
process as a result,” said an independent Syrian source. “On the other hand the 
opposition are spoiled. They have got used to people being nice to them and 
going along with their narrative. Now things are difficult and it’s pretty 
devastating.”

 Mutual suspicions could hardly be deeper. The Syrian government objects to 
the choice of Mohammed Alloush, of the Saudi-backed Jaysh al-Islam (JAI) group, 
as chief opposition negotiator. It sees him as a terrorist – like his brother 
and JAI leader, Zahran Alloush, who waskilled in a recent airstrike near 
Damascus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/25/zahran-alloush-leader-syria-rebel-group-killed-airstrike>
.

De Mistura ignored Russian demands that Syrian Kurds be invited to the talks – 
partly because of strong opposition by Turkey – but he bowed to pressure for 
Russian-backed Syrian moderates to be present, albeit described as 
“consultants”.

 Western-backed opposition figures clearly fear the tide is turning against 
them. “We live in a time where things are turned upside down; a criminal 
becomes the victim and the victim becomes the executioner,” complained Burhan 
Ghalioun, the former president of the Syrian National Council. “All this takes 
place behind a veneer of affable but false talk about a political solution, 
peace and reconciliation.”

I long for the day when Syria's starving children run for fun, not from 
rockets | Abeer Pamuk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/28/syria-starving-children-madaya-run-for-fun-not-rockets>
 Military realities on the ground are not helping. This week saw the fall of 
Sheikh Miskeen, a strategic rebel-held town near the Jordanian border, with the 
help of Russian airstrikes. The town of Salma, in the Latakia area of 
north-west Syria, was also retaken by Assad’s forces.

 De Mistura appears to be following the model of the Oslo talks between Israel 
and the Palestine Liberation Organisation: their initial 1993 agreement was 
dramatic but was followed by interim deals, while the toughest “final status” 
issues were left until the end of a “peace process” that was emptied of content 
until it ground to a halt. Applying that parallel, failing to address Syria’s 
political future now means it will be even harder to do so in future. Leaving 
it unresolved will not restore the stability needed for millions of refugees to 
return home.

 “Negotiations must begin, in good faith,” said Michael Ratney, the US envoy 
to the Syrian opposition, “and only then can the world know with clarity who is 
responsible for their success or failure.”
 