
Horatio Clare and his editor Penny Thomas at Firefly 
<http://www.fireflypress.co.uk/> have won the much coveted Branford Boase award 
2016 for their bookAubrey and the Terrible Yoot 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/332253/s/aubrey-and-the-terrible-yoot/>
, illustrated by Jane Matthews.

The Branford Boase children's book awards shortlist 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/may/04/branford-boase-childrens-book-awards-shortlist-2016>
The book tells the story of Aubrey who tries desperately to find a cure for 
his father’s depression, against the advice of others. Through 
self-determination and the help of animal friends, Aubrey sets off on a mission 
to challenge the Terrible Yoot, the relentless “spirit of despair” that has 
overtaken his father’s mind.

The Branford Boase award is unique in the UK because it recognises the massive 
input of editors, especially for debut children’s authors.

Aubrey and the Terrible Yoot is not Horatio Clare’s first book (in fact his 
very first Running for the Hills, an account of a Welsh childhood, won a 
Somerset Maugham Award, was longlisted for the Guardian First Book Award – and 
since then he’s written a string of other books for adults) but it’s his first 
book for children, which is what the Branford Boase is all about.

Top writing tips for new children's authors from top editors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/09/the-best-writing-advice-for-new-childrens-authors-from-top-editors>
So how does it feel to win? “Winning this wonderful award means the world to 
me for three reasons,” explained Horatio Clare. “This is the book I am most 
proud of: it was written with heart and soul about something painful and 
important, but meant to read as a joy and an adventure.”

Editor Penny Thomas said she was, “bowled over by Aubrey and the Terrible Yoot 
from the minute I read it and so delighted to sign Horatio for Firefly. The 
book is funny, big-hearted and original and derives its brilliance from a 
superb use of language, an empathy for people and nature and a refusal to 
patronise the reader. It also has one of the best visionary endings I’ve ever 
read. I’m overjoyed for Horatio and for Firefly that the Branford Boase judges 
loved Aubrey too. It means an enormous amount to all of us at Firefly to win 
this unique award.”

The book was funded by the Welsh Books Council: “State support for writers in 
Wales is exemplary,” said Horatio Clare, “I and many other Welsh writers are 
working to repay the support and faith placed in us by the executive and the 
people of Wales, with books which will travel and last. This award is theirs as 
much as mine.”

This year the judges were Russell Allen (Public Librarian of the Year 2016) 
bookseller Simon Key, editor Marion Lloyd and author Rosie Rowell (winner of 
last year’s Branford Boase withLeopold Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/09/rosie-rowell-wins-the-branford-boase-award-with-leopold-blue>
. The panel was chaired by Julia Eccleshare, children’s books editor of the 
Guardian. Judges called the book: “something very special - a book that is both 
pensive and sparkling with originality and life. It is a testament to the 
healing power of the imagination.”

Congratulations to all the authors and editors shortlisted for this year’s 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2016/may/04/branford-boase-childrens-book-awards-shortlist-2016>
, and particularly to the winners of course!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhoratio-clare-branford-boase-penny-thomas-aubrey-and-the-terrible-yoot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1f244718b60a5361b82b6b57863a777dc06bc7b%2F0_0_2480_3508%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Horatio%20Clare%20and%20Penny%20Thomas%20win%20the%20Branford%20Boase%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhoratio-clare-branford-boase-penny-thomas-aubrey-and-the-terrible-yoot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Horatio%20Clare%20and%20Penny%20Thomas%20win%20the%20Branford%20Boase%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fhoratio-clare-branford-boase-penny-thomas-aubrey-and-the-terrible-yoot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1f244718b60a5361b82b6b57863a777dc06bc7b%2F0_0_2480_3508%2F2480.jpg> 