
Leaning my skis against the thick walls of the bomb shelter before I entered 
its sinister decontamination zones, I mused that, 25 years ago, this was one of 
the safest places to be in Germany. It’s easy to forget the paranoia of those 
times, when 300,000 Soviet soldiers stood guard in East Germany, where I was 
now skiing. And I was aware that I was being followed – not by the Stasi, but 
by my luggage. Where there was once a ruthlessly efficient secret service, 
there was now a super-efficient baggage transfer service the length of the 
Rennsteig, a historic 169km trail along the top of the Thuringian mountains, 
which bears many testaments to the Cold War era and earlier.

The trail is popular with cyclists, walkers and runners in summer, but there 
are also 22 small downhill ski resorts leading off the 1,000-metre-high ridge. 
Growing in popularity is the adventure of exploring the trail on cross-country 
skis, and for me there couldn’t be a more beautiful and exciting way to go.

On a bright, crisp morning, I set off to follow milestones erected from 1643 
onwards fromHotel Schieferhof <http://www.schieferhof.de/> in the little town 
of Neuhaus am Rennweg, between Nuremburg and Leipzig.
 See the full visual 
My guide was a €3 trail map, and I’d booked my hotels and luggage transfers 
through (German-only) websiterennsteig-und-mehr.net 
<http://out.easycounter.com/external/rennsteig-und-mehr.net>, which recommends 
doing sections of between 18 and 25km a day, though it will organise any 
distance or duration. And there’s no need for much cross-country skiing 
experience; the trip can simply be treated as walking or running on skis, 
depending on your level of fitness.

The going was generally easy, until the times the freshly groomed trail turned 
into a narrow riverbed that I could scarcely snowplough down. I had to plunge 
into the fresh powder at the side to slow myself, and eventually resorted to 
unclipping my skis and walking down.

I regularly got lost, and it was only by asking directions in broken German – 
for over-40s around here, Russian, not English, is the second language – that I 
found my way. “Let’s take this route – it’s sunnier,” one fellow skier 
suggested. And soon I found myself at the observation tower in the little 
resort of Masserberg.
 A cross-country skier on the trail. Photograph: Martin Schutt/DPA/Corbis 
Climbing to the top, I could see how the mountain range had formed a natural 
second line of defence for the Soviets and GDR, a few kilometres east of the 
barbed wire East-West Germany border. And I could also see a hubbub of activity 
below me. An international mushing championship was in full swing, so as I sped 
down to the village, I was racing huskies eyeball-to-eyeball. At the bottom the 
glühwein was flowing freely and the postilion of a horse-drawn sled blew his 
curly bugle to part the crowds.

I had expected to spend the nights in rather spartan hostels, but at Spa Hotel 
Auerhahn <http://www.kurhotel-auerhahn.de/> not only was my bag waiting, but 
the food and wine were excellent and inexpensive. The next day, reinvigorated, 
I flew along wide open avenues, using the relatively modern technique of skate 
skiing, which only works on packed snow. At other times I used the less tiring 
classic technique down narrower trails, exchanging a friendly “Schi heil” with 
passing skiers.
 The Bunker Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
At the village of Neustadt am Rennsteig, wood smoke was swirling between 
typically Thuringian houses, with tiled, curved walls. I carried my skis to the
Rennsteig Museum 
<http://www.neustadt-rennsteig.org/wsp2/seiten/rennsteigmuseum.php>, which 
tells the history of the trail and how it had been used by messengers since the 
14th century. I had by now cracked the Rennsteig’s code, which is to follow the 
white Rs painted on tree trunks, even when beautifully prepared trails entice 
you left or right on to the other 1,000km of paths.

I made such good progress I was on time for a tour of the Bunker Museum 
<http://www.waldhotel-rennsteighoehe.de/bunkermuseum-rennsteig/> near 
Schmiedefeld, where the guide led us past mannequins in gas masks and plastic 
suits slumped against the wall. He made the place come alive by telling it as a 
haunting “what if world war three had broken out” story.


Other communist-era relics had proven less robust. Next door to the Endspurt 
hotel <http://www.rennsteiglaufhotel.de/> lay an abandoned block. “DDR ruins,” 
said the owner, before serving me a cosy dinner by the fire in the Endspurt’s 
restaurant. I later nodded off to dreams of following an ever-lengthening trail 
of Rs.
 Young children cross-country skiing on the Rennsteig trail. Photograph: 
DPA/AFP/Getty Images 
I left the hotel in a blizzard the next morning, but the firs of the dense 
Thuringian forest soon sheltered me from the wind’s angry blast and, having 
stopped at many cosy cafes on the way, I picnicked in one of a string of 
south-facing mountain huts when the sun did finally appear.

By the time I arrived at the Vergissmeinnicht hotel 
<http://www.haus-vergissmeinnicht.de/> in Oberhof, I wished I could go on to 
complete the trail, despite the bitter wind. I had covered just 60km in three 
days, and yearned to go on to historic Eisenach in the north. I could also 
retrace my tracks to Blankenstein in the south, once on the other side of the 
Iron Curtain, completing a journey that was never possible during the Cold War. 
But it was time for this spy to come in from the cold.

• The trip was provided by Thuringia Tourism (thuringia-tourism.com 
<https://www.visit-thuringia.com/travel-hotel-holiday-tour/index.html>) and 
Hiking and Biking in Thuringia (rennsteig-und-mehr.net 
<http://www.wandern-in-thueringen.info/de/rennsteig-und-mehr__253/>). Four 
nights’ B&B with luggage transfers costs from €358pp. For trail conditions see
thueringer-wald.com 
<http://www.thueringer-wald.com/urlaub-wandern-winter/index.html>. Ski hire at 
Sport Service Marr (sportmarr.de <http://sportmarr.de/>) costs €10 a day. 
Lufthansa <http://www.lufthansa.com/online/portal/lh_com/de/homepage> flies to 
Frankfurt from London, Manchester and Edinburgh from £104 return, and has 
Rail&Fly train tickets to any German station for €58 return. For further 
information visitgermany.travel <http://www.germany.travel/en/index.html>
 