
During the first US presidential debate, observers noted  
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/9/26/13068010/presidential-debate-2016-trump-clinton-interruptions>
that Donald Trump interrupted Hilary Clinton 51 times, while Clinton talked 
over her opponent 17 times.

For many commentators <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-us-2016-37481754>, 
the gender dynamics within these televised debates have been impossible to 
ignore. They have magnified the gendered nature of political debate globally. 
In countries around the world, “masculine” qualities of strength and aggression 
are valued. And women are interrupted.

Women are the focus of only 10% of news stories and comprise just 20% of 
experts or spokespeople interviewed

News media and political programming everywhere all too often feature men 
talking to men about men. According to theGlobal Media Monitoring Project 2015 
<http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-the-news/Imported/reports_2015/global/gmmp_global_report_en.pdf>
 [pdf], women are the focus of only 10% of news stories, comprise just 20% of 
experts or spokespeople interviewed, and a mere 4% of news stories are deemed 
to challenge gender stereotypes.

What we see on-screen matters for what happens off-screen. There’s no shortage 
of evidence <http://economics.mit.edu/files/3122> [pdf] demonstrating that who 
we see in power influences how we see ourselves. When politics is portrayed in 
the media as a man’s game, it’s no coincidence that progress towards women’s 
equal participation in politics is excruciatingly slow.

For development practitioners working on women’s empowerment, no matter where 
it is in the world media is ignored at our peril.

Five myths about global women's economic empowerment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/12/five-myths-about-global-womens-economic-empowerment>
But making programmes that buck the trend is not easy. The practice of telling 
stories and producing debates, which reflect a male-dominated political sphere, 
is both deeply ingrained and incredibly subtle. Getting women in front of the 
camera is only half the battle; we also need fundamentally to change the way we 
interact and the language we use.

Having grappled with these issues over the past few years, a new report for 
BBC Media Action 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/policy/practice-briefings/gender-and-governance-empowering-women>
 explores how the media can help redress – instead of exacerbate – gender 
imbalances in politics. Here are three key things it can do:

Provide role models

It can be a revelation to see women as leaders – or questioning those in power 
– especially given that media and political environments habitually sideline 
and attack women. Moreover, we havegrowing evidence 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/research/reports/media-and-political-participation>
 that political debate and discussion shows inspire audiences to participate in 
their own communities.

When the ladies ask questions of the officials, I become encouraged and proud 
of them
Woman in Afghanistan responds to seeing a woman question the president 
Our recent research reports that those who regularly tune in to BBC Media 
Action’s governance programmes are more likely to participate in politics than 
those who don’t, even once other influencing factors such as demographics and 
interest in politics are taken into account.

This is how a woman in rural Afghanistan reacted when she saw a woman from her 
area ask the then President Hamid Karzai a question on our political debate 
programmeOpen Jirga 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/where-we-work/asia/afghanistan/open-jirga>: 
“I like her courage for asking. When the ladies ask questions of the officials, 
I become encouraged and proud of them.”

Put gender on everyone’s agenda

The media can take gender issues out of the private realm and put them on the 
political agenda. The Tanzanian political discussion programmeHaba Na Haba 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/where-we-work/africa/tanzania/a-national-conversation>
 (Little by Little) does this by treating women’s health topics,such as fistula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/23/why-do-a-million-women-still-suffer-the-treatable-condition-of-fistula>
, as political issues.

But we need to go beyond this. “Applying a gender lens” is common parlance in 
women’s rights circles – but how often does the news use this lens? Rarely. 
Development practitioners can help the media cover all stories in a way that’s 
representative of both men and women’s lives and experiences. As the senior 
producer of political debate programmeSema Kenya 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/where-we-work/africa/kenya/sema-kenya> says: 
“We always made gender part of the programme. If it was on cross-border trade, 
we’d think about if it affected women in a different way. We didn’t crowbar it 
in. And gender issues weren’t directed at women, they were just subtly raised.”

Promote inclusion by disrupting norms

Political debate in the media often sends a strong message to women: this is 
not for you. So it is unsurprising that women are far less likely to watch the 
news than men. We have been contending with how to make programmes that imagine 
a new, more inclusive space, rather than recreate an elitist political one.

I decided to be a Ugandan woman for a week – it was the wig that broke me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/22/woman-for-a-week-salve-international-gender-inequality>
Nepal’s Sajha Sawal <http://bbcsajhasawal.com/en/> (Common Questions) debate 
show is experimenting with new formats. Instead of bringing people into a 
potentially intimidating studio environment, they take politicians out to 
communities to visit communal taps, tea shops and fields – places where women 
feel much more confident to ask questions.

The media is powerful. It can reach millions of people, challenge rigid gender 
roles and empower both men and women. However, making programmes that transform 
how we see men and women is complex; there’s no simple, universal recipe to 
follow. Presidential debates in the US show that having a woman in the race may 
represent enormous progress, but does not transform the debate.

Whether or not women feel genuinely heard, fully valued and spoken to as 
equals is certainly no box-ticking exercise. And as the pundits deliver their 
verdicts on Clinton and Trump’s performances, making programmes in which we not 
only see women, but actually hear them, will still be a work-in-progress.

Josephine Casserly is a governance and rights adviser at BBC Media Action 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/mediaactioninsight/entries/703ec6e0-e8e1-4891-b614-752d48c678fc>
.

Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. 
Follow@GuardianGDP on Twitter. Join the conversation with the hashtag 
#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 