
In Aldous Huxley’s 1932 novel Brave New World, a Polish boy, Reuben 
Rabinovitch, falls asleep next to a radio receiver. When he wakes up, he is 
able to recite the entire broadcast. He has no idea what any of it means, 
though – it’s all in English.

Countless articles today claim that you can actually learn music 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/learn-music-while-you-sleep/>, hone 
your foreign language skills 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/daviddisalvo/2014/07/28/how-to-really-learn-a-foreign-language-while-you-sleep/>
, orcram for tomorrow’s maths exam 
<http://www.livescience.com/34048-sleep-learning.html> during sleep. And there 
is a whole industry trading on this idea. Subliminal message tapes, popularised 
by the self-help guruTony Robbins <https://www.tonyrobbins.com/>, promise to 
help youstop smoking 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.quit.smoking&hl=en>, lose 
weight <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.weight.lose&hl=en>, 
and evenbrush up your golf skills 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.playbetter.golf&hl=en> and 
find love <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.draw.love&hl=en> – 
all the while catching some shut eye.

The big sell of “sleep learning” is seductive – how lovely it would be to be 
productive while we lie like lifeless lumps in bed. But is it actually based on 
any evidence?

What the research says

The idea that you can learn facts and figures while listening to a recording 
in a “hypnotic state”, like sleep, was debunked in asimple 1950s experiment 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/content/124/3231/1066.extract?related-urls=yes&legid=sci;124/3231/1066&cited-by=yes&legid=sci;124/3231/1066>
. Researchers Charles Simon and William Emmons attached electrodes to the 
scalps of participants to observe them as they went in and out of sleep states. 
While they slept, Simon and Emmons played a tape of a person listing 96 facts 
about history, science, sports, and other topics. The subjects were asked 
trivia questions after awakening, but there was no evidence that they’d 
retained any of the information that was played to them. The researchers 
concluded that sleep-learning was “impractical, and probably impossible”.


More recent research has tied in Ivan Pavlov’s notion of classical 
conditioning – the idea that we respond to new information when it’s paired 
with a stimulus that elicits an innate response. In 2010, Susan Diekelmann and 
colleagues in Germanypublished a study 
<http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v14/n3/abs/nn.2744.html> in which subjects 
examined specific patterns of objects on a grid before sleeping in the 
laboratory. While studying, each subject was exposed to a subtle odour in the 
room, which was later re-introduced when subjects were in a sleep stage called 
slow-wave sleep. Subjects remembered 84% of the objects’ locations when their 
memories were paired with the odour during sleep.

What happens in your brain when you make a memory?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/16/what-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory>
Then a 2012 study 
<http://www.nature.com/neuro/journal/v15/n8/full/nn.3152.html> by a US group 
reported that participants were more likely to correctly play a melody in a 
musical video game (similar toGuitar Hero <https://www.guitarhero.com/>) if the 
tune had been previously played to them during the slow-wave stage of a 
90-minute nap. The authors suggested that learning can occur subconsciously 
during sleep.

Learning while you sleep, or learning because you sleep?

A study published last year 
<http://cercor.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/06/23/cercor.bhu139> by 
Swiss researchers suggested that sleep enhances our ability to learn foreign 
language words. Subjects were presented with a series of Dutch-to-German word 
pairs at 10 pm, then listened to an audio recording of these word pairs until 2 
am. Half of the group, however, was allowed to sleep during this period. When 
re-assessed, the researchers found that those who slept recalled significantly 
more words than those who didn’t.


Learning a new language while you sleep makes the story of Huxley’s Polish boy 
seem almost possible. But are the subjects actually learning from the audio 
recordings during their sleep? Or, rather, are their memories improved simply 
because they slept?


In fact, slow-wave or deep sleep has been recognised for some time as critical 
for memory consolidation – the stabilisation of memory from short-term to 
long-term. During slow-wave sleep, which tends to happen during the first half 
of the night, the firing of our brain cells is highly synchronised. When we 
measure sleep using electrodes attached to the scalp, slow-wave sleep appears 
as slow, high-amplitude oscillations.

These “slow waves” originate in the neocortex and make a circuit with the 
hippocampus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocampus>, the brain structure 
which encodes new memories.Scientists believe 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2824214/> that this connection 
allows for newly-learned information to be repeatedly activated with each 
oscillation. It’s been shown that patients with insomnia, who experience less 
slow-wave sleep than normal sleepers, showimpaired memory consolidation 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16944676>. 

Your best bet? Let sleeping dogs lie

So, yes, we can learn during sleep – a bit. However this is mostly limited to 
making subconscious associations, like pairing scents with images. This is not 
exactly practical in the real world, nor will it likely lead to long-term 
memory storage.


How to treat your brain during revision time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2012/nov/06/how-your-brain-likes-to-revise>
For more complex learning, such as baseball statistics or foreign language 
vocabulary, it’s more likely that sleep is helping to consolidate what we’ve 
already learned, not actively processing new incoming signals.


Instead of donning clunky headphones or spritzing your pillow with the same 
lavender scent you used while studying for your Spanish test, it’s probably 
best to stop trying to “hack” your sleep. Our brains have developed a pretty 
clever mechanism for helping us learn new information. Be kind to your noggin 
and give yourself enough sleep to take advantage of it.


Get involved with the Use your head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead or pitching your ideas to
natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com <mailto:natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 