
Have you ever been in a meeting and realised that you are the only person 
being excluded from the conversation? Did it cross your mind that far from 
being because you don’t have anything to contribute, maybe it was because of 
something much more fundamental, such as your gender? I recently experienced 
this situation first hand – blending into the decor, for no other reason than I 
am a woman.

Could these people really be excluding me purely based on this, or had I 
missed something? Then I recalled what I had recently learned at theWomen in 
Educational Leadership conference <http://www.womened.org/>, about the extent 
to which unconscious bias is prevalent in our everyday lives.

Unconscious bias describes situations where our background, personal 
experiences, societal stereotypes and cultural context can impact our decisions 
and actions without us realising. How many of us have unduly and unknowingly 
experienced or perpetrated the negative forces of unconscious bias?

In its most obvious of manifestation, unconscious bias is the essence of the 
gender equality debate. How many women have been passed over for promotion in 
favour of a man or been considered not dedicated to the job because they had to 
leave to collect their children from school? These unconscious biases can hide 
inside all of us, lurking under the surface, influencing our decisions and 
actions. It also affects more than just gender.

Research conducted by Jaluch  
<http://www.jaluch.co.uk/unconscious-bias-infographic/>this year revealed the 
extent to which we are unconsciously biased: 67% of the British public admits 
to feeling uncomfortable talking to a disabled person; gay and lesbian job 
seekers are 5% less likely to get an interview; and 80% of employers admit to 
making decisions based on regional accents. Unconscious bias doesn’t just 
negatively affect women – it can have a detrimental impact on any minority 
group.

 Exposing our unconscious bias is extremely complex. For a start, we have to 
be open to the idea that we are biased, but then what does “unconscious bias” 
look like? Would you know it if you saw it? Would you know it if you had it? 
See if you can spot unconscious bias in action in this video by McKinsey & 
Company.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFW2cfzevio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFW2cfzevio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFW2cfzevio&media=>
Once unconscious bias has been identified, there are practical steps you can 
take to address the issue.

Review your internal conversation 

Are you basing your decisions on 30-second judgments or quantitative and 
qualitative information? Review every aspect of your personal story for 
unconscious bias. In the workplace, the first step might be to analyse who it 
is that you trust. Diversity consultant Scott Horton’s four-minute workshop 
explores who we trust, why we trust them and how this might influence who we 
choose to promote.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_52T8ufdZM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_52T8ufdZM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_52T8ufdZM&media=>
Don’t be exclusive

Giving your attention and time to those who look like you in terms of age, 
gender, race or academia reinforces unconscious bias.

Develop a core value system

This value system should focus on fair treatment and respect for others. A 
basic human right, but one that we can often forget or overlook in the heat and 
pressure of daily life.

Change your lens

Try using an unconscious bias lens when considering job promotions or how you 
interact in teams. We all are biased to some extent, but consciously becoming 
aware of it and taking action to address it will benefit us all. Don’t be that 
person excluding others in a meeting; recognise your unconscious actions and 
don’t let them hold you or others back.
 