
For the last few years, the Hugo awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hugoaward> for science fiction have been 
campaigned against by a group of writers and fans calling themselves the Sad 
Puppies – mostly male, very white, and overwhelmingly conservative. Unhappy 
with sci-fi’s growing diversity, the Puppies have deliberately block-voted for 
certain titles to get them nominated for Hugos at the expense of a wider field. 
They say it is their goal to “poke the establishment in the eye” by nominating 
“unabashed pulp action that isn’t heavy-handed message fic”. I say it is to 
sponsor awful writers.

The Puppies have two criteria for what they deem excellence: does it turn a 
buck? And has the author dared to say anything, ever, that they disagree with? 
This, paired with their conspiracy theories about some big sci-fi publishers, 
means that they tend to champion mostly self-published authors. Nothing about 
quality – though you don’t need an in-depth knowledge of sci-fi to understand 
that a short story calledSpace Raptor Butt Invasion 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-et-jc-hugos-puppies-20160427-snap-htmlstory.html>
 (yes, really) has not arrived on the Hugo lists because of its calibre.

Dinosaur porn or Rabid Puppy pastiche? The strange story of Chuck Tingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/19/dinosaur-porn-or-rabid-puppy-pastiche-the-strange-story-of-chuck-tingle>
With this year’s Hugo awards coming on Saturday night in the US, I thought I’d 
read some of the authors championed by the Puppies. (Don’t ever say I don’t do 
anything for you.)

If you find meaning in straight-to-video Dolph Lundgren films, then Larry 
Correia <http://monsterhunternation.com/about/>’s novels will be your kind of 
read. Correia, accountant-turned-author-turned-Sad-Puppies-creator, kicked off 
his Monster Hunter series with Monster Hunter International, about an 
accountant whose boss turns into a monster. So he shoots him. In fact, much of 
the Monster Hunter series relies rather heavily on people the hero doesn’t like 
turning into monsters … so he can shoot them.

Sadly, Correia’s books are not quite awful enough to be good. They’re just 
mediocre. That’s fine – Dolph Lundgren movies are also often mediocre, but 
plenty of people like them. But did Lundgren’s Masters of the Universedeserve 
to take the 1987 Oscar over Oliver Stone’s Platoon? I don’t think so – and in 
that same way, Correia’s novels in no way merit consideration for the Hugos 
(thankfully, he only made the 2014 longlist).

Dave Freer’s Changeling Island, shortlisted for this year’s inaugural Dragon 
awards <http://awards.dragoncon.org/>, is all about story – which is fortunate, 
because sentences as thoroughly mangled and amateurish as Freer’s won’t be 
winning any prizes (at least I hope not). Open with a strong start, they say; 
now read Changeling Island’s opening:

It had been the most terrifying, miserable day of Tim Ryan’s whole miserable 
life. He’d just done it to show Hailey. Because … because she said he was too 
scared. He was. Every time he tried anything it always went wrong. Horribly 
wrong. And he wasn’t a thief. Well, he didn’t want to be. It was one of the few 
thing things his dad ever really got angry with him about. And then he’d only 
been a little five-year-old kid helping himself to a chocolate bar in a store. 
But Hailey … she said … and he’d do anything to get her.”

In fairness … to Freer … pick any passage, from. Any Puppy author like Brad 
Torgersen <https://bradrtorgersen.wordpress.com/> or Sarah Hoyt 
<https://accordingtohoyt.com/about/> and you will find … sentences … as mangled 
as these.

Within the Puppy movement, John C Wright <http://www.scifiwright.com/> is 
considered to be its resident intellectual colossus and was nominated three 
times for the 2015 best novella category (which eventually went to no one). He 
is hugely influenced by the Inklings, particularly CS Lewis. But in comparison 
to Lewis, whose metaphysical investigations were built up from wide-reading 
during a lengthy education, Wright reads like a first-year humanities undergrad 
who refuses to read beyond a small pool of comforting favourites, writing essay 
after essay (or novel after novel) only to demonstrate how much he knows. 
Consider this dialogue from Wright’s The Phoenix Exultant:

Rhadamanthus said, ‘There is a tension between the need for unity and the need 
for individuality created by the limitations of the rational universe. Chaos 
theory produces sufficient variation in events, that no one stratagem maximises 
win-loss ratios. Then again, classical causality mechanics forces sufficient 
uniformity upon events, that uniform solutions to precedented problems is 
required. The paradox is that the number or the degree of innovation and 
variation among win-loss ratios is itself subject to win-loss ratio analysis.

This goes on, for page after page. The characters are no more than ciphers for 
Wright’s ranting, and what story exists is only glimpsed in momentary fragments 
between diatribes. After long enough reading Wright, you start to suspect that 
he, like most of these authors, simply can’t help himself, vomiting on to the 
page whatever passes through his head.

The Hugo Awards: George RR Martin, Vox Day and Alastair Reynolds on the 
prize's future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/26/the-hugo-awards-george-rr-martin-vox-day-and-alastair-reynolds-on-the-prizes-future>
At this point, we must be reminded that these are amazing times for science 
fiction and fantasy storytelling. We have Ted Chiang’s sublime short stories
making it to the big screen in Arrival 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tFMo3UJ4B4g>, a new book from China Miéville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/02/the-census-taker-china-mieville-review-novella>
, Alan Moore’smagnum opus Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/10/alan-moore-finishes-million-word-novel-watchmen-v-for-vendetta>
 coming next month.Claire North <http://www.kategriffin.net/> is topping 
bestseller lists, while there’s an exciting debut fromLaurie Penny 
<https://medium.com/@Rachel_E_Brown/laurie-penny-feminist-politics-requires-a-futurism-525d5bbdbba3#.b0tj83m15>
 anda TV adaptation of Neil Gaiman’s American Gods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/25/neil-gaiman-american-gods-tv-adaptation-casting>
 following in the footsteps of Game of Thrones … I could go on. And the hack 
writers and sloppy sentences championed by the Sad Puppies deserve no place in 
that picture; for their politics, yes, but also their sheer shoddiness.

But the Sad Puppies don’t want any of their books to end up on bestseller 
lists or TV screens. It’s the same frustrating paradigm that British MP Michael 
Gove hit upon when he said that people were sick of experts, or what Donald 
Trump plays upon when he rails against “professional politicians”. We’re seeing
the Dunning-Kruger effect 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect> played out on a 
mass scale, and the Sad Puppies are just a speck in that wider problem.
 