
There are many ways in the English language to describe the act of 
disappearing without a trace or explanation – fleeing, vanishing, going awol, 
taking off, “stepping out for cigarettes” – but none are as suggestive as the 
Portugueseembora. Idra Novey unpacks the layers of meaning embedded in this 
concept in her debut novel, Ways to Disappear, which starts with a very literal
embora. In the first scene, a famous middle-aged female novelist climbs up an 
almond tree with a suitcase and a cigar and vanishes from the planet.


But Novey is much more interested in figurative notions of “disappearing”; how 
we vanish from the definitions we impose upon ourselves and others. Her 
action-packed, tragicomic novel follows Emma, a thirtysomething Portuguese 
translator who, when hearing that “her author” Beatriz Yagoda has vanished, 
leaves her frustrating life in Pittsburgh for Rio to investigate the 
disappearance. The story is sensual and fast-paced, suspenseful and subtle, 
full of observations about Brazilian life and North American double standards.

In writing her novel, translator Novey had to perform a disappearance of her 
own in order to write without feeling under scrutiny as a 
translator-turned-novelist. “I didn’t tell anyone I was working on the novel 
for five years,” she recalls. “I didn’t even tell my own sister until I sold 
the novel. I needed that privacy, because I didn’t want to have to redefine 
myself.”

I was wondering, how can you write fiction that is as lyrical and sensual as 
poetry?
Idra Novey 
Ways to Disappear is full of mock definitions by Novey, presented as 
dictionary entries alongside radio announcements, emails and poems. “I wanted 
to surprise myself and burn down the house of fiction on every page, as much as 
I could,” she says. She estimates she rewrote every section in the book around 
five times: “If I was working on something and I didn’t like where it was 
going, I approached it like a poem and just erased it entirely and started 
again.” She wanted to avoid “filler” written simply to get to the next bit of 
the story. “I was wondering, how can you write fiction that is as lyrical and 
sensual as poetry – and that moves to the next meaningful moment as quickly as 
poetry does?”


A literary translator at the centre of an action-packed novel might sound 
unlikely, but Novey thinks otherwise. “But we are the heroes of literature!” 
she exclaims. Ways to Disappear is the product of that old advice: write the 
book you want to read – and Novey wrote this one, with a fellow translator as 
the lead. “I kept coming across books that had translators as characters, and 
they didn’t ring true to me. They were often portrayed as somewhat inhibited 
characters who wished that they were braver. I actually find that translators 
are brave people who have lived all over the world, who speak multiple 
languages and fly all over and they’re just really big-hearted and adventurous 
people. I think it’s a really joyous, beautiful life – getting to know the work 
of other people in this intimate way. And there’s nothing about it that’s 
inhibited.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fidra-novey-i-wanted-to-burn-down-the-house-of-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F543b37e581fd2cd59949b53edcf1096814258385%2F0_0_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Idra%20Novey%3A%20'I%20wanted%20to%20burn%20down%20the%20house%20of%20fiction'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fidra-novey-i-wanted-to-burn-down-the-house-of-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Idra%20Novey%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20to%20burn%20down%20the%20house%20of%20fiction%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fidra-novey-i-wanted-to-burn-down-the-house-of-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F543b37e581fd2cd59949b53edcf1096814258385%2F0_0_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
 ‘I think [translation] is a really joyous, beautiful life.’ Photograph: Donata 
Zanotti 
Her own life story and outlook are not inhibited either. Born in western 
Pennsylvania in 1978, she learned Spanish young and then moved to Chile and 
Brazil to pursue her dreams. She is remarkably determined in all things, it 
seems. As she tells it, she met her husband on the New York subway and 
immediately knew they would get married. “I called my grandma to tell her, and 
she said to me ‘oh Idra, you’re so dramatic.’ Five years later we married, and 
two children, 15 apartments and three countries later we’re still together.” 
Now living in Brooklyn, Novey speaks only Spanish at home, spends a month every 
year in Chile, and reads in Spanish and Portuguese every night. “At the end of 
the day,” she explains, “I like to get out of the language I’ve been living or 
teaching in.”

The zippy plot of Ways to Disappear is sprinkled with meditations on language 
and with sharp assessments of the publishing world. As soon as Yagoda 
disappears, her books acquire a renewed interest and an optimistic loan shark 
sees a newly discovered book as an opportunity to make millions (little does he 
suspect hundreds is a much more likely figure for fiction in translation).



I do think we all have a desire to disappear – especially from our online 
lives.

The idea of vanishing came to her from lived experience as a translator: “You 
sort of fade to disappear. You’re on the sidelines, not often interviewed. And 
yet every word on the page came from your imagination! I also think as a woman 
writer, we tend to disappear from the canon and from the record. Clarice 
Lispector [whose The Passion According to GH Novey translated in 2012] was a 
peripheral writer until long after her death, when she became more visible 
internationally.” But that invisibility can also be liberating: “You’re both at 
the centre of it and up against the wall. It’s kind of a beautiful freedom.”

“I do think we all have a desire to disappear – especially from our online 
lives … You log into your social media account and realise that even when 
you’re not on there, you’re continually visible. But also, we’re all going to 
disappear eventually, as mortals – vanishing is inevitable! Part of the thing 
about disappearing is that it’s almost a little death. People say sex is a 
little death, but vanishing is like a little death as well; frightening, but 
also desirable. To experience some brief form of disappearance can feel like 
preparation for the permanent vanishing we’ll all have.”

Catching the zeitgeist with Eileen Myles, Martin MacInnes and Idra Novey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/jul/22/catching-the-zeitgeist-with-eileen-myles-martin-macinnes-and-idra-novey>
The new interest in translated literature in the English-speaking world – with 
initiatives such as August’sWomen in Translation Month 
<https://ayearofreadingtheworld.com/2016/08/01/women-in-translation-month/> – 
is nothing novel to Novey, who since childhood has known her sights were set on 
a global conversation well beyond American “MFA culture 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/116778/mfa-vs-nyc-most-useful-explanation-how-writers-get-paid>
”. “I was very used to being an outsider. Because the rural American country 
where I grew up made me hungry for more, I always sought out writers who came 
to literature as outsiders. I wanted to read beyond what was happening in the 
US. I always knew I wanted to translate Clarice Lispector.” And it was the 
adventure of reading in other languages that made Novey want to be a writer 
herself: “It’s such an exciting relationship to the page!”

All these experiences have positioned her comfortably between cultures. “Once 
you leave a strictly national context and think in a more global way, you can 
really never go back to thinking in a provincial way,” Novey reflects, a 
realisation that also strikes Emma in the novel. “You can grow up in a 
language, in a culture, but actually find that your sensibility is better 
suited to another culture and language. But to see that, you have to be quite 
open to your own intuition … I can relax in Spanish in a way I can’t in 
English. Switching languages is a way to shed your skin.”

 * Ways to Disappear is published by Daunt Books at £8.99 and is available 
from the Guardian Bookshop for £7.37 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-to-disappear.html>.  