
A new report this week revealed that every day, 15 babies are stillborn or die 
within four weeks of being born 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/17/15-babies-a-day-uk-stillborn-or-die-within-month-of-birth>
. But perhaps the most shocking aspect of the report, fromMBRRACE-UK 
<https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/athena-swan> (Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk 
through Audits and Confidential Enquiries Across the UK), is the significant 
variations it reveals in death rates across the country. These vary between 4.1 
and 7.1 deaths per 1,000 births, with women from the poorest backgrounds and 
black and Asian mothers at higher risk.

While the report called for more research into causes of the deaths, leading 
stillbirth charity Sands <https://www.uk-sands.org/> called the government’s 
funding commitment “woefully inadequate” (a charge the government denies), and 
reported that maternity units are struggling, with midwives not getting 
sufficient training and some units lacking the funds for the monitoring 
equipment they need. Judith Abela, acting chief executive of Sands, said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/17/15-babies-a-day-uk-stillborn-or-die-within-month-of-birth>
:

“It’s clear from today’s report that variations in care across the UK persist 
and the risk of your baby dying remains influenced by where you live and who 
you are.”

The implication that black and minority ethnic women and those from the 
poorest backgrounds may be some of the hardest hit by this problem is 
particularly significant in light of societal attitudes that stigmatise poor 
mothers. From hackneyed tropes about poor teenage mothersdeliberately getting 
pregnant in order to get a council house 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/teens-get-pregnant-to-avail-of-free-local-housing-26462643.html>
, to sensationalised articlesportraying mums on benefits as greedy scroungers 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/4787421/Scrounging-mum-admits-she-deliberately-has-kids-to-avoid-getting-a-job.html>
, our society deliberately dehumanises and blames mothers and pregnant women 
from poor backgrounds.

These suggestions are wildly inaccurate – in the UK in 2011, there were just 
130 families with 10 children 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/blighty/2013/04/benefit-cuts> claiming at least 
one out-of-work benefit, and in 2013, only 8% of claimants had three or more 
children. The evidence suggests that, on average, unemployed people have 
similar numbers of children to employed people and no evidence suggests that 
benefits provide a significant incentive to have children.






The problem of inequality in pregnancy outcomes is not restricted to the UK. 
According toa study published in the American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology <http://www.ajog.org/article/S0002-9378(09)00701-7/abstract>, black 
women in the United States are more than twice as likely to suffer a stillbirth 
than white women. Health concerns, such as high blood pressure and diabetes, 
were one issue cited as a contributing factor for the larger share of 
stillbirths among black women. But the study also found that higher education 
reduced the hazard for white women more than for black and Hispanic women, and 
that pregnancy and labour conditions contributed more to preterm stillbirth 
risk among black mothers than white mothers.

It is also worth noting that the health issues cited (high blood pressure and 
diabetes) are connected to poverty, with poverty rates in the UShigher for 
black and Hispanic people than the national average 
<http://www.npc.umich.edu/poverty/>, and that the black community in the US 
generally suffers from poorer health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/jan/05/rising-income-inequality-deadlier-for-black-americans-study>
. Another potential factor linking the different outcomes to inequality is that 
black Americans are only half as likely as their white counterparts to have 
health insurance. According toa census survey 
<http://aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/2011/cpshealthins2011/ib.shtml> from 2011, 
the uninsured rate for black Americans was 20.8%; for whites, it was 11.7%.

While the problem is global, there is worrying evidence to suggest that the UK 
lags behind other countries in making progress on stillbirth and early infant 
mortality. Therate of stillbirth deaths in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/07/rate-of-stillbirths-in-uk-higher-than-poland-croatia-and-estonia>
 is higher than Poland, Croatia and Estonia, and the rate of change is slower. 
On average, the number of stillbirths in the UK has fallen 1.8% since 2000, 
compared with 3.5% in Poland and 6.8% in the Netherlands. A study published in 
the Lancetranked Britain 21 out of 35 developed nations for stillbirth rates 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3405699/More-700-stillbirths-year-blamed-poor-care-mums-One-three-avoided-Britain-lags-wealthy-nations-reducing-death-rate.html>
, and 114 out of 164 countries for improvements over the past 15 years.


The high number of stillbirths shows we are not listening to women properly | 
Rebecca Schiller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/stillbirth-uk-women-baby-funding-midwives>
An expert inquiry published last year found that there were “missed 
opportunities” in the care of pregnant women, with national guidelines for 
screening and monitoring not having been followed in two-thirds of the cases 
reviewed. Dr David Richmond, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists,said it was 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/offices/press/press-releases/2015/november/critical-gaps-in-antenatal-care-identified-in-cases-of-term-stillbirths>
 “desperately disappointing that the four recommendations from this report 
remain exactly the same as when the last confidential inquiry took place 15 
years ago”.

The inquiry also suggested that in some cases women’s concerns were not taken 
seriously. Almost half of the women sampled for the study had contacted their 
maternity units, concerned that their baby’s movements had slowed, changed or 
stopped. In half of these cases, there were missed opportunities to potentially 
save the baby, including a lack of investigation, misinterpretation of the 
baby’s heart trace or a failure to respond appropriately to other factors. 
Rebecca Schiller, director of Birthrights, the human rights in childbirth 
charity, hassuggested that a failure to listen to pregnant women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/stillbirth-uk-women-baby-funding-midwives>
, and a tendency to dismiss their concerns, may be contributing to the problem.

 It is sobering to think that in 2016, racial and economic inequality and a 
failure to listen to women may still have a major impact on the health of 
mothers and babies. Tackling these wider problems must be a necessary part of 
progress, and ditching the grossly misdirected blame and stereotyping about 
low-income parents would be a good place to start.







 