
Members of the Australian Council of Superannuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/superannuation-australia> Investors 
– who between them own approximately 10% of the average ASX200 company – will 
start voting against sitting company directors whose boards are full of men.

The policy was developed by the council in collaboration with its members, and 
will see companies which have not taken steps to address their lack of female 
directors by 2017 face votes against sitting directors. ACSI’s policy is 
reaching 30% women on ASX200 boards by 2017.

Workplaces that consider themselves meritocracies 'often hide gender biases'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/workplaces-that-consider-themselves-meritocracies-often-hide-gender-biases>
Council CEO Louise Davidson told Guardian Australia that members were 
“absolutely committed” to backing the policy.

“We’ve been talking to boards about the lack of women for a long time, 
probably for the past five years,” she said.

“Now we’re backing that talk with action and a policy that advises members 
about the election of directors to boards that have shown little improvement in 
their female representation or which have no women represented on them at all.”

A letter sent by the council to its members reads, “... where the council 
believes that a company has demonstrated no progress in either changing the 
make-up of its board, or in presenting a clear plan to achieve that 30% target, 
it will begin recommending that its members oppose the re-election of existing 
directors”.

The council is now speaking to other companies and encouraging them to 
implement similar policies, Davidson said.

“We are not the only organisation to see the value in increased board 
diversity but in the face of multiple campaigns, some boards are just not 
getting the message and are now seriously out of step with their peers,” she 
said.

Australia's leaders are still mainly Anglo-Celtic, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/australias-leaders-are-still-mainly-anglo-celtic-report-finds>
Seventeen ASX200 companies still have no women on their boards, and 63 have 
just one female director. Meanwhile, 57 companies have reached or exceeded the 
30% target and another 52 have 25%-29% female representation on their boards.

The council’s move follows an announcement last month <http://the 
https://www.theguardian.com.au/story/4196060/minister-for-women-michaelia-cash-oversees-department-with-lowest-female-representation-on-government-boards/>
 from the minister for women, Michaelia Cash, that the government had set a 
target of women holding 50% of government board positions overall.

It marked the most ambitious target the government had set for female 
representation on boards, with the previous target set at 40%. The proportion 
of female government board directors hit 40.5% at the end of June, prompting 
the revised target.


A white paper  
<https://unwomen.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Re-thinking-Merit-Whitepaper.pdf>
from UN Women found that men were not being appointed to boards more frequently 
because they were more qualified than women but because of a flawed process of 
merit which saw a range of biases discriminate against women and other diverse 
groups.

The paper was backed by a report released in August by Chief Executive Women 
and Male Champions of Change which cited research which found the more an 
organisation described itself as a meritocracy, the greater the bias from 
managers towards men over equally-qualified women.

“Many studies confirm that we are drawn to those who think, look and act like 
us,” the report found.


“This is a problem for women working in male-dominated environments where 
there are deeply held beliefs and norms about who is suitable for leadership. 
Research has found that gender bias persists in many organisations, and even 
more so in self-labelled ‘meritocracies’.”
 