
Iranian leaders have claimed a military victory in Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, with the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s 
chief military aide boasting that Syrian president Bashar al-Assad’s forces 
would have been unable to retake the besieged city without support from Tehran.

“Aleppo was liberated thanks to a coalition between Iran, Syria, Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Lebanon’s Hizbollah,” said Seyed 
Yahya Rahim-Safavi. “Iran is on one side of this coalition which is approaching 
victory and this has shown our strength. The new American president should take 
heed of the powers of Iran.”

Aleppo civilians plead for help as airstrikes resume: 'Save us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-civilians-plea-as-airstrikes-resume-syria>
Iran’s defence minister called his Syrian counterpart to congratulate him and 
Mohsen Rezaie, a former commander of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, wrote on 
Instagram that Iran’s aim was to cleanse “terrorists and takfiris [a term used 
in Iran for Sunni jihadists]” fromSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Iraq.

The parliamentary speaker, Ali Larijani, also congratulated Assad’s 
government, saying that US and British policies had hit a dead end in Syria, 
Iraq, Libya and Yemen.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fare-you-incapable-of-shame-samantha-power-criticises-syria-iran-and-russia-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Are%20you%20incapable%20of%20shame%3F'%3A%20Samantha%20Power%20criticises%20Syria%2C%20Iran%20and%20Russia%20over%20Aleppo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fare-you-incapable-of-shame-samantha-power-criticises-syria-iran-and-russia-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Are%20you%20incapable%20of%20shame%3F%27%3A%20Samantha%20Power%20criticises%20Syria%2C%20Iran%20and%20Russia%20over%20Aleppo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fare-you-incapable-of-shame-samantha-power-criticises-syria-iran-and-russia-video&media=>
‘Are you incapable of shame?’: Samantha Power criticises Syria, Iran and Russia 
over Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/14/are-you-incapable-of-shame-samantha-power-criticises-syria-iran-and-russia-video>
The comments underline the key role played by Iranian-backed Shia militias – 
but they also signalled a new phase in the power struggle for Syria’s second 
city, the fate of which will largely determine who wins the war.

Tuesday’s Russian-Turkish deal to spare the last of the opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/deal-reached-to-evacuate-rebels-and-civilians-from-aleppo>
 was brokered with little input from Iran or the Syrian leadership, who had 
controlled the battle since Russia scaled back its bombardment.

Pro-Assad forces which had cornered the city’s lasted holdouts were startled 
by the ceasefire agreement, and were determined to transform their momentum 
into all-out conquest of the rebel-held areas.

The militias resumed their offensive before dawn on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-residents-evacuation-uncertainty-ceasefire-deal-assad>
, not long before the first of tens of thousands of trapped civilians were 
supposed to be evacuated.

Airstrikes, believed to be Syrian, soon followed, and a hard-won diplomatic 
reprieve was in peril, as in all previous attempts to broker peace inAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6df278751edb0fee935cc667e4fd39742e0bc01%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20hails%20victory%20in%20Aleppo%20as%20Shia%20militias%20boost%20Syria's%20Bashar%20al-Assad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20hails%20victory%20in%20Aleppo%20as%20Shia%20militias%20boost%20Syria%27s%20Bashar%20al-Assad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6df278751edb0fee935cc667e4fd39742e0bc01%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Pro-government forces patrol Aleppo on Wednesday. Photograph: George 
Ourfalian/AFP/Getty Images 
Until recently, Russian firepower has been decisive. But after the air 
campaign gave way to a ground offensive earlier this month, Iran’s proxies took 
the lead, giving them a driving role in what happens next.

According a spokesman for one of the Aleppo factions, the ceasefire was 
immediately in doubt afterIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> imposed 
conditionsthe rebels could not meet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-civilians-plea-as-airstrikes-resume-syria>
.

Yasser al-Youssef, of the Noureddine al-Zenki militia said Iran’s demands 
included the lifting of a rebel siege on Shia villages in Idlib, province, as 
well as deals on prisoners and missing members of Iranian-backed militias.

“Iran has prepared to invade our besieged areas and has defied Russia’s 
agreement,” said al-Youssef.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> and the Syrian government do not 
want to compromise on the battlefield or at the negotiating table, believing 
that total domination will give them a better hand to shape the aftermath. 
Russia, on the other hand, sees a benefit in transitioning from bludgeoning 
superpower to peace-broker.


The clash is the first serious divergence between Tehran and Moscow, whose 
heavyweight interventions have saved Assad but greatly diminished Syria’s 
sovereignty. But with the endgame in sight, the “win first, settle up later” 
approach has reached a nadir.


Sectarian fighters mass for battle to capture east Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/aleppo-attack-foreign-syrian-fighters-plan-shia-islamic>
Iran’s role in the Aleppo crisis is set to dominate Thursday’s regular meeting 
of EU heads of state in Brussels, with leaders of the Syrian opposition calling 
for economic sanctions to be imposed on Russia and Iran.


The EU, increasingly marginal to a crisis being resolved by Russia, Iran and 
Turkey , is certain to make it clear that it will not supply any cash for 
economic reconstruction unless there is a negotiated political settlement – and 
not a military resolution imposed by Iran or the Syrian government.

In a letter to EU leaders, Dr Riyad Hijib, the co ordinator of the Syrian High 
Negotiating Committee (HNC), called for “targeted unilateral sanctions against 
Russian and Iranian entities and individuals directly enabling war crimes in 
Syria through the supply of material assistance”.

The HNC also called for an urgent review of economic ties with Iran , 
including commercial airlines used by Iran to send weapons and fighters to 
Syria.

Many EU states will be deeply reluctant to re impose sanctions on Iran so soon 
after lifting them as part of the wider deal on Iran’s nuclear programme.


But the renewed emphasis on Iran reflects the key role played by Iranian 
artillery in the capture of east Aleppo.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Voices%20from%20Aleppo%3A%20the%20situation%20is%20apocalyptic%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Voices%20from%20Aleppo%3A%20the%20situation%20is%20apocalyptic%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvoices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report&media=>
Voices from Aleppo: the situation is apocalyptic – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/13/voices-from-aleppo-the-situation-is-apocalyptic-video-report>
Shia militias have also played a decisive role. Raised by Iran’s Revolutionary 
Guards,the militias have been far more effective than Syrian units 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/29/aleppo-attack-foreign-syrian-fighters-plan-shia-islamic>
. Their numbers had built around east Aleppo since early last year to an 
estimated force of 6,000-8,000 troops, many of them battle-hardened in Iraq or 
southern Lebanon.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04c9b0d69d42544b5367b45b8fccac33853903c%2F1315_0_2075_2594%2F2075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20hails%20victory%20in%20Aleppo%20as%20Shia%20militias%20boost%20Syria's%20Bashar%20al-Assad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20hails%20victory%20in%20Aleppo%20as%20Shia%20militias%20boost%20Syria%27s%20Bashar%20al-Assad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Firan-aleppo-syria-shia-militia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04c9b0d69d42544b5367b45b8fccac33853903c%2F1315_0_2075_2594%2F2075.jpg>
 Major General Qassem Suleimani, the leader of the Iranian-backed militias 
fighting in Syria. Photograph: HO/AFP/Getty Images 
The militias report to the Iranian Maj Gen Qassem Suleimani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/16/qassim-suleimani-iraq-iran-syria>
, who was tasked more than a decade ago by the supreme leader, Ayatollah 
Khamenei, to export the values of the Islamic Revolution into the Arab world. 
Suleimani’s Quds Force is one of the Guards’ most elite units, attracting 
ideological cadres who believe in Shia supremacy.


Under Suleimani’s control are several Iraqi units, Asa’ib ahl al-Haq, Abu 
al-Fadhil al-Abbas, and the Nujaba Front, which is affiliated withthe Keta’ib 
Hezbollah militia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/12/iraq-battle-dead-valley-peace-syria>
. All are power players in Iraq’s political-military sphere. Lebanese Hezbollah 
plays the same role in Beirut and southern Lebanon, where it is interwoven into 
the political and security apparatus.


The battle for eastern Aleppo in maps: how rebel territory is shrinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/nov/30/battle-eastern-aleppo-maps-rebel-territory-shrinking>
Hezbollah was the first of the Iranian proxies to join the fight alongside 
Assad, and has paid a heavy price for doing so. Party loyalists in Beirut say 
at least 1,600 of its fighters had been killed in Syria before the conquest of 
east Aleppo.


Shia graveyards in Najaf have similarly been filling up, with several thousand 
Iraqi fighters known to have been killed in Syria and buried in large dedicated 
plots bought by the militias over the past three years.

Most casualties from the Iranian side have been Afghan refugees, recruited on 
the promise that their families would gain the right to reside in Iran. But an 
Iranian official said recently that as many as 1,000 Iranians had died in Syria 
since the conflict began.

The blood and treasure expended by Iran has focused on Aleppo and the western 
suburbs of Damascus, the site of the Zainab shrine – a pilgrimage point for 
Shia Muslims.


Iran has framed its war effort in sectarian terms, insisting the men it has 
sent to fight are in Syria to defend the shrine from Sunni extremists. In 
addresses inside Syria, Akram al-Ka’abi, the leader of the Nujaba Front, has 
exhorted his followers to seek revenge for battlefield losses to Sunni figures 
in the founding years of Islam.


On Tuesday, President Hassan Rouhani, meeting with the prominent Iraqi cleric 
Ammar al-Hakim, in Tehran, said his government would spare no efforts in 
supporting “the oppressed nations of the region, including Iraq and Syria”.

In a departure from his hitherto cautious stance on Syria, Rouhani telephoned 
Assad on Wednesday to “congratulate” him on the “liberation of Aleppo”, Fars 
news reported. “We see it as our duty to support those trying to force takfiri 
terrorism out of their territory,” he told his Syrian counterpart.



• This article was amended on 15 December 2016. Because of an editing error, 
an earlier version mistranslated the word “takfiris”.
 