
A group of prominent Iranian-Americans has reached out to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, urging him to keep Iran’s 
landmark nuclear agreement once he is sworn in as US president.


The signatories, who include artists, scientists, business leaders and 
pro-democracy activists, said millions of Iranians disagreed with their 
government on many political issues, but still backed the nuclear accord. The 
deal was struck between Tehran and the world’s six major powers – known as the 
P5+1 – in Vienna in July 2015 after nearly two years of talks.


“We all drew a sigh of relief when the P5+1 Iran nuclear deal was reached. To 
us, it meant ensuring that a disastrous war between the United States and Iran 
was avoided,” the group writes ina public letter 
<https://medium.com/@LetterToTrump/letter-to-president-elect-trump-99eae327c01a#.jk3vbootu>
.


“As prominent scientists and arms control experts in the United States and 
around the world have observed, this was a good deal because it dramatically 
reduced the chances of a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.”


The actor Shohreh Aghdashloo, artist Shirin Neshat, writer Firoozeh Dumas and 
leading scholars, including the scientist Mohammadsharif Tabebordbar from 
Harvard University, all signed the letter, as did Ahmad Kiarostami, an 
entrepreneur and son of Iran’s most celebrated film-maker, Abbas Kiarostami.


While many Iranians fear Trump presidency, others see opportunities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/while-many-iranians-fear-trump-presidency-others-see-opportunities>
Some of the signatories are considered persona non grata in Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> because they are viewed as too 
critical of the state. They are unable to visit their home country.


Trump’s victory has thrown the future of the deal into doubt. At one point 
during his campaign, he promised to “dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran”, 
but many believe he might instead adopt a more rigorous implementation of the 
agreement and tighten sanctions already in place. That could force Iran to 
violate the deal or make it redundant. The mood among Iranian politicians is 
mixed. While many Iranians fear Trump’s presidency,others see opportunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/while-many-iranians-fear-trump-presidency-others-see-opportunities>
.

“While the easing of sanctions that resulted from this deal has yet to have a 
tangible impact on the lives of ordinary people in Iran, it has without a doubt 
given millions hope that the country’s economy has backed away from the edge of 
the cliff,” the group said. “This is precisely why we are worried about any 
effort to undo this agreement.”


The plea comes after a group of dissident Iranians published a letter in 
December claiming that Isis and Tehran “are two sides of the coin that is 
Islamic fundamentalist terrorism”. The dissidents called on Trump to review the 
nuclear deal and impose more sanctions.


“During the presidential campaign, we and millions of Iranians followed your 
forthright objection to the nuclear agreement reached between the Obama 
administration and the Islamic Republic of Iran,”the dissidents wrote 
<http://taghato.net/article/30837> after congratulating Trump on his victory. 
“We ask the incoming administration to develop a comprehensive regime of 
sanctions against those Iranian officials who have violated the human rights of 
the Iranian people over the last four decades.”


The first letter drew loud condemnation 
<https://globalvoices.org/2016/12/25/open-letter-from-iranian-americans-to-trump-causes-upset-amongst-iranians/>
 from many Iranians, particularly those living inside the country. Prominent
reformist figures 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/12/iran-30-dissidents-letter-trump-reactions-reformists.html>
, including those who have served time in prison, criticsed the letter and said 
its authors did not represent the majority of Iranians.


 All signs suggest that the deal remains popular in Iran. Last year, 
candidates who supported the dealwon significant gains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/reformist-backed-candidates-tehran-iran-assembly-elections>
 in parliamentary elections in a sign of approval for President Hassan 
Rouhani’s administration. Rouhani faces re-election in May and is under 
pressure to show that the deal has borne fruit.


In the US, popular support for the agreement also appears high. A survey 
published by the University of Maryland earlier this week found nearly 
two-thirds of respondents wanted their government to abide by it.


“Though president-elect Trump campaigned on ripping up the deal and seeking to 
negotiate a better one, the majority of Americans would rather continue with 
the deal as long as Iran continues to comply with its terms,” said Steven Kull, 
the director of the University of Maryland’s public consultation programme.


A group of top scientists also wrote to Trump earlier this week, asking him to 
abide by the nuclear deal,the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/02/science/top-scientists-letter-trump-iran-nuclear-deal.html?_r=0>
. “We urge you to preserve this critical US strategic asset,” they wrote. 
Richard L Garwin, who designed the world’s first hydrogen bomb, was among the 
signatories.


The latest letter asks Trump to choose diplomacy over sanctions and war. “As 
we witnessed over the course of the last decade, sanctions and the threat of 
war only serve to empower Iran’s hardliners while harming ordinary citizens who 
represent the backbone of any possible positive change,” the group wrote.

 