
Iran and Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> held secret talks 
on peace proposals for Syria in 2013 and as recently as this year, but the 
talks broke down amid mutual suspicions, according to a new report to be 
published on Tuesday.


The report 
<https://www.crisisgroup.org/middle-east-north-africa/gulf-and-arabian-peninsula/iran/b051-turkey-and-iran-bitter-friends-bosom-rivals>
 on the Iran-Turkey relationship by the International Crisis Group (ICG), is 
based on interviews with top officials. It is being published as pro-regime 
forces, including Iranian-led militias, storm the last rebel-held districts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
 of Aleppo amid reports of massacres.

Aleppo residents issue evacuation plea as Assad loyalists tighten grip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
The report is the latest of a series of accounts of failed diplomacy 
throughout the nearly six years of the Syrian conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/us-iran-syria-civil-war-peace-talks>
, which has cost the lives of up to half a million people. It says that in 
September 2013, three months after the election of pragmatist presidentHassan 
Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/05/profile-hassan-rouhani-iran>, 
Tehran presented Ankara with a peace proposal that had been formulated in 
consultation withQassem Suleimani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/28/qassem-suleimani-iran-iraq-influence>
, the head of the powerful Quds Force of the Revolutionary Guard.

The plan envisaged a ceasefire followed by a national unity government and 
constitutional reform aimed at constraining presidential powers. Most 
importantly, there would then be presidential and legislative elections under 
UN supervision. The plan was the subject of several months of shuttle diplomacy 
between the Iranian foreign minister,Mohammad Javad Zarif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/03/iran-nuclear-mohammad-javad-zarif>
, and his Turkish counterpart,Ahmet Davutoğlu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/ahmet-davutoglus-future-turkish-prime-minister-balance>
, but it eventually collapsed over the future role of the Syrian president, 
Bashar al-Assad.

“We agreed on every detail, except a clause in the final phase of the plan 
which called for UN-monitored elections. Turkish leaders wanted Assad barred,” 
Zarif is quoted as saying in the report. “I noted that this should not be a 
concern in an internationally monitored election, particularly if, as Turkey 
holds, Assad has a dreadful record and a minority constituency. But Davutoğlu 
refused... and our efforts came to naught.”

According to the report, titled Turkey and Iran: Bitter Friends, Bosom Rivals, 
the Turkish government did not believe that Assad would accept any transition 
process that would weaken his grip on power and Ankara still thought his 
military defeat was inevitable.

The Turkish president at the time, Abdullah Gül 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/aug/28/turkey.marktran1>, told the ICG 
“our government did not pursue an agreement with Iran because it thought Assad 
would be toppled in a few months”.

“From Ankara’s perspective, Assad’s battlefield losses would remove need to 
compromise or at least improve a deal’s terms,” the report said.

The ICG said a second opening for a Tehran-Ankara deal presented itself after 
theabortive military coup in Turkey in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/whats-happened-in-turkey-first-hours-of-the-coup>
 this year, when Iran promptly stated its support for president Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan, creating a temporary thaw in relations and a resumption of talks on 
Syria. At the same time, military advances by Kurdish YPG forces in northern 
Syria had led to a simultaneous reconciliation between Ankara and Moscow.

Although the Iranians and Turks still disagreed on Assad’s fate, they focused 
their discussion on other issues, including whether there should be a 
presidential or parliamentary system and how power should be shared in general. 
After two high-level rounds, the report says, the talks got mired in mutual 
distrust heightened by Turkey’s decision to intervene directly in Syria, in an 
operation codenamedEuphrates Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/turkey-launches-major-operation-against-isis-in-key-border-town>
, to prevent the YPG securing all the border zone for the Kurds.

“Iranian officials expressed surprise Turkey had not notified them of the 
operation despite the presence of a senior Iranian official in Ankara the day 
before. Turkey may have feared thatIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>
 would tip off the YPG,” the report suggests.
 