
A senior US commander in Iraq on Sunday gave a vote of confidence to Iraqi 
forces fighting to recapture thenorthern city of Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/iraqi-troops-resume-push-to-take-mosul-from-isis-after-two-week-lull>
 from Islamic State militants, saying such forces were currently “at their 
peak” and adjusting well to changing realities on the battlefield.

Speaking in an interview, Brig Gen Rick Uribe said he agreed with the forecast 
given by Iraqi prime minister Haider al-Abadi that it would take another three 
months to liberateMosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, the last 
Iraqi urban center in the hands of the extremist group.

US military says Mosul airstrike may have killed civilians at hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/us-military-mosul-airstrike-civilians-casualties-hospital>
“I think that sounds reasonable that we could potentially have a liberated 
Mosul in about that time period,” Uribe said, dismissing the notion that Iraqi 
forces were behind schedule.

“We are on pretty close to where we want to be,” said Uribe, explaining that 
military planners knew that while the initial push toward the city would be 
quick, progress would become “significantly” slower on the city’s fringes.

Uribe, speaking in Irbil, capital of the self-ruled Kurdish region in northern 
Iraq, said Iraqi forces north and south of Mosul had made progress since a new 
offensive was launched last week after atwo-week lull in fighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/iraqi-troops-resume-push-to-take-mosul-from-isis-after-two-week-lull>
.

A government campaign to liberate Mosul and surrounding areas in Nineveh 
province began in mid-October. More than two months later, the only major 
fighting inside the city has been done by elite counter-terrorism forces, also 
known as the “golden division”.

Since the new offensive began, the special forces have pushed forward in at 
least two neighborhoods in the city’s eastern sector, while the army’s ninth 
and 16th divisions also made headway south and north of the capital 
respectively.

The ninth division was joined by units of the militarized federal police, 
while the 16th was bolstered by army units.

“I think the forces right now, the Iraqi security forces, as we sit here today 
on 1 January 2017, are at their peak and I think they will continue to improve 
because of the lessons they are learning on a daily basis,” said Uribe, whose 
official title is deputy commanding general – Baghdad of the combined joint 
forces land component command.

Uribe said Iraqi forces, backed by a US-led coalition, would face a different 
fight when they crossed to the west bank of the Tigris River, saying it would 
mostly be a “dismounted” battle fought in part on narrow streets, some of which 
were not wide enough for a vehicle to pass.

“It will be a different fight and they will adjust as they go from the east to 
the west. They are already planning these adjustments,” he said.

'A more dangerous long-term threat': Al-Qaida grows as Isis retreats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/a-more-dangerous-long-term-threat-al-qaida-grows-as-isis-retreats>
He praised Iraqi security forces for what he said was going out of their way 
in Mosul to protect civilians.

“They have been extremely good at taking care of those civilians. I don’t know 
whether you would have seen this a few years ago,” he said. “That was part of 
the training [by the coalition]. You got to treat people with dignity and 
respect. You cannot go into a city and make it worse than before.”

Iraqi authorities have advised the estimated 1 million civilians believed to 
be still inside Mosul to stay in their homes until the city is fully liberated, 
but fears of getting caught in the crossfire between government forces and the 
militants have forced at least 120,000 residents to flee so far.

Many are also leaving the city because they have run out of food and money, or 
due to a lack of essential services like water and power.
 