
In 1924, the crossword had not yet reached these shores but was becoming a 
full-blown fad across the Atlantic – or, in the words ofa scaremongering 
British editorial of the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/15/crosswords-meow-meow-1920s>
, had led to AN ENSLAVED AMERICA. They could be spotted …

… in trains and trams, or omnibuses, in subways, in private offices and 
counting-rooms, in factories and homes, and even – although as yet rarely – 
with hymnals for camouflage, in church.

While the crossword is no longer regarded as a threat to humanity, there 
remain times when it seems that solving is or is not acceptable – or, as 
solvers fond of obsolete abbreviations might put it,U or Non-U 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/22/how-talk-posh-glossary-non-u>
.

Chief among these is the workplace. The God of Growth may demand that the 
nation spend longer than is sane at its work stations, but taking any of that 
time for yourself is not the done thing,as some Glasgow steelworkers discovered 
in the 1980s 
<https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=1sNAAAAAIBAJ&sjid=8KUMAAAAIBAJ&pg=4496%2C3784433>
 following a downtime session with the FT:
 Solving at work gets political in the 1980s. Photograph: Glasgow Herald / 
Google News 
For office workers, Facebooking and eBaying can be made to look like 
screenwork, but those who prefer a paper solve risk shirking in plain sight.

And the same, it seems, goes for bus drivers. 
Brent Gunning (@Gunning590) 
Bus driver banging out a crossword at a red light #Dedication 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Dedication?src=hash> #ttc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ttc?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/EqCWXInMWL 
<http://t.co/EqCWXInMWL>
 <https://twitter.com/Gunning590/status/595519805433589760> May 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Gunning590/status/595519805433589760> 
In a striking example of how we can now use our phones to police each other 
<http://www.680news.com/2015/05/05/exclusive-ttc-driver-caught-doing-crossword-at-red-light/>
, a Toronto driver has been shopped for solving. Health and safety was an issue 
whena fellow Canadian was fired for crosswording at the helm of a moving 
Calgary monorail 
<http://www.torontosun.com/news/canada/2011/03/15/17617721.html>. 

Reader, do you see the red light 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2015/05/06/ttc-says-action-taken-in-driver-crossword-case>
 in the bus case as in any way mitigating? Can a quick clue clear and focus the 
mind? Or are you zero-tolerance? And if so, what do you make of a woodwind 
player knocking out a nine across in his downtime? I’m thinking of a Welsh 
National Operaoboist 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/sacked-oboist-says-italian-maestro-1891460>
’s claims to a tribunal that he was reprimanded by a conductor for solving.

What about when it’s you that has a yen to solve in working hours? Do you 
repress it, and keep the puzzle for the coffee break and the commute? Or 
perhaps you have some tricks which allow you to get a grid half-filled without 
the opprobrium of peers and superiors?

You’re among friends.
 