
Islamic State fighters have taken “tens of thousands” of people hostage and 
are herding them towards the city of Mosul for use as human shields as the 
battle for the militant group’s last major Iraqi stronghold intensifies, the
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> has said.

Isis also shot dead at least 232 civilians on Wednesday, the UN said on 
Friday, in its latest warning of atrocities by the group that has embraced rule 
by terror since it swept to power across the region. More evidence of crimes is 
likely to be unearthed as the self-proclaimed caliphate recedes into the desert.

Some of the latest victims are understood to have refused to comply with 
orders to leave their homes, and others were former members of the Iraqi 
security forces, who Isis may have feared would rise up against the group as 
its enemies advanced.

Speaking at a news conference, UN spokeswoman Ravina Shamdasani said the 
hostage-taking was aimed at making certain parts ofMosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> “immune from military action”.

“Isil’s depraved, cowardly strategy is to try to use the presence of civilian 
hostages to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from 
military action, essentially using tens of thousands of men, women and children 
as human shields,” Shamdasani said, using a different term for the group.

As the offensive to reclaim the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/isis-islamic-state-us-raqqa-mosul-syria>
 paused on Friday to allow Iaqi forces to deal with attacks to their rear, 
there are growing concerns about the fate of civilians who have been living 
under Isis. They face a grim choice between retreating into Mosul to serve as 
human shields, waiting out fierce fighting in their homes, or fleeing to areas 
where they fear being targeted as collaborators or supporters of Isis.

The battle pits up to 6,000 Isis fighters dug in around Mosul against 30,000 
troops from a broad coalition including the Kurdish peshmerga, the Iraqi army 
and special forces, Shia militias allied with Iran, US warplanes and military 
advisers, and Turkish forces positioned to the north of the city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&media=>
How important is Mosul for Isis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/25/how-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
On Friday, Shia militias said they would soon attack to the west of Mosul, 
currently the only open route out of a city now surrounded on three sides, and 
reportedly used by Isis to transport some commanders and their families to 
Syria.

People trapped along the path of Isis’s retreat say the group is branding 
anyone who refuses to head to Mosul with them an “apostate”, a crime carrying 
the death penalty under Isis rule, making fleeing to relative safety of 
government-controlled areas a risky gamble.

“Daesh detains families or sometimes just young people as they withdraw from 
an area. My brother was in the village of al-Hood and is one of those that they 
have taken. We do not know what has become of him,” said Jassim, 36, a farmer 
fromQayyarah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2016/oct/27/eyewitness-qayyarah-iraq>
, using the Arabic acronym for the group.

“When the army attacks any village, civilians are caught in crossfire. We have 
to decide whether to go to the army side or stay where Daesh is. Daesh 
considers anyone who leaves the land of caliphate as ‘apostate’ so they force 
people to go with them as they withdraw towards Mosul.”

So far the UN has details of about 8,000 families who have been shifted from 
villages on the eastern and southern edge of Isis control towards the suburbs 
of Mosul and the city itself.

But those figures likely represent a minimum number of victims, Shamdasani 
said. “These reports ... do not mean there are not more civilians who have been 
killed, more families displaced.”

Fears battle for Mosul could open new front in wider Sunni-Shia conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/fears-battle-for-mosul-open-new-front-wider-sunni-shia-conflict-iraq-turkey>
One place Isis is thought to have taken hostages is the town of Hamam al-Ali, 
a stronghold for the group which had about 23,000 residents before the Mosul 
offensive. Now around 60,000 people are thought to be gathered there, the UN 
said.

The US has been bombing vehicles used to move civilians towards Mosul, in an 
attempt to disrupt the forced march into the city, a senior US general told 
Associated Press. The buses and trucks have been struck when empty, and far 
from civilians, he said.

Inside the city, residents said displaced people were arriving in their 
hundreds and moving into empty public buildings and offices, living in 
appalling conditions as chillier autumn weather sets in.

“Congestion is increasing in the city, since the military operation began, 
hundreds of families from villages around Mosul began to come to the city and 
they are housed in schools and empty government buildings,” said Issa, a 
teacher in his 30s, who lives in the west of the city.

He did not know if they had chosen to leave their villages or had been forced 
out by Isis, but said their situation in Mosul was dire, with most struggling 
to feed themselves or stay warm.

“They live under difficult conditions and we are helping them as much as we 
can by giving them food, water, blankets and other needs. They are scared.” 
Former members of the security forces among the new arrivals have been taken 
away by Isis, he added, and their current location is unknown.

There have also been reports of revenge attacks on men and boys believed to 
have fought for Isis or supported it, by the forces closing in towards Mosul. 
Shamdasani said it was vital that Isis killings did not draw security forces 
into a spiral of violence.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkurdish-troops-advance-towards-mosul-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kurdish%20troops%20advance%20towards%20Mosul%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkurdish-troops-advance-towards-mosul-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kurdish%20troops%20advance%20towards%20Mosul%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkurdish-troops-advance-towards-mosul-video&media=>
Kurdish troops advance towards Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/20/kurdish-troops-advance-towards-mosul-video>
“In the face of these flagrant violations of international humanitarian law by 
Isil, it is even more crucial that government forces and their allies ensure 
scrupulous respect for these laws,” she said.

In some areas residents thought to have supported Isis are being blocked from 
returning home, with fighters citing security concerns andboasting of summary 
executions 
<http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/33498769/iraqis-dispense-what-they-call-justice-for-alleged-militants>
.

“Captured (Isis) fighters and those perceived to have supported them must be 
held in accordance with international law,” Shamdasani said.

Adding to concerns about those trapped near the frontlines, Amnesty 
International warned it had credible reports thatwhite phosphorus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/nov/19/thisweekssciencequestions.uknews>
 had been used around Mosul.

The chemical, which burns at an extremely high temperature on exposure to air 
and can sear through flesh and bone, is allowed in some battlefield situations 
but is illegal in areas with a civilian population.

“We are urging Iraqi and coalition forces never to use white phosphorus in the 
vicinity of civilians,” Amnesty said. “Even if civilians are not present at the 
time of its use, due to the residual risks they should not use airburst white 
phosphorus munitions unless it is absolutely necessary to achieve military 
objectives which cannot be accomplished through safer means.”

In addition to the concerns about Isis’ human shields, the Iraqi military has 
“paused” its advance to Mosul, as it confronts Isis attacks .

The Iraqis have stalled approximately 10 to 20km of the city to “make sure 
their flanks and their their rear are cleared of Daesh,” said US air force Col 
John Dorrian, the spokesman for the US war command, who insisted that the 
Iraqis are still “largely on plan.”


Dorrian did not discuss the seriousness of the resistance the Iraqi lines are 
confronting, though he conceded some had encountered “tougher areas.” From the 
start of the offensive earlier this month, US and Iraqi officials have 
portrayed the defeat of ~Isis in Mosul as inevitable. Dorian said the advance 
is expected to resume after “a couple days” as forces reposition and resupply.


Additional reporting: Spencer Ackerman in New York
 