
The Israeli embassy official who was caught on camera plotting to “take down” 
British MPs has resigned from government service.

Shai Masot, a senior political officer at the embassy in London, resigned 
several days ago when he was sent back toIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. The UK Foreign Office and the 
Israeli ministry of foreign affairs both said that they regarded the matter as 
closed.

But the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry>, has called on the 
Commons foreign affairs committee to conduct an inquiry into the matter, saying 
it amounted to “improper interference in our democratic politics” by a foreign 
state.

Masot was filmed by an undercover reporter from Al Jazeera television’s 
investigations unit as hetalked about taking down MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
 he considered hostile to Israel, including Sir Alan Duncan, the foreign office 
minister.

A UK civil servant who took part in the conversation, Maria Strizzolo, has 
also resigned from her post at the Skills Funding Agency.

Masot is a former officer in the Israeli navy. His LinkedIn profile page – 
which has been taken down – described him as an employee of the Israeli 
ministry of defence.

On that profile, he wrote that his responsibilities in London included working 
to influence the drafting of UK legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-plotted-against-mps-set-up-political-groups-labour>
 and founding several political organisations that are supportive of Israel.

In Al Jazeera’s series of documentaries, he is filmed as he starts to 
establish a group called YoungLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> Friends of Israel – unaware that 
the man he has chosen to be chairman was an undercover reporter. He is seen 
making attempts to obscure the group’s connection with the embassy.

The Guardian view on Trump and Israel: stick to the script | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/the-guardian-view-on-trump-and-israel-stick-to-the-script>
Israeli foreign ministry officials have played down Masot’s significance, 
describing him as a relatively junior figure. However, retired British 
diplomats say they believe it is highly unlikely that he was acting without 
authorisation.

Last year, Israeli diplomats in London warned the foreign ministry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/israeli-diplomats-cautioned-against-operating-british-jewish-organisations>
 that attempts by another government department, the strategic affairs 
ministry, to run British Jewish groups from Jerusalem could be unlawful.

The strategic affairs ministry has been given the task of countering a 
worldwide campaign that is targeting Israel with boycotts, divestment and 
sanctions.

The cable from London warned: “The strategic affairs ministry must understand 
that ‘operating’ organisations directly from Jerusalem by email and telephone 
isn’t good for their health.”
 