
A group of Israeli film-makers have issued a joint statement 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/israeli-filmmakers-call-for-ceasefire/5075171.article>
 condemning the current Israeli military action against Palestinian targets in 
Gaza, and the attacks by Hamas on Israel.

At a press conference during the Jerusalem film festival, the likes of Keren 
Yedaya and Shira Geffen read out the names of children who had been killed in
the Israeli missile attacks of recent days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/13/thousands-flee-gaza-israel-bombing>
. They said it was "not an act of provocation, it's natural to give them a name 
and remember... Children living in Gaza today are our partners in peace 
tomorrow. The killing and horror we inflict only push any diplomatic solution 
further away."

Yedaya, whose controversial film A Lovely Girl appeared in the Un Certain 
Regard section of this year's Cannes festival, was in tears as she described 
being "the mother of two kids who suffer from the fear and panic of the threat 
of the missiles."

The group took a dovish stance, arguing "we do not seek revenge and do not 
believe in a military solution," and that film-makers and journalists have a 
duty to depict the suffering on both sides of the conflict. "Cameras here, in
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, film and tell about the 
suffering and pain of Israeli citizens subject to missile attacks... A dialogue 
must be established, an acknowledgment of the suffering of the other. Today, we 
want to direct those cameras to the suffering of Gaza residents, men, women and 
children killed during the last few days. Those filming the suffering of 
Israelis should be courageous and honest enough to film the killing and 
destruction in Gaza as well, and tell that story as well."

Various cultural activities in Israel and Palestine, such as a planned Neil 
Young concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/14/neil-young-crazy-horse-israel-concert-gaza-conflict>
, have been cancelled, and Yedaya considered not attending the festival before 
she spoke with the other film-makers. They argue that the "'life goes on' 
conception... is morally impossible," and instead the festival is an 
opportunity "to issue a clear, loud cry for change."

Negotiations between Israel and Hamas have begun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/15/israel-approves-egyptian-ceasefire-in-gaza-live-updates>
, but a ceasefire remains far from certain as a proposed truce, initially 
accepted by Israel's security council, was rejected by Hamas.
 