
Sara Netanyahu, the wife of the Israeli prime minister, could reportedly face 
fraud charges <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.722077> relating to a 
long-running controversy over the management of her husband Binyamin 
Netanyahu’s official residence in Jerusalem, following the conclusion of a 
police investigation.

The recommendations of the investigation – which concluded on Sunday and 
details of which have been widely reported in the Israeli media, although not 
officially announced – are the latest chapter in the long-running saga over the
Netanyahu’s household expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/31/police-question-sara-netanyahu-over-household-spending>
.

Sara Netanyahu and her husband’s office strenuously deny any suggestion of 
wrongdoing.

The prime minister <https://www.theguardian.com/world/binyamin-netanyahu> also 
denies reports that the police investigation had recommended his wife’s 
indictmentOn his Facebook page, he insisted: “There was no recommendation in 
the police’s statement to indict Sara Netanyahu. Contrary to the report, Mrs 
Netanyahu committed no crime. The various allegations that have been aired by 
the media outlets will prove to be untrue, just as has happened with all the 
allegations that have been directed against the Netanyahu family for years.”

The couple have faced a litany of criticism over the years. Sara Netanyahu was 
questioned by the police financial fraud unit 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/police-recommend-sara-netanyahu-stand-trial-on-graft-allegations/>
 – Lahav 433 – in December last year, which reportedly concluded there were 
three cases in which there was sufficient suspicion of wrongdoing to warrant 
possible prosecution.

The investigation reportedly focused on whether the state was defrauded into 
paying for private expenses at the Netanyahus’ family home in Caesarea, 
including billing for food and private chefs.

Among other issues Sara Netanyahu was questioned about then were claims of 
unusual work at her private Caesarea home carried out at weekends and on 
holidays by a political associate of her husband who had been barred from 
working for the family on official business.

In another case – according to the Israeli newspaper Haaretz – Sara Netanyahu 
employed a caregiver for her father out of the budget of the prime minister’s 
residence.


The police announcement of the conclusion of the case was unusual in that it 
did not name any of the individuals involved, although details were quickly 
leaked and reported across the Israeli media.

Police said: “The national unit of the Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> police has concluded its 
investigation of the prime minister’s residences. The case began in February 
2015 with the approval of the attorney general and the state prosecutor and 
focused on a number of issues in connection to which suspicion of the 
commission of criminal offences arose, including fraudulent receipt, fraud and 
breach of trust, including addressing mutual accusations.

“At the conclusion all of the purported evidence, findings and insights 
gathered in the police investigation were provided to the Jerusalem district 
prosecutor – which was involved in the investigation – for its review and 
decision.”

The police investigation was launched after a report by the state comptroller 
in February last year and in the midst of a long-running court case involving 
former members of the staff at the prime minister’s official home, whichaccused 
Sara Netanyahu of abusive behaviour. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/09/ex-employee-alleges-bullying-netanyahu-wife>

In February, a former staff member won a court case against her over the 
claims. 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/ex-caretaker-wins-abuse-case-against-sara-netanyahu/>

The reported recommendation that criminal charges should be pursued follows 
hard on the heels ofanother scandal 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Comptroller-blasts-PM-for-Bibi-Tours-Affair-454841>
, detailed in this year’s state comptroller’s report, known as the Bibi Tours 
affair, a reference to the Israeli prime minister’s nickname.

Covering a period when Netanyahu was finance minister in Ariel Sharon’s 
government, it disclosed how Netanyahu and his familywere beneficiaries of 
state funds and foreign donations 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahu-suspected-of-criminal-behavior-over-travel-expenses/>
 – including from a well-known British businessman – who paid for trips and 
stays at hotels. 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahu-suspected-of-criminal-behavior-over-travel-expenses/>
 