
When Jack Urwin was nine years old, his father Richard died on their bathroom 
floor. He’d had a heart attack. This was the first time that the Urwin family 
had heard of him having heart problems. That was not the case for Richard: his 
post-mortem revealed significant scar tissue, indicating a previous attack, 
while weeks later, Jack’s mum found angina medication in the pocket of one of 
his jackets. He’d known, but never said anything.

Weeks later, Jack won the epithet “funniest pupil” at school. The absurdity of 
this, he would write a decade later in a Vice article, was that he had never 
been particularly funny, but a fierce appetite for humour had been born from 
his father’s death. “After he died, jokes took preference over sincerity in 
almost any situation,” he wrote, “because the idea of picking at wounds and 
revealing the fragile human beneath was about the most terrifying thing I could 
comprehend. It’s a trait I now recognise as one of my father’s greatest flaws, 
ultimately contributing to his downfall. It’s also an inherent characteristic 
of so many men.”

The article, A Stiff Upper Lip Is Killing British Men 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/a-stiff-upper-lip-is-killing-british-men-344> 
went viral online on its publication in 2014. Urwin, then 22, was struck by 
another absurdity: as hundreds were lauding him as a fresh new voice on gender, 
as feminist writer Laurie Penny was messaging him about finding an agent and as 
Irvine Welsh was praising his piece as “fabulous” – he was stuck working a 
shift in a bar, unable to respond to any of it. Two years on, it is still easy 
to see why it took off: Urwin’s voice is honest, young, funny and sad. On a 
poignant, humorous note, his piece ends: “Please: start talking. I don’t want 
to have to write a whole book about this stuff.”

On the day I meet Jack about his whole book, the Orlando nightclub shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack> have happened 
overnight and the world is still trying to process why the gunman killed 49 
people. Fights are breaking out at the Euro 2016 championship in France, with a 
Russian politician tweeting his support of Russians attacking English fans: 
“Well done lads, keep it up!” It is a heavy day to be talking about 
masculinity; he wrinkles his nose when I bring up the news.

“We do need to look at how we ascribe meaning to these events,” he says.“That 
98% of mass shootings in the US are by men 
<http://time.com/114128/elliott-rodgers-ucsb-santa-barbara-shooter/> is never 
mentioned. If 98% of mass shootings were committed by Muslims or black people, 
there would be uproar! And you don’t see women trashing bars in Marseille.”

Urwin’s first book, Man Up, is all about what he calls this “toxic 
masculinity”: the public performance of masculinity that is conditioned into 
men from birth, the idea that acknowledging weakness is a weakness itself. Boys 
don’t cry, listen, talk about feelings: every caricature that is mined for 
advertising and sitcom fodder is rooted in a more sinister truth that produces 
real problems: like violence, sexism and mental illness. Britain’s “lad 
culture” – which Urwin defines as “vile, shitting-in-pint-glasses, 
rape-culture-perpetuating behaviour” – is at its heart one big pantomime, 
fuelled by the attention of the men involved.

I knew this was stupid behaviour. But I still took part in it. Why? A sense of 
belonging I think.
Jack Urwin 
Urwin himself might be mistaken for one of his male performers - tall and with 
a burly frame that would probably look serious on a rugby pitch – but the 
personality that goes with it is warm and acutely, almost apologetically 
self-aware.

“There is something about the male personality that means we are so driven by 
a mob mentality,” Urwin says. “I remember from school how fascinating it was to 
see how perfectly intelligent boys could spur each other on.” He reels off a 
list of “games” he played with other boys: pushing on someone’s chest until 
they fainted; flicking coins at each other’s knuckles; spraying deodorant up 
one’s nose; drinking Tabasco sauce. “I wasn’t an idiot. I knew this was stupid 
behaviour. But I still took part in it. Why? A sense of belonging I think. You 
don’t want to be the only one in a class of 30 not doing the masculine thing. 
It makes them perceive you as effeminate or gay.”

He doesn’t buy that this comes down to something innate in his gender – what 
the British Medical Journal calls “male idiot theory 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/349/bmj.g7094>”, or “evolutionary neuroandrogenic 
theory”, which links more testosterone to more aggression. “I have a problem 
drawing links such as these, as I fear they are all too often used to justify 
awful behaviour while ignoring the greater issue of how we are brought up and 
socialised to act,” he says.

How men are socialised to act is a product of history, Urwin argues in Man Up: 
he traces the concept of masculinity from the birth of “behavioural modernity” 
50,000 years ago, up to today’s “lads”, who he thinks were born from a desire 
to emulate the disappearing working class. One element Urwin returns to 
frequently is why men don’t talk about their feelings – an attitude he believes 
was handed down father-to-son from the two world wars. He does not exempt 
himself from this problem: “My partner says, ‘You literally wrote a book about 
talking more!’ But when you are writing, there is this level of detachment that 
you don’t get when talking. You can remove yourself from what you are writing 
about, almost as if it is fictional.”

This freedom allowed Urwin to share something he had never spoken about 
before: a period of self-harm when was 13. When his family read the book, there 
was some unhappiness. “It was very difficult for them knowing I felt able to 
share that with the whole world but not with them. I agonised over sharing it 
in the first place, but if it reaches someone who is ashamed about 
self-harming, I thought it might be a valuable resource. My mum was saying, 
‘Why did you never tell us about this? You’ve written a book about being more 
honest, but you’ve kept a lot of stuff from us.’” He suddenly laughs. “I was 
fairly certain my family hated me for a while. I still need to do some bridge 
building.”

Male suicide rate in UK discovered to be 3½ times that of women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/18/male-suicides-three-times-women-samaritans-bristol>
Silence produces more silence. As is often reported, there is a huge disparity 
in suicide rates between genders: men are three times more likely to complete a 
suicide attempt than women. However, the lastAdult Psychiatric Morbidity in 
England 
<http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB02931/adul-psyc-morb-res-hou-sur-eng-2007-rep.pdf>
 survey found that 7% of women and 4% of men in the UK had attempted suicide, 
which Urwin believes indicates another problem: “Some research suggests that 
men use more violent methods, because in that point of absolute despair, this 
is a way they can claw back some success. If they fail, it is a humiliation. Of 
all the ways our masculinity is killing us, there is nothing more harrowing 
than a man feeling successful if he completes his suicide.”


As the problems came before, Urwin feels a solution will also be produced from 
generational change. “It is like racism and homophobia – we sort of have to 
wait for some people to die out. I think some people can be changed, but when 
you get to middle age, it is very difficult to unlearn everything you’ve always 
known. But our attitudes to gender and sexuality are a world apart from 50 
years ago. We don’t need to be the men our grandfathers were.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fjack-urwin-we-dont-need-to-be-the-men-our-grandfathers-were%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94654c20c6f656637bd00c7b6e84c6bb781828c7%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jack%20Urwin%3A%20'We%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20the%20men%20our%20grandfathers%20were'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fjack-urwin-we-dont-need-to-be-the-men-our-grandfathers-were%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jack%20Urwin%3A%20%27We%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20the%20men%20our%20grandfathers%20were%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fjack-urwin-we-dont-need-to-be-the-men-our-grandfathers-were%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94654c20c6f656637bd00c7b6e84c6bb781828c7%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 ‘When you are writing, there is this level of detachment that you don’t get 
when talking...’ Jack Urwin. Photograph: Michael Barker 
While the book is in early days, Urwin is happy about the reception it has 
received: “It has left me feeling quite optimistic about the future of 
humanity.” He is thankful that women and feminists have been supportive; Urwin 
is a vocal feminist and is confounded by the idea that men and feminism are 
somehow at odds. For anyone new to today’s online dialogue, discussions of 
gender and abuse tend to go hand in hand. But bar a few run-ins with Men’s 
Rights Activists (MRAs) online, who argue men are now at a disadvantage due to 
the progress of feminism, Urwin has remained unscathed. When I write about 
women or gender, I pre-emptively logout of Twitter, I say; Urwin winces. “That 
is a male privilege,” he says. “For the most part, I don’t have any trouble, 
even when I support feminism.”

What he is finding troubling is dealing with praise. Men have lauded Man Up as 
something bold and new, but Urwin is hyper-aware of his female predecessors. “A 
lot of this has been touched on before but mostly by women. There are lots of 
ideas that aren’t necessarily new but people are celebrating me for them. It 
does feel a bit bad.”

He looks grim, then huffs a laugh. “I am not going to argue with it too much 
though. I want to sell books, on the cynical side of it.”

 * Man Up by Jack Urwin is published by Icon Books at £12.99. To order a copy 
for £10.65 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/man-up-440612.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, go tobookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 
333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of 
£1.99.
 