
“Downright nonsense” was the verdict of Mrs Augusta Bramston, a Hampshire 
friend and neighbour of the Austen family, on readingPride and Prejudice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/26/pride-prejudice-200th-anniversary>
. In 1814, Jane Austen publishedMansfield Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/10/mansfield-park-unsung-literary-heroines>
, a sophisticated study of love and family life. Mrs Bramston nevertheless 
thought she ought to give it go, and having struggled through volume one, 
“flattered herself she had got through the worst”.

Jane Austen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten> recorded this and 
other hilarious remarks from friends in a list of opinions onMansfield Park. 
The document, in Austen’s own neat handwriting, is just one of the funny and 
sad items in the British Library’s new exhibition,Jane Austen Among Family and 
Friends, which opened on Tuesday.

Austen surely recorded the comments in a spirit of malicious mockery rather 
than regret. Even if only a small number of readers appreciated her at the time 
of her death in 1817, she hopefully knew just how brilliant a writer she was. 
Two hundred years later, everyone knows it. Her face is to appear on£10 notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/24/jane-austen-appear-10-note> 
and£2 coins <http://www.royalmint.com/discover/uk-coins/the-coins-of-2017>, and 
the bicentenary of her death will see a slew of exhibitions showcasing her 
writing and world.

The British Library <https://www.theguardian.com/books/british-library> show 
concentrates on the handful of people who did value Austen: her family and 
friends. To them, she was not just an entertaining writer, but a daughter, 
sister and especially an aunt to her 33 nieces and nephews. Yet, while the 
Austens were proud of her, they couldn’t quite comprehend that she had 
published four well-received novels. “Every country has had its great men,” 
wrote her niece Caroline, “Such a one was my Aunt.” She was actually doing her 
best to talk up Austen’s achievements, but lacked the language with which to do 
so. “Great” writers were so obviously supposed to be male, and not anyone’s 
aunt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde85d0d439c53f85eed5339ae2ecb46b516b76e%2F456_486_2600_1745%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Austen%20at%20200%3A%20still%20a%20friend%20and%20a%20stranger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Austen%20at%20200%3A%20still%20a%20friend%20and%20a%20stranger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde85d0d439c53f85eed5339ae2ecb46b516b76e%2F456_486_2600_1745%2F2600.jpg>
 ‘A prettified version’ … a £10 note featuring Austen. Photograph: Bank of 
England/Rex Shutterstock 
Many of Austen’s stories – and some of her very earliest are on display at the 
British Library – were first written for family members, to be read aloud 
during quiet country evenings in the various parsonages, cottages and, in a few 
lucky cases, the mansions in which the extended Austen clan lived.

Until she published her books, Austen had no income apart from pocket money 
from her father or brothers. “Her whole world was her family,” explains Sandra 
Tuppen, the exhibition’s curator. “They gave her stability to write, she was 
reliant on them for money.” But with that came a sense of obligation. The 
exhibition contains a watercolour of Godmersham Park, her wealthy brother 
Edward’s mansion in Kent, where Jane spent long periods as the poor relation 
relied upon for cheap childcare. Once you know this, you understand how Austen 
the novelist used her insider-outsider perspective to skewer the vanities of 
the genteel world.

George Austen, Jane’s father, looms large in the exhibition. First, there’s 
the mahogany writing desk he bought her for her 19th birthday, which folds up 
into a neat, lockable box for travel. It represents a vote of confidence from 
the man who would act as her first, if unsuccessful, literary agent. One of the 
British Library’s treasures today, the desk’s drawers would have concealed the 
drafts ofSense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice.

George also purchased the notebooks in which Jane wrote out the uproarious and 
wicked short stories of her adolescence and teens. The notebook called “Volume 
the Second” contains Jane’s own handwritten version, for example, of “The 
Beautiful Cassandra”. The heroine falls in love, but not with a bewitching 
young viscount. The object of her desire is a bonnet. She steals it from a 
shop, before going to a confectioner’s where she “devoured six ices, refused to 
pay for them, knocked down the Pastry Cook and walked away”. Cassandra’s 
riotous adventures take place in 12 short chapters, each a sentence long: 
another joke was that this “novel” contained only 350 words. The three of 
Jane’s notebooks containing her teenage writings have been reunited by the 
British Library for the first time in 40 years.

But then there’s a letter from Jane to her brother Frank, telling him of their 
father’s death in Bath. His decease plunged his widow and daughters into 
financial crisis, for with George’s death their income simply stopped. From 
then on Jane had to live upon the charity of her brothers. “It’s a difficult 
society in which to be a woman,” explains Tuppen. “At one point, Jane has to 
stay in Kent for two months because there’s no one free among her brothers to 
‘bring’ her home again.” It was not respectable to travel in a public 
stagecoach alone. Frank was Jane’s benefactor, but also her controller.

Every word written by Austen was published long ago, so what is there to gain 
from seeing the real thing? The paper, the pens, the handwriting are all 
important, according to Tuppen. “The kinds of book she had to write in affected 
how her stories grew,” she says, pointing out that all the exhibits are small, 
no sheet of paper wider than a handspan. Paper was expensive; Austen had to use 
it carefully. “You also get a sense of her as a human being, quick thinking, 
very witty,” Tuppen continues, pointing out one letter where she has flipped 
the paper to squeeze more words in upside-down.

The exhibition closes with the last of Austen’s surviving letters, dating from 
just a few weeks before she died. Her hand, formerly so neat, has now become a 
scrawl. Poignantly, Jane reassures her nephew that she’s going to get well 
soon. “I am gaining strength very fast,” she claims. “I am now out of bed from 
9 in the morning to 10 at night - Upon the Sopha t’is true.” Within two months 
she would be dead, possibly from Hodgkin’s lymphoma, to beburied in Winchester 
Cathedra 
<http://www.winchester-cathedral.org.uk/our-heritage/famous-people/jane-austen-a-great-english-novelist/>
l under a memorial that famously neglects even to mention her books.

Austen often took her writing desk with her from her native Hampshire to 
London, where she negotiated her publishing deals. Once the British Library 
exhibition closes, the desk itself will be moved on to Oxford to appear from 22 
June in the Bodleian Library’sWhich Jane Austen? 
<http://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/whatson/whats-on/upcoming-exhibitions> 
exhibition. Rather than turning inward on her family, this exhibition will look 
at her wider world, examining her role as a professional writer in an age of 
war and the clashing of empires. “She lived in turbulent times,” says Kathryn 
Sutherland, an Austen scholar and the curator of the Bodeleian show, who 
beleives Austen was “our first novelist to describe the effect of war on the 
home front”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d31d3ce8a224f4aba92fa481204b64e1704f378%2F89_146_975_928%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Austen%20at%20200%3A%20still%20a%20friend%20and%20a%20stranger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Austen%20at%20200%3A%20still%20a%20friend%20and%20a%20stranger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjane-austen-200-anniversary-friend-stranger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d31d3ce8a224f4aba92fa481204b64e1704f378%2F89_146_975_928%2F975.jpg>
 Jane Austen may have sat for her sister Cassandra’s illustration of Mary, 
Queen of Scots. Photograph: British Library 
That second notebook of early stories also has another journey planned: after 
London, it will appear from 13 May inThe Mysterious Miss Austen 
<http://janeausten200.co.uk/event/jane-austen-200-mysterious-miss-austen> at 
Winchester Discovery Centre. The book also contains Austen’s version of a
Horrible Historiesstyle parody of a pompous history textbook. Jane’s elder 
sister and closest confidante Cassandra illustrated it, and may have asked Jane 
to sit for the portrait of her favourite historical figure, Mary, Queen of 
Scots. You’ll be able to make up your own mind if you think the sitter is 
really her or not, as the exhibition focuses on the vexed issue of Austen’s 
physical appearance. It is “not the usual reverential fare,” says its curator 
Louise West, who wants the anniversary celebrations to be both “highbrow, and 
lowbrow”. Winchester will be the place to go to see the five best-known 
possible portraits of Jane Austen, each with its own supporters and detractors, 
gathered together for the first time.

While Janeites are pleased that she’s going to be on the banknote, many of 
them feel the intense irony that the image chosen by the Bank of England is a 
prettified, fictional author portrait produced well after her death. One of 
Austen’s nieces described the image as a “pleasing, sweet face”, yet confessed 
to “not thinking it much like the original”.

Although all these anniversary exhibitions will attempt to reveal her to the 
world, it’s oddly appropriate that we don’t know quite what Austen looked like. 
“Seldom, very seldom,” she herself warns us, “does complete truth belong to any 
human disclosure; seldom can it happen that something is not a little 
disguised.” This most mysterious of authors always holds something back – and 
so continues to intrigue.

• Lucy Worsley’s book Jane Austen at Home will be published by Hodder in May.
 