
A popular Japanese girl band set up by an executive board member 
<https://tokyo2020.jp/en/organising-committee/structure/officer/> of the Tokyo 
2020 Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games-2020> organising 
committee has been criticised for giving a Halloween concert in costumes 
modelled on Nazi Waffen-SS uniforms.

Keyakizaka46, a spin-off of the phenomenally popular AKB48 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/08/japan-election-pop-group-akb48> 
J-pop stable formed by Yasushi Akimoto, donned black military-style costumes 
similar to those worn by the paramilitary wing of Hitler’s Nazi party. 
Publicity photos showed members wearing peaked caps featuring a bird insignia 
that resembles the Parteiadler eagle emblem of the Nazis.

The group, which formed in 2015, reached No 1 in the Oricon daily single CD 
and BillboardJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> top singles charts 
with its debut single,Silent Majority 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DeGkiItB9d8>, earlier this year. 


Akimoto, the band’s producer and lyricist, will help produce the opening 
ceremony for the Tokyo 2020 Olympics.

Social media users criticised the band’s choice of costume for its Perfect 
Halloween concert in Yokohama late last month.

Twitter user @batayanF3 <https://twitter.com/batayanf3> wrote: “Just because 
you didn’t know or because you don’t praise Nazis doesn’t mean you can do this 
kind of thing. It’s unforgivable considering how influential they are as 
talents.” Another,@buppii21 
<https://twitter.com/buppii21/status/793335014402306048>, suggested the members 
of the group, aged from 15 to 21, should read the Diary of Anne Frank.

@pfd1212 <https://twitter.com/pfd1212/status/793252671335477248>, said the 
group’s management should have known better than to dress children in Nazi 
uniforms.

Ichika Rokuso, a Japanese writer based in Berlin, implored young people to 
understand the hurt felt by the families and friends of those who died in the 
second world war.

In a statement posted on Keyakizaka46’s website, Akimoto said he was very 
sorry “for failing to oversee matters as the producer”.

Sony, the group’s label, said: “We express our heartfelt apology for causing 
offence ... because of our lack of understanding. We take the incident 
seriously and will make efforts to prevent a recurrence of a similar incident 
in the future.”


This is not the first time a Japanese pop band has provoked anger over the use 
of Nazi symbolism. In 2011, Sony and MTV apologised afterKishidan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kishidan> appeared on primetime television 
wearing Nazi-style uniforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/02/kishidan-nazi-uniforms-japan-aplogy>
. The apology came after the Los Angeles-based Simon Wiesenthal Centre, which 
monitors antisemitic activities, expressed “shock and dismay” at the boy band’s 
appearance.

Akimoto invited ridicule last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/03/japan-olympic-row-j-pop-band-akb48-opening-ceremony>
 when he proposed choosing the best of the AKB48 stable to play at the Olympic 
opening ceremony in Tokyo. One TV celebrity said subjecting a global TV 
audience to the group’s saccharine lyrics and juvenile dance routines would be 
an “embarrassment”.

 