
The Japanese government has scrapped controversial plans for a dramatic Zaha 
Hadid-designed $2bn (£1.3bn) stadium envisioned as the focal point of the 2020 
Tokyo Olympics, amid concern about rising costs and a growing public backlash.

The troubled history of Zaha Hadid's Tokyo Olympic stadium project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/17/the-troubled-history-of-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-project>
The move sparked an immediate response from world rugby’s governing body, 
which was scheduled to host the 2019 World Cup final in the stadium and will 
now no longer be able to do so. It said it was “very disappointed” at the 
decision and would need to consider its options.

“We have decided to go back to the start on the Tokyo Olympics-Paralympics 
stadium plan, and start over from zero,”said the prime minister,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/jul/17/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-zaha-hadid-tokyo-olympic-stadium-video>
Shinzō Abe, after a meeting at his office with Yoshirō Mori, chairman of the 
Tokyo 2020 organising committee. Organisers had already decided to scale back 
the original designs but they will now be scrapped altogether.

“I have been listening to the voices of the people and the athletes for about 
a month now, thinking about the possibility of a review,” he added. “We must go 
back to the drawing board. The cost has just ballooned too much.”

He said he had taken the decision after being reassured that there was still 
time to draw up new plans and complete the new stadium, on the site of the 
existing national stadium, before the 2020 Olympics. London began building its 
Olympic stadium in 2007, five years before the Games.

The ambitious design by the award-winning Iraqi-British architect Hadid, 
likened to a bike helmet, was due to not only host the opening game and final 
of the 2019 Rugby World Cup but also the 2020 Olympics and then become the new 
national stadium.

It was a key part of the bid that triumphed over Istanbul and Madrid in 2013 
to win the right to host the 2020 Games. But the government has faced growing 
criticism as the estimated cost for the stadium almost doubled from original 
estimates to 252bn yen (£1.3bn).

Abe said he had obtained the consent of Mori, a former prime minister, and 
instructed the sports and Olympics ministers to conduct a review and draw up a 
new plan.

World rugby’s governing body immediately hit out at the decision and said it 
would seek urgent clarification of the plans for the 2019 World Cup, awarded as 
part of a push to grow the sport in new markets.

“World Rugby is extremely disappointed by today’s announcement that the new 
national stadium will not be ready to host Rugby World Cup 2019 matches, 
despite repeated assurances to the contrary from the Japan Rugby 2019 
organising committee andJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> Sports 
Council,” said a spokesman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjapan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437129560917%2Ffdaa5d1d-e02a-44a4-8903-b5b2315c39c7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20scraps%20Zaha%20Hadid%20plan%20for%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjapan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20scraps%20Zaha%20Hadid%20plan%20for%20Olympic%20stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Fjapan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437129560917%2Ffdaa5d1d-e02a-44a4-8903-b5b2315c39c7-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Zaha Hadid won the design contest for the Tokyo stadium in 2012, but faced a 
barrage of criticism over its appearance. Photograph: David Levene 
Hadid, who has designed a similarly divisive stadium for the 2022 Football 
World Cup in Qatar, won the design contest for the Tokyo stadium in 2012, but 
faced a barrage of criticism over its appearance.

And amid growing international scrutiny of the costs and benefits of hosting a 
Games – something that the recently elected International Olympic Committee 
president, Thomas Bach, has promised to focus on – and domestic public 
pressure, organisers will now be forced to look for a more cost-effective 
solution.

Jim Heverin, project director at Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> Architects, said the 
rising cost of the stadium was not a result of the design, instead blaming the 
increasing cost of materials.

“Our teams in Japan and the UK have been working hard with the Japan Sports 
Council to design a new national stadium that would be ready to host the Rugby 
World Cup in 2019, the Tokyo 2020 Games and meet the need for a new home for 
Japanese sport for the next 50 to 100 years,” he said.

“It is not the case that the recently reported cost increases are due to the 
design, which uses standard materials and techniques well within the capability 
of Japanese contractors, and meets the budget set by the Japan Sports Council. 
The real challenge for the stadium has been agreeing an acceptable construction 
cost against the backdrop of steep annual increases in construction costs in 
Tokyo and a fixed deadline.”

One Japanese architect, Arata Isozaki, described the design as “like a turtle 
waiting for Japan to sink so that it can swim away”. The Pritzker prize-winning 
architect Fumihiko Maki, 86, organised a symposium to protest against the 
scheme, and was joined by fellow leading Japanese architects Toyo Ito, Kengo 
Kuma and Sou Fujimoto. A petition was launchedcalling for the project to be 
scrapped 
<https://www.change.org/p/%E6%96%87%E9%83%A8%E7%A7%91%E5%AD%A6%E7%9C%81-%E6%97%A5%E6%9C%AC%E3%82%B9%E3%83%9D%E3%83%BC%E3%83%84%E6%8C%AF%E8%88%88%E3%82%BB%E3%83%B3%E3%82%BF%E3%83%BC-%E7%A5%9E%E5%AE%AE%E5%A4%96%E8%8B%91%E3%81%AE%E9%9D%92%E7%A9%BA%E3%81%A8%E9%8A%80%E6%9D%8F%E4%B8%A6%E6%9C%A8%E3%81%AE%E9%A2%A8%E6%99%AF%E3%82%92%E5%AE%88%E3%82%8D%E3%81%86-%E5%B7%A8%E9%A1%8D%E3%81%AE%E5%BB%BA%E8%A8%AD%E8%B2%BB%E3%82%92%E3%81%8B%E3%81%91%E3%81%AA%E3%81%84-%E3%81%84%E3%81%BE%E3%81%82%E3%82%8B%E5%9B%BD%E7%AB%8B%E7%AB%B6%E6%8A%80%E5%A0%B4%E3%82%92%E7%9B%B4%E3%81%97%E3%81%A6%E4%BD%BF%E3%81%8A%E3%81%86>
.

Last year Hadid hit back at her peers’ complaints, telling Dezeen magazine 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2014/12/08/zaha-hadid-tokyo-2020-olympic-stadium-criticism-japanese-architects/>
: “I think it’s embarrassing for them. Many of them were friends of mine, 
actually the ones which I supported before like Toyo Ito, who I worked with on 
a project in London. I’ve known him for a long time.

“I understand it’s their town. But they’re hypocrites because if they are 
against the idea of doing a stadium on that site, I don’t think they should 
have entered the competition. The fact that they lost is their problem.

Zaha Hadid's Tokyo Olympic stadium slammed as a 'monumental mistake' and a 
'disgrace to future generations'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/nov/06/zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-slammed-as-a-monumental-mistake-and-a-disgrace-to-future-generations>
“They don’t want a foreigner to build in Tokyo for a national stadium. On the 
other hand, they all have work abroad. Whether it’s Sejima, Toyo Ito, or Maki 
or Isozaki or Kengo Kuma.”

The affair has echoes of the controversy that surrounded Hadid’s Aquatics 
Centre in London, where costs soared threefold to £269m as a result of the 
ambitious design, and certain elements had to be pared back.

The history of Olympic stadiums is chequered, due to the difficulties in 
planning for a future beyond the Games. The Beijing National Stadium, also 
known as the Bird’s Nest, is rarely used, although it will be pressed into 
action for the World Athletics Championships this summer, while the legacy 
issues with the venues built for the 2004 Games in Athens have become a symbol 
for the subsequent wider malaise in the country.

The the future of London’s Olympic Stadium, where total costs have now soared 
to £701m thanks to an ambitious plan to convert it into a multi-use venue that 
will become West Ham United’s home ground, has also proved controversial.

IOC vice-president John Coates, who is chair of the coordination commission 
that liaises with the host organising committee, said it had been reassured 
that the review would not affect the delivery of the stadium in time for the 
Games.

“The national stadium is a national project, which will serve the people of 
Japan for many years to come. This is why the Japanese government is best 
placed to decide on what is appropriate for this venue,” he said.
 