
A host of authors, including JK Rowling, David Nicholls, Jonathan Coe and Evie 
Wyld have powereda crowdfunded anthology of essays on race and immigration 
<https://unbound.co.uk/books/the-good-immigrant/supporters> to its funding 
target in just three days.

The Good Immigrant <https://unbound.co.uk/books/the-good-immigrant>, which 
promises to bring together 15 British black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) 
writers to explore “why we come here, why we stay … [and] where our place is in 
the world if we’re unwelcome in the UK”, launched on the crowdfunding site
Unbound <https://unbound.co.uk/> on Monday. It was propelled to full funding 
after JK Rowling lent her support, pledging £5,000 and a tweet to her six 
million followers: “I think this will be an important, timely read.”
J.K. Rowling (@jk_rowling) 
I think this will be an important, timely read. Help fund 'The Good Immigrant' 
(I've donated at link below)https://t.co/iWWuqGW0GG <https://t.co/iWWuqGW0GG>
 <https://twitter.com/jk_rowling/status/672204295253676032> December 3, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/jk_rowling/status/672204295253676032> 
Speaking to the Guardian, Nicholls confirmed he was also one of the book’s 470 
supporters. “It was a very modest pledge,” he said, “but I did want to support 
the project because it’s an important subject, and not something I know enough 
about.”

'Where are the brown people?': authors slam lack of diversity in UK publishing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/30/authors-slam-lack-diversity-in-uk-publishing-nikesh-shukla-jon-mcgregor>
According to the anthology’s editor, author Nikesh Shukla, the project came 
about after participating on “a bunch of panels on diversity” and deciding to 
do something positive. “Basically, I never want to sit on another diversity 
panel again,” he said.

The project’s extraordinary success left Shukla “giddy with happiness” and 
feeling “a mixture of relief and vindication that there is such a fierce 
appetite for BAME voices out there”.

“I think I’d feel more nervous if the book was just by me,” Shukla said, “but 
given there are so many voices contributing, I know it’ll be sick. These 
writers are ek dum first class.”

Contributors to the collection will include Miss L from Casting Call Woe, who 
will be writing about the pressures of being a woman of colour and a jobbing 
actor; the poet and broadcaster Musa Okwonga, who will examine leaving the UK; 
and the playwright Vinay Patel, who will explore death in immigrant families 
from India.

While the collection’s meteoric rise to full funding can partly be attributed 
to “the darling JK Rowling’s patronage”, Shukla explained, “but also because 
people want these books. And aren’t getting them. It shows that when you give 
people what they want, what they’ve been begging for – diverse voices – they’ll 
leap on to it.”

According to Shukla, the immediate response shows people are “tired of losing 
stories to a lack of representation, that if we continue to pass the buck to 
other people nothing will change, and that readers have voted with their 
pledge. By pledging for a book that hasn’t even been written yet.”

John Mitchinson, co-founder of Unbound, said the publisher was “thrilled” to 
publish The Good Immigrant.

“The beauty of crowdfunding is that we can respond swiftly,” Mitchinson said. 
“The handwringing that usually surrounds this issue is replaced by positive 
action on the part of both contributors and potential readers and a new book is 
born.”

Shukla called on publishers to specifically ask for BAME authors to send them 
their work.


“Look for the authors,” he said. “Don’t wait for them to come to you. Make 
them feel welcome enough to send you their stuff. I opened my inbox and was 
flooded with wicked-sounding submissions. Imagine if I’d been an agent or a 
publisher.”

For Shukla, a truly diverse publishing industry can change more than the books 
on our shelves. “If we can make positive steps to increase BAME representation, 
then we can start to look at other hidden inequalities,” he said, “and books 
will be inclusive and representative of a voracious nation of readers who can 
see themselves and others in books.”
 