
My friend John Shotter, who has died of cancer aged 79, was a psychologist 
who, through his questioning of mainstream ideas, influenced the direction of 
academic psychology and the training of psychotherapists.

Born in Glasgow, John was raised in Fareham, Hampshire, to which his parents, 
Louise (nee Scarlett) and Will, a soap salesman, had moved when he was young. 
John won a scholarship to the fee-paying Fareham grammar school, but left at 15 
to work as an apprentice engineer in the local aeronautics factory.

His interests, however, were turning from engineering to psychology, and in 
1959 he began a degree in psychology and mathematics at Birkbeck, University of 
London. He completed this as a part-time student over four years, and graduated 
with a first.

In 1966, he obtained a lectureship at Nottingham University. In those days 
British academic psychology was extraordinarily narrow: psychologists were 
expected to pride themselves on being experimental scientists and to dismiss 
any non-experimental approach.

With his engineering background, John realised that the procedures of the 
natural sciences were inappropriate for understanding human experience, and he 
wrote two highly original books,Images of Man in Psychological Research 
<http://www.taosinstitute.net/images-of-man-in-psychological-research> (1975) 
andSocial Accountability and Selfhood 
<https://www.amazon.com/Social-Accountability-Selfhood-John-Shotter/dp/0631130217>
 (1985), arguing for new forms of psychological inquiry.

The British psychology establishment did not respond kindly, and in 1987 John 
left Nottingham to take up a chair at Utrecht University, then at the 
University of New Hampshire in 1991. He produced further books and articles, 
includingCultural Politics of Everyday Life 
<https://openlibrary.org/books/OL1141571M/Cultural_politics_of_everyday_life> 
(1993) andConversational Realities 
<https://uk.sagepub.com/en-gb/eur/conversational-realities/book204172> (1994).

His 38-year marriage to Ann (nee Johnstone) did not withstand the strain of 
separation, and it ended in 1997. Ann remained with their four children, Mark, 
Laura, Emily and Joachim, in Nottingham.

In recent years, John was involved in training psychotherapists, first in 
London, then at the University of Bedfordshire and through the Taos Institute. 
In the course of this work he met Cherrie Ravello, a psychotherapist and senior 
psychiatric manager, whom he married in 2014.

Earlier this year, in Joint Action: Essays in Honour of John Shotter, 
contributors discussed the important of his writings, and in theInternational 
Journal of Collaborative-Dialogic Practices 
<https://collaborative-practices.com/>, psychotherapists from around the world 
explained why they found his work so inspiring.

His influence can also be seen in the loosening of British psychology degrees 
to incorporate the sort of critical perspective that he initiated. The British 
Psychological Society now requires accredited degrees to teach non-experimental 
forms of inquiry. That would have been unthinkable when John started out.

John is survived by his children; and by Cherrie and her sons, Kern and Frank.
 