
The art critic, essayist and novelist John Berger threw down his challenge 
early in his television series Ways of Seeing. This came in 1972, the year when 
Berger, who has died aged 90, broke through to real fame from his niche 
celebrity on the arts pages of the New Statesman. Ways of Seeing, made on the 
cheap for the BBC as four half-hour programmes, was the first series of its 
kind since Civilisation (1969), 13 one-hour episodes for whichKenneth Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/kenneth-clark>, its writer and 
presenter, and a BBC production team had travelled 80,000 miles through 13 
countries exploring 2,000 years of the visual culture of the western world. 
Berger travelled as far as the hut in Ealing, west London where his programmes 
were filmed, and no farther. What he said in his characteristic tone of sweet 
reasonableness was:

“In his book on the nude, Kenneth Clark says that being naked is simply being 
without clothes. The nude, according to him, is a form of art. I would put it 
differently: to be naked is to be oneself; to be nude is to be seen naked by 
others and yet not recognised for oneself. A nude has to be seen as an object 
in order to be a nude.”

In other words, art is a commodity and a woman in art is an object. No 
approach to art could have been more different from Clark’s gentlemanly 
urbanity. These demotic programmes turned Berger into the hero of a generation 
studying the burgeoning new university courses on European visual culture. The 
spin-off book was never out of print. Clark, meanwhile, found himself derided 
as Lord Clark of Civilisation.

Ways of Seeing was Berger’s apotheosis as a populariser, but in this year too 
he won the Booker prize, the James Tait Black Memorial prize and the Guardian
Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> prize with his novel G. In 
1967 he had published, with his frequent collaborator the photographer Jean 
Mohr, A Fortunate Man, a sensitive documentary account of a country doctor on 
his daily round in Gloucestershire. These three books began to sketch out the 
areas of Berger’s lifetime enterprise.

They were preceded by the publication of The Success and Failure of Picasso 
(1965) andArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> and Revolution: 
Ernst Neizvestny and the Role of the Artist in the USSR (1969); in one, he made 
a hopeless mess of Picasso’s later career, though he was not alone in this; in 
the other, he elevated a brave dissident artist beyond his talents.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm1GI8mNU5Sg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm1GI8mNU5Sg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm1GI8mNU5Sg&media=>
 John Berger, Ways of Seeing, BBC TV, 1972, episode 2, on the portrayal of the 
female nude 
The success and failure of John Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-berger> was not predictable for a boy 
born in Stoke Newington, north London, into a prosperous middle-class family, 
even though his mother, Miriam (nee Branson), had been born in working-class 
Bermondsey. His father, Stanley Berger, had wanted to be a priest, but while 
serving on the front in the first world war he lost his faith and won an MC, to 
which in peacetime he added being appointed OBE for his pioneering work in 
business cost accounting.

He left St Edward’s school, Oxford, at 16 to study at the Central School of 
Art; his course was interrupted in 1944 when he was called up and posted to a 
Belfast training depot, where he served as a lance-corporal in the Oxfordshire 
and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry. It was his first day-by-day encounter with 
the working classes and it shaped his politics for life.

On demob, Berger continued his education at Chelsea School of Art (1945-47). 
In 2002 a Barbican Gallery exhibition devoted to the 1950s London art scene 
included an unremarkable Berger painting of scaffolding on the South Bank site 
for the Festival of Britain, but when I interviewed Berger for the publication 
of the stories collected in Pig Earth in 1979 he pointed out on the walls of 
his mother’s well-appointed flat near Regent’s Park a couple of his paintings 
of peasants at work, a kind of stylised realism not far from the approach of 
the Italian realistRenato Guttuso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/12/renato-guttuso-estorick-collection-review-communist-marilyn-monroe>
, about whom Berger would later write extensively. The pictures clearly showed 
that he might have made some kind of a career in painting, though fortune was 
smiling on him when he chose to write instead.

After college he taught drawing at St Mary’s teacher training college at 
Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, southwest London, continued to paint, and 
exhibited his work at the Leicester, Redfern and Wildenstein galleries. It was 
not until a friend invited him to give a series of talks on art for the BBC 
World Service that he found his feet. In 1952, he showed the scripts for a 
couple of his broadcasts to TC Worsley, literary editor of the New Statesman, 
and began a 10-year stretch as a controversial and highly influential art 
critic for the journal, often singling out for praise an artist nobody else had 
heard of. This who he? element became a regular feature of his writings, but 
never seems to have damaged his reputation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU7LZxCUApds&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU7LZxCUApds>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU7LZxCUApds&media=>
 John Berger interviewed on Newsnight, BBC2, in 2011 
His first published collection of essays in 1960 was mostly drawn from his New 
Statesman reviews. He called it after the artist’s colour option Permanent Red 
(pun intended: his US publishers pointedly retitled the book Toward Reality: 
Essays in Seeing). In it, magisterially, he categorised artists under chapter 
headings such as Artists Defeated by the Difficulties and Artists Who Struggle. 
The first category included Jackson Pollock – an unconvincing essay in which he 
could not quite bring himself to write the artist off though he did assign to 
his work the dreaded description “decorative” – Naum Gabo, Paul Klee, Jean 
Dubuffet and – which dates the collection –John Bratby 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/john-bratby-804>. The second, containing 
implicitly greater artists, included Henry Moore, Ceri Richards, David Bomberg, 
George Fullard and Friso ten Holt, a Dutchman who remained doggedly obscure 
despite Berger’s advocacy.

An essay in Permanent Red headed Who Is an Artist? imagines the thought 
processes of an artist lying under a beech tree and assessing shapes, light, 
space and volume: prefacing all the argumentative pieces about the role of art 
in society, it briefly indicates why Berger was a successful and popular 
teacher and how perceptive he could have been as a critic had he not been so 
prescriptive.

Although Berger’s emergence as television’s populist sage in Ways of Seeing 
was a throwback to the dogmatism of Permanent Red, it was an extraordinary 
trick to have pulled off. A running theme was that portable oil paintings came 
at the right time in the growth of capitalism to be used for publicity and 
propaganda, a use vastly expanded with the invention of photography. The 
Guardian art critic of the time, Norbert Lynton, wrote bluntly: “I often cannot 
believe Berger ... it is clear from his writings that he is a sensitive man and 
in many ways a wise one, and that he is willing to lie about art to make his 
political points.”

“Lie” may be a bit strong, but in his early days Marxist dialectic did force 
him into uncomfortable contortions. Lynton may, to take one example, have been 
thinking of what Berger had to say about the analysis of Frans Hals’s two last 
paintings by the scholar of Netherlands art Seymour Slive. Slive closely shows 
how the paintings work technically as group portraits of the governors and 
governesses of the Haarlem almshouses where the impoverished Hals himself 
received charity; but Berger says of Slive’s analysis, “It’s as though the 
author wants to mask the images, as though he fears their directness and 
accessibility.”

However prone Slive may be to an art historian’s preference for painterly 
values over social discourse, his analysis is nevertheless closer to the heart 
of the matter than Berger’s fanciful account of a kind of class stand-off 
between the destitute artist and the governors, not least because on another 
and more likely reading, given Hals’s approach to portraiture even of men and 
women in their prime, these two groups are painted with compassion but above 
all with a sharp eye for laying down what was before him.

Though Berger never specifically recanted, he did later admit that Ways of 
Seeing was too rushed and crude, and that he had not allowed for the genius 
factor. All the same, if urgency and clarity were at this stage Berger’s great 
virtues as a writer, as a television performer he also brought warmth and an 
engagingly persuasive personality to bear.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVLwmv-1AZDg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVLwmv-1AZDg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVLwmv-1AZDg&media=>
 John Berger interviewed by Jeremy Isaacs on Face to Face, BBC2 
It is inevitable that this huge success remains the main element of Berger’s 
career, but his more impressive work was rooted in his life-changing decision 
in 1962 to abandon England as his home and settle first in Geneva, and then 
from 1974 in a remote peasant community at Quincy in the Haute-Savoie. The 
intellectual climate of England was too unserious for him.

Visitors to Berger noticed how the villagers took to him and his family as 
easily as he had to them. The outcast in his native London had come home. Here 
Berger’s remote situation allowed him the time and serenity to stitch his 
writing into a seamless garment fitting to the village life in which he helped 
whenever extra hands were needed, at harvest time or with animal husbandry.

He had already published his first novel, A Painter of Our Time, in 1958. The 
painter of the title is a Hungarian refugee from fascism who, just as he 
achieves a great success in London, returns to Budapest to take part in the 
1956 uprising against Soviet domination and is not heard of again. This is a 
satisfying tale of personal and artistic integrity, though the painter has 
uncannily similar views to the author’s own much bruited opinions on life and 
art.

Berger followed this with two less successful novels, The Foot of Clive (1962) 
and Corker’s Freedom (1964), before G, with its three prizes in 1972. Guests at 
the lunch for the Guardian award held their breath: at the Booker award a few 
days earlier Berger had attacked the sponsors for exploitation of their 
Caribbean workforce, and announced that he would be giving half the prize to 
the Black Panthers, the revolutionary movement. The Guardian’s editor, Alastair 
Hetherington, said in his speech that he would double the prize money 
(admittedly small to start with) if Berger would give half of it to a 
constructive cause rather than the obviously destructive Black Panthers. Berger 
turned away wrath with a smile, and with warmth and grace accepted the Guardian 
cheque.

Yet G is a not just a powerful book, it is powerfully flawed as well. It is an 
experimental novel at a time when experiment was the norm, influenced by the 
French nouveau roman. The structure, with its lumpen authorial interpolations, 
is painting by numbers: here is one of many possible examples from early in the 
novel when the rich father of the hero is speaking of his journey through the 
Alps to be reunited with his mistress (whom he addresses as a sparrow):

“‘Ah! Laura. To think that I came under those mountains, the tunnel is fifteen 
kilometres long, fifteen. It is a marvel ... And on this side of the mountain,
passeretta mia, you are waiting for me.’

“(The St Gothard tunnel was opened in 1882. Eight hundred men lost their lives 
in its construction.)”

Cervantes had made this sort of writer’s intervention with a better and 
lighter touch 400 years earlier.

Nevertheless, it seemed that Berger had found his vocation as novelist, 
playwright, screenwriter and (much less known) poet of simplicity and lucidity 
– enough verse to put together in a Collected Poems (2014). The half of the 
Booker money that he didn’t give to the Black Panthers he spent on putting 
together, with Mohr again, a book called A Seventh Man (1975). It was more 
ambitious than A Fortunate Man, an attempt to describe in verse, fiction, 
reportage, photographs and readymade images the lives of Europe’s 22 million 
migrant workers. The modernist method that marred G worked much better in this 
media montage, and it was received with acclaim.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De3VhbsXk9Ds&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De3VhbsXk9Ds>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De3VhbsXk9Ds&media=>
 John Berger, The Art of Looking, BBC TV, 2016 
His first peasant work of fiction – or storytelling, as from his adopted 
peasant way of life he preferred to call it – was Pig Earth, produced in 1979 
by Writers and Readers, a publishing co-operative that Berger helped to set up 
and finance. It was a collection of tales developed from the talk of his fellow 
villagers, seemingly as close to the lives of these peasants and their animals 
as their own skins. It concluded with three stories about the murder of Lucie 
Cabrol and her presence after death in the community. Simon McBurney and Mark 
Wheatley adapted them into a play,The Three Lives of Lucie Cabrol 
<http://www.complicite.org/productions/TheThreeLivesofLucieCabrol>: when the 
Complicite company took it to the Shaftesbury theatre, the Guardian critic 
Michael Billington described the production as “one of the supreme theatrical 
experiences in all London”.

His next two books, Once in Europa (1987) and Lilac and Flag (1990), were each 
a collection of discrete stories accumulating into a novel, and were brought 
together with Pig Earth in a trilogy published as Into Their Labours (1992). 
Three years later he published To the Wedding and gave all his royalties to the 
London Lighthouse, an organisation supporting the victims of Aids.

Though he never admitted it publicly, the writing of this novel was prompted 
by the death of his daughter-in-law from an Aids-related virus. The book is a 
remarkable achievement in which the sequences covering many years and several 
countries mesh effortlessly into a lucid yet almost visionary tale of a young 
footloose and fancy-free woman, Ninon, who is dying of Aids after a casual 
sexual encounter on a beach. She later falls in love with a man who, 
regardless, decides to marry her. The account mixes the method of magic fiction 
and a Greek chorus – a blind seller of little metal religous votive plaques,
tamata, who has the power to zoom in on the lives of the other characters – 
with lyrical descriptions of Ninon’s fancy-free life and sharp cinematic cuts 
between brief sequences describing the journey of her mother from Austria and 
her father (Berger’s motorbike-riding doppelgänger) fromFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> to Ninon’s wedding in the village 
church of Gorino in the delta of the river Po.

With this book Berger arrived at a mastery that he displayed again in 
Photocopies (1996), a collection of encounters with real and imagined 
characters, and later books. He continued to write about art, but related it 
more closely to his personal experience, and though he never ceased to believe 
in the perfectibility of society, he edged towards an understanding of Marxism 
as an analytical tool rather than an infallible cure for the ills of the world.

His first marriage, to the artist and illustrator Pat Marriott in 1949, ended 
in divorce. His second marriage, in the mid-1950s, was to the Russian Anya 
Bostock (nee Anna Sisserman); they split up in 1970s. Soon after he married for 
a third time, to the American Beverly Bancroft, who worked with the British 
Library on itsacquisition of the Berger archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/20/british-library-john-berger-archive>
, now open to the public. Beverly died in 2013.

Letters: John Berger obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/12/john-berger-obituary-letters> 
Last year saw the premiere in Berlin of the film The Seasons in Quincy: Four 
Portraits of John Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/16/the-seasons-in-quincy-four-portraits-of-john-berger-review-tilda-swinton-berlin-2016>
, directed by Tilda Swinton, Colin McCabe, Christopher Roth and Bartek 
Dziadosz, and the publication of Confabulations, a miscellany of essays and 
drawings.At the end of his life Berger lived in the Paris suburb of Antony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/30/john-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller>
.

He is survived by his three children. Katya, a writer, and Jacob, a film 
director, came from his marriage to Anya. From that to Beverly he had another 
son, Yves, an artist and writer, who collaborated with him on the book Rondo: 
Une Élégie pour Beverly (2015).

• John Peter Berger, writer and art critic, born 5 November 1926; died 2 
January 2017

• This article was amended on 3 January 2017. The play The Three Lives of 
Lucie Cabrol was adapted by Simon McBurney and Mark Wheatley, and John Berger’s 
archive was acquired by the British Library rather than the British Museum. It 
was further amended on 18 January 2017. Berger’s book A Fortunate Man was 
published in 1967 rather than 1972, and he split up with Anya Bostock in the 
1970s rather than the 1990s. He did not move to Quincy in 1962, but to Geneva; 
his move to Quincy came in 1974.
 