
My friend John Caffrey, who has died aged 78, was a remarkable and modest man. 
He was a self-taught artist, naturalist, scholar and proud Morpethian.

Born and brought up in the Northumberland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northumberland> town, he left school at 
15, and for six years worked as a miner at Pegswood colliery. National service, 
though, changed his life. Trained as a combat medic in the Parachute Regiment, 
he travelled the world and learned new skills. When his service ended he joined 
the Post Office Telephone Service (later to become BT) as a linesman. He stayed 
with BT until, as Newcastle area manager, he retired.

As a young man, John met the artist George Jude McLean 
<http://artuk.org/discover/artists/mclean-george-jude-19201993>, director of the
Bondgate Gallery <https://www.alnwickplayhouse.co.uk/exhibitions> in Alnwick, 
who recognised his talent and encouraged him to paint. Since then his paintings 
from nature, particularly of native birds, have been widely exhibited and 
reproduced. For many years he wrote a natural history column for theMorpeth 
Herald <http://www.morpethherald.co.uk/> entitled The Wansbeck and Beyond, 
drawing on memories and observation. At any season, a walk with him along the 
wooded Wansbeck valley was an education in itself.

Among his heroes were the Northumberland naturalist and wood engraver Thomas 
Bewick <http://www.bewicksociety.org/>, and the American essayist Henry David 
Thoreau <http://www.biography.com/people/henry-david-thoreau-9506784>, author 
of the natural history classic Walden, or Life in the Woods. John visited 
Walden Pond during a sketching holiday in New England, and became involved with 
theThoreau Society, <http://www.thoreausociety.org/> in Concord, Massachusetts, 
which published his articles and art work in their quarterly bulletin; his 
painting of the American woodthrush is held by the Thoreau birthplace museum.

Over the years John built up an extensive library of Thoreau’s writings and 
Thoreau scholarship, and at the time of his death was compiling an exhibition, 
to be held in May at Newcastle’sLit & Phil Society 
<http://www.litandphil.org.uk/>, to commemorate the bicentenary of Thoreau’s 
birth.

John was a devoted family man. In 1961, on a short leave from the army, he 
married Margaret Wilson in Morpeth. They created a home together, where they 
welcomed many friends, who would climb the nearly vertical stairs to the tiny 
attic studio where John read, wrote and painted, looking down to the woods and 
fields he loved.

Margaret survives him, along with their children, Melanie, Theresa and 
Patrick, and five grandchildren.
 