
On 5 November, John Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-berger> 
will turn 90. As I travel to Paris to meet him, I carry a bagful of books. 
There are recently published art historical writings,Portraits 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337806/s/portraits-john-berger-on-artists/>
, and, to coincide with his 90th birthday,Landscapes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/landscapes-445290.html> (judiciously selected 
by Tom Overton for Verso), a fascinating series of encounters with the thinkers 
who have mattered to Berger, from Brecht and Walter Benjamin to Rosa Luxemburg. 
A marvellous miscellany of more recent work,Confabulations 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/confabulations.html>, has just been published 
by Penguin, andA Jar of Wild Flowers: Essays in Celebration of John Berger 
<https://www.zedbooks.net/shop/book/a-jar-of-wild-flowers/forthcoming/> 
(including tributes from Ali Smith, Sally Potter and Julie Christie) is coming 
soon from Zed books.

The homage continues on film in The Seasons in Quincy: Four Portraits of John 
Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/16/the-seasons-in-quincy-four-portraits-of-john-berger-review-tilda-swinton-berlin-2016>
, shot during his late 80s – a collage of informal conversation and political 
discussion, with offerings by Tilda Swinton, the writer and producer Colin 
MacCabe and others. It was shot in the hamlet in Haute-Savoie, in the French 
Alps, where Berger lived for more than 40 years. These jostling admirers show 
not only that the man is greatly loved, but an intellectual indebtedness behind 
the wish to say thank you. Critic, novelist, poet, dramatist, artist, 
commentator – and, above all, storyteller – Berger was described by Susan 
Sontag as peerless in his ability to make “attentiveness to the sensual world” 
meet “imperatives of conscience”. His bookWays of Seeing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-of-seeing.html>, and the 1972 BBC 
television series <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00dtnvm> based on it, 
changed the way at least two generations responded to art. And his writing 
since then – especially about migration – has changed the way many of us see 
the world.

Berger still has the ability to give himself the slip, to turn perception into 
an out-of-body experience

Berger now lives in Antony, a suburb seven miles outside Paris, where he stays 
with his old friend Nella Bielski, an actorand writer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/24/fiction.features1> who grew up 
in the Soviet Union. They open the door together, and as we sit down to lunch, 
she turns to me and says: “The thing you have to understand about John is that 
he is not interested in talking about himself.” While the chorus of approval 
gets louder on this side of the Channel, he is, unlikely as this might sound, 
barely aware of any fuss brewing. When I produce a proof ofA Jar of Wild Flowers
, he turns it over in his hands in delighted surprise. “That is a drawing by 
Melina,” he exclaims, surveying the flowers with spindly stems on the cover, 
“my granddaughter.” He gets up from the table and returns with an oil portrait, 
the size of a sheet of A4 paper. It is of an ageless face and yet Melina is 
only 13. (Berger has three children – Katya, Jacob and Yves – and five 
grandchildren.) He props it next to us and we look at her, as if she had joined 
us for lunch. “If you ask me who I am,” Berger says, “I’d like to see myself 
through her eyes, in the way she looks at me.” Her stare is disconcertingly 
level. She looks, we agree, as if she knows more than she could possibly know 
or have seen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfafe60d160d6d1036e42899acf9b72b7c067218%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfafe60d160d6d1036e42899acf9b72b7c067218%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 The painting of his granddaughter, Melina, 13, by Jules Linglin, of which 
Berger says: ‘If you ask me who I am, I’d like to see myself through her eyes.’ 
Photograph: Jules Linglin/Kate Kellaway 
There are two things that are wonderful about this moment. The first is the 
reminder that Berger is as interested as ever in ways of seeing; that he still 
has the ability to give himself the slip, to turn perception into an 
out-of-body experience. And second, it is characteristic that he is keen to 
champion the young artist who painted his granddaughter. “Fetch me a piece of 
card from that side table,” he says. He writes in his not-quite-steady, 
attractively looping hand: Jules Linglin. “He is going to be very well known 
one day,” he declares, handing the card back to me.

In spite of his wish to be seen through his granddaughter’s eyes, it is Berger 
himself I now observe. He is smallish, but his face is big – handsomely hewn, 
with blue eyes and thick white hair. I have recently watchedWays of Seeing on 
YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pDE4VX_9Kk>, and it is extraordinary 
how commanding the four episodes still are. Berger had no time for ivory towers 
– his way of seeing was radical. Forty-four years ago he was a charismatic 
presence, looking into the camera with piercing eyes and a frequent frown, as 
if constantly on the edge of disagreeing with himself. The look was fitting 
because what the series did was to make people rethink. He never ducked 
difficulty: he described, for instance, how women, in traditional painting, 
were there to “feed an appetite, not to have any of their own”. Unlike Kenneth 
Clark’s patricianCivilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/19/kenneth-clark-civilisation-bbc-review>
(1969),Ways of Seeing was never overbearing. In each episode, Berger sports the 
same groovy shirt with a geometric brown design on a cream background. His 
voice is clear and emphatic and fudges its Rs. His final words in the series 
are: “What I’ve shown, and what I’ve said… must be judged against your own 
experience.” That is what everything he has written asks us to do.

For me, Berger will always be the author of To the Wedding 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/to-the-wedding.html> – a moving, unexpectedly 
affirmative novel about Aids, in which truth pursued fiction because he 
discovered only after he had started writing it that his daughter-in-law was 
HIV-positive. When I was a Booker judge in 1995, it was, out of 141 contenders, 
the novel I most wanted to win – although it possibly made for a quieter life 
that it didn’t. Berger famouslygave away half his Booker prize money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/09/lookingbackatthebookerjoh>
 to the Black Panthers in 1972, whenG <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/g.html>
, his postmodern novel about an Italian philanderer’s political coming-of-age, 
secured the prize. A lifelong Marxist (although never a member of the Communist 
party), he disapproved of Booker McConnell’s historical association with 
indentured labour in the Caribbean. The other half of the money went to funding 
Berger’s book,A Seventh Man <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/seventh-man.html>
, with the photographerJean Mohr <http://www.jeanmohr.ch/image/oeuvre>, about 
European migrant workers – a work he has since said is the one he would most 
like to survive him. Apparently, one of the Black Panthers went with him to the 
Booker ceremony and repeatedly advised him to “keep it cool”.

I'm like the lookout guy on a boat who does small jobs, such as shovelling 
stuff into a boiler, but I’m no navigator

And now Berger is looking at my proof copy of Confabulations – a miscellany of 
his essays and drawings (he went to the Chelsea School of Art as a young man, 
studying under Henry Moore, and taught there before being hired as theNew 
Statesman’s art critic). We consider his lively sketch of half a dozen 
topsy-turvy mushrooms. Underneath, in his hand, is written: “See you later, 
Omelette…” People forget that Berger is funny. And curious. And that he listens 
– how he listens. Over lunch, the small talk is of artichokes and an incredible 
Georgian dish involving walnuts, but this then leads Nella to talk about 
Berger’s American wife, Beverly Bancroft (mother of Yves; the older children 
are from an earlier marriage), who died in 2013, and of her artistry as a 
gardener. This makes me think of the most moving scene inThe Seasons in Quincy, 
in which Berger urges Tilda Swinton’s teenage twins to pick raspberries because 
Beverly loved them. Berger suggests the twins gather photos of Beverly – and 
they go ahead and make a sort of homemade shrine and eat bowlfuls of 
raspberries alongside it. “Your pleasure will give her pleasure,” Berger tells 
them. Towards the end of lunch, Nella whispers to me, in an aside, that she has 
nicknamed her Parisian house “Hotel Spinoza” – after Berger’s favourite 
17th-century philosopher. His bookBento’s Sketchbook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bento-s-sketchbook-268205.html> (2011) was 
inspired by Spinoza, whose day job was as a lens grinder. Like his hero, Berger 
prefers not to distinguish between the physical and spiritual. Spinoza’s 
vision, he now tells me, is that “all is indivisible”.

After lunch we move into his study, a den of paintings, a place of light, its 
windows thrown wide, looking on to trees. He tries to make himself comfortable 
on the white sofa, an arthritic back giving him trouble. As a writer, Berger 
has that rare and wonderful gift of being able to make complex thoughts simple. 
He once said, in a BBC interview with Jeremy Isaacs, that he likes, in all his 
work, to follow the advice of the photographerRobert Capa 
<https://pro.magnumphotos.com/C.aspx?VP3=CMS3&VF=MAGO31_10_VForm&ERID=24KL535353>
: “When the picture is not good enough, go closer…” His eye for detail remains 
unrivalled and consistently surprising (think of his irresistible observation 
that cows walk as if they were wearing high heels). Reading him is like 
standing at a window – perhaps a bit like the window of this study – with no 
one blocking the view. “The way I observe comes naturally to me as a curious 
person – I’m likela vigie – the lookout guy on a boat who does small jobs, 
maybe such as shovelling stuff into a boiler, but I’m no navigator – absolutely 
the opposite. I wander around the boat, find odd places – the masts, the 
gunwale – and then simply look out at the ocean. Being aware of travelling has 
nothing to do with being a navigator.”

Berger was born in Stoke Newington, north London. His father, Stanley, was a 
Hungarian émigré who came from Trieste via Liverpool to London and was much 
affected by the first world war, in which he served as an infantry officer and 
was awarded the Military Cross. He loved painting and was self-taught (paternal 
conscience led him, when he found John reading Joyce’sUlysses, to confiscate 
the book, along with five others, and lock them up in his safe). In Colin 
MacCabe’s film forThe Seasons in Quincy, Berger instructs Tilda Swinton (a 
friend for more than 20 years) on how to quarter and peel apples in the way his 
father used to do, and affectionately remembers how his father wanted him to be 
a lawyer, a doctor, an English gentleman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b160689d23db595ce781fc9efe94527255ed87%2F0_0_928_523%2F928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b160689d23db595ce781fc9efe94527255ed87%2F0_0_928_523%2F928.jpg>
 Berger with Tilda Swinton in The Seasons in Quincy. 
Berger’s mother, Miriam, came from Bermondsey, south London (her father worked 
in the docks and looked after brewery dray horses). She had been a suffragette 
and, Berger has said, was a “very mysterious person, very secretive”. But she 
was not secretive about her ambition that her son would one day become a 
writer. Berger prefers to avoid talking about his boarding school, St Edward’s, 
Oxford, which he once described as “lunatic” and with “sadism, torture, 
bullying… an absolutely monstrous place, a little totalitarian system”. He was 
sent there aged six and ran away at 16. Was it at school he first understood 
that the world was unjust? “I learnt even earlier,” he replies, “at about 
five.” And he pauses and I wait. It is like watching a fisherman pulling on a 
line: “My mother – to make money to send me to school – made biscuits, sweets 
and chocolate to sell. I didn’t see much of her as she was always in the 
kitchen, working. But once I was in the kitchen and a young man on a bicycle 
came in and asked for two bars of chocolate. She picked them up, told him the 
price and he said: ‘Oh, forgive me, I’ve not got this money, they’re too 
expensive for me,’ and walked out without any chocolate. And I was enormously 
struck by this incident. I did not judge. I did not judge my mother nor did I 
judge him for not having enough money.” He pauses, “I was just waiting for Karl 
Marx,” and he laughs.

In his essay Impertinence (in Confabulations), he describes the New Zealand 
governess (pre-school) who used to banish him into what she called “the Cry 
Cupboard” whenever he wept. Sometimes his mother would come upstairs to see how 
he was doing and cheer him along with a box of her chocolate fudge. “School, 
rather than confronting me with something, confirmed something I already felt 
because, from a very early age, I had this sense of harshness and the need for 
endurance.”

This landscape was part of my energy, my body. I loved it not because it was a 
view – but because I participated in it

In 1944 he joined up, refusing a commission with the Oxfordshire and 
Buckinghamshire light infantry, and became a lance corporal at a training camp. 
He preferred the company of working-class recruits, for whom he became a 
scribe, writing their letters home. In a sense, he has continued to do this all 
his life: telling other people’s stories lest they vanish. In a conversation 
with Susan Sontag, he once said: “A story is always a rescuing operation.” And 
he has also said (inThe Seasons in Quincy): “If I’m a storyteller it’s because 
I listen. For me, a storyteller is like apasseur who gets contraband across a 
frontier.”

In his 1975 book A Seventh Man, about migration, the rescuing impulse is 
clear. Berger writes in the preface: “To outline the experience of the migrant 
worker and to relate this to what surrounds him – both physically and 
historically – is to grasp more surely the political reality of the world at 
this moment. The subject is European, its meaning is global. Its theme is 
unfreedom.” When he considers today’s refugee crisis – no longer confined to 
Europe – does he see the first world as suffering from a failure of 
imagination? There is another extended pause, like a ravine into which one 
might fall. Eventually he replies: “What two different people have in common 
will always, in all cases, be larger than what differentiates them. And yet for 
dozens of different reasons, circumstances blind people to that.”

And what does he think about Brexit? He leans back on the sofa (we have now 
shifted from the overheated study into a cooler parlour, a sofa crawl in 
operation) and admits it has always been important to him to define himself as 
European. He then attempts to describe what he sees as the bigger picture: “It 
seems to me that we have to return, to recapitulate what globalisation meant, 
because it meant that capitalism, the world financial organisations, became 
speculative and ceased to be first and foremost productive, and politicians 
lost nearly all their power to take political decisions – I mean politicians in 
the traditional sense. Nations ceased to be what they were before.” In 
Meanwhile (the last essay inLandscapes) he notes that the word “horizon” has 
slipped out of view in political discourse. And he adds, returning to Brexit, 
that he voted with his feet long ago, moving to France.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60577ec26b72ae2f91c7e80139b067e8bc9c5d36%2F0_0_2184_2743%2F2184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Berger%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20storyteller%20it%E2%80%99s%20because%20I%20listen%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fjohn-berger-at-90-interview-storyteller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60577ec26b72ae2f91c7e80139b067e8bc9c5d36%2F0_0_2184_2743%2F2184.jpg>
 John Berger c1962, the year he moved to France. Photograph: Peter Keen/Getty 
Images 
We talk about what it is for a person to adopt a foreign country as home, and 
about how it is possible to love a landscape like a familiar face. For Berger, 
that face is the Haute-Savoie. “This is the landscape I lived in for decades 
[he left only after Beverly died; his son Yves still lives there with his 
family]. It matters to me because during that time, I worked there like a 
peasant. OK, don’t let’s exaggerate. I didn’t work as hard as they did but I 
worked pretty hard, doing exactly the same things as the peasants, working with 
them. This landscape was part of my energy, my body, my satisfaction and 
discomfort. I loved it not because it was a view – but because I participated 
in it.”

He explains: “The connection between the human condition and labour is 
frequently forgotten, and for me was always so important. At 16, I went down a 
coal mine in Derbyshire and spent a day on the coal face – just watching the 
miners. It had a profound effect.” What did it make you feel? “Respect,” he 
says quietly. “Just respect. There are two kinds. Respect to do with ceremony – 
what happens when you visit the House of Lords. And a completely different 
respect associated with danger.” He says: “This is not a prescription for 
others, but when I look back on my life I think it’s very significant I never 
went to a university. I refused to go. Lots of people were pushing me and I 
said, ‘No. I don’t want to’, because those years at university form a whole way 
of thinking.” And you feel free from that? “Yes.”

Even at my old age, I’m still capable of getting very angry

Berger – fittingly, given his work with peasants – means shepherd in French. 
Do the French see him as one of their own? “My writing in France has not had a 
huge impact. The countries where I’m most read are Spain, Latin American and 
until recently, oddly, Turkey… and Italy.” Nor has he lived up to his surname, 
except “I’ve occasionally taken a ewe on heat in the back of my 2CV to meet a 
ram”. I say we don’t call that shepherding, we call that something else. He 
laughs. He is a man of action: until a few months ago he was (a most dashing 
octogenarian) still riding a motorbike. Nella tells me they hope it won’t be 
long before he rides again – and swims. Berger is a keen swimmer and, in
Confabulations, writes brilliantly about the democracy of swimming – people 
stripped of telltale trappings, doing their lengths. “When you are swimming,” 
he says, “you become almost weightless, and that weightlessness has something 
in common with thought.” There is also a wonderful account inBento’s Sketchbook 
 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2011/11/22/john-berger-on-%E2%80%98bento%E2%80%99s-sketchbook%E2%80%99/>
of a friendship he strikes up with a Cambodian woman who shares the same 
Parisian swimming pool. She gives him a painting of a bird and, he maintains, 
teaches him something about homelessness.

As he nudges closer to 90, Berger feels his own way of seeing has changed 
surprisingly little, although, he points out, technology has changed the way 
younger generations explore art. He admits, then, to his enthusiasm for 
texting: “I’ve been a fan for a long while because it’s like whispers – and 
with that goes intimacy, secrecy, playfulness…” But there is nothing fixed 
about the way he sees. He believes one never sees the same picture twice: “The 
second time I saw theGrünewald altarpiece 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5f/Grunewald_Isenheim1.jpg> 
was after a terrorist attack – it was the same painting yet I saw it 
differently.” The importance of certain painters has shifted too. He reveres 
Modigliani less, admires Velázquez more: “When one is young, one likes drama, 
excitation, bravura – Velázquez has none of this.”

John Berger: ‘Writing is an off-shoot of something deeper’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/12/john-berger-writing-is-an-off-shoot-of-something-deeper>
As a writer, Berger has always had a gift for making absences present. Can he 
summon the people he has lost in his mind? “Yes, yes, yes… they are very 
present.” I tell him how moved I was by his essay Krakow (inLandscapes), in 
which he remembers a New Zealand teacher, Ken, a huge influence on him. And his 
eyes fill as I speak. It was Ken who told him that whenever he could not sleep, 
he should “imagine you are shuffling a pack of cards” – advice he still 
follows. Ken also taught him the trick (not so useful now) of how to walk into 
a pub for a spot of underage drinking: “Don’t look back… don’t doubt for a 
moment, just be surer of yourself than they are.” And he advised against 
self-pity. “Whenever I might have been filled with self-pity, I turned it into 
furious anger. Even at my old age, I’m still capable of getting very angry.”

But Berger’s greatest strength in old age is his ability to live in the 
present. “I cultivated this early on – and this is the paradox – because it was 
an escape from prescriptions, prophecies, consequences and causes.” The present 
moment is key to his thinking too. InWays of Seeing, he suggests that paintings 
embody the present in which they were painted. Defining the secret of reading 
aloud well, he says it is “refusing to look ahead, to be in the moment”. And he 
says that a story puts its listener “in an eternal present”. He has also 
written about the circularity of time. Does he think that applies to an 
individual life? Is there, in old age, a way in which one starts to hold hands 
with one’s younger self?

“Time is circular, and in relation to that portrait of Melina, that is exactly 
what I feel.” He suggests I take a photo of the painting. We carry it into the 
sunlight, prop it against the back of a chair. I say theObserver will need a 
photograph to go with this interview and he asks with boyish mischief: 
“Couldn’t we use her instead?”

It is only after I get home that I realise I failed to ask him how he intends 
to spend his birthday. I text him and he rings straight back. “Listen,” he 
says, “I feel so grateful to have reached 90 – it is such an age – and to my 
friends for wanting to celebrate, but what I’ve told them all is that what we 
ought to do on the day is be silent. My birthday should just be a day like any 
other.”

 * To order Portraits 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337806/s/portraits-john-berger-on-artists/>
,Landscapes <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/landscapes-445318.html> or 
Confabulations <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/confabulations.html> by John 
Berger at a discount, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 6846

 * The Seasons in Quincy will be screened on 11 November at the Birkbeck 
Cinema, 43 Gordon Square WC1, 6pm, as part of theFaces of John Berger symposium 
<http://www.bbk.ac.uk/events-calendar/bimi-in-collaboration-with-the-derek-jarman-lab-presents-faces-of-john-berger-symposium>
; and on 17 November atCurzon Goldsmiths 
<http://www.curzongoldsmiths.com/comingsoon/john-berger>, London SE14, 6.30pm 
 * A Jar of Wild Flowers: Essays in Celebration of John Berger is published by 
Zed Books 
<https://www.zedbooks.net/shop/book/a-jar-of-wild-flowers/forthcoming/> on 15 
November.Click here to preorder a copy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jar-of-wild-flowers.html>  