
Australia would not have supported a UN resolution condemning Israel’s 
settlements program in the West Bank and east Jerusalem,Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> has indicated.

The foreign affairs minister said in a statement Australia did not support 
“one-sided resolutions targeting Israel”,the ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-30/australia-rejects-obama-stance-against-israeli-settlements/8153504>
.

The resolution was co-sponsored by New Zealand, which the Israeli prime 
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said wastantamount to a “declaration of war” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/netanyahu-told-new-zealand-backing-un-vote-would-be-declaration-of-war>
.

“If you continue to promote this resolution, from our point of view it will be 
a declaration of war. It will rupture the relations and there will be 
consequences,” Netanyahu reportedly told New Zealand’s foreign affairs 
minister, Murray McCully.

Israel to ‘reassess’ ties with UN, says Benjamin Netanyahu
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/israel-reassess-ties-united-nations-settlement-benjamin-netanyahu>
But McCully, insisted: “This resolution conforms to our policy and we will 
move it forward.”

The US, which has a veto in the UN security council, abstained from the vote, 
drawing stinging criticism from the Netanyahu government, whichaccused Barack 
Obama of orchestrating the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
, a claim the US government strongly denies.

Australia is not currently a member of the UN security council and so was not 
eligible to vote on the resolution but Bishop indicated the federal government 
would not have taken the same line as its New Zealand counterpart.

“In voting at the UN, the Coalition government has consistently not supported 
one-sided resolutions targetingIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>
,” the statement read.

Bishop said the Australian government remained “firmly committed to a 
two-state solution, where Israel and a Palestinian state exist side by side in 
peace and security, within internationally recognised borders”.

“Australia urges both sides to refrain from steps that damage the prospect for 
peace and to resume direct negotiations for a two-state solution as soon as 
possible,” the statement said.

Netanyahu has been invited to visit Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/benjamin-netanyahu-accepts-invite-to-be-first-israeli-pm-to-visit-australia>
 in the new year and would become the first Israeli prime minister to do so. 
Issuing the invitation in September, when she was in Israel, Bishop said the 
Australian public would “warmly embrace you, welcome you”.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, has been in Israel in the past week, where he 
described Netanyahu as “a good friend of Australia”.
Bill Shorten (@billshortenmp) 
Pleasure to meet with the Prime Minister of Israel @netanyahu 
<https://twitter.com/netanyahu>, a good friend of Australia. 
pic.twitter.com/Sth7ImfkjF <https://t.co/Sth7ImfkjF>
 <https://twitter.com/billshortenmp/status/811052723135127552> December 20, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/billshortenmp/status/811052723135127552> 
On Thursday the former Labor foreign affairs minister Bob Carr sounded a 
dissenting note by saying the election of Donald Trump could ­“unleash 
Netanyahu to approve a rash of new settlements and even annex the West Bank … 
that would destroy a two-state ­solution”,the Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/foreign-affairs/us-and-kiwis-wrong-on-israel-says-julie-bishop/news-story/b134f0dd6ab85e57b5eca4f0f13f7aa0>
.
 