
On 1 September 1939, the day that Germany invaded Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/sep/01/secondworldwar-poland1>, 
my mother started a diary: “Oh! War broke out today. Nobody could believe it 
... God help our poor planet in the grip of this madness!”

She was 32, a mother of two, leading an ordinary family life in a two-room 
apartment in Stockholm. I was five and my brother 12. My father worked as an 
office manager, my mother took on part-time jobs as a typist-stenographer, a 
profession she was trained for. But in my memory, she is always at home with us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51fdbd92b2f73e9cf309d1fa877cb703e96d7c9f%2F0_2072_3512_2107%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karin%20Nyman%3A%20My%20mother%20Astrid%20Lindgren%2C%20and%20the%20night%20I%20named%20Pippi%20Longstocking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karin%20Nyman%3A%20My%20mother%20Astrid%20Lindgren%2C%20and%20the%20night%20I%20named%20Pippi%20Longstocking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51fdbd92b2f73e9cf309d1fa877cb703e96d7c9f%2F0_2072_3512_2107%2F3512.jpg>
 ‘We knew she had a talent for telling stories’ … Astrid Lindgren and Karin 
Nyman. Photograph: Krause, Johansen/Lindgren Estate 
What urged her to take clippings of war news from the morning papers almost 
daily, to gather them in notebooks and add commentaries of her own, along with 
details of her family life? And to stick to this task, dutifully,for the rest 
of the war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/astrid-lindgren-second-world-war-diaries>
? She was not a diary keeper by habit. Nor was she at that time an established 
writer who might consider any of it fit for publication. She did it for 
herself, and for her family; perhaps to try and piece together a coherent 
picture of what she felt was an incalculable disaster to come. And it is 
fascinating, 70 years later, knowing how events unfolded, to follow her 
apprehensive, sometimes sarcastic, reactions to the news of the day.

Astrid Lindgren's second world war diaries published in Sweden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/astrid-lindgren-second-world-war-diaries>
The diaries were kept in a basket in which my mother had received packages of 
butter and eggs from her farming parents during the war, sent by railway 
probably. In her old age, when her eyesight grew very bad, we would read 
passages aloud to her, and she would say: “I am glad I did that.” I suppose she 
meant that it was a good thing that she had documented it all for us to read. 
It was only later that it occurred to us to publish her diaries for a wider 
readership.

Review: Pippi Longstocking by Astrid Lindgren
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
On 9 April 1940, she notes: “So now the Nordic countries are a theatre of war 
and Sweden is the only one of them not to have experienced foreign troops on 
its soil. The peaceful corner of Europe, ha ha! We are braced for general 
mobilisation and it is probably only a matter of time before the Germans decide 
to ‘defend’ our neutrality, too.”

Sweden was spared in the end. It was the one Nordic country that wasn’t 
invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany, as Denmark and Norway were, or forced to 
defend itself against the Soviet Union, like Finland. We had peace. But we 
lived in fear nevertheless, every week during those first war years, of 
becoming the next country to be attacked.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48de593fa8a68d28455bd3f9344db7130718d58d%2F0_0_2333_1811%2F2333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karin%20Nyman%3A%20My%20mother%20Astrid%20Lindgren%2C%20and%20the%20night%20I%20named%20Pippi%20Longstocking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karin%20Nyman%3A%20My%20mother%20Astrid%20Lindgren%2C%20and%20the%20night%20I%20named%20Pippi%20Longstocking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fkarin-nyman-my-mother-astrid-lindgren-invented-pippi-longstocking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48de593fa8a68d28455bd3f9344db7130718d58d%2F0_0_2333_1811%2F2333.jpg>
 The Lindgren family go skiing, in a page from Astrid’s wartime notebooks. 
Photograph: Lindgren Estate 
The war years had an effect, even on us children who lived safely in Sweden. 
We were surrounded by enemy forces at each border and in every country on the 
other side of the Baltic Sea. But we were told not to worry, that “the war 
won’t come to Sweden”. And I think I believed that. I had every reason to trust 
my mother, I always did. It seemed quite reasonable to us that we, for some 
reason, had escaped the great danger that threatened the world outside.

On 5 September 1942 my mother noted: “The war is three years old and I have 
not celebrated its birthday. We’ve all found our attitude to the war gradually 
changing. We used to talk about it all the time; now we see it as a necessary 
evil, to be thought of and talked about as little as possible.”

My memories of that period of my life are rather faded. I seem to recall an 
atmosphere of drab colourlessness in the streets of Stockholm. The winters were 
extremely cold and the pavements encumbered with huge stacks of wood, for 
heating. There were few people about, and almost no motor traffic.

I was an indoor child, not adventurous and outgoing like my brother. I 
preferred to stay close to my family at home, reading, writing and drawing. I 
enjoyed skating, though, on the ice rink in the park nearby. And my mother and 
I went skiing in a wood not far from where we lived.

The summers were bright and happy, despite the war; always warm and sunny in 
my memory. We would spend July at my father’s parents’ house in the Stockholm 
archipelago, bathing in the sea, learning to swim and cycle. In August I would 
stay with my cousins at the farm that my other grandfather was the tenant of, 
in my mother’s birthplace, Småland. We helped with harvesting, as much as 
little children can, weeding beets, driving horse carts across the fields, 
delivering stakes to the farm workers. To me, my grandparents’ and my uncle’s 
homes were paradise, and gave me a valuable insight into the countryside of my 
mother’s childhood – a world I came to recognise when I read her books, years 
later.

The 10 best Pippi Longstocking quotes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/02/the-10-best-pippi-longstocking-quotes>
Her books. At the time there were none published, and none intended. My mother 
for some years had been supplementing her income by selling children’s tales to 
Christmas magazines, but there was no author’s ambition linked to it. It is 
obvious from her wartime diaries that she had a talent for journalism (at 19 
she had worked as an assistant reporter for a daily newspaper in her hometown). 
And we children knew that she had a great talent for telling stories. Bedtime 
was always connected with her reading aloud, or making up stories. She read us 
all the well-known children’s books, but also the classics – RL Stevenson, 
Dickens and Thackeray, as well as modern humorists such as PG Wodehouse.

But who could have known that one day her books would come to be regarded as 
some of the finest children’s literature ever written, translated into more 
than 90 languages? That her story about a small red-haired girl with 
extraordinary physical strength would sell millions of copies was something she 
could never have foreseen in these days.

I was ill in bed for a long period in 1941, my first school year. I was bored, 
and kept begging my mother to tell me stories. One evening she said, exhausted: 
“But what more can I tell you?” An answer came bursting forth, in an attempt to 
keep her by me: “Tell me aboutPippi Longstocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
!” It was a name out of the blue, only a child’s play on words. But it did the 
trick. She started to tell me a completely new story.

• A World Gone Mad: The Diaries of Astrid Lindgren 1939-45 is published by 
Pushkin Press. To order a copy for £15.57 (RRP £18.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/world-gone-mad.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99..
 