
The daughter of the British humanitarian who organised the Czech 
Kindertransport operation that saved 669 children on the eve of the second 
world war has written to the home secretary to urge that Britain extend the 
same “compassion and warmth” to thechild refugees of Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/fears-for-calais-refugee-camp-children-who-were-bound-for-the-uk>
.

In an open letter 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/news/barbara-winton-kindertransport-survivors-speak/>
 to Amber Rudd, Barbara Winton, whose father became known as “the British Oskar 
Schindler”, writes: “My father, Nicholas Winton, witnessed the appalling 
conditions children were enduring in the refugee camps in Czechoslovakia in 
1939 and was determined to give them the chance of a better, safer life by 
bringing them to Britain.”

While many children returned to Czechoslovakia after the war, others, whose 
families had been murdered by the Nazis, remained in Britain and “became 
valuable, integrated citizens”, she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fkindertransport-heros-daughter-urges-uk-to-welcome-calais-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51426fc5b4fe655e0eb3168696f1db16559223ea%2F0_691_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kindertransport%20hero%E2%80%99s%20daughter%20urges%20UK%20to%20welcome%20Calais%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fkindertransport-heros-daughter-urges-uk-to-welcome-calais-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kindertransport%20hero%E2%80%99s%20daughter%20urges%20UK%20to%20welcome%20Calais%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fkindertransport-heros-daughter-urges-uk-to-welcome-calais-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51426fc5b4fe655e0eb3168696f1db16559223ea%2F0_691_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Nicholas Winton, who organised the rescue of Jewish children on what became 
known as the Czech Kindertransport. He died in 2015. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
It is estimated there are 6,000 people across the world alive today thanks to 
the rescue.

She wrote: “Despite some disgruntled voices, much like today, protesting the 
dangers of allowing into our country those from such foreign cultures, the 
overwhelming response was one of compassion and warmth … Even at a time when 
city evacuations were being planned for British children, homes were found for 
these vulnerable young refugees.”

Now Winton is calling on the government to do the same for hundreds of 
unaccompanied child refugees stranded inCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> after the demolition of the 
makeshift camp.

In a letter published on the charity Help Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> website, she said: “Those who have 
travelled across Europe to Calais, to escape the life-threatening dangers of 
their home country, are hoping desperately to find the sanctuary their parents 
dared to believe Britain would once again offer.”

The Guardian view on child refugees: too little, too late | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/the-guardian-view-on-child-refugees-too-little-too-late>
The story of what Nicholas Winton achieved did not become public until 40 
years after the event, and in 2003 he was knighted for “services to humanity in 
saving Jewish children from Nazi occupied Czechoslovakia”.

Two women, now in their 80s, who were among those rescued from the Nazis by 
Winton’s initiative, have also written to the government urging that the 
children stranded in Calais be brought to the UK.

Eve Leadbeater, 85, was brought to Britain in July 1939 as an unaccompanied 
minor and taken in by a primary schoolteacher who had responded to an appeal 
put out by Winton.

She wrote: “In the last few months I have been putting myself in the place of 
those unaccompanied children in Calais fleeing their own horrors; the contrast 
with my own experience has left me distressed and in tears.”

She said the increased animosity toward immigrants since the referendum has 
left her in shock: “In 2016 do we live in the same country that welcomed me in 
1939?

“I keep thinking what those children could contribute to the UK. As an honest, 
hard-working British citizen since 1945, I hope I have repaid some of my debt 
to this country by teaching children in secondary schools and working as a 
charity volunteer in my retirement.”

Another Kindertransport child, Dr Lisa Midwinter, said she would have perished 
in the Auschwitz concentration camp with the rest of her family had it not been 
for the “generosity of the British government”.

In a separate letter she wrote that “we must now urgently help the Calais 
refugee children”.

Between 1938 and 1939, a large-scale British humanitarian operation brought 
10,000 mostly Jewish children fleeing Hitler’s growing threat from Germany, 
Austria and Czechoslovakia to safe homes in the UK.
 