
Three days after he collapsed onstage in eastern Spain, Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> is scheduled to perform in 
Barcelona tonight. The 75-year-old singer was rushed to hospital on Friday, 
allegedly suffering from food poisoning.

Video of Cohen's concert 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f3upf6BdRXk&feature=player_embedded#t=218> at 
Velódromo Luis Puig in Valencia, shows the Canadian poet and performer at full 
strength, singing Bird on the Wire – and then suddenly not. The passionate 
performance, Cohen's fourth song of the night, is brought to an abrupt end 
part-way through the bridge. After kneeling several times through the course of 
the song, Cohen simply falls over during a saxophone solo. As shocked 
concertgoers look on, his accompanists immediately abandon their instruments 
and rush to Cohen's side.

An ambulance rushed the singer to Nueve de Octubre hospital, where he was 
reportedly released the next morning. Plans are now going ahead for the last 
date on Cohen's Spanish tour, tonight at the Palau Sant Jordi concert hall in 
north-eastern Barcelona.

Later this week, Cohen is scheduled to appear in a contentious concert at Tel 
Aviv's Ramat Gan football stadium. "The performance here will take place, and 
it will be excellent," Cohen's Israeli promoter assured the Jerusalem Post. 
"There's nothing to worry about."

Cohen had originally planned to perform in both Tel Aviv and the West Bank 
city of Ramallah. But, after Palestinian rights groups protested against both 
concerts, theRamallah performance was cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/14/leonard-cohen-ramallah-gig-cancelled>
 and Amnesty International withdrew their support for the tour.
 