
Leonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> will be saying 
So Long to Montreal's Marianne street as he embarks on a world tour this 
summer, his first in 15 years. The tour takes him through the UK, Ireland and 
Europe, including stops at the Glastonbury, Montreux and Benicassim Festivals. 
He will also appear at London's O2 Arena, Edinburgh Castle, the Manchester 
Opera House and at three hometown Montreal dates. Ticket prices for the 
Montreal dates, which went on pre-sale yesterday, begin at about Â£75. Given the 
rarity of Cohen's live appearances, fans are unlikely to struggle with this. I 
certainly didn't: seat J26, you are mine.

Cohen has spent the past 15 years recording privately (he's maintained his 
partnership with the singer Anjani). He buys freshly squeezed orange juice from 
a place just down the street from us, and makes sporadic public appearances, 
such as his 2007 collaboration with Philip Glass.

He's also struggled with legal issues, suing his long-time manager Kelley 
Lynch for misappropriation of funds. Although Cohen won the case, it's 
understood that Lynch's sins left a major dent in Cohen's finances.

On a happier note, Leonard Cohen was inducted earlier this week into the Rock 
and Roll Hall of Fame. Lou Reed introduced the songwriter at the ceremony, and 
Damien Rice performed a rendition of Hallelujah in tribute to the man. (Please 
let this be as close as Damien Rice ever comes to being inducted into the Hall 
of Fame.)

The critic Jon Landau once said: "I have seen the future of rock'n'roll, and 
he is not Leonard Cohen." Perhaps Cohen is not the future, but he is one of our 
favourite parts of its past.

Find Leonard Cohen's tour dates as they're announced at this website 
<http://www.leonardcohenfiles.com/tour2008-1.html>.
 