
Breitbart technology editor Milo Yiannopoulos has been permanently banned from 
Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
 for breaking its rules against “participating in or inciting targeted abuse of 
individuals”, after he was said to fan the flames of sickening abuse directed 
at Ghostbusters actor Leslie Jones.

Jones quit the platform after a torrent of tweets comparing her to apes and 
videos of people screaming racist epithets, to people sending her images of her 
face covered in semen. On Tuesday evening, she wrote:

She hasn’t tweeted since.

In response, Yiannopoulos told Breitbart 
<http://www.breitbart.com/milo/2016/07/19/breaking-milo-suspended-twitter-20-minutes-party/>
:

With the cowardly suspension of my account, Twitter has confirmed itself as a 
safe space for Muslim terrorists and Black Lives Matter extremists, but a no-go 
zone for conservatives. This is the end for Twitter. Anyone who cares about 
free speech has been sent a clear message: you’re not welcome onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>.

Of course, this is nonsense. Freedom of speech doesn’t include the freedom to 
abuse or incite racial hatred. And in such tantrums about the right to offend – 
tantamount to a bully throwing his toys out of the pram – we hear nothing about 
the silenced free speech of those who, like Jones, are driven off social media 
platforms because the sheer level of vitriol is just too much to bear.

Milo Yiannopoulos: Twitter banning one man won’t undo his poisonous legacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-twitter-ban-leslie-jones-bad-idea>
If Twitter takes effective action against racist and misogynistic bullies, 
this has the potential to be the beginning, not the end. The beginning of the 
platform as a space that is open to all to express and debate views, instead of 
a hate-filled pit where members of minority groups are threatened, abused and 
taunted.

But banning one high-profile user is nowhere near enough to achieve that 
reality. The abuse being hurled at Jones has starkly highlighted the fact that 
despite years ofpaying lip service to the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/05/twitter-ceo-we-suck-dealing-with-trolls-abuse>
, Twitter and other social media platforms have utterly failed their users over 
tackling abuse.

On Monday night, Twitter released a statement. 

This type of abusive behavior is not permitted on Twitter, and we’ve taken 
action on many of the accounts reported to us by both Leslie and others. We 
rely on people to report this type of behavior to us but we are continuing to 
invest heavily in improving our tools and enforcement systems to prevent this 
kind of abuse. We realize we still have a lot of work in front of us before 
Twitter is where it should be on how we handle these issues.”

But what became very clear in Jones’s case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 was that relying on people to report this type of behaviour is completely 
inadequate in cases where a storm of coordinated abuse has been stirred up and 
deliberately incited against an individual. This is a scenario many women, and 
in particular women of colour, disabled people and members of the LGBT 
community will recognise only too well.

These incidents of coordinated abuse are often instigated by influential users 
with thousands of followers, or even planned on a separate website or forum, 
where the victim is singled out as a target. In these cases it should be 
possible for a user simply to report the situation to Twitter. Moderators 
should monitor the situation and tackle the abusers as a group. There should be 
no need for the victim to trawl through and report accounts individually.

This wouldn’t require any alteration of Twitter’s community guidelines on what 
is and isn’t acceptable, simply more proactive implementation. This more 
victim-centred approach seems so mind-blowingly obvious that the fact it 
doesn’t seem to have been tried before makes Twitter’s claim to be working hard 
on this issue hard to swallow.

As Ijeoma Oluo points out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/leslie-jones-twitter-abuse-deliberate-campaign-hate>
, the impact of this problem reaches way beyond social media. By effectively 
denying women of colour access to these spaces it not only removes their 
freedom of speech, but also access to vital professional networks, visibility, 
fan interaction and promotion of their work.

The abuse against Jones comes in the same week that Facebook’s global head of 
safety admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/facebook-teams-fail-uphold-companys-abuse-standards>
 the platform is failing to meet its own standards on dealing with rape threats 
and abuse. And just last year,Twitter’s chief executive acknowledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/05/twitter-ceo-we-suck-dealing-with-trolls-abuse>
 that the company “sucks at dealing with abuse and trolls on the platform, and 
we’ve sucked at it for years”. Against this backdrop, with companies openly 
conceding that they are failing to protect users, the idea that it’s really 
bullies such as Yiannopoulos who are being persecuted is laughable.

He claims that his banning signals the end of Twitter, but what might actually 
bring the platform down is its ongoing failure to tackle online bullying. The 
success of social media platforms relies entirely upon us, their users. If they 
can’t take measurable, decisive action to tackle the kind of sickening abuse 
Jones and others receive, they no longer deserve our membership or support.












 