
Pop music’s relationship with sex has historically been more centred on, say, 
a 15-year-oldChristina Aguilera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/13/christina-aguilera-interview-bionic>
 rolling in the sand andimploring us 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIDWgqDBNXA> to “rub her the right way”, or 
Rick James asserting “give it to me baby”, than a nuanced conversation about 
consent. While morally disappointing, it is hardly surprising; consent is 
fundamental to sex but has never been particularly sexy. A new project bySadie 
Dupuis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/17/speedy-ortiz-sadie-dupuis-i-use-songs-to-feel-better>
 of indie bandSpeedy Ortiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/29/speedy-ortiz-stories-vanguard-college-rock-revival>
 aims to tackle the issue head on.

Recording under the name Sad13, Dupuis’s debut solo record, Slugger, posits 
that consent can be both an uncomplicated interaction and a more hampered 
complexity.

The drive behind this record comes from the position of wanting to educate, as 
a result of the schooling and society’s neglect in this area, Dupuis explains. 
“Affirmative consent is an absolutely central and vital part of a healthy sex 
life,” she says. “We aren’t taught to be caring and respectful in seeking our 
own pleasure.”

As a record, Slugger has a somewhat off-kilter pop aesthetic; it’s scrappy and 
danceable, but also intricate. It feels like a risky record, though Dupuis 
insists it is not. Though not considered a particularly compelling theme for a 
pop album, negotiations before sex can feel stilted and transactional; it was 
decoding these interactions that persuaded her to make Slugger.

Throughout pop’s chequered past on the topic of sexuality, men’s dogged 
pursuit of women is often stylised as romantic; and prior discussion about 
whether to have sex is actively removed from the discourse. At times, consent 
is obscured by “I can see it in your eyes” presumptions. Dupuis worries that 
the glorification of pushing sexual boundaries in pop music has displaced the 
topic.

“Blurred Lines came to mind as I was writing Get a Yes,” she says. “It is a 
response to pop songs that view silent communication, reading a look in 
someone’s eye, as mysterious and sexy, instead of potentially dangerous.”

I’ve wanted to write a song celebrating how exciting good communication about 
sex can feel

Responses to Blurred Lines by Robin Thicke ranged from YouTube parodies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tC1XtnLRLPM> to photo essays in which women 
displayed lyrics from the songthat were said to them by their actual rapists 
<https://thesocietypages.org/socimages/2013/12/30/from-the-mouths-of-rapists-the-lyrics-of-robin-thickes-blurred-lines/>
. If something good came from the track and video – in which a fully clothed 
Robin Thicke is surrounded by parading semi-naked and hair-twirling women while 
he intones “You’re an animal!” – it was consent becoming a talking point in 
music.

But it was not just the opportunity to pursue this talking point that spurred 
Dupuis to make Slugger. She wanted to make consent exciting: “I’ve broached the 
topic of consent in several Speedy Ortiz songs, but wanted to do it really 
explicitly here – a song celebrating how exciting good communication about sex 
can feel.”

Blurred Lines: the most controversial song of the decade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/13/blurred-lines-most-controversial-song-decade>
But she thinks we’re still very much behind when it comes to communication and 
sex. “We implicitly understand that characters are having sex in most TV shows 
and movies, but we rarely see the conversations and negotiations that lead up 
to that point. I think it would be huge to see consent centralised in more 
mainstream media representations of sex.”

Slugger addresses the plain affirmation of sexual consent, with lyrics such as 
“Don’t even put words in my mouth / You can’t guess out the gate what I’m all 
about / That’s why I try to say every time what I want from you.” But what if 
you can’t say what you want? Perhaps what is more exciting about Slugger is 
that it doesn’t reduce consent to the singular act of getting a yes, but 
explores the nuances that exist within. It makes a rallying call for people to 
candidly consider with what they want sexually.

This theme has been a consistent for Dupuis, but has it been exorcised in 
making Slugger? Not quite. “It’s always going to be important to me,” she says, 
“until expectations for human capability aren’t unfortunately tied to gender 
identity.”
 