
A while back, I interviewed one of my heroes, Tim Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tim-key>, and asked him to list his comedic 
idols. He reeled off a predictable enough list –Chris Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/20/chris-morris-comeback-stewart-lee-comedy-vehicle>
,Steve Coogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/21/comedy-gold-steve-coogan>, 
Stephen Fry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry> – but among the 
alt-comedy patriarchs he named a less obvious influence. In doing so, he 
confirmed in my impressionable student’s mind that Caroline Aherne was one of 
the funniest, smartest, coolest figures of the last golden age of British 
comedy.

I hadn’t really thought of her since the culmination of the third series of 
The Royle Family in 2000. But now a child of the new wave of offbeat comedians 
had given her props, I was licensed to revere her once more, that Bambi-eyed 
princess of northern working-class naturalism, whose voice (now familiar to 
viewers of bad TV showGogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/17/channel-4-gogglebox-goes-global>
) croaked and trilled and danced about prosodically like a sun-tired child 
hopscotching on a balmy summer’s eve.

Let some emphasis fall on her skilful and charming turns in The Fast Show 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VsNq3nQ612c>, and more yet on her 
float-like-a-butterfly-sting-like-a-bee chatshow host,Mrs Merton 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lj-9lSEBBm0>, who as a pioneer of the 
faux-naif celebrity interviewer shtick, paved the way for Sacha Baron Cohen’s 
brand of wind-up merchantry. But give laudatory priority to her best piece of 
work, her collaboration with Craig Cash, the TV show that the BFI deemed the 
31st best ever made in Britain, the sitcom the nation agreed to be its 19th 
favourite and the piece of entertainment that brought my family together more 
closely than anything else: The Royle Family.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqz-TZF4uhfc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqz-TZF4uhfc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqz-TZF4uhfc&media=>
I’ve met a few people who didn’t take to it, found it crude or dull (though I 
always suspected obtuseness or snobbery behind the disapproval), but I’ve met 
many more who thought it was great. I can remember few other programmes that 
had the whole household (two sullen teenagers and two boring adults) sitting 
happily together laughing and saying things like “You do that, dad!” and “No, I 
don’t, children”. “They’re just like us!” we probably told each other, but in 
truth they weren’t. We watched the Royles with a combination of sentimental 
nostalgia for the kind of working-class habits that my parents had all but left 
behind, and a fond middle-class amusement at their parade of inelegancies.

The writing was mainly comfy but sometimes caustic, like Alan Bennett’s 
comedy. Stylistically, it was like nothing I’d seen before. The Office hadn’t 
happened yet, and anyway, it wasn’t mockumentary. It was something else, 
something both intimate and voyeuristic – a sort of fly-on-the-sofa style. Mike 
Leigh is the most obvious reference point; Aherne recounts being blown away the 
first time she saw Abigail’s Party. But whatever the influences, it felt 
utterly new and it was massively successful. A bold sitcom, original and yet 
hugely popular – it hardly seems conceivable in this rubbish modern age of TV 
comedy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5hXZ8gak2ak&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5hXZ8gak2ak>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5hXZ8gak2ak&media=>
And for me Aherne was the best thing in it. All the characters were funny and 
real and distinctive, of course. Sure, Sue Johnson was the hard-working engine, 
the show’s regista, to borrow a footballing term. But Aherne was the attacking 
playmaker: sparky, full of flourish, always there to deliver a masterful 
punchline to Johnson’s concerted set-up work. She was the subtlest, the most 
surprising, the most arresting of a talented cast.

And usefully for a comedian, she’s very funny. But not just funny; brave too, 
and poetic too, and nice too, and a lot more besides.

• Liam Williams’s show Capitalism is at Soho theatre, London 
<http://www.theinvisibledot.com/>, 23 to 28 February & 4 to 7 March. Then 
touring <https://www.ents24.com/uk/tour-dates/liam-williams> until 6 June.
 