
Lindsey Vonn has declared her season over in what she called one of the 
toughest decisions of her Alpine skiing career.

The 31-year-old said in a statement on her Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/LindseyVonnUSA/?fref=nf> that scans on a hairline 
fracture in her left knee had shown it was far more serious than thought and 
further damage “could result in a serious surgery that would risk my future in 
ski racing”.

The American won a record 20th World Cup trophy last month when she clinched 
the downhill crown. She has won 76 World Cup races and has been chasing the 
Swedish great Ingemar Stenmark’s record of 86 as well as a fifth overall World 
Cup crown. She currently leads Switzerland’s Lara Gut by 28 points in the 
overall standings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9491deb9ab1eeafc53ad7b86c544c701df0d34%2F0_164_3864_2319%2F3864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsey%20Vonn%20declares%20her%20season%20over%20after%20suffering%20knee%20fracture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsey%20Vonn%20declares%20her%20season%20over%20after%20suffering%20knee%20fracture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9491deb9ab1eeafc53ad7b86c544c701df0d34%2F0_164_3864_2319%2F3864.jpg>
 Vonn in action a day after her injury. Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Despite fracturing her left knee in a super-G crash on Saturday, Vonn had set 
the fastest time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/28/lindsey-vonn-fastest-time-day-after-fracturing-knee>
in the first run of the women’s World Cup combined event in Andorra on Sunday. 
After her run, she posted a tweet saying: “No one can ever call me a wimp.”

Before Sunday’s race, Vonn had said on her Facebook page: “Drained my knee a 
few times and it’s feeling a little better. Going to go up on the hill and see 
how it feels.”

Vonn’s start to this season had been delayed after her continued recovery from 
reconstructive surgery on her right knee.She won her World Cup downhill comeback
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/07/lindsey-vonn-world-cup-downhill-comeback-skiing-lake-louise>
at Lake Louise in December, her first victory since January, 2013, in Maribor, 
Slovenia, two months before she injured her knee at the world championships.

She tried to get back in time for the Sochi Games but partially tore one of 
the reconstructed ligaments in a training crash in Copper Mountain, Colorado, 
three months before the Olympics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc6f57974a697b8b129f06f8953398416d548b1%2F0_50_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsey%20Vonn%20declares%20her%20season%20over%20after%20suffering%20knee%20fracture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsey%20Vonn%20declares%20her%20season%20over%20after%20suffering%20knee%20fracture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F02%2Flindsey-vonn-season-over-knee-injury-skiing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc6f57974a697b8b129f06f8953398416d548b1%2F0_50_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Vonn had been in high spirits since her comeback in December. Photograph: 
IBL/REX/Shutterstock 
Vonn attempted another comeback, only to sprain her medial cruciate ligament 
racing a downhill in France in December 2014. A month later she had a second 
surgery.

In her lengthy statement on Wednesday, the 31-year-old, who claimed Olympic 
gold in the downhill in 2010, said: “Today I am making the difficult decision 
to end my season and leave the World Cup circuit due to an injury I suffered 
last Saturday. Because I am currently leading the overall World Cup standings, 
this is one of the toughest decisions of my career.

“When I crashed on Saturday in Andorra, I fractured my tibial plateau. The 
traditional X-rays that were taken that afternoon showed a hairline fracture, 
but the tibial plateau appeared to be stable and did not pose significant risk 
to competing. So I raced on Sunday. After the super combined on Sunday, I went 
to Barcelona where more precise MRI and CT equipment was available and scans 
were performed on Tuesday morning.

“Those images showed that there was not just 1 hairline fracture, but in fact 
3. And the fractures are not hairline, but instead they are significant enough 
that they are not sufficiently stable to permit me to safely continue skiing. 
Further damage any of the fragments could result in a serious surgery that 
would risk my future in ski racing. With the world championships in St Moritz 
next year and the Winter Olympics in South Korea the following year, I cannot 
take that risk.
 Vonn’s crash. 
“So I have made the decision to end my season. I am very proud of what I have 
been able to accomplish this year: 9 World Cup victories, breaking the World 
Cup downhill win record, breaking the World Cup super-G podium record, and 
winning the most World Cup discipline titles – 20 – of any skier, male or 
female.

“While I am confident that I’m making the right decision, it still doesn’t 
make this decision any easier. Thanks to everyone who supported me and stood by 
me through it all. Best of luck to all the World Cup competitors. I’ll see you 
again next year. Xo LV.”
 