
Liz Smith, who has died aged 95 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/26/the-royle-family-actress-liz-smith-has-died-aged-95-a-spokeswoman-for-her>
, was unknown until middle-age, but became a well-known and much-loved 
character actor. Her breakthrough came in aMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh> film, Bleak Moments, when she was 
49. She reached a wider audience when she starred in the memorable 1970s 
television comedy I Didn’t Know You Cared, written byPeter Tinniswood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/11/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
. Her eye for the entertaining anarchies of old age was also deployed in The 
Vicar of Dibley and 2point4 Children. However, Smith is likely to be best 
remembered for her work as Norma Speakman, or Nana, in The Royle Family, the 
groundbreaking comedy written byCaroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne> and 
Craig Cash, for which Smith won a Bafta nomination. Smith brought her flair for 
grotesque comedy to the role; the programme became a hit, and she with it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc83799782182050bcccaebcfb0e221909d897f10%2F248_63_998_1279%2F998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc83799782182050bcccaebcfb0e221909d897f10%2F248_63_998_1279%2F998.jpg>
 The Royle Family - 1998 - Liz Smith, centre right, with Ralf Little, Caroline 
Aherne and Craig Cash, Sue Johnston and Ricky Tomlinson. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
“I’ve never considered a facelift,” she said in 2007, “because I earn my 
living by looking old.”

Liz Smith, The Royle Family actor, has died aged 95
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/26/the-royle-family-actress-liz-smith-has-died-aged-95-a-spokeswoman-for-her>
Born Betty Gleadle, in Scunthorpe, Lincolnshire, she had a rough start in 
life. Her mother died in childbirth when Betty was two and she was brought up 
by her widowed grandmother. She remembered her father, only 20 years her senior 
and prone to wine, women and song, throwing her up in the air and catching her, 
and festooning her with costume jewellery. When she was seven, her father 
walked out without explanation – his daughter only discovering, many years 
later, that he had married another woman who had insisted that his previous 
life did not exist. “He was a weak man and did as he was told, so he just 
disowned me,” she recalled in the later years of her success.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc81da354ac0557f7d4757683a8e99f5c75a21a%2F235_135_2681_1762%2F2681.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc81da354ac0557f7d4757683a8e99f5c75a21a%2F235_135_2681_1762%2F2681.jpg>
 Liz Smith with Max Wall in We Think the World of You, 1988. Photograph: Alamy 
Stock Photo 
She discovered acting at her local school but left at 16 and took a job with a 
dressmaker. During the second world war she served in the Women’s Royal Naval 
Service and in 1945 married a sailor, Jack Thomas, whom she met on service in 
India. She contracted hepatitis and returned to London.

In 1947, she managed to get a job with a small repertory company called the 
Gateway theatre in Westbourne Grove, using the stage name Liz Smith. But she 
and her husband and their children, Sarah and Robert, soon moved out to 
Buckhurst Hill, near Epping, Essex, which put the repertory theatre out of 
range.

The marriage ended in divorce in 1959. Acting was both an emotional release 
and a way of earning a living. The American directorCharles Marowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/09/charles-marowitz>, a devotee of 
the Method school of acting, introduced his ideas to London at rooms in Fitzroy 
Square, London. Smith was auditioned and chosen to be in the first improvising 
group. Marowitz did not pay her, and only a series of day jobs, including one 
as a postwoman, made it possible for her to attend his school for four nights a 
week over a period of five years. Then, one day, Marowitz simply did not turn 
up and Smith was told he had gone to link up with the Royal Shakespeare 
Company. “And that was that. He dropped us – just like Father,” Smith said. She 
then joined the Forbes Russell Repertory Company, which played at Butlin’s 
holiday camps.

Liz Smith, The Royle Family actor, has died aged 95
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/26/the-royle-family-actress-liz-smith-has-died-aged-95-a-spokeswoman-for-her>
But Smith’s experience with improvisational theatre was to prove an advantage. 
For Bleak Moments in 1971, Leigh could find the children he wanted but not the 
eccentric mother, because it was difficult to find actors used to 
improvisation. Smith, who rarely gave media interviews, once told of how she 
was selling toys in Hamley’s at Christmas when Leigh told her he needed a 
middle-aged woman to do improvisations. Smith was cast as a woman who could not 
leave her bed, so she stayed in bed for the six weeks of rehearsals and 
shooting. She later said that Bleak Moments, which was Leigh’s first film, 
“changed my life” and cued up an exhaustive list of TV credits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe16b7df5855ce841f8b5168a88c6bab5520205b4%2F0_208_3478_4480%2F3478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fliz-smith-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe16b7df5855ce841f8b5168a88c6bab5520205b4%2F0_208_3478_4480%2F3478.jpg>
 Liz Smith in 1984. Photograph: Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Leigh was so satisfied with Smith that he cast her again in his first 
television play, Hard Labour, this time as a charwoman. She scrubbed the floors 
of the Territorial Army hall in which rehearsals took place until her stockings 
were full of holes and she was satisfied that she knew what a charwoman really 
felt like.

Smith found her first agent in 1973 and began to work steadily, mostly for 
television, from Dickens to The Sweeney. By the 1980s she was an established 
face who did not lack work. Her films included Lindsay Anderson’s Britannia 
Hospital (1982) and Malcolm Mowbray’s A Private Function (1984), for which she 
won the Bafta award for best supporting actress.

In 1988 she played the mother of a young gay hustler in We Think the World of 
You, directed by Colin Gregg and starringAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews>. The 
following year, for Peter Greenaway, she appeared in the film The Cook, The 
Thief, His Wife and Her Lover.

Her late-life successes included Letitia Cropley, a provider of ghastly cakes, 
in The Vicar of Dibley. When the popular character was killed off by the writer 
Richard Curtis, the first Smith heard of it was when a motorcycle messenger 
came to her door with next week’s script, accompanied by a note reading, “Here 
is a script for the next episode, which contains your death.” She confessed to 
being hurt and bewildered.

How we made The Royle Family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/23/how-we-made-the-royle-family>
Smith continued to work extensively in television. She appeared as Miss Lory 
in Alice in Wonderland (1999), in two versions of A Christmas Carol (1999 and 
2000, the latter a modern version with Ross Kemp andWarren Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/14/warren-mitchell>), as Peg 
Sliderskew in the Charles Dance version of Nicholas Nickleby (2001) and in the 
series Lark Rise to Candleford (2008). She was Grandma Georgina in Charlie and 
the Chocolate Factory (2005) and the voice of Mrs Mulch in Wallace and Gromit: 
The Curse of the Were-Rabbit in the same year. When well into her 70s, she said 
she was always “completely energised” by work.

Smith, who often complained that whatever she did on stage made the audience 
laugh, appeared when she was in her 80s in a 2004 production of Samuel Beckett’s
Endgame at the Albery theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/mar/11/theatre>, with Michael Gambon, 
who thought her “bloody marvellous”.

In 2009, she announced that she was retiring from acting following a stroke. 
But in 2010 she appeared in The Young Ones for the BBC, in which older 
celebrities reminisced about the 1970s.

Smith was appointed MBE in 2009.

• Liz Smith (Betty Gleadle), actor, born 11 December 1921; died 24 December 
2016

• Dennis Barker died in 2015

• This article was amended on 30 December 2016. The 2004 production of Endgame 
was at the Albery theatre rather the National Theatre, as originally stated
 