
Ann Leckie and Naomi Novik won the top two prizes at this weekend’s Locus 
awards <http://www.locusmag.com/News/2016/06/2016-locus-awards-winners/>, with 
George RR Martin, Neil Gaiman and the late Terry Pratchett also honoured at the 
Seattle ceremony.

Leckie took the Locus award for best science fiction novel for Ancillary Mercy 
<http://www.annleckie.com/novel/ancillary-mercy/>, the conclusion of her story 
about Breq, a soldier who carries within her the intelligence systems of a 
now-destroyed starship. The trilogy’s first part, Ancillary Justice, won Leckie 
the Hugo, Nebula and Arthur C Clarke awards, and was hailed for the distinctive 
voice in which it was told – Breq refers to all characters as “she”, regardless 
of their gender.

Novik’s Uprooted, which won best fantasy novel, is set in a land blighted by a 
dark, enchanted forest, and is also in the running for the Hugo award and the 
BritishFantasy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fantasy> Society award.


The prestigious Locus prizes, which are voted for by the American speculative 
fiction magazine’s readership, have been running for more than 40 years, and 
have gone to authors including Isaac Asimov, Gene Wolfe and Ursula K Le Guin in 
the past.

This year, Pratchett took the prize for best young adult novel for his final 
Discworld book, The Shepherd’s Crown. Gaiman, with whom Pratchett co-wrote the 
comic fantasy novel Good Omens, won two Locus awards, with his story Black Dog 
taking best novelette, and his short story collection Trigger Warning winning 
the best collection prize.

Trigger Warning by Neil Gaiman review – ridiculous and sublime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/08/neil-gaiman-trigger-warning-short-stories-review-sublime-ridiculous>
Old Venus 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/book-review-old-venus-edited-by-gardner-dozois-and-george-r-r-martin-1426269581>
, the anthology of science fiction writing edited by Martin and Gardner Dozois, 
won the best anthology award. In a note sent to be read at this weekend’s 
ceremony, Martin said that “the real credit belongs to our writers, who gave us 
such amazing stories”.

“Nonetheless, we plan on keeping the plaque for ourselves. Two years ago, the 
readers of Locus honoured Old Mars as best anthology. This year Old Venus. It’s 
very gratifying to know that the readers still appreciate new anthologies of 
old stuff … that is, new old stuff … well, you know what I mean … put together 
by old grey editors who were new young turks just yesterday. Keep your eyes out 
for Old Uranus, coming to a bookstore near you soon,” said the novelist.

He was quick to add on his blog <http://grrm.livejournal.com/491941.html> that 
this was only a joke, for now. “Before the crazy internet rumours start flying, 
I had better say that I was only kidding about Old Uranus. I do want to do some 
more books with Gardner, but not until I have subdued the Son of Kong,” wrote 
Martin, referring to the sixth novel in his Game of Thrones fantasy series, the 
yet-to-be-completed Winds of Winter, which he has described as the monkey on 
his back.

The Hugo awards, which have proved controversial after the shortlists were 
once again filled with nominations lobbied for by rightwing campaigners, will 
unveil their winners in August.
 