 Well, you've got to give the woman credit. Theresa May certainly knew how to 
make a statement at the Tory party conference on Monday. Oh, sure, she made a 
bit of a squawk about the party having been "slaughtered" at the polls; and 
yes, there was a stir when she made some vague reference to the party's 
unfortunate habit of attracting MPs who end up in prison, but these were not 
the attention-grabbing nuggets that really hogged yesterday's front pages. No, 
it was her shoes.
Those quite simply mind-bogglingly awful leopard-print high heels in which Ms 
May strode on to the platform and terrorised the ever-ageing party faithful. It 
was like watching the collective fantasy of all those Tory men in the audience: 
to be harangued by a scary, school-marmish woman with hints of kinky 
inclinations. Listen to me or I'll kick you with my pointed printed toes, you 
naughty, naughty boys!

But let us pause a moment and think. Imagine, if you can bear it, that you are 
the chairman of a party trying to scrape itself off the bottom of the boot of 
unpopularity and focus attention on the rather dull here and now. 
Unfortunately, aged dinosaurs from the past insist on resurrecting themselves 
at the most inopportune moments, rather like embarrassing relatives at 
Christmas lunch when you've invited all of your friends around ('Oh, Auntie 
Edwina, will you stop unbuttoning your blouse at the dinner table! And Uncle 
Jeffery, please stop pinching my best friend's bottom, thank you.')

So was Ms May pulling a Vorderman - the old trick of wearing an implausible 
item in order to create a new image and divert attention from a tiresome past? 
Will she turn up tomorrow in a gauzy Julien Macdonald slip? (Maybe that's more 
Edwina.) On balance, probably not. After all, a bit of animal pelt on one's 
feet is not the most effective method of replacing the party's seedy reputation 
with a vision of a sober future.

So what was our Theresa up to, then? Well, this may come as a bit of a shock, 
but perhaps the Tories have a normal woman in their midsts: perhapsTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is just a shoeaholic. Let us 
examine the evidence: on Monday it was leopard-print pumps; on Sunday she was 
photographed wearing a rather improbable pair of pink-and-black kitten heels. 
Before that, well, who knows? The only person who ever studied assiduously a 
Tory lady's feet before was the late Alan Clarke, but, if memory serves, that 
was more of an appreciation of Lady Thatcher's ankles than a consideration of 
her fashion choices.

May's weakness for dodgy footwear has marked her out as the most human, most 
identifiable-with woman in the party. (Although, considering her competition is 
Ann Widdecombe, who is currently dieting on screen with the fat teenager from 
Pop Idol and, it was revealed by her secretary the other week, frequently 
"shouts at her salad", that wasn't too tricky.)

In one tabloid last week, Joan Collins counselled women that in order to be 
"really glamorous" they should just wear tan and black shoes and ditch the 
gimmicky ones. Now, this is why Joan is Joan and the rest of us, thank the 
Lord, aren't. We know that silly shoes are, well, silly, and won't go with 
anything and make us all look like Minnie Mouse, and yet women do still buy 
them. Just yesterday, I saw a grown woman in what looked suspiciously like an 
Armani suit buying a pair of turquoise flats with butterfly appliqu√©s on the 
toe - by choice.

It is as though women siphon off style weaknesses and questionable taste into 
the footwear compartment of their closets, away from the Joseph jackets and 
Nicole Farhi trousers. Hence Theresa in her sombre black suits paired with pink 
or pelt shoes. I, for example, have a notorious weakness for pink, round-toed 
shoes, a problem that has led to various unflattering comparisons with cartoon 
characters. I am not proud of this and, yes, I am considering counselling.

Occasionally, these urges will seep out into other areas of women's wardrobes. 
Posh ladies, for some reason, think it is "just relly blahdy good fun" to wear 
flower pots and fruitbowls on their heads at formal occasions. There was a 
spate, about two summers ago, when normally right-thinking women took to lacy 
pink vest tops outside. But, in the main, women relegate these perversions 
downwards to their feet.

Men have a similar problem with ties (hence the strange phenomenon of 
businessmen in stern suits with hot-air balloon-print neckwear), but women's 
shoes somehow garner more attention. How could we forget the columnist Suzanne 
Moore, whose fondness for so-called "fuck me shoes" were said to have revealed 
her lack of real feminist beliefs. In fact, to some of us, those pointy 
monstrosities revealed nothing more than Moore's impressively high threshold 
for pain.

Shoes are actually the one part of a woman's outfit that are entirely for the 
wearer's pleasure, as opposed to that of the man. The male gaze tends to work 
from the top downwards, rarely ever getting as far as the shoe. So women tend 
to treat shoes as their secret outlet for fantasy self-image. The rest of their 
outfit is usually intended for the approbation of the observer. But down there, 
squirreled away, hidden beneath their hem lines and trouser legs, is the secret 
treat they save for themselves, that they can look down and admire with a small 
smile in the middle of their working day. Thus, my unfortunate weakness towards 
pink shoes says as much about me as Teresa's footwear does about her. But what, 
precisely?

Well, certainly, her choice of shop is not smart - Russell and Bromley, one of 
the most overpriced shoe outlets on the high street. And her choice of leopard 
print is objectionable on every possible count of taste. It is outdated, a 
little bonkers, intrinsically associated with the late 70s and somehow redolent 
of very tacky and somewhat distasteful sex. In other words, it is the perfect 
pattern for the Tory party today.

But at least someone is having fun at the party conference.
 