
A photograph taken in 1990 of Madonna by photographer Steven Meisel is up for 
auction at Bonhams in New York next month; it is expected to sell for £5,000. 
The black and white shot shows a toplessMadonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> posing with a cigarette in her 
mouth, her hair in a Marilyn bouffant and her mascaraed eyes looking directly 
into the lens. The mix of allure and sexual control is indisputable and it's no 
wonder that the singer chose Meisel to be her chief collaborator on her Sex 
book two years later. Once panned, Sex now sells for around £650. Is it time to 
re-evaluate the project?

That the Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> book came after a 
record-breaking album and tourfelt like a shrinkwrapped curve ball. Whatwas she 
thinking? But Madge was expressing something unique in the book.

The 80s saw multiple musical and image changes: she married, divorced, jogged 
and acted, but the "real" Madonna was still hidden behind several layers. 
Looking back, Sex was clearly part of a slower reveal that began with 
confessional tracks such as Oh Father (from 1989's Like A Prayer) and continued 
with the many scenes of narcissism captured In Bed With Madonna.

In Sex she wrote 
<http://www.beautifulmadonna.com/madonnasex/madonna_sex_text.html>: "A lot of 
people are afraid to say what they want. That's why they don't get what they 
want." She, of course, was sayingexactly what she wanted, warts and all. Sex 
was an unabashed, sometimes ugly, sometimes angry, sometimes ridiculous (what 
was worse, Madonna posing provocatively with an elephant trunk or steamily with 
Vanilla Ice?) statement about personal desire. Indeed, this idea that she was 
penning her own sexual narrative was perhaps the most shocking part of thewhole 
enterprise. And while it was easy to critique Sex, it should be applauded for 
this balls-to-the-wall honesty. Happy bidding.
 