
In recent times, expectations for lead female characters in British TV 
thrillers have been ratcheted up to dauntingly high levels. First there was the 
icily cool performance ofGillian Anderson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00wrk40>, the sexually liberated police 
detective inThe Fall. Then earlier this year in The Line of Duty, Keeley Hawes 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/10708872/Keeley-Hawes-I-like-Lindsay-Denton-more-than-anybody-Ive-ever-played.html>
 was dizzyingly good as a suspected corrupt police officer. Now it's the turn 
of the American actress Maggie Gyllenhaal to see if she can grip our attention 
with something equally complex and intriguing.

Gyllenhaal is the star of The Honourable Woman 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01z78nq>, Hugo Blick's eight-part conspiracy 
thriller centred on the historical triangle of Britain, Israel and Palestine. 
She plays the philanthropic Baroness Nessa Stein, the heir of a murdered 
Zionist arms dealer, who is attempting to use her family wealth to improve 
Israeli-Palestinian relations.

In the opening episode Gyllenhaal showed that she can handle an English accent 
without looking as if she's straining to remember vowel sounds. So effortless 
was her Kensington enunciation that it enabled the viewer to focus on a plot 
that required an awful lot of concentration.

Blick, who made 2011's bewildering The Shadow Line 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0111dqc>, likes to offer his actors plenty of 
opportunity for stagey silences and impassive expressions, but initially at 
least, Gyllenhaal plays Nessa as a morally earnest idealist, a carefully 
composed blue stocking in ermine.

The accuracy of the accent should come as no surprise, as Gyllenhaal has twice 
before played an Englishwoman – inNanny McPhee Returns 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1415283/>, under the tutelage of Emma Thompson, 
which is a bit like being schooled by the Queen, and in Hysteria 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1435513/>, which did the admirable job of 
dramatising the invention of the vibrator.

Both those roles came in feature films and only a few years ago the presence 
of a Hollywood actress in a British TV series would have denoted a sharp 
downturn in her career opportunities. Nowadays, cinema is increasingly the 
preserve of teen comedies and the most ambitious drama is often be found on 
television.

Gyllenhaal herself admits to falling prey to the old system of ranking. "I 
think in my own mind there still is a hierarchy," she recently said. "But then 
I think, this is better work than I've done in my life. I feel more proud of 
this than anything."

That's no small self-praise, coming from a woman who was nominated for an 
Oscar for her part inCrazy Heart <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1263670/> and who 
drew widespread critical plaudits with 2002'sSecretary 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0274812/>, playing a former psychiatric patient 
with a penchant for being spanked by her boss. When she walked on screen 
wearing a tight skirt, high heels and across her shoulders a rod to which her 
hands were manacled, it was as clear as a buttock welt that here was a 
genuinely idiosyncratic talent.

Not because the scene was sexually charged, but because the then 23-year-old 
Gyllenhaal brought to it a captivating quality somewhere between sweet 
innocence and crazed conviction.

For a brief moment, it was she, more than her younger brother Jake, who was 
the toast of the town. She has said that during the period afterSecretary's 
acclamation, she was invited to a lot of parties, which she enjoyed until she 
realised that it was not her personality but her earning potential that people 
were interested in. However, at one dinner party she met the actor Peter 
Sarsgaard, best known here for his role as a creepy groomer inAn Education 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1174732/>. Sarsgaard and Gyllenhaal may sound like 
a Swedish law firm, but that didn't stop them forming a partnership. They got 
married in 2009 and have two daughters.

With her Betty Boop face and bookish intelligence – she studied literature at 
Columbia University – Gyllenhaal was never cut out to be paparazzi-fodder. Like 
Shirley MacLaine, she is a vivaciously attractive woman who happens to have a 
prettier brother. But as with MacLaine (sister ofWarren Beatty 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000886/>), she has a strong claim to be the more 
gifted sibling, acting-wise.

Understandably, Gyllenhaal discourages speculation about sibling rivalry. 
"He's one of my best friends and I really adore him," is one of her stock 
replies to the repeated question about Jake. They are the children of the 
director-turned-academic Stephen Gyllenhaal and screenwriter Naomi Foner. They 
grew up in New York in a bohemian environment that featured a cast of famous 
actors – Paul Newman was Jake's godfather.

By Gyllenhaal's own account, her parents, who split up five years ago after 31 
years of marriage, are "left of Trotsky". Her "very operatic and baroque" 
father was an early critic of Obama for what he perceived as a lack of 
radicalism. Gyllenhaal, having been a vocal supporter of the president, left 
her disillusionment to later. As she put it: "He's broken my heart in a lot of 
ways. I'm not clear what Obama believes in – and I wish I did."

She's one of those actors who thinks it's important to use whatever fame she's 
granted to ventilate her political concerns. "If I care about the state of the 
world then I should say pay attention to who the president is and what his 
policies are, pay attention to Iran and what's happening inGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza>," she says.

As a result, she has spoken out in support of Chelsea (formerly Bradley) 
Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chelsea-mann> and, less 
controversially,Pussy Riot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot>. In 
other words, Gyllenhaal is the kind of Hollywood liberal who can place Fox News 
presenters under threat of myocardial infarction. But what she's not prepared 
to express an opinion on, it seems, is the issue of Israel and Palestine, which 
is at the heart ofThe Honourable Woman.

When asked during promotion of the show what she thought of the situation 
vis-a-visIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, Gyllenhaal, whose 
mother is Jewish, declined. Instead, she said that the series "articulated so 
beautifully how incredibly complex it is". You can say that again. In later 
episodes,The Honourable Woman apparently takes a more intimate dramatic turn as 
Nessa, according to Gyllenhaal, "starts sleeping with strangers in stairwells" 
and "cracks up and becomes more human". She said in an interview that she 
"related" to that experience, meaning, we can safely assume, in the sense of 
becoming more human rather than sleeping with strangers in stairwells.

Yet although she speaks of the role as a mixture of career high and key stage 
in her personal development, she very nearly turned it down. She was concerned 
about uprooting her children, but more than that she took an instant dislike to 
Blick, the writer, producer, director.

"I was really put off by him," she said, "and I thought, 'What a drag, because 
I really like this script and I can't seem to communicate with this guy.'"

She says Blick invited himself to a disastrous dinner party at her house in 
Park Slope, Brooklyn, in which she made stinging nettle pasta and he made 
barbed jokes about going into anaphylactic shock. The hostess was not 
impressed. Relations obviously improved because she now says that she's never 
had "a more loving, inspiring collaboration", which is probably actor-speak for 
still being on speaking terms.

The other relationship that blossomed during filming was Gyllenhaal's with 
London. After graduating from Columbia, she had come to do a summer term at 
Rada and enjoyed herself. But having completedThe Honourable Woman, she says 
that if she could persuade Sarsgaard she would like to move to London.

Her one doubt about the UK is the way she says that Jewishness is treated 
here. "It was a culture shock for me. In America, we don't expect there to be 
any social difference [between Jews and non-Jews]. I don't seem Jewish, I don't 
have a Jewish name. No one would ever know. But when I came here people started 
talking in a different way about what it meant to be Jewish. People would talk 
about specific areas of London being Jewish, about Jewish ways of behaving."

Nessa does have a Jewish name, but otherwise no one would ever know. Who she 
really is and what she really wants remain for the time being a mystery. Over 
the rest of the summer, all eyes will be on the enigmatic Gyllenhaal as the 
truth is slowly and no doubt perplexingly revealed.
 