
Establishing itself in the midst of a global economic downturn in 2007 merely 
served to bolster Malta’s then-burgeoning financial sector. The backdrop of the 
crisis endowed an underlying innovation to its approach, which today is helping 
open up markets far beyond the EU. That creativity, coupled with the country’s 
political and economic stability and highly-regarded regulatory framework, has 
helped Malta avoid the worst of the fallout and concentrate on growing steadily 
in size and credibility, paving the way for a prosperous future.

“We were the last to go into a brief recession,” says Kenneth Farrugia, 
chairman of FinanceMalta, the non-profit, public-private entity that markets 
the sector’s financial services industry and champions its critical success 
factors internationally. Malta was also one of the first countries to emerge 
from the downturn, relatively unscathed and with its robust banking sector 
intact.

Year-on-year growth means that the sector now represents a healthy 12 percent 
of Malta’s GDP, employing over 10,000 people. But FinanceMalta is far from 
resting on its laurels. To maintain progress, the organisation has been active 
promoting the country outside of the EU, specifically to finance hubs such as 
New York and Dubai. The move represents not just a desire to expand 
geographically, but into the realms of new financial areas and products, 
including international pensions and Islamic finance, as well as international 
funds.

We are constantly taking the necessary measures to further enhance our 
regulatory framework
Edward Scicluna, minister of finance 
This expansion is the obvious next step for the country, which has put itself 
at the leading edge of financial services, while finding solutions to 
regulations and creating open dialogue with operators at home has led to new 
avenues of business. Earlier this year, the retirement pensions act came into 
force. The culmination of legislation to offer tax relief on HMRC-recognised 
and UK-registered pensions for non-UK residents, it helped to underline Malta’s 
mantra as the ‘jurisdiction of choice’ for international pensions.

With its pension schemes undergoing an annual independent audit, coupled with 
its highly skilled, English-speaking workforce, Bethell Codrington, global head 
of pensions at TMF Group and chairman of MARSP, agrees with the catchphrase. 
“When looking at jurisdictions in which to manage its business, TMF 
International Pensions has the choice of some 80 countries,” he said, “but it 
is a testament to Malta that this is where we have decided to build our 
business.”

For multinationals, Malta’s ability to centralise the administration of 
complex networks of pensions represents an enormous streamlining opportunity. 
Since the country issued the first licenses to retirement scheme administrators 
in 2010, the pension scheme business has boomed, and today it manages an 
estimated €5 billion in assets, all passing through strict licensing and 
legislation.

“While encouraging and promoting Malta’s financial institutions, we ensured 
that strong regulatory measures are in place so as to avoid any unnecessary 
risks,” says finance minister Edward Scicluna. “We are constantly taking the 
necessary measures to further enhance our regulatory framework.”

As the island continues to develop, what was once an industry heavily skewed 
towards the UK market now has a global reputation as a valuable financial 
centre in Europe. In the decade since joining the EU, Malta has sharpened its 
own competitive edge by being able to implement new directives quickly and look 
forward, while many states continue to wrestle with fallout from the global 
crisis.

According to Joseph Bannister, chairman of the Malta Financial Services 
Authority, the key to the success of Malta’s financial services industry lies 
in breaking new ground within the constraints of EU-wide regulatory uniformity. 
“It is a challenge, and in all instances and within all structures, the funds 
have to follow European regulation.” But this is Malta, renowned for its 
creativity. By setting up compliant structures that provide flexibility to 
operators to set up attractive vehicles for their clients’ assets, the sector 
has once again shown its flair for innovation through regulation.

Interview: Kenneth Farrugia, chairman of FinanceMalta
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmaltas-got-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa95e6751f69bd744601cf2ddecd680ba134c3677%2F0_98_980_925%2F980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malta's%20got%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmaltas-got-talent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malta%27s%20got%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmaltas-got-talent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa95e6751f69bd744601cf2ddecd680ba134c3677%2F0_98_980_925%2F980.jpg>
 Kenneth Farrugia. Photograph: PR 
FinanceMalta is Malta’s national promotional body for the financial services 
industry and works to create business and networking opportunities for firms in 
the sector.

How does the sector look today?
We are continuing to see sustained growth in asset management, as evidenced by 
the strong flow of new business at the product level in terms of new investment 
schemes being licensed in Malta as well as the onset of new asset servicing 
organisations. Last year, just under 120 new funds were licensed and 23 new 
investment services licences were issued by the Malta Financial Services 
Authority.

In the insurance sector, we did not experience growth in numbers, but the 
activity within existing operations experienced a marked increase in value. In 
fact, gross written premiums reached around €2.8 billion, predominantly 
covering foreign risks.
Information 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/report-company/malta/boxouts/finance.html>
Likewise, in fund administration, we did not see a growth in administrators, 
but their book of business has continued to grow because today fund 
administrators based in Malta are not only servicing Malta domiciled funds but 
are increasingly servicing funds in both other EU and non-EU jurisdictions.

Where do you see growth coming from?
The industry is experiencing growth in relatively new sectors. Pension assets 
have exceeded the €2 billion mark and this sector started gaining traction only 
around three years ago. There are also institutions that fall under the 
financial institutions act, which are not banks but that provide strands of 
banking services such as e-money transmissions or payment processing. The 
number of these operators has increased by just under 50 percent in two years. 
All these developments are shaping the financial ecosystem of the industry by 
way of the sheer diversity of the growth that the industry is experiencing.

During our annual conference, we touched on other potential areas such as 
Islamic finance. Malta’s location makes it an ideal jurisdiction to issue 
sukuks and Malta itself may tap into the international sukuk market to attract 
foreign direct investment. While traditional bonds represent pure debt 
obligations, the sukuk represents ownership of well-defined asset.

Does Malta have the right human resources?
Demand for non-traditional skill sets has increased. The regulator, the 
industry, and private education service providers are all playing a pivotal 
role in introducing training programmes pertinent to the various industry 
sectors. The faculty of economics, management and accountancy (FEMA) is one of 
the largest faculties at the University of Malta, with a student population of 
some 1,800. Apart from the initiatives to ensure labour sufficiency, Malta, as 
an EU state, is well positioned to import the necessary skilled labour.
 