
When Nasa astronaut and comparative physiologist Jessica Meir tweeted about 
entering the “space equivalent zone, where water spontaneously boils” 
<https://twitter.com/Astro_Jessica/status/774051144012148736> last week, one 
man, whose Twitter bio said he had once been to space camp, responded as 
follows: “Wouldn’t say it’s spontaneous. The pressure in the room got below the 
vapor pressure of the water at room temp. Simple thermo.”

Naturally, Twitter responded magnificently, with other users queuing up to 
congratulate him on his expertise and asking him to “please explain science in 
more detail to the tweeting astronaut”.

He wasn’t alone. In recent months, there has been a spate of men stepping up 
to foist their own, less informed perspectives on far more qualified women.

At a rally last week, Donald Trump got in on the act. When former aviation 
operations specialist and US Marine Corps veteran Rachel Fredericks, who 
suffers from PTSD,asked Trump what action he would take to “stop 20 veterans a 
day from killing themselves” 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/09/08/veteran-with-ptsd-responds-to-trumps-incorrect-fact-check-of-veteran-suicides-yet-again-we-are-going-to-stigmitaze-veterans/>
, Trump’s immediate response was: “Actually, it’s 22.” Fredericks was left 
shaking her head as Trump cited statistics less up to date than her own.

This came only a month after astrophysicist Katherine J Mack tweeted her 
distress about the damage being caused by climate change,only for a male 
blogger to suggest 
<https://www.good.is/articles/deny-global-warming-you-get-burned>: “Maybe you 
should learn some actual SCIENCE then.” Luckily, Mack had the perfect response:

But even her excellent retort wasn’t allowed to go unchallenged. The man, not 
knowing when to quit, delete his Twitter account and reconsider his life 
choices, replied: “Then you should ask for a refund because they failed to 
teach you the most basics of science”. When Mack fired back with further proof 
of her credentials, another male tweeter stepped in to instruct her: “Katie, as 
much as its hilarious, let’s not entertain the trolls.” Because it would have 
been too much to let the incredibly intelligent and qualified astrophysicist 
choose her own method of dealing with the problem.

Women in a wide variety of fields can encounter this problem, as Olympic 
cyclist Annemiek van Vleuten discovered when she had a serious crash during the 
women’s road race in Rio. Tweeter Martin Betancourt offered herthis generous 
advice 
<http://www.rawstory.com/2016/08/internet-scorches-fan-who-tried-to-mansplain-sport-to-world-renown-olympic-cyclist/>
: “Frst lesson in bicycling, keep your bike steady … whether fast or slow.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fmansplaining-how-not-talk-female-nasa-astronauts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc303b9207e441f41da18ba8d840fbe3173e415%2F0_0_3852_2568%2F3852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mansplaining%3A%20how%20not%20to%20talk%20to%20female%20Nasa%20astronauts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fmansplaining-how-not-talk-female-nasa-astronauts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mansplaining%3A%20how%20not%20to%20talk%20to%20female%20Nasa%20astronauts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fmansplaining-how-not-talk-female-nasa-astronauts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc303b9207e441f41da18ba8d840fbe3173e415%2F0_0_3852_2568%2F3852.jpg>
 Dutch Olympian and champion cyclist Annemiek van Vleuten. Photograph: Bryn 
Lennon/AFP/Getty Images 
Being corrected by less qualified men is a phenomenon reported by many women, 
particularly those with expertise in a male-dominated area. At theEveryday 
Sexism Project <http://www.everydaysexism.com/>, we’ve heard from an IT worker 
whose less experienced male colleagues outline basic computer functions to her 
in meetings, an engineer who had a man try to explain solar panels to her and a 
woman who dealt with a customer slowly spelling out her own company policies to 
her while calling her “honey”.

The witty responses to such situations can raise a smile – such as the time 
one Twitter user tweeted about men explaining things to her,only to have a man 
respond with a classic mansplain 
<https://twitter.com/voldemortsbicep/status/720238299814625280>. 

But there is a serious underlying issue here. These interactions are the 
visible manifestation of societal assumptions about women’s inferiority in 
intellectual and professional situations. They represent the same ingrained 
stereotypes that lead towomen being less frequently promoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/mar/20/highereducation.uk5> or 
hired for certain jobs.

The same issues are at play when women find themselves being spoken over in 
the workplace, when a client directs every question to a junior male colleague 
or when a woman makes a suggestion in a meeting and is ignored, only for the 
same idea to be voiced by a male colleague, to loud agreement, moments later. 
It is what writerSoraya Chemaly has described as 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/soraya-chemaly/10-ways-society-can-close-the-confidence-gap_b_5200419.html>
 “good old-fashioned sexism expressed in gendered socialization and a default 
cultural preference for institutionalized male domination of public life”.

However, as Chemaly points out, the way to fix it isn’t simply to suggest that 
women need to be more assertive, as we are often told. The problem doesn’t 
spring from hesitant women wringing their hands and dithering until a heroic 
man rides in and provides an explanation. The aforementioned astronaut, 
astrophysicist, Marine Corp veteran and Olympic cyclist hardly fit that 
description.

No, it arises when men are brought up in a world that teaches them that their 
knowledge and opinions are worth more than those of a far more qualified woman. 
It happens when some men act on these ingrained assumptions. And its impact, 
particularly in the workplace, can go far beyond the initial annoyance. The 
only way to stop it is to change the narrative that sets up male contributions 
as superior in the first place, not to “train” women to deal with it later on.

In the meantime, here is a good rule of thumb for overenthusiastic men on 
Twitter to follow: if she’s wearing a Nasa spacesuit, take a minute to consider 
whether you really want to tell her how to do her job. Or, as one tweeter put it
 <https://twitter.com/omearan/status/774215701707919365>, “This lesson went 
well, I think. But you should have told her to smile more. Women love that.”
 