
When I was growing up, I had access to two VHS videos. One was The Snowman 
<http://www.thesnowman.com/>, the classic adaption of the Raymond Briggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymond-briggs> cartoon, and the other was 
Mary Poppins <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0058331/reference>. (I’m talking 
about the mid-1980s, when this represented an extraordinary range of options on 
top of Britain’s four terrestrial TV channels.) As a result, I watched Poppins 
probably 3,000 times; I know it from the first spit-spot to the umbrella’s 
final squawk. It is thanks to this movie that I still misuse the word “amortize 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/amortize>” and, in times of stress, 
can be unaccountably soothed by the phrase “Shipyards, the mercantile”.

I was, therefore, interested to read this week of a new Poppins movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/mary-poppins-to-be-remade-by-disney>
 in the works, to be directed byRob Marshall  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/steve-schonberg/qa-rob-marshall-on-direct_b_7180072.html>
– who just madea long-winded version of Stephen Sondheim’s Into the Woods  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/08/into-the-woods-review-fairytale-musical-tastefully-retooled>
– and with new music byMarc Shaiman and Scott Wittman 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/publishing/6077534/marc-shaiman-scott-wittman-award-winning-songwriters-sign-with>
, a songwriting duo known mainly for Hairspray and the Broadway production of 
Catch Me if You Can. There is no word on casting yet, but with the memory of
Carrie Underwood’s Maria von Trapp still waking many of us screaming in the 
night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/emma-brockes-blog/2013/dec/05/sound-of-music-carrie-underwood-nbc>
, I am braced for the worst.

The rationale for remaking a successful film – the original Poppins won Julie 
Andrews and composers the Sherman brothers all Oscars – is, often, that it will 
revisit the source material to do it greater justice. As we know fromSaving Mr 
Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/film/saving-mr-banks>, the recent PL Travers 
biopic starring Emma Thompson, Travers hated the Disney adaptation of her book. 
She thought it sentimental and silly. She hated the fact they turned Mrs Banks 
into a suffragette. And she thought the film-makers got the character of 
Poppins all wrong.

Another spoonful of sugar: Mary Poppins to be remade by Disney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/mary-poppins-to-be-remade-by-disney>
The author had some cause for complaint. The first Poppins book was written in 
1934, but was set 20 years earlier, in Edwardian England, and its central 
character, like the woman who created her, was difficult to the point of 
obnoxious. PL Travers described Mary Poppins as a woman who “never wastes time 
being nice”. She was sharp, short-tempered and a bit of a tyrant, a childcare 
professional with no references who did not, as in the Disney version, 
materialize by gliding serenely down onto the doorstep, but was hurled against 
the gate by the wind.

Neither was she sentimental. Poppins had little time for the Bird Woman, the 
vagrant stationed on the steps of St Paul’s Cathedral, and on the issue of 
avian welfare in the capital went further even than Dawes Sr – “Feed the birds 
and what have you got? Fat birds!” – by suggesting they should be baked in a 
pie.

The biggest difference between the book and film versions of Poppins, however, 
was one of class. In the guise of Julie Andrews, you would call Poppins posh; 
all those crystal-cut vowels and crisp consonants. The original Poppins was 
nothing of the sort. Travers, an Australian immigrant to London, placed her 
heroine further down the social scale, as she herself, in that era, would have 
been judged to be. This is unequivocal. The original Poppins, in the accent 
that so magnificently eluded Dick Van Dyke, refers to the birds as “sparrers”.

Poppins is also a bit of a snob, disdainful of the Banks’ aspirational middle 
class style. (On a deputy bank manager’s salary, the Bankses could not have 
afforded 17 Cherry Tree Lane, which is clearly in one of the grand squares in 
Chelsea. Travers deals with this in the book by identifying their house as the 
shabbiest in the street and having them constantly worry about money, 
particularly after the arrival of Jane and Michael’s twin siblings, John and 
Barbara, whom Disney cut from the movie.)

How we made Mary Poppins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/02/how-we-made-mary-poppins> 
In spite of all this, Travers was wrong in her assessment of the Disney film, 
which was more faithful to her version than she allowed herself to see. The 
tone of the movie is sharp and the moral at times subversive. Mr Banks is slyly 
ridiculed by his wife. His stuffiness and commitment to “tradition, discipline 
and rules” is presented as ruinously inflexible. The banking system, the 
preserve of ancient old men shouting at each other across marble hallways, is a 
farce and a confidence trick.

I’ve always thought that Mary Poppins is David Tomlinson 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0866835/reference>’s movie as much as it is Julie 
Andrews’. When, as Mr Banks, he gets his hat punched inside out and his bosses 
destroy his umbrella, he plays the scene with a pathos that, to a child of 
seven or eight, does terrible violence to the notion of parental infallibility. 
Tomlinson is the great heart of the movie, the warmth to Andrews’ splinter of 
ice, who, while sustaining the film’s line in jokey verbosity, still manages to 
be moving.

“The cup is dashed from his lips / The flame is snuffed aborning / He’s 
brought to rack and ruin in his prime,” he sings with quiet defeat after the 
collapse of his career. (To which Bert, of course, replies gamely: “Life’s a 
rum go, guv’nor, and that’s the truth.” Perhaps Ray Winstone –or indeed Idris 
Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/anthony-horowitz-apologises-idris-elba-too-street-bond>
 – in this role for the remake?)

The problem for Travers was that in the movie, none of this goes far enough. 
It all comes right in the end. Mr Banks does not become a stay-at-home dad, but 
returns to the bank, triumphant. Order is restored.

The book occupies a darker moral universe, one in which an alternative, more 
definitive ending is alluded to. Poppins is always looking in mirrors because 
she feels only tenuously connected to the physical world. (One sees why Sylvia 
Plath liked these books; TS Eliot, too.) What’s more, she has a cousin who is a 
snake and who, on the night of her birthday, gives her his shed skin and 
speculates that to eat and be eaten amount to the same thing when we are, “as 
one, moving to the same end”. It’s an extraordinary piece of paganism for a 
children’s book, prefiguring the end, when Poppins disappears with a “wild 
cry”, never to return. You don’t get that in Lassie Come Home.

Enough of this complexity made it into the movie, however, to preserve its 
original flavour and even, perhaps, to deepen it. I have a theory that the Bird 
Woman is Poppins’s alter ego: despised and destitute, the mad old bat whom 
women like PL Travers were expected to become – invisible, husbandless and in 
need of a chin wax. She is the crone in the snow globe whom Poppins compels us 
to see.

Poppins herself, of course, remains defiant, both in the book and in the 
movie, which denies us the resolution it has spent the entire storyline setting 
up. At the end, Bert gazes at Poppins’ retreating form as she floats up through 
the sky. “Don’t stay away too long,” he says, touching his cap and looking 
incredulous as only Dick Van Dyke can.

Looking down, Poppins smiles back rather condescendingly, as if to say, very 
much in the spirit of her creator: “Really, Bert. I don’t have the requisite 
vulnerabilities for marriage. Don’t you know that about me by now?”
 