
A pink lobster rests on a glistening metal platter, surrounded by furrowed 
brown clam shells and black-eyed, gossamer-legged shrimps. A hunk of bread and 
a glass of amber liquid complete the still life. Set in a pool of deep shadow, 
the mutely lit objects in this photograph by Mat Collishaw beautifully resemble 
foodstuffs painted by some Dutch artist in the age ofVermeer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Vermeer>. You might expect to find such 
a picture hanging in the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. But the calm conceals 
a terrible truth: we are looking at a reconstruction of the last meal ofAllen 
Lee Davis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allen_Lee_Davis>, who was executed in 
Florida in 1999.

Davis was convicted of a brutal crime: in 1982, he murdered Nancy Weller and 
her two young daughters, Kristina, nine, and Katherine, five, in Jacksonville, 
Florida. But his own execution became a grisly farce when the electric chair 
failed to deliver the clean death it was supposed to, and witnesses heard him 
scream and saw him bleed. It was the last time the electric chair was used in 
Florida, which now prefers to end the lives of prisoners with a lethal 
injection.

For his last meal, Davis requested and got the banquet that Collishaw has 
reassembled and photographed to look like an Old Master painting: a lobster 
tail, fried potatoes, fried clams, fried shrimp, garlic bread and root beer.

Collishaw's Last Meal On Death Row 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/last-meal-death-row/> series is one of 
the eerily paradoxical works in which this powerful artist confronts beauty 
with horror. Other meals in the series are far more restrained. Karla Faye 
Tucker, who when she died in 1998 was the first woman executed in Texas since 
1863, chose a healthy final meal of fruit and salad. Collishaw has pictured it 
in a sombre light that deliberately recalls paintings by the 17th-century 
Spanish religious artist and still life masterFrancisco de Zurbarán 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francisco_de_Zurbar%C3%A1n>. Tucker had converted 
to Christianity in prison. Collishaw gives his imagined picture of her last 
meal a spiritual intensity.

In his studio in a converted south London pub, Collishaw is remembering his 
own religious childhood. His parents are members of the fundamentalist
Christadelphian sect <http://www.christadelphian.org.uk/>, and he grew up in 
Nottingham in a strictly regulated household where Christmas was not celebrated 
– he got no presents – and TV was forbidden. "I get on with my parents now," he 
says, "but those kinds of things were difficult." Once, he recalls, "I came 
home to find my dad burning all my copies ofthe Face 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Face_%28magazine%29>."

This childhood helps to make sense of his apparent compulsion to break rules, 
defy moral codes and, as it were, profane the host. Collishaw is an artist of 
risk and menace, whose work takes its audience to some very dark places. Once 
there was a name for this kind of provocative imagery: we called itYoung 
British Art <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young_British_Artists>.

Collishaw is one of the YBAs, a name coined in the 1990s for a generation or a 
school or just a gang of artists who were then becoming internationally 
celebrated. He is a hardcore original YBA whose most famous early work,Bullet 
Hole <http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/bullet-hole/>, appeared in the 
exhibitionFreeze <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeze_%28exhibition%29> that 
his friendDamien Hirst <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/damienhirst> 
curated in a docklands warehouse in 1988. It is a massively enlarged photograph 
of a bullet hole in a human head, seen as a purple-lipped orifice surrounded by 
greasy hair. Through the giant hole you see darkness. Again, there is a 
religious echo: it is like one of the wounds of Christ in a painting of the 
Passion. Not that anyone noticed at the time, when Young British Art was 
tabloid headline, shock-horror stuff and its deeper meanings were rarely 
considered. Even by people who acknowledged it had any.
 With Tracey Emin at the Serpentine Gallery summer party in 2005. Photograph: 
Getty 
Collishaw flitted in and out of the tabloid version of the new British art. He 
wasTracey Emin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/emin>'s boyfriend, as 
well as one of Hirst's best pals (as he still is: Collishaw recently took up 
painting after Hirst gave him 10 huge boxes of paint). And, of all the YBAs, he 
did project the image of being young, wild and a bit of a romantic. He 
photographed himselfbare-chested in a pond on Clapham Common 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/catching-fairies/>, trying to catch 
fairies. He posed asNarcissus gazing in a puddle 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/narcissus/> (not so much recreating a 
Renaissance painting as restaging the cover photograph from the Smiths' single
This Charming Man <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/This_Charming_Man>). A raw, 
urban romanticism, a whiff of youthful daring came off his art.

And now he is in his 40s.

I owe Mat Collishaw an apology. In 2009 I sat at a boardroom table in Tate 
Britain discussing who should be shortlisted for theTurner prize 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2009/oct/05/turner-prize-shortlist-artists#/?picture=353835466&index=0>
, as one of that year's jury. I suggested Collishaw, who was still young enough 
– Turner Prize artists have to be under 50 – and in my opinion getting better 
all the time. I thought he deserved to be shortlisted for a series of
photographs of butterflies crushed and smashed 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/insecticide/> and seen apparently at 
the moment of their deaths, enlarged into great gaudy smears of colour. What 
haunting images of beauty and ruin, life and death. But one fellow juror said 
this could happen only if we created "an all-YBA shortlist", the last hurrah of 
the movement that made British art famous. In the thinking of the art world, 
the Collishaw generation are the establishment now and their stuff is old hat. 
Sensation and shock are dirty words, crude populism frowned upon now that 
modern art is the favourite entertainment of the well-heeled middle class. Art 
now, apparently, is more subtle than it used to be, as are our souls. The mind 
of visceral art that drew crowds toSensation! 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensation_%28art_exhibition%29> at the Royal 
Academy in 1997 is judged too brash and loud.

I lost the argument. So no Turner for Collishaw.

Instead, he has a retrospective about to open at the Arter Foundation in 
Istanbul <http://www.arter.org.tr/W3/>, a show that foregrounds his political 
conscience in powerful works such as Last Meal On Death Row. For me, Collishaw 
is a good political artist for the same reason he is a good religious artist 
and a good artist-artist. It is because he believes in the efficacy of images. 
Not for him the abstract evasion, the minimalist half smile – fashionable or 
not, he wants to punch your imagination in the stomach. He justifies the art of 
sensation by showing how it can have depth in its oomph.

He is very articulate on the subject, as we chat in his studio while looking 
through drawers full of Insecticides, the pictures for which I wanted to 
shortlist him for the Turner. "Shock makes us feel more alive," he insists. 
Sure, back in the 90s, "Some people were using shock art as a 
fuck-you-in-your-face kind of thing", but for him shock is much more serious, 
and all his favourite painters from the past make use of it – "great art that I 
like when I go to the National Gallery, likeCaravaggio 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/michelangelo-merisi-da-caravaggio> 
andRubens <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/peter-paul-rubens> and 
Géricault 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/jean-louis-andre-theodore-gericault>
andDelacroix <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/eugene-delacroix>."
 Collishaw's best-known early work, Bullet Hole (1988). Photograph: Courtesy 
of Mat Collishaw and Blain|Southern 
The book on his desk is a new academic study of the 19th-century French poet 
and art criticCharles Baudelaire <http://www.poets.org/poet.php/prmPID/607> – 
specifically, about his drug use. Baudelaire was surely taking drugs when he 
celebrated his favourite artist, Eugène Delacroix, whose paintings indulge in 
violent excesses worthy of any artist of today. Delacroix's paintingThe Death 
Of Sardanapalus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_of_Sardanapalus> portrays a 
tyrant killing himself on a vast pink bed surrounded by his harem and slaves in 
a frenzied apocalyptic party. Its mood of dissipation haunts Collishaw's art. 
In his photographBurnt Almonds 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/burnt-almonds/>, he recreates a scene 
described by a Russian officer in the ruins of Berlin in 1945: a Nazi officer 
and his mistress lie dead, having taken poison in the middle of a last decadent 
party. In a new cycle of paintings that Collishaw has created – they are being 
finished by an assistant in the downstairs of the pub – he enlarges empty 
cocaine wrappers to suggest the decadence of the high-flying financial world on 
the eve of the credit crash.

His Nazi picture, he says, shows "a total corruption of beauty". His use of 
shock always involves "seduction and beauty". I am staring at the Last Meal Of 
Death Row pictures pinned on his studio wall as he says this. You can scarcely 
have a starker example of art that lures the eye, only to punish the mind with 
terrible knowledge. Other subjects he has eerily illuminated with installations 
and images that are at once beautiful and appalling include war photography, 
Victorian child prostitution and, most recently, the portrayal of poverty. 
His Istanbul exhibition includes the premiere of a video in which he stretches 
photojournalistKevin Carter's famous image of a child apparently being stalked 
by a vulture in the Sudan famine in 1993 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/b8/Kevin-Carter-Child-Vulture-Sudan.jpg>
 into an event that happens in time, in slow-motion. By animating Carter's 
shot, he wants to question the way we take pictures at face value – this image 
became controversial because some said Carter should have intervened, and he 
responded by telling contradictory stories about it. Soon after winning a 
Pulitzer for this perfect press photograph, Carter took his own life. "He 
couldn't make another image that gave him that buzz," Collishaw says.

In the basement of his pub, we encounter a couple of mangy stuffed animals; 
Collishaw lives with taxidermist-artistPolly Morgan 
<http://www.pollymorgan.co.uk/>, and they are currently showing together in an 
exhibition in Walsall about contemporary art and nature called The Nature Of 
The Beast 
<http://www.thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/whats-on/exhibition/the-nature-of-the-beast>
. Of all the images with which he seduces and confounds the onlooker, 
Collishaw's flowers are his most beguiling and disgusting achievements. He has 
been experimenting with flowers since the 1990s, breeding – he claims – hybrid 
blooms that attest to genetic mutation. HisInfectious Flowers 
<http://www.matcollishaw.com/art/archive/infectious-flowers/> started as 
photographs and have recently been realised as monstrous sculptures. "I make a 
beautiful flower," as he puts it, "and then I have to go and infect it with 
venereal disease." Black sores well up on pink petals, and in his 2012 sculpture
The Venal Muse: Fenside 
<http://tanyabonakdargallery.com/upload/ex_images/TBG13633_The%20Venal%20Muse_Fenside_2012_3_share.jpg>
, orchidean blooms have turned into gory pustulating columns of suppurating 
flesh. Nature produces monsters, and life evolves into corrupted versions of 
itself.

Collishaw placed his venereal flowers instead of bouquets at the entrance to 
his recent exhibition about the madness of the bankers on the eve of the crash. 
His art is lovely and vile. It is an art of our time and it hits true, like a 
bullet in the head.

• Mat Collishaw is at Arter, Istanbul <http://www.arter.org.tr/W3/> from 2 May 
to 11 September. The Nature Of The Beast runs until 30 June atNew Art Gallery, 
Walsall 
<http://www.thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/whats-on/exhibition/the-nature-of-the-beast>

This article was edited on 29 April 2013. The original said that Collishaw was 
married to Polly Morgan, and referred to the Arter as a centre. Both have been 
corrected.
 