
Leilani Münter has a motto: never underestimate a vegan hippy chick with a 
racing car. She is a fierce environmental activist – who earns a living in one 
of the most gas-guzzling industries on the planet.

But the 42-year-old, a Nascar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nascar> 
racing driver, insists she isn’t the walking contradiction you might imagine. 
She’s a pragmatist. “I am making the biggest difference when I am at a race 
track and not when I am at an environmental event, preaching to the converted,” 
she says from her home in North Carolina.

There are 75 million racing fans in the US, and Münter has the platform to 
reach them all. “If I was just a biology graduate running around telling people 
to buy electric cars and give up eating meat and dairy, not many people would 
listen to me.”

Cove director's new doc warns of impending ecological catastrophe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/the-coral-triangle/2015/dec/02/cove-directors-new-doc-warns-of-impending-ecological-catastrophe>
Driving a racing car was on Münter’s bucket-list as a teen. “I was born with a 
lead-foot,” she says. After graduating from her degree in biology she funded 
her way through racing school by working as a stunt double for Catherine 
Zeta-Jones in the films Traffic and America’s Sweethearts.


It was in 2001 that Münter ran her first race, and the usual announcement, 
“Gentleman, start your engines”, had to be changed to accommodate her. “I felt 
like I had already won the race,” she remembers. But receiving trophies from 
scantily clad grid girls can be quite a weird experience.


“It’s good for little girls watching to see me standing alongside [the girls 
giving out trophies] in a racing suit; hopefully it plants a little seed in 
their head.”

But finding sponsors who don’t compromise her ethics can be tough: she refuses 
to work with companies associated with fossil fuels, animal testing, meat or 
diary products, fur or leather.

Instead, she works with environmentally-friendly companies and advocacy groups 
fighting for clean energy and animal rights, and nine years ago committed to 
adopting an acre of rainforest for every race she runs to offset her carbon 
footprint. And off the track she drives a Tesla car powered by the solar panels 
on the roof of her house.

Speed Sisters: meet the Middle East’s female car-racing team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/15/speed-sisters-palestine-female-racing-team>
“I have walked away from big sponsor deals, and in some ways it has hurt my 
racing career because I haven’t been in a car as much as I could have,” she 
admits.


Getting on the track might have its challenges, but being an environmental 
activist who can make a quick getaway proved a valuable asset to the team 
behind the documentaryRacing Extinction <http://racingextinction.com/>. 
Directed by Oscar-winning Louie Psihoyos, famous for The Cove, the documentary 
draws attention to mankind’s role in a potential loss of at least half of the 
world’s species. It follows the scientists, activists and journalists who are 
documenting it all over the world, and fighting to stave off mass extinction.

Münter was dispatched in a customised electric Tesla car to beam rogue 
projections of endangered species across New York City. Passers by were 
astounded to see giant tigers stalk along buildings and a blue whale swim up 
the Empire State. She also incriminated corporations by lighting them up and 
highlighting their CO2 and methane emissions, with a filter that made the gases 
visible to the human eye.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773308988dbc2e85f627f31687b4ccde4f7e47f8%2F0_346_5307_3184%2F5307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20woman%20racing%20to%20save%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20woman%20racing%20to%20save%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773308988dbc2e85f627f31687b4ccde4f7e47f8%2F0_346_5307_3184%2F5307.jpg>
 The Tesla car Leilani Münter drives in Racing Extinction, fitted with a 
powerful projector. Photograph: Joshua Brott/Obscura Digital 
 “With 7.3 billion people on the planet, we have to change the way we’re 
living and I think people are waking up to that – it’s something we have to 
confront,” she says. “A few times when the cops or security were called, I 
could speed away and, because the car’s camouflage paint job could be turned 
off, I’d hide in plain sight.”

Shell, McDonald’s and Seaworld have all come under Münter’s fire, and not 
everybody is pleased about her taking a bolshie stand with her racing car.

“I have had a few death threats and in one race I was given a security team 
because someone making threats was thought to be there in the crowd.”

Quick to shrug it off, she is not afraid to ruffle feathers. In 2014 she raced 
in aBlackfish <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155585/blackfish>-themed 
car and handed out a thousand DVDs of the film, about killer whales in 
captivity. She did the same in 2012 with the dolphin-hunting filmThe Cove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/the-coral-triangle/2015/dec/02/cove-directors-new-doc-warns-of-impending-ecological-catastrophe>
 and hopes to get behind the wheel of a Racing Extinction-themed car soon too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a4dfa4666f1e7bb3995b6e721657c5221b1962%2F0_258_5553_3332%2F5553.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20woman%20racing%20to%20save%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20woman%20racing%20to%20save%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwomen-in-leadership%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fnascar-female-driver-leilani-munter-racing-extinction-vegan-environment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32a4dfa4666f1e7bb3995b6e721657c5221b1962%2F0_258_5553_3332%2F5553.jpg>
 Münter beamed rogue projections of endangered species across New York City. 
Photograph: Joshua Brott/Obscura Digital 
Veganism is another movement close to her heart. She is planning to drive a 
vegan-themed race car and give away vegan food to racing fans at the finish 
line. She has already converted a few of her pit crew to eat vegan meat 
substitute, and that’s proof that US racing fans are just the sort of audience 
the environmental community should be speaking to, she insists.

“If you really want to have an impact you have to have the uncomfortable 
conversations with the people who may not be on our side yet.” She recently 
received a message from a man whom she’d inspired to adopt an acre of 
rainforest for his wife’s birthday.

He looked like the stereotypical Nascar fan that people picture, she says. “He 
had the big beer belly, the Budweiser in his hand, and I know that a lot of 
environmentalists would just write someone like that off and think there was no 
sense in reaching out to him, but that’s just not true.”

Ultimately, Münter would like to see Nascar move towards either using 100% 
renewable fuel or electric racing cars. “Innovation often comes from the 
racetrack and the sport could really help move us forward,” she says. “They 
have all these brilliant engineers who could also be working on making the 
sport more sustainable and environmentally friendly.”

Münter is going to continue to fight from behind the wheel – beating men to 
the finishing line while she’s at it.

Racing Extinction <http://racingextinction.com/> is out on DVD now.


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 