
In the city of Herat in western Afghanistan, a small but determined contingent 
of young women are quietly learning to code. They grow more empowered, creative 
and confident every day, says Fereshteh Forough, who set up after-school 
programme Code to Inspire – the country’s first coding school for women – in 
November 2015.

“The beauty of coding and tech is that it doesn’t matter who you are or where 
you are – with one computer and the internet they can reach the world and work 
without even leaving the house,” says the 29-year-old, an Iranian-born Afghan 
refugee who returned to Afghanistan with her family after the Taliban regime 
fell in 2001.

Code to Inspire would have been unthinkable before then, when under Taliban 
rule, girls’ education was illegal and the internet was banned. Code to Inspire 
is looking to the future. So far it has taken on 50 students between the ages 
of 15 and 25 in Herat and aims to expand into Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif. 
Students are learning the language to develop websites, creating their own 
mobile apps and exploring gaming technology.

In a highly conservative country where up to 85% <http://codetoinspire.org/> 
of women have had no formal education, andonly 16% 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.FE.ZS> of the workforce are 
women, in many ways these students are the lucky ones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fafghanistan-female-coders-defying-gender-stereotypes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa09a46b4e976bab78ca555c2bd6e5dc07d68d9c%2F0_11_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Afghanistan's%20female%20coders%20who%20are%20defying%20gender%20stereotypes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fafghanistan-female-coders-defying-gender-stereotypes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Afghanistan%27s%20female%20coders%20who%20are%20defying%20gender%20stereotypes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fafghanistan-female-coders-defying-gender-stereotypes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa09a46b4e976bab78ca555c2bd6e5dc07d68d9c%2F0_11_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 ‘The beauty of coding is that they can reach the world and work without even 
leaving the house.’ Photograph: Code to Inspire 
“Education for women is still a very sensitive topic, it is a very 
male-dominated culture,” says Forough. Even in strict families, where young 
women might still have limitations on their independence, coding offers the 
chance to work from home, she points out.

When studying computer science at Herat University, Forough encountered lots 
of problems as one of the only female students. “I was a very vocal student; 
the majority of my classmates were male and a lot of the time they didn’t like 
to see a girl being so vocal in the classroom,” she says.

Forough became one of the first female mentors to teach Java. More than 200 
students were taking the class – but only 10 turned up for the first few weeks. 
“They didn’t want to learn from a girl – they didn’t think I’d be capable.”

With her own experiences in mind, the first priority was to find a safe and 
secure location to hold the coding classes – “we didn’t want to create any 
unnecessary trouble for the women or their families”. The Code to Inspire team 
has worked hard to foster good relations with the local community and has won 
the approval of the students’ fathers and brothers.

Among the students is 20-year-old Heydeh, who aspires to become a professional 
web developer. “I have big dreams, I want to make websites to support local 
people with their work so they are no longer forced to turn to other countries 
for help,” she explains.

“I was excited to come to Code to Inspire because coding is not too familiar 
[in Afghanistan] and women cannot normally raise their voices – but we are 
proving women have that power and we can talk with the world via coding.” She 
says her family were skeptical at first, but now they want to help her realise 
a future beyond just “housework and marriage”.

One student has already created a delivery app for a local restaurant, while 
others are working on how they can build platforms to promote their country to 
potential tourists.

Girls can code

Other organisations are recognising the potency of nurturing female coders in 
Afghanistan, too. In April 2016 non-profitThe Womanity Foundation 
<https://womanity.org/> launched Girls can Code in two of Kabul’s biggest 
girls’ schools. Forty students between the ages of 16-18 are enrolled in the 
classes, which take place before and after school.

“Coding empowers girls by teaching them how to use their creativity, 
imagination and problem-solving skills to develop solutions,” says Elizabeth 
Rector, programme leader. “Through this process they build confidence and learn 
to rely on their own abilities to find solutions, and these skills are forever 
with them.”

Will learning to code help you get a job?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/2015/apr/14/coding-isnt-just-for-the-next-zuckerberg-it-can-help-dentists-too>
There is global shortage of skilled tech workers expected in the coming years, 
Rector adds. In Afghanistan the population’s access to the internetis currently 
only 7% <http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users-by-country/> and 
businesses need to prepare for the coming growth in internet access.

“Investing in educating girls in subjects like coding, where we expect there 
to be abundant, good-paying jobs is key to the future of Afghanistan. With a 
full range of talent to tap into, Afghanistan’s economy can grow and become 
less reliant on foreign aid and retain ambitious young women,” says Rector.

Female app developers are already emerging in Kabul and Herat – in May, 45 
young women submitted mobile app ideas at Girls Make Apps workshops, organised 
by Herat Technovation. Universities and other technical schools are working to 
increase female enrolment and organisations such as USAid are investing in 
matching young women to ICT employment opportunities, according to Rector.

Travel the world and reach for the stars

For Afghan women aspiring to get into tech, Forough is testament that it can 
be done. So is her former classmate, Roya Mahboob, who founded IT consulting 
firm Afghan Citadel Software Co in 2010, making her one of the country’s first 
female tech chief executives. She also launchedDigital Citizen Fund 
<http://digitalcitizenfund.org/about/>, a nonprofit which helps girls and women 
in developing countries gain access to technology.

Mahboob says setting up her business wasn’t easy: “It was very hard to 
establish a client base at first – many men didn’t want to do business with 
women, even though we could bring them clients,” she says.

When pitching for business, the fact she is the chief executive of her own 
company is regularly met with outright disbelief, and it hasn’t been uncommon 
for clients to refuse to pay for work carried out. Mahboob and her team have 
even been followed, spied on and threatened. Undeterred, she has made it her 
priority to hire female programmers and bloggers from the beginning. Today more 
than half of her staff are women – and business is thriving in Afghanistan and 
beyond its borders.

“While cultural barriers threaten the dreams and aspirations of young women 
and girls, the opportunities they can find through the internet and 
technologies show them a larger world than the one that they have always 
known,” says the entrepreneur. “They can travel the world and reach for the 
stars, without even having a passport.”

The story in Afghanistan feeds into a wider struggle going on throughout the 
world to get more women into tech. In an increasingly digital world, it will be 
at the heart of unlocking greater equality, empowerment and economic stability 
in every country.


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 