
Men are still paid vastly more than women across many jobs and regions despite 
firms “tinkering around the edges” to try to close the gap, according to a 
report.

Where men and women are doing the same job, they are usually paid almost the 
same – although men still have a slight advantage, earning an average of 1.6% 
more. However, the real gap is caused by the scarcity of women at the highest 
and best-paid levels of industries such as oil and gas, technology and life 
sciences.

How to end the UK's gender pay gap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/how-to-end-uk-gender-pay-gap> 
The biggest pay gap – 34% – was in the east Midlands, followed by the 
south-east at 30%, the north-east at 28% and the West Midlands at 26%.

The study, conducted by the business advice group Korn Ferry Hay and based on 
research into about 500,000 UK workers, found that firms were offering 
incentives such as flexible working instead of tackling the problem head on.

Ben Frost, a pay data specialist at Korn Ferry Hay, said the figures showed 
that overall across the UK men were paid far more than women.

“This shows that organisations still aren’t dealing with the real issue here – 
which is that we need more women working in higher paying jobs and industries 
and at the most senior levels,” he said. “At the moment firms are tinkering 
around the edges by offering benefits like flexible working to address the 
issue. More fundamental change needs to happen.”

On Friday the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, challenged all Greater London 
Authority bodies 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/sadiq-khan-pledges-to-cut-unacceptable-gender-pay-divide-as-earnings-report-published-a3404736.html>
 to publish action plans to tackle the problem. He released figures showing a 
gender pay gap of 11.6% in the Metropolitan police, 19.2% in Transport for 
London and 35% in the post-Olympics London Legacy Development Corporation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmen-uk-still-paid-vastly-more-women-gender-pay-gap-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c868f501644f08016cb5d1df62664c77b8b1733%2F0_461_2399_1439%2F2399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%20still%20paid%20vastly%20more%20than%20women%20on%20average%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmen-uk-still-paid-vastly-more-women-gender-pay-gap-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%20still%20paid%20vastly%20more%20than%20women%20on%20average%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fmen-uk-still-paid-vastly-more-women-gender-pay-gap-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c868f501644f08016cb5d1df62664c77b8b1733%2F0_461_2399_1439%2F2399.jpg>
 Sadiq Khan described the gender pay gap in the capital as unacceptable. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Khan made closing the pay gap in the capital, where his mother once stitched 
dresses for 50p apiece, one of theplanks of his election manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/08/sadiq-khan-to-tackle-gender-issues-in-london-mayoral-bid>
 earlier this year.

In July he published the first City Hall pay audit, which showed that women 
made up more than half of all employees, but less than a third of those earning 
more than £100,000.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in the UK have in 
effect been working for free since 10 November, which the Fawcett Society 
calculated to beEqual Pay Day 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/2016/11/10th-november-equal-pay-day/> for 
2016. On average, women effectively stopped earning 51 days before the end of 
the year, relative to men.

Campaigners say the gap will take 60 years to close at the current rate of 
progress.

The Fawcett Society’s chief executive, Sam Smethers, said: “A root cause of 
the gender pay gap is that we don’t value the work done by women ... We are 
focusing on the fundamental question of who and what we value and asking why it 
is that we don’t value women and the work they do – paid or unpaid.”
 