
Male speakers are outnumbering women by two to one on political panels during 
party conference season, a new report has estimated.

Women in Public Affairs (WiPA) made the finding after examining the gender 
ratios at Conservative,Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and 
Liberal Democrat conferences last year.

It also discovered there were around five times as many fringe events without 
any female speakers as there were without men.

The report said Labour had the most equal representation, with around 39% of 
panellists being female speakers, compared with 35% for the Lib Dems and 27% 
for theConservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

Across the three parties, it found that two of every three chairs of fringe 
events were male. It did not include analysis of the SNP, Ukip or Green fringes.

Ahead of the Labour and Tory conferences this year, the group called for the 
parties to guarantee that 90% of their events had at least one woman on the 
panel and urged MPs to challenge organisers if there was a lack of female 
representation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmen-on-political-panels-outnumber-women-two-to-one-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a6e884d7b6013ab3dcf7ea0f2d9e06ae71ae26d%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%20on%20political%20panels%20outnumber%20women%20two%20to%20one%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmen-on-political-panels-outnumber-women-two-to-one-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%20on%20political%20panels%20outnumber%20women%20two%20to%20one%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmen-on-political-panels-outnumber-women-two-to-one-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a6e884d7b6013ab3dcf7ea0f2d9e06ae71ae26d%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, right, takes part in the Women 
50:50 conference last year. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
There were also almost five times more fringe events without any female 
speakers than without male speakers.

 Laura Gilmore, the co-founder of WiPA, said the parties ought to be setting a 
better example.

“During high-profile party leader speeches, it is glaringly obvious the effort 
party communications teams go to to ensure their leader is framed by a diverse 
selection of people – men, women; old, young; black, white,” she said.

“Therefore, it is all the more disappointing to find that this conscious 
effort to promote diversity stops here and does not reach the abundance of 
fringe speaking opportunities.”

Women’s Equality party leader Sophie Walker: ‘It’s complex, but not 
complicated’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>
Sophie Walker, the leader of the Women’s Equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> party, said the figures showed 
the “extent to which mainstream politics is about men’s ideas, men’s needs and 
men’s voices”.

“That’s exactly what brought the Women’s Equality party into existence. WE 
represent the other 51% of the population,” she said. “And it’s why at our 
party conference, in Manchester at the end of November, most of the speakers 
will be women, represented in all their glorious diversity.

“It’s a small step towards redressing the imbalance of speakers across 
conference season, but it’s another huge step towards building an inclusive 
politics that works for everyone.”
 