
Even the most hopeless student of history knows that people from different 
locations have coveted Gibraltar throughout the ages. But now the territory is 
increasingly opening its arms to a different sort of invasion: tourism. 
Gibraltar’s geographical singularity and vibrant history are the magical 
ingredients the territory’s tourism chiefs have to work with, while carefully 
building up modern-day infrastructure and services to complete a winning 
formula.

“It is a destination that is brimming with history, quality services and 
exciting visitor attractions that result in an unforgettable holiday 
experience,” says Nicky Guerrero, CEO of the Gibraltar Tourist Board.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fmore-reasons-to-visit-gibraltar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24180c9711cf1071c5ecd51aaa2d81cedba1d473%2F23_0_2498_3744%2F2498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20reasons%20to%20visit%20Gibraltar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fmore-reasons-to-visit-gibraltar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20reasons%20to%20visit%20Gibraltar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fmore-reasons-to-visit-gibraltar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24180c9711cf1071c5ecd51aaa2d81cedba1d473%2F23_0_2498_3744%2F2498.jpg>
 Gibraltar’s emblematic Europa Point Lighthouse. Photograph: Barrie Glover 
The message is clearly filtering through. All told, some 10 million people 
cross the border into Gibraltar each year, with arrivals at Gibraltar’s airport 
topping 200,000 in 2014, doubling the annual figure at the start of the century.

Most staggering is the around 792,000 visitors to the Upper Rock nature 
reserve last year, an eye-popping figure for a territory with around 30,000 
inhabitants.

And it is the Rock which offers enduring appeal to visitors, from the 
geological majesty of St Michael’s Cave to the military heritage still redolent 
of the past battles which have forged Gibraltarian’s identity. Recalling that 
as recently as the 1960s, the Upper Rock was out of bounds due to military 
restrictions, Johnnie Gaggero, chairman of shipping and tourism company MH 
Bland, argues there are more riches to be revealed by improving access. Many 
miles of tunnels, “where Eisenhower’s headquarters can be found”, and the 
northern defences are yet to be exploited.

Down at sea level, much has been done to provide state-of-the-art visitor 
facilities, such as the £1.1bn Blue Water marina complex to boost the capacity 
for superyachts and stimulate luxury property development. Samantha Sacramento, 
whose mixed ministerial portfolio includes tourism, is determined to continue 
developing “all the quality services that a modern leisure destination can 
offer its customers”.

Just as Gibraltar is booming in financial terms, tourism too is seeking the 
higher ground.

The Neanderthals of Gibraltar


While today’s inhabitants are rightly proud of their long history of 
endurance, the Gibraltarians who occupied the Rock for longest were 
Neanderthals. The discovery of a female skull in Forbes’ Quarry in 1848 paved 
the way for a series of remarkable finds in what is now considered likely to 
have been the last stronghold of the species Homo neanderthalensis, the traces 
of which disappeared as recently as 23,000 years ago after inhabiting the many 
caves around the Rock and surrounding coastal plain before sea levels rose.

Gorham’s Cave, extending 40 metres into the cliffs of Gibraltar, was where the 
species survived longer than anywhere else, providing Clive Finlayson, director 
of the Gibraltar Museum, with powerful and poignant finds, including charcoal 
hearths, knife blades and scrapers used to cure hides, and even, it is claimed, 
artwork in an astonishing 2012 discovery which challenged many assumptions 
about the species’ supposed intellectual inferiority compared to Homo sapiens.

The abstract engraving in the rock “brings the Neanderthals closer to us, yet 
again”, Professor Finlayson said last year when the discovery was presented to 
the world.

But the species which, like us, took care to bury its dead, would run out of 
time after 100,000 years in Gibraltar. As the climate turned cold and arid 
between 25,500 and 22,500 years ago, the remaining inhabitants of Gorham’s Cave 
became too few to resist the threats brought by inbreeding and possibly disease 
as their once-abundant food supplies from the sea and land diminished.

Reaching the Rock

Increased air links and better access for yachts and cruise ships are crucial 
to taking tourism in Gibraltar to the next level. The Blue Water development 
will eventually provide berths for 70 superyachts, but in the meantime yacht 
arrivals reached 2,373 last year and 79 cruise ships stopped by in the first 
half of 2015 alone. Regarding air traffic, diversification from the traditional 
mainstay of flights from London’s airports is a new priority. Recently opened 
routes include an EasyJet flight from Bristol and Royal Air Maroc flights from 
Tangier and Casablanca, connecting Gibraltar to a new market to the south of 
the Strait.
 