
My dad hated Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-obituary>, still 
Cassius Clay to him to the day he died: so, of course, I loved him. He 
represented changing times, youth, anti-establishment liberalism – the 60s. He 
was a flamboyant American: eloquent, confident and black; I was a white 
middle-class teenager, and totally impressed. He was a brilliant boxer, and 
when “Our ’Enery” nearly won, I was still in the Clay camp.

There were feet of clay in the ensuing years, and I didn’t really get the 
Muslim thing with Elijah Muhammad, and some of his arguments. He continued to 
win fights, and get us all onside with opposing the war in Vietnam. He was a 
very brave fighter, and rarely ducked a challenge, in or out of the ring. Some 
of his bouts were extraordinary, with his style combining Joe Louis’s power 
with Sugar Ray Robinson’s grace and acumen. He could be ruthless, though, in 
and out of the ring, and his personal attacks onJoe Frazier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/joe-frazier> were hardly his finest hour.

After Ali’s final fight, Hugh McIlvanney, the nonpareil of boxing 
correspondents, described him as “the king who went out on a dustcart”. I never 
thought that he would go on too long, like so many before him, but he did; and 
he soaked up the punishment, too much for even his wonderful brain. He was the 
most well known and popular man on the planet for many years, but in the end 
his feet lived up to his “slave name”.

My dad would not have mourned his loss, but to me he was a heroic figure, and 
no other sporting star has come close to eclipsing him.
Bill Taylor
Matlock, Derbyshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 