
“In life, there’s the beginning and the end,” John Carlos, the black American 
Olympic medalist whoraised his fist in a black power salute from the podium of 
the 1968 Olympic games 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/mar/30/black-power-salute-1968-olympics>, 
told me. “The beginning don’t matter. The end don’t matter. All that matters is 
what you do in between – whether you’re prepared to do what it takes to make 
change. There has to be physical and material sacrifice. When all the dust 
settles and we’re getting ready to play down for the ninth inning, the greatest 
reward is to know that you did your job when you were here on the planet.”

As tributes have poured in this weekend from world leaders and sporting 
figures, boxing fans and political activists following Muhammad Ali’s death, 
it’s clear that, from beginning to end, he understood he had a job to do while 
he was on the planet – inspire people.

And he did it brilliantly. Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> says he kept a pair of Ali’s 
gloves on display in his study under picture of Ali towering over Sonny Liston 
after he knocked him out in the first round of the world heavyweight title 
fight in 1965. “Muhammad Ali shook up the world,” said Obama. “And the world is 
better for it. We are all better for it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06dd0a07c7a6ae8995989c59f414e599270824b8%2F0_0_2100_3160%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Muhammad%20Ali%20knew%20he%20had%20a%20job%20to%20do%20on%20this%20planet%20%E2%80%93%20inspire%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Muhammad%20Ali%20knew%20he%20had%20a%20job%20to%20do%20on%20this%20planet%20%E2%80%93%20inspire%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06dd0a07c7a6ae8995989c59f414e599270824b8%2F0_0_2100_3160%2F2100.jpg>
 Barack Obama works in his office in 2004 beneath a photo of Muhammad Ali 
standing over Sonny Liston. Photograph: M Spencer Green/AP 
With former president Bill Clinton scheduled to deliver a eulogy, Ali’s 
funeral on Friday will in effect become an affair of state. Everyone, from the 
presumptive Republican nominee, Donald Trump, to the “democratic socialist” 
hopeful, Bernie Sanders, has lauded him. “When champions win, people carry them 
off the field on their shoulders,” said the Rev Jesse Jackson, the civil rights 
leader and a long-time friend. “When heroes win, people ride on their 
shoulders. We rode on Muhammad Ali’s shoulders.”

As such, in a moment when America both enjoys a black president and is 
enveloped by a heightened black consciousness through #BlackLivesMatter, it 
will bid farewell not just to a man but a symbol of unapologetic resistance and 
a radical template for what constitutes black achievement. At a time when black 
youth are being told that their bad behaviour, not racism, explains their 
disproportionate criminalisation, here was a black man who never knew his 
place. He is universally celebrated in death in no small part because he was 
always larger than life.

Ali’s prowess as a boxer was never in doubt. The way he moved around the ring 
was a thing of beauty – as though he turned up for an audition of theSoul Train 
line <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LLnlkxgRDlE> in boots and gloves. “If 
karate kicks had been introduced to boxing,” wrote Norman Mailer in The Fight, 
“Ali would also have been first at that. His credo had to be that nothing in 
boxing was foreign to him.”

But the widespread adulation that greets his passing stands in stark contrast 
with his treatment as a pariah both within his sport and by the entire 
political class after he joined the black separatist Muslim organisation the 
Nation ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> and then came out 
against the Vietnam war.

When he announced his membership of the Nation of Islam and that he was 
changing his name from Cassius Clay toMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali>, he told the press: “I’m no 
troublemaker. I have never been to jail. I have never been to court. I don’t 
join any integration marches. I don’t pay attention to all those white women 
who wink at me. I don’t carry signs. A rooster crows only when it sees the 
light. Put him in the dark and he’ll never crow. I have seen the light and I’m 
crowing.”

The World Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Association 
suspended him for “conduct detrimental to the best interests of boxing” and 
unsuccessfully moved to strip him of his title. Promoters recoiled; endorsement 
offers dried up.

But Ali continued to crow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2002/jan/18/boxing.artsfeatures>, both 
playfully, setting his braggadocio to rhyme and his opponents to ridicule, and 
politically. When it came to Vietnam, he didn’t dodge the draft, he defied it – 
openly, brazenly – not out of fear of dying for an immoral war but as an 
affirmation of his life principles at a time when such opposition was not yet 
widespread, making the link between racial injustice in America and the 
imperalist injustice in Vietnam a year before even Martin Luther King would 
voice his full-throated opposition to the war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fmuhammad-ali-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Muhammad%20Ali%3A%20'a%20personality%20that%20transcended%20his%20sport'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fmuhammad-ali-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Muhammad%20Ali%3A%20%27a%20personality%20that%20transcended%20his%20sport%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fmuhammad-ali-video-obituary&media=>
Muhammad Ali: ‘a personality that transcended his sport’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-video-obituary>
Herein stood the sheer audacity of Ali’s stand at the prime of his career and 
why his memory – even for those who were not alive when he competed – resonates 
so widely and so deeply. His stand carried not risk but the certainty of exile 
from the one way he knew how to make a living – boxing. He could have had 
anything that America offered a black man by way of riches and fame at the 
time, and he turned his back on all of it to make a connection between his own 
freedom and that of the oppressed globally. He was stripped of his title the 
same day and his licence was suspended.

Standing his ground elevated his image internationally. “We knew Muhammad Ali 
as a boxer but more importantly for his political stance,” says the artist 
Malick Bowens in the film When We Were Kings. “When we saw that America was at 
war with a third world country in Vietnam and one of the children of the US 
said, ‘Me? You want me to fight against Vietcong?’ It was extraordinary that in 
America someone could have taken such a position at that time. He may have lost 
his title. He may have lost millions of dollars. But that’s where he gained the 
esteem of millions of Africans.”

But there was nothing inevitable about Ali emerging triumphant, still crowing, 
laden with awards and ceremonial pride of place, with a funeral fit for the 
king that he was.

Esteem does not pay the bills. Nor does it offer any guarantee of readmission 
to national mythology – particularly for a black sportsman. After his 
celebrated Olympic victory before Hitler in Berlin, the sprinter Jesse Owens 
ran a dry-cleaning business, was a gas pump attendant and even raced horses for 
money and eventually went bankrupt. “People say it was degrading for an Olympic 
champion to run against a horse,” he said. “But what was I supposed to do? I 
had four gold medals, but you can’t eat four gold medals.” And Owens never 
tried to upset the apple cart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97e946b4633e290f74ebc0a2945961af7c9d6d3e%2F0_114_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Muhammad%20Ali%20knew%20he%20had%20a%20job%20to%20do%20on%20this%20planet%20%E2%80%93%20inspire%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Muhammad%20Ali%20knew%20he%20had%20a%20job%20to%20do%20on%20this%20planet%20%E2%80%93%20inspire%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fmuhammad-ali-gary-younge-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97e946b4633e290f74ebc0a2945961af7c9d6d3e%2F0_114_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Muhammad Ali leaves the Huston armed forces induction centre with his 
entourage after refusing to be drafted in 1967. Photograph: AP 
 Ali’s return in the 1970s, culminating in winning back his title and the 
Rumble in the Jungle, was like a glorious karmic rebuke to his exile. His 
global appeal was only enhanced by the international venues that staged his 
comeback – Kinshasha, in what was then Zaire, for the Rumble in the Jungle, and 
the “Thrilla in Manila” in the Philippines.

Throughout, the most powerful message Ali sent was one of self-definition – a 
freedom beyond the legal rights and formal equality that had been won as he 
rose to prominence. The ability to rise above the strictures of race, nation, 
class and the myriad constraints that regulate our behaviour and take the 
consequences for living your life as you see fit. “I am America,” he once said. 
“I am the part you won’t recognise. But get used to me. Black, confident, 
cocky, my name, not yours; my religion, not yours; my goals, my own; get used 
to me.”

Ali was a product of his time whose meaning transcended his time; a product of 
his sport whose significance transcended his sport; a product of his race whose 
appeal transcended his race. America, in particular, sees him differently now 
than it did 50 years ago not simply because the world has changed – but because 
he did so much to change the world.
 