
Six years since the uprising, women in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> are still fighting for our rights.

Our bodies are controlled by wider society in both public and private spaces. 
“Honour” is still judged to rest upon women’s conduct and sexual activity. So 
we are inhibited from publicly expressing our sexuality and bodily autonomy. 
This context means that a woman’s private life can be used against her if 
someone threatens to make it public. The online world is now a battlefield for 
women struggling for their right to privacy.

I have suffered the wounds of this battle. In 2009, I sent a private video of 
me dancing to my then boyfriend, who threatened to post it online after we 
broke up. In 2013, a friend told me he had seen me dancing on YouTube. I was 
furious, realising that my ex-boyfriend had uploaded it. I reported him. My 
ex-boyfriend was convicted and sentenced to a year in jail, but I didn’t pursue 
the case, satisfied he was punished enough.

Related: What working as an FGM counsellor taught me about female sexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/17/what-working-as-an-fgm-counsellor-taught-me-about-female-sexuality>

The blackmailing didn’t end there. The video remained on YouTube and cyber 
bullies used it to target me as a feminist activist. I decided to take the 
matter into my own hands byposting the video on Facebook myself 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-37655117>. I wrote: “My body is not a 
source of shame. I have nothing to regret about this video.”

Recently Sahar (she doesn’t want her last name published), an Egyptian woman 
and mother of two, was targeted with online shame when her ex-boyfriend posted 
nude photos of her on social media. Soon after they broke up on New Year’s Eve 
in 2015, her horrified daughter showed her a fake Facebook account with Sahar’s 
name, photos and advertisements for prostitution. They were sent to her 
children and other family members.

“I will never forget the moment I saw myself naked on social media, with my 
real address and phone number, targeted by revenge porn,” she says. “I 
recognised that it was cropped from a video of us having sex, hiding his face. 
Ironically, he recorded this clip using a cellphone that I gave him for his 
birthday.”

Male strangers started to visit Sahar at home to ask for sex. She contacted 
The Girls’ Revolution <https://www.facebook.com/EgyGirlsRev/>, an Egyptian 
feminist platform I founded that supports women’s bodily rights.

I believe that a woman has authority over her own body; no-one has the right 
to violate​​ or humiliate it

She then reported her ex-boyfriend to the police, accusing him of defamation. 
“It was not easy,” she says. “I had to publicly show my naked photos to be 
included into the official report. I knew that every officer at the police 
station could have seen my intimate moments shown in these photos, but I had no 
choice.” Her ex contacted her saying that he would delete the account if she 
gave him 45,000 Egyptian pounds (£2,000) and cancelled the police report.

Sahar told him to stop intimidating her. “Every time I thought about 
retreating, I remembered that horrific look on my daughter’s face seeing that 
fake profile,” she says. In December 2016, her ex was officially sentenced to 
two years in jail. Sahar has no regrets. “I believe that a woman has authority 
over her own body; no-one has the right to violate or humiliate it.”

Although my blackmailer and Sahar’s were convicted of defamation, our stories 
show the lack of a specialised law for cybercrimes in Egypt. According to 
article 11 of the Egyptian constitution (2014), the state shall protect women 
against all forms of violence, whereas cybercrimes against women are classified 
as “defamation” crimes. That suggests that a woman’s private life is shameful, 
and doesn’t recognise it as a gender-based crime of violence. UN Women defines 
“cyber violence” 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2015/9/cyber-violence-against-women-and-girls>
 as online threats and harassment, which Sahar and I both experienced.

Facebook and YouTube privacy policies should also consider a specific 
reporting rationale for gender-related cybercrimes in order to secure women’s 
online safety. For instance, Facebook community standards do not make it easy 
for fake accounts to be removed, unless nude photos are posted, and not photos 
posted for defamation. YouTube follows the same policy, however its reporting 
procedures are not always successful. Hundreds of Arab women’s private videos 
are still uploaded to YouTube tagged as “hot”, including mine.

Cyber blackmailing and online shaming are being experienced by women around 
the world; however, they are hard to fight against in societies like Egypt 
where women are criticised for as little as dancing in public. Fighting against 
this in solidarity requires a sensitive conversation that supports our rights 
and does not accept violations as part of non-western culture. They need to be 
vocally condemned.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 