
US actress Jennifer Lawrence penned an insightful essay 
<http://us11.campaign-archive1.com/?u=a5b04a26aae05a24bc4efb63e&id=64e6f35176&e=1ba99d671e#wage>
 this week which included her thoughts as to why she was paid less than her 
American Hustle co-stars. What stood out was that she knowsshe didn’t negotiate 
as hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/oct/15/jennifer-lawrence-adorable-women-held-back-workplace-paygap>
 as she could for fear of being labelled difficult or unlikeable, fears that 
her well-paid male co-stars clearly did not suffer from.

I'm with Jennifer Lawrence, F-that to being 'adorable' at work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/oct/15/jennifer-lawrence-adorable-women-held-back-workplace-paygap>
This reluctance to negotiate is something that I see all the time. As a 
negotiation coach, it is my job to help people get the best deal they can for 
themselves or their business. Of course as individuals we negotiate all the 
time; who is going to cook dinner each night, our mobile phone contract, work 
deadlines, the list goes on. Negotiation is a fact of life for everyone, every 
day at varying levels of complexity and importance.

But for many people the whole process is intimidating, frustrating, 
time-consuming and difficult, as a result they will often go to great lengths 
to minimise time spent on it or will actively avoid it altogether. In addition 
to this, some believe that negotiating will make them appear greedy or selfish. 
We’re so worried about not being likeable that we forget to just ask.

We know that there are a number of stereotypes about women as negotiators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/apr/29/negotiation-a-mans-game>
 including that we are less likely to negotiate and when we do we don’t aim as 
high as our male peers. Women also appear to face more of a social penalty for 
being assertive when they negotiate.Research 
<http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Lei_Lai/publication/228182559_Backlash_Social_Incentives_for_Gender_Differences_in_Negotiating_Behavior/links/53ff8cf30cf29dd7cb52261f.pdf>
 from Carnegie Mellon University showed that both men and women would penalise 
women who were assertive at the negotiation table.

Jennifer Lawrence was brave enough to admit that a failure to negotiate had 
cost her millions of dollars. Here’s what she should have done:

1 Research: 90% of negotiation is about preparation. Before any negotiation 
find out all the facts, numbers, statistics, trends, legislation and precedents 
you can about the issue up for discussion. Use that information to help you 
plan plenty of proposals in advance and always be ready to respond to “no” with 
a “why?” or a new suggestion. A negotiator should never wing it.

2 Challenge: in the research I mention above on women and negotiation (and in 
similarstudies <http://asq.sagepub.com/content/56/4/622.short>) what stands out 
for me is that women are just as responsible for penalising assertive women as 
the men are. If this is the case we all have a responsibility to challenge this 
in both the men and women around us, and perhaps also in ourselves. And 
remember, if the implication of not negotiating is you miss out on promotions, 
opportunities and fair pay then the implication of not being liked would have 
to be pretty severe for it to warrant staying quiet.

3 Aim high: women tend not to aim as high as men when they negotiate, 
particularly for themselves. A simple solution is to ensure every time you sit 
down to plan for a negotiation that you open ambitiously. If you were going to 
ask for a 10% raise, ask for 15%. If you were going to request a 2 day 
extension, request 4. We often underestimate what people are willing to agree 
to.

Negotiation is not going away and we shouldn’t try to avoid it. It’s a 
fundamental part of how people interact and business gets done. You might find 
it awkward or difficult, but we need to learn to be comfortable with being 
uncomfortable and just ask for what we want. Because if you don’t ask, who is 
going to do it for you?

Natalie Reynolds is the CEO of Advantage Spring 
<http://www.advantagespring.com/>. You can learn more from her at “negotiating 
the gender pay gap 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/negotiating-the-gender-pay-gap-tickets-18775597317>
” on 11th November 2015.
 