
A visit to New York by Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, and his 
wife Sara cost the country’s taxpayers $541,886 (£382,000) , according to a 
detailed breakdown published after months of attempts by his office to prevent 
its release.


The cost – which included thousands of dollars for hairstyling and makeup for 
Netanyahu – follows a series of other recent controversies over the luxurious 
life enjoyed by the prime minister at the taxpayer’s expense – not least their 
travel.

Striking inclusions among the expenses listed for the visit to the UN’s 
general assembly last autumnwere the cost of maintaining Netanyahu’s 
distinctive coiffure, at $1,600 – equivalent to more than $300 per day for the 
trip. 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/netanyahus-1600-coif-is-window-into-his-ny-expenses/>

Similarly, Netanyahu’s makeup artist was billed at $1,750.

The latest disclosures follow official criticism over the Netanyahus’ spending 
habits. Last year the state comptroller listed what he considered excessive 
expenditures on takeaway meals, cleaning, makeup and hairstyling. The latterhas 
prompted articles in the Israeli media attempting to determine the precise 
colour of his favoured dye wash 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/because-youre-worth-it-bibi/>.

A detailed breakdown for Sara Netanyahu – who police recently said could face 
charges for expenditure at the couple’s official residence – was not included. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/30/israeli-police-are-considering-charges-against-sara-netanyahu-say-reports>

The list of expenses also includes minor items, such as chocolate costing $4 
and matches charged at $8.69.

Regular disclosures about the lifestyle of the Netanyahus have become a 
long-running soap opera inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, as 
details have emerged on an almost monthly basis from court cases brought by 
former staff, a police investigation and reports by the government’s official 
auditor.

They include allegations of holidays paid for by wealthy friends of the 
Israeli prime minister – including Arnaud Mimran, a French businessman 
currently on trial for fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/binyamin-netanyahu-israeli-prime-minister-accepted-40000-dollars-alleged-fraudster-arnaud-mimran>
.

Three years ago it was disclosed that the Israeli government had paid for a 
specially commissioned $127,000 “resting chamber” on a plane taken by the 
Netayahus for a five-hour flight to London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/12/netanyahu-turbulence-127000-bed-plane>
.

A year earlier, it was revealed that Netanyahu had an annual contract of more 
than $2,000 with a Jerusalem ice cream parlour to supply his favourite flavour 
– pistachio. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/15/binyamin-netanyahu-ice-cream>

In May an Israeli employment court awarded compensation to a former handyman 
in the prime minister’s home, accepting the worker’s claims of abusive terms of 
employment by Sara Netanyahu.

Other items listed during the Netanyahus’ New York visit were the removal of 
furnishings from the hotel rooms, apparently to meet the needs of the guests, 
which cost Israel almost $20,000 – $3,500 for their removal and about $16,000 
for “storage of the removed furniture”. Supplies of the newspaper Yedioth 
Ahronoth cost $60.60. Theonline version of the paper 
<http://www.ynet.co.il/home/0,7340,L-8,00.html> is free.

The couple’s meals cost $1,860 while another item – described as “special 
cleaning” – was listed as costing $6,900 although it was unclear whether that 
was actually charged or recouped.

The details of the cost of the trip were revealed after an Israeli lawyer, 
Shahar Ben-Meir, requested disclosure of the expenditure in a case he pursued 
through the courts and eventually won.
 