
The New York Review of Books on Monday night issued a retraction from its 
architecture critic over an article criticising British-Iraqi architectZaha 
Hadid <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> for her attitude to 
construction worker deaths in Qatar.

The magazine published a statement on its website in which the author of the 
article, Martin Filler, said he regretted his error.

Hadid began proceedings for defamation against the magazine and Filler at 
Manhattan supreme court last week.

She claimed the article, a review of a book by Rowan Moore, the Observer's 
architecture critic, published in June, accused her of "showing no concern" for 
the deaths of hundreds of migrant construction workers inQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>, where she has designed a football 
stadium for the 2022 World Cup. She is seeking damages, a halt to the review's 
continued publication and a retraction.

The planned location of the World Cup is controversial, not only for the 
sweltering temperatures in the bone-dry region but for the vast numbers of 
migrant workers killed on football-related construction projects there in the 
last two years, as revealed by the Guardian.

In the review Filler criticised comments made by Hadid in London in February 
on the topic of workers' deaths.

On Monday night, the editor of the New York Review of Books, Robert Silvers, 
released a statement to the Guardian and then posted it on the magazine's 
website. It was a letter of regret from Filler in the form of a note to his 
editors at the magazine.

It reads: "To the Editors: In my review of Rowan Moore's Why We Build: Power 
and Desire in Architecture [NYR, 5 June], I quoted comments by the architect 
Zaha Hadid, who designed the Al Wakrah stadium in Qatar, when she was asked in 
London in February 2014 about revelations a week earlier in the Guardian that 
hundreds of migrant labourers had died while working on construction projects 
in Qatar.

"I wrote that an 'estimated one thousand laborers â€¦ have perished while 
constructing her project thus far'.

"However, work did not begin on the site for the Al Wakrah stadium, until two 
months after Ms Hadid made those comments; and construction is not scheduled to 
begin until 2015.

"There have been no worker deaths on the Al Wakrah project and Ms Hadid's 
comments about Qatar that I quoted in the review had nothing to do with the Al 
Wakrah site or any of her projects. I regret the error."

Robert Silvers said the magazine was posting the statement on its website 
independently, not as a result of consultation with Hadid or her lawyers.

"We have done this entirely on our own. This letter contains the facts that 
should be made public and the regret that we thought was appropriate," he told 
the Guardian. He declined to discuss monetary damages. He said retractions at 
the magazine were "very rare".

He said Filler was out of town and not available for comment.

Hadid is being represented in her lawsuit by top New York-based lawyer Oren 
Warshavsky, well-known for his work on efforts to recover assets defrauded from 
clients by jailed pyramid-scheme mastermind Bernard Madoff.

Warshavsky issued a statement saying: "The decision to file a lawsuit is never 
one made lightly. Ms Hadid carefully considered the issues at stake to her 
professional career and reputation and came to the conclusion that the filing 
of the lawsuit was the correct action to take.

"We are in receipt of Mr Filler's retraction issued today and aware of the New 
York Review of Books' plan to post it on their website. Ms Hadid together with 
counsel are reviewing it now and will respond after further careful 
consideration."

Sources said no decision had been made about damages.

The magazine printed the retraction online under the article from Filler, 
called The Insolence of Architecture, which is only available to subscribers, 
and plans to put it on its home page and to publish it in the next print 
edition of the magazine due out on Thursday 28 August, on the letters page.
 