
America’s two leading climate science agencies are conducting an unprecedented 
survey via land, sea and air to investigate the current El Niño event and 
better understand its impact on weather systems that have brought both parched 
and soaking conditions to North America.


The project <http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/enso/rapid_response/>, which will 
conclude in March, will deploy resources from the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) and Nasa to analyze one of the strongest El 
Niños on record. El Niño is a periodic phenomenon in which parts of the eastern 
Pacific warm, causing a ripple effect for weather around the world.

Noaa’s Gulfstream IV research plane and its ship Ronald H Brown will collect 
data from the vast stretch of the Pacific ocean where El Niño climate events 
are spawned. Nasa will deploy its Global Hawk unmanned aircraft, which is able 
to fly at 65,000ft for 30 hours at a time.

It is hoped that instruments dropped from aircraft, supported by weather 
balloons, will help improve weather forecasts and models that predict the 
longer-term impact of climate change. The scientists will coordinate with 
researchers based in Honolulu and the Pacific island of Kiribati, around 1,340 
miles south ofHawaii <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii>.

“This has never been done with a major El Niño,” said Randall Dole, a senior 
scientist at Noaa’s Earth Sciences Research Lab.

“A field campaign ordinarily takes years to plan and execute. But we 
recognized what an important opportunity we had and everyone worked hard to 
pull this mission together.”

Noaa said it was conducting the rapid assessment due to heightened interest 
over El Niño’s impact upon California, which is in the midst of a historic 
four-year drought. El Niño brought a slew of rain to California in December and 
January,prompting warnings to residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/02/california-drought-conservation-rules-water-consumption-el-nino-rain-storms-conservation>
 not to let their guard down in an unprecedented water conservation push.

California’s Folsom Lake, which was nearly depleted by the drought, is nearing 
capacity; Lake Tahoe has been replenished by around 28bn gallons of water since 
December.

The precipitation has proved a boon for ski resort operators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/31/el-nino-blamed-weather-chaos-california-upside-still-drought>
, with the water content of Sierra Nevada’s snowpack standing at 130% of normal 
for this time of year. Californians have also marveled at strange sightings of 
tropical fish, with several warm-water sea snakeswashing up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/15/venomous-sea-snake-found-california-beach-en-nino>
 on the state’s beaches in recent months.

 Felicia Marcus, chair of California’s state water resources control board, 
said: “We are hopeful that we are turning the corner on this drought.”

However, 64% of the state remains in extreme drought conditions 
<http://droughtmonitor.unl.edu/Home/StateDroughtMonitor.aspx?CA>, with 11 of 
its 12 largest water reservoirsbelow historical capacity averages 
<http://cdec.water.ca.gov/cdecapp/resapp/getResGraphsMain.action>.

While California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> has received 
some welcome rain, other parts of the US have experienced exceptionally dry and 
mild conditions. According to Noaa, only 5.7% of the Great Lakes’ surface was 
covered by ice as of 3 February, a huge drop on 2015, when 50% of the lakes’ 
surface was frozen.

 The impact of El Niño has perhaps been most pernicious in Africa, with 
Zimbabwe declaring a state of emergency this week over a drought that has 
ravaged much of the south of the continent. An estimated 26% of Zimbabwe’s 
population, around 2.4 million, are now considered food insecuytre due to dying 
cattle and failed crops.
 