
Those of us who grew up with E Nesbit’s wonderful novels for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/18/the-unquenchable-brilliance-of-e-nesbit>
 –The Railway Children, Five Children and It, The Phoenix and the Carpet – may 
be surprised to learn that she wrote ghost stories for adults. And it might be 
even more surprising to encounter some of the grim underpinnings of these 
delicious fireside tales. Lurking in the background are dead children, thwarted 
love, jealousy, vengeance and the sense that even the best kind of love – the 
famous love that never falters, the love that pays the price – has something 
dark lurking within it.

Edith Nesbit's enduring magic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/aug/15/edith-nesbit-enduring-magic-children-adventures>
Profile: Edith Nesbit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/09/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
“This is not an artistically rounded-off ghost story,” says the narrator of 
“The Shadow”, “and nothing is explained in it, and there seems to be no reason 
why any of it should have happened.” Which of course begs the reader to ask 
what the explanation for the story is, and why any of it should have happened. 
There is a young couple, very much in love, expecting their first baby. And 
there is Miss Eastwich, a woman so silent that the children she looks after 
later in life never think of treating her as “other than a machine”. She tells 
her story of the shadow that crept into the house of her two friends, whom she 
had “loved more than anything in the world” and who had married each other. The 
narrator understands, as does the reader, that Miss Eastwich had trusted her 
best friend Mabel – one half of that connubial bliss – not to take the man she 
loved, but Mabel had taken him anyway. And then what happens? Well, there’s “a 
shadow”. Is Miss Eastwich the shadow? Is she the one responsible for all that 
happens in the house?

There is darkness in the corners of these stories, like that gathering shadow 
– ordinary callousness turning into something more disturbing. “There’ll be 
more wedding tomorrow than ever you’ll take the first part in,” snarls the 
narrator of “John Charrington’s Wedding” to his spinster sister – a man so 
consumed with jealousy that he sneaks around eavesdropping on the happy couple. 
What happens to them reads as a dark enactment of his deepest wishes. The nurse 
narrator of “The Violet Car” – presented with a couple who each claim the other 
is the mad one in need of her care – mentions with cool appraisal “that 
importance, that conscious competence, that one feels in the presence of other 
people’s troubles”. The whole story is concerned with the complicated business 
of apportioning blame, guilt and justice. A lot of inconvenient people are got 
rid of in these stories, one way or another, and they are more disquieting than 
they seem at first read.

But of course, it was always so. Nesbit’s stories for children are always 
aware of adult sadness – it’s just that she never made the children look in 
that direction. Think of the father ofThe Railway Children, sent to prison 
after being falsely accused of spying. Think of the smug and awful young man 
that the Lamb turns into inFive Children and It. Nesbit knew that adults could 
be rapacious, contemptuous, malicious and sadistic.Her own life story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/mar/26/theatre.booksforchildrenandteenagers>
 includes an adulterous husband who got one of her dearest friends pregnant. 
She knew about anger, hatred and sexual jealousy. And in these very chilling 
grownup stories, she lets the knowledge out that she held back so carefully in 
her work for children.

• E Nesbit’s Horror Stories, selected and introduced by Naomi Alderman, will 
be published in the Penguin Worlds series on 29 September. To order a copy for 
£7.37 (RRP £8.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/horror-stories-426374.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 