
“Wow, that’s a lot of women.” Those were the first words my taxi driver 
uttered since we left my Washington DC hotel and embarked on our journey to the 
White House-convenedUnited State of Women 
<http://www.theunitedstateofwomen.org/> (USOW) summit. As I opened the car 
door, I couldn’t help but blurt out “and now I am one of them”.

Normally, I am not comfortable in a mass of people. Yet, there I was, one of 
many and all I could think was: I found my people. The people around me, mostly 
women and a few good men, were invited to the summit because of their work in 
elevating the state of women around the globe.

Coming at a time with so much turmoil in the world, the summit brought to 
light a few refreshing realities: 1) theconversation is finally starting to 
shift 
<http://www.inc.com/patricia-fletcher/white-house-demo-day-what-astia-wants-startup-funders-to-do-not-say.html>
; 2) there are more of us fighting for gender equity than I could have 
imagined; and 3) now is the time for each of us to harness that momentum.

For years, discussions about the role of women in the world were seen as a 
women-only philanthropic issue. Leadership development programmes focused on 
women have had a clear message and a desired outcome: women, you need to be 
more like men.

The sentiment at the summit, however, by the likes of Warren Buffett, Goldman 
Sachs, Tory Burch and many, many others is that women are just fine, thank you 
very much. Business, societal and government structures, the policies and 
mindsets of the people in power, have to shift towards providing equal access 
to opportunities.

Why the shift? The economics of women’s equality speaks for itself. In many 
countries, women are40%-49% 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.TOTL.FE.ZS> of the workforce and in 
an increasing number of households are thesole or primary breadwinners 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/05/29/breadwinner-moms/>. And with 70%-80% 
of consumer-buying decisions falling into the hands of women and women playing 
an equal role in labour markets, with equal pay, an additional$28 trillion 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/how-advancing-womens-equality-can-add-12-trillion-to-global-growth>
 (yes, that’s trillion with a “T”) could be added to the economy.

Power in numbers

While seeing the US President talk about being a feminist or Oprah 
interviewing the first lady,Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>, will certainly go down as 
highlights in my life, what struck me the most about the summit is that women I 
know, and I, are not alone in our fight – and make no mistake, it is a fight – 
for gender equity. If the people in the room were a mere representation of the 
many people heading in the same direction, just imagine if we all banded 
together.

Make no mistake; there is power in numbers. Drawing from his experience and 
observations of how Indian entrepreneurs succeeded en masse in the rich, white 
American dude nirvana that is Silicon Valley, Stanford University professor and 
entrepreneurVivek Wadhwa 
<http://www.inc.com/vivek-wadhwa/how-the-indians-succeeded-in-silicon-valley.html>
 has talked about five key success factors: they were open about the barriers; 
cultivated an environment of success; invested in the next generation of 
entrepreneurs; invested in each other’s businesses; and shared their contacts 
and established highly-active associations.

Looking around the room at the powerhouse USOW attendees, it became blatantly 
clear that banding together is the only option we have to accelerate progress. 
I will be long dead by2085 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/number-of-women-leaders-will-equal-men-in-2085-2012-11>
, the year we will be on par with men if change continues at the current rate, 
and I want to be around to earn as much as the guy next to me and to know that 
my daughters will too. This is not a pipe dream. Not for me, not for any of us.

Move over old boys’ network

Peer networks, like those described by Wadhwa, are the secret to women 
achieving their career goals, gaining access and closing the gender equity gap 
for themselves and each other. “Over the past 100 years men have created 
networking and mentoring systems that go outside of their companies,” explains 
Chantal Pierrat, CEO and founder ofEmerging Women 
<http://www.emergingwomen.com/>. 

Instead of creating an atmosphere where women are able to thrive, top-down 
mentorships have stifled women. “Peer mentoring groups shouldn’t be about 
better negotiating tactics for women. Leadership is an internal experience for 
women and being able to talk about challenges and successes allows us to 
optimise ourselves as leaders,” says Pierrat.

Echoing Wadhwa and Pierrat’s sentiments, in her New York Times bestselling 
book about Silicon Valley’s powerhouse women banded together for the good of 
all,Stiletto Network 
<http://www.pamelaryckman.com/wordpress/stiletto-network/overview/>, Pamela 
Ryckman, wrote: “Women still need a forum to discuss the intractable issues 
their forebears confronted decades ago.” One of the biggest lessons from this 
book may just hold the key for women: we each have the power to create an 
environment for success, where each one of us can have equal access to power, 
to money, to being able to thrive.

Go create the world in which you want to live. Start by finding your people. 
Trust me, they are looking for you.

Dr Patti Fletcher is a multi-disciplined executive and entrepreneur, Astia 
Board member, and columnist forInc. 
<http://www.inc.com/author/patricia-fletcher>, Xconomy 
<http://www.xconomy.com/author/pfletcher/>, LinkedIn Pulse 
<https://www.linkedin.com/today/author/2597031?trk=pulse-det-athr_posts> and 
PSDNetwork <http://www.psdnetwork.com/>. She tweets at @pkfletcher 
<https://twitter.com/pkfletcher> and @pattionmktg 
<https://twitter.com/PattiOnMktg>
 