
A lawyer for Olympic gold-medalist skier Picabo Street said on Thursday that 
she was defending herself during a December fight with her father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/14/olympic-gold-medal-skier-picabo-street-charged>
 and will demand a jury trial on domestic violence and assault charges.


 Attorney Joe Wrona said that the ex-Olympian called 911 for help after her 
father attacked her, and she doesn’t plan to strike a plea deal with 
prosecutors. “We’re not interested in a sweetheart deal. We’re interested in 
being vindicated at trial,” he said.

Street is accused of throwing her 76-year-old father down the stairs and 
locking him in the basement during a fight at her home near Park City,Utah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah>, on 23 December.

Olympic gold-medal skier Picabo Street charged with attacking her father
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/14/olympic-gold-medal-skier-picabo-street-charged>
 Street, 44, told 911 dispatchers that she “put” her father Roland Street down 
the stairs after he pulled her hair and scratched her face, according to a 
recording of the call. Her mother can be heard in the background disputing that 
version of what happened.

 Picabo Street told dispatchers her dad started the fight after he bumped his 
car into her house in snowy weather and she tried to help dig it out so her 
parents could use her car. Prosecutors say an investigation found Picabo Street 
was the primary aggressor. Roland Street has not been charged over the incident.

 Roland Street told police his daughter got angry and started yelling after he 
hit the house while trying to leave, documents show. He said the physical 
altercation broke out after they re-entered the house and she pushed him down 
two flights of stairs. Police saw cuts on Roland Street’s elbow and neck. 
Picabo Street is facing three counts of misdemeanor domestic violence in the 
presence of a child and one count of misdemeanor assault. A hearing is set for 
Tuesday.

Picabo Street had an illustrious skiing career highlighted by a gold medal at 
the 1998Winter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> in 
the women’s super-G event. She also won silver in the downhill at the 1994 
Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, and competed in the 2002 Games in Salt Lake 
City. She was the first American woman to win the World Cup downhill season 
title in 1995, and she repeated as champion the next season. She totaled nine 
downhill victories in World Cup races during her career.

 More recently, she worked as an analyst for Fox Sports during the 2014 Winter 
Olympics.



 