
The Jump, Channel 4’s celebrity alpine-sports-extravaganza/deathtrap, rears 
its head once more on Sunday evening. However, this is 2016 and the stocks of 
celebrities willing to appear on this sort of programme are running dry.

Take Celebrity Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/13/celebrity-big-brother-angie-bowie-david-gest-and-the-bleakest-farce>
, for instance. The biggest name they could muster this year was Darren Day, 
and that show only requires you to sit in a house before an audience of almost 
zero. Compare that to The Jump, where about a third of the competitors will 
definitely suffer some sort of horrific injury, and you can understand why the 
A-listers aren’t exactly queuing up to join in.

The Jump: the most cursed show on TV?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/25/the-jump-channel-4> 
So treat this as an explainer. Here are The Jump’s contestants, in ascending 
order of likely success. Also, please note that most of these people will have 
shattered their pelvis by the middle of next week, and the actual winner will 
be whichever X Factor runner-up they’ve booked as a stand-in.


James ‘Arg’ Argent

Towie’s walking punchline. Everything about Arg says immediate failure, from 
his hopeless attempts to do anything with his life (his 2014 autobiography 
Living it Arg is available for a single penny on Amazon) to his general 
demeanour (that of a concussed competition winner airdropped into the opening 
scene of Saving Private Ryan). Even his name sounds like the noise you’d make 
if you crashed head-first into a tree, which can’t be a great sign.

Sid Owen

Last seen 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/showbiz/news/a458138/eastenders-sid-owen-photobombs-chris-brown-at-grammys-party-picture/>
 inexplicably hanging out with Chris Brown at the 2013 Grammys, The Jump 
represents another chance for Owen to try and put EastEnders behind him. That 
said, he will almost definitely be taken out by an avalanche 10 seconds after 
someone ironically shouts the word “Rickayyyyyy!” at him.

Louisa Lytton

Still, it could be worse for Sid Owen. It could be that nobody remembers he 
was ever onEastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> at 
all. This is Louisa Lytton’s lot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ff9307dc61e2a271f547a528c254234cc81c2d%2F0_119_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ff9307dc61e2a271f547a528c254234cc81c2d%2F0_119_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Louisa Lytton, of formerly-on-Eastenders fame. Photograph: Ian Derry / Channel 
4 Television 
Tina Hobley

Hobley succeeded in Holby City because “Hobley” sounds a bit like “Holby”. She 
doesn’t have that advantage here, unless she suddenly decides to change her 
name to Tina VaJomp, which she should.

Mark-Francis Vandelli

I’ll be honest, I don’t have a clue who this is. He’s apparently from Made in 
Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/13/made-in-chelsea-cast-series-nine>
, though, so he doesn’t really have anything to live for. Potentially the 
wildcard of the show.

Rebecca Adlington

Rumour has it that Adlington burst into tears the first time she stood at the 
top of The Jump’s titular ski-jump. This doesn’t bode well for her chances of 
winning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5b50fc65f3f1209c00beebf5af9635876f36cb%2F0_155_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d5b50fc65f3f1209c00beebf5af9635876f36cb%2F0_155_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Rebecca Adlington, trying to hide her terror. Photograph: Ian Derry/Channel 
4/PA 
Sarah Harding

Harding wanted to be an actor, but then she appeared in Run for Your Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/14/run-for-your-wife-review> and now 
she’s going to snap her ankle on The Jump. If anything, this still represents a 
lenient punishment for appearing in Run for Your Wife.

Tamara Beckwith

Beckwith was an original It Girl, and It Girls love to ski. This means that 
Tamara’s sense of balance should be second to … oh, wait, she was also 
literally the first person ever to be voted off Dancing on Ice. Disregard 
everything I just said.

Linford Christie

Linford Christie, as we know, will do whatever it takes to win. But he’s a big 
guy, and historically the biggest guys have suffered the worst injuries on The 
Jump. This could end horribly for him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27021a571112fee0ba04a6988fc55f5eb4231b63%2F430_106_2254_1353%2F2254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympians%2C%20Superman%20and%20Sid%20Owen%3A%20meet%20the%20contestants%20of%20The%20Jump%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fthe-jump-2016-contestants-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27021a571112fee0ba04a6988fc55f5eb4231b63%2F430_106_2254_1353%2F2254.jpg>
 The harder they fall... Linford Christie. Photograph: Ian Derry / Channel 4 
Television 
Beth Tweddle

A successful Olympian who pretty falls over for a living. The Jump is 
Tweddle’s to lose.

Celebrity Big Brother: Angie Bowie, David Gest and the bleakest farce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/13/celebrity-big-brother-angie-bowie-david-gest-and-the-bleakest-farce>
Brian McFadden

McFadden is an inveterate risk-taker. He left Westlife at the height of their 
fame. He spent a period of his life known as Bryan because he mistakenly 
believed that the letter Y is cooler than the letter I. He once recordeda song 
that sounded like a direct endorsement of date rape 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0K3z_efF-I>. He remained married to Kerry 
Katona for four entire years. Basically, McFadden cannot possibly fear death 
and this means we should watch him very closely.

Dean Cain

Cain played Superman once. Imagine being Superman, and then losing an alpine 
reality show to Arg from Towie. You’d never live it down. Dean Cain must win 
The Jump. His very existence depends on it.
 