
A German federal court has thrown out a 95-year-old former Auschwitz death 
camp guard’s appeal against his conviction for being an accessory to murder.

The decision to uphold Oskar Gröning’s conviction sets an important precedent 
for German prosecutors’ efforts to pursue others who allegedly served at Nazi 
death camps.

'Accountant of Auschwitz': I am morally complicit in the murder of Jews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/accountant-auschwitz-oskar-groning-trial-nazi-germany>
Gröning was convicted in July 2015 of being an accessory to the murder of 
300,000 Jews and sentenced by a court in Lüneburg to four years in prison.

Gröning testified at his trial that he oversaw the collection of prisoners’ 
belongings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/01/accountant-auschwitz-trial-oskar-groening-admits-guilt>
 and ensured valuables and cash were separated to be sent to Berlin. He said he 
witnessed individual atrocities, but did not acknowledge participating in any 
crimes.

On Monday, the federal court of justice said it had thrown out Gröning’s 
appeal. It also rejected appeals from several survivors and their relatives who 
had joined the trial as co-plaintiffs, as is allowed under German law, and had 
sought more serious charges.

It is the first time an appeals court has ruled on a conviction obtained under 
the logic that serving at a death camp, and thus helping it operate, was enough 
to convict someone as an accessory to the murders committed there – even if 
there was no evidence of involvement in a specific killing.

At the original trial, the presiding judge, Franz Kompisch, said Gröning was 
part of the “machinery of death,” helping the camp function and also collecting 
money stolen from the victims to help the Nazi cause.

The federal court noted that Gröning’s responsibilities had included keeping 
watch on the inmates and preventing resistance or attempts to flee by force.

In 2011, John Demjanjuk, a former Ohio autoworker, became the first person 
convicted inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> solely for 
serving as a death camp guard without evidence of being involved in a specific 
killing. Demjanjuk, who always denied serving at the Sobibor camp, died before 
his appeal could be heard.
 