
Two years after the start of the second intifada 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/3677206.stm> the Israeli army 
designated thePalestinian Polytechnic University <http://www.ppu.edu/p/> a 
military zone and sealed all its gates. At that point I was in the final year 
of a five-year engineering degree. I had dreamed of being an engineer since I 
was six years old, and I knew I couldn’t let this happen. After four years of 
hard work, just at the moment that I was on the cusp of graduating, my 
university had become another casualty of the occupation.

Breaking the cycle of violence: technology can bring hope for peace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/21/technology-conflict-resolution-israel-palestine>
I decided to organise sit-ins to get the university reopened. I convinced 
fellow students that we had to resist this. For six months we moved into 
classrooms, organised protests and demonstrated. We would conduct lessons while 
surrounded by soldiers. We agreed that it had to be peaceful and non-violent, 
and in the end we won. The army moved out and the university reopened. After so 
many defeats against the occupation, that one campaign was a great moment.

This experience was important for me because I learned about the importance of 
tactics and became convinced about the value of non-violence as a way to 
resist. I read books by Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi and Nelson Mandela. 
I became convinced that their non-violent method was the best strategy for 
community resistance. Furthermore non-violence meant that there was a role for 
every Palestinian, as it is not the job of some vanguard in fighting the 
occupation; we can all do something. This is particularly important if you are 
fighting a professional army as it is the only realistic way in neutralising 
their power. They don’t know what to do in the face of this.

Gandhi said, in effect, if you want to achieve liberation through violence you 
will achieve it quicker than through non-violence, but you should know that 
violence will then become a part of your society. The advantage of non-violent 
resistance is that it forces your institutions to be active and strong in the 
face of the occupation, which in effect helps us to build our state.

My campaigning, my whole philosophy, everything I do now, is underpinned by 
these ideas. My daily routine can be prosaic and is often frustrating. I meet 
with the local media and the families of those who have had their land occupied 
or their homes attacked. A big part of it is trying to convince more young 
people to adopt our methods, and we have been quite successful at recruiting 
people to non-violence. I hope this will allow Palestinians to address the 
issues they face.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IDd4OwWgo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IDd4OwWgo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IDd4OwWgo&media=>
 Palestinians in Hebron call for the occupied Shuhada Street, where Issa was 
born, to be reopened. 
One month after the ceasefire, how is Gaza being rebuilt?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/sep/23/gaza-palestine-agriculture-after-conflict>
My major project is Youth Against Settlements 
<http://www.youthagainstsettlements.org/videos>, where we protest against the 
settlements that have been created in Hebron. We wanted to get the young people 
to adopt the non-violent approach but also to be active in fighting the 
occupation. In 2007 I organised theB’Tselem’s camera project. 
<http://www.btselem.org/video/cdp_background> We gave the youngsters video 
cameras and trained them to document the human rights violations they suffered 
at the hands of the settlers. The cameras are the most trusted witnesses and 
can be used as evidence when we are arrested and have to face the courts. I 
have used the evidence when I have been arrested and it’s allowed me to go 
home. The response of the youngsters to this project and the opportunity to 
handle technology and better their situations and lives with it and fight the 
occupation is encouraging.

Over the years I’ve had my wrist and nose broken, been arrested dozens of 
times, and been constantly threatened – both me and my family. I have been 
kidnapped, blindfolded, driven around for hours, then dropped off home. Yes, 
this really affects you. For hours you have no idea of what is going to happen 
to you, or whether you will ever go home. You can’t feel safe about yourself, 
your children, your people. I’ve been shot in the legs three times, and had 
stones thrown at my head. The “pattern of harassment” against me was raised by
UN special rapporteurs in 2013 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=45615&Cr=palestin&Cr1#.VPmYvmSsWJf>
, and evenEU ministers have spoken out about my safety 
<http://www.eccpalestine.org/letter-to-the-meps-issa-amro-human-rights-defender-in-danger/>
 and treatment at the hands of the settlers and army.


A few weeks ago when I was showing Swiss parliament members around Hebron and 
explaining to them what was happening,I was arrested  
<http://www.martinlejeune.com/?p=1624>by the Israeli army and detained for six 
hours. The Swiss diplomats were left confused, but this is a normal situation 
for me.

2,000 farmers and 8,000 new trees: a decade exporting olive oil from Palestine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/31/2000-farmers-and-8000-new-trees-a-decade-exporting-olive-oil-from-palestine>
In Palestine we like life, we like to have fun, to have a life like all other 
people in the world. I want to stay young and fight for the rights of my people 
and my homeland. But I am not your normal human rights campaigner because I am 
not allowed to be. You can’t divorce Palestinian human rights from our 
political rights. Our struggle is about occupation, future, history, homeland. 
Other human rights campaigners document issues, or try to change the situation 
without working on the ground. Here we live our reality, we experience directly 
the brutality. We will never give up.

 * As told to Faisal Hanif. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 