
Peter West, who has died aged 83, was for almost four decades one of the 
best-known voices and faces in broadcasting. Whether covering Test cricket, 
rugby, Wimbledon, the Olympic Games or compering Come Dancing from 1957 to 
1972, he seemed never to be far away from a microphone.

The range of his work was staggering: apart from his sporting commitments on 
air, he appeared on panel games and presented the Miss World contest in the 
1960s. It was said that he was employed by every BBC department except drama.

West invested his broadcasting with calm and quiet knowledge. In post-Test 
match interviews or when it was raining, a microphone was regularly thrust into 
his hands and he carried off frenetic moments of improvised TV with apparent 
phlegm and affability.

He was, in many ways, the perfect anchorman. The pipe was his trademark, 
adding to his reliable, old-fashioned charm. "My wife Pauline always liked to 
see me with my pipe," he recalled, "but I gave it up eventually when I was told 
it was bad for my health."

West was an outstanding sportsman at Cranbrook School, at fly half and 
high-order batsman, but a spinal condition was to end his participation. After 
the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he served during the second world war in 
the Duke of Wellington's regiment.

His postwar broadcasting career started by accident. He was working for an 
agency in 1947 at Taunton, covering a Somerset cricket match and found himself 
sitting next to one of his heroes, CB Fry, in the press box. Fry, who was 
working that day for the old Sunday Graphic, was annoyed that his hired 
telephonist had failed to turn up. The resourceful West volunteered to dictate 
the report instead.

Fry must have approved. "Have you ever thought of becoming a BBC commentator? 
I shall send your name to the head of outside broadcasts." The call came: the 
tyro commentator, always clear in his diction, was on his way. West went on to 
work for the BBC West Region, covering Somerset, Gloucestershire and Hampshire 
cricket matches - but, because he could adapt and had an imperturbable 
temperament, he was rapidly in demand for television and many other sports. His 
Test match career extended from 1952 to 1986; he covered Wimbledon from 1955 to 
1982, and rugby from 1950 to 1985. He worked on the Olympics in 1948, and then 
from 1960 to 1976.

He seemed equally at home presenting Come Dancing, although he admitted 
privately to an ambivalent affection for the programme. He took letters of 
criticism in his stride. The Scots did not always like the way he compered 
their dancing. "I am expressing my sheer disgust at your pompous attitude and 
downright cheeky manner of presenting a TV show in which Scotland plays a part. 
Here and perhaps elsewhere you are the most disliked of the BBC's many 
comperes." And he would chuckle at more bigoted letters that came with the job. 
He took a disparaging view of his own agility on the dance floor. "My wife 
wears shin pads when we dance," he used to joke.

West seldom turned down work, appearing on What's My Line with Gilbert 
Harding, who told him: "Don't be nervous old chap - we'll see you through." 
From 1971 to 1983 he was chairman of the West Nally sports marketing group. He 
wrote on rugby for national papers and in retirement, near Cirencester, 
continued to follow Gloucestershire cricket and rugby. He was president of 
Cheltenham Cricket Society.

More recently he moved to near Bath with his wife, to be closer to his 
children, two sons and a daughter.

Â· Peter West, broadcaster, born August 12 1920; died September 2 2003
 