
On Tuesday Julia Gillard ignited a "gender war", today, menugate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/12/gillard-menu-sexist-liberal-dinner>
 went some way to justify it.

In a progressive world, her gender should not be an issue – but we are a long 
way off that being an everyday reality. How far off is best illustrated by a 
photo <http://pic.twitter.com/AcSSyt4GMk> doing the rounds taken of a menu at a 
Liberal fundraiser in March this year, which describes a Moroccan quail dish 
as: “Julia Gillard Kentucky fried quail – small breasts, huge thighs and a big 
red box Moroccan carrot salad and sumac yoghurt.”

As prime minister, Gillard is not representative of all women – and nor should 
she ever be expected to. But as the elected leader of our nation, we tend to 
view her stance as that of Australia's women.

Perhaps she has come to think of herself this way too. It might go some way in 
explaining her launching a fundraising organisation calledWomen for Gillard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/12/kevin-rudd-supporters-gillard-abortion>
 yesterday, where she called on women not to vote for the Liberal party – the 
result of which would be “women being banished from the centre of Australia's 
political life."

Gillard may in fact be right about the Liberal party – but menu options aside, 
there’s some obvious discomfort in being asked to vote for one party over the 
other, on the basis of one’s sex. As sociologist Eva Cox pointed out to the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-06-12/gillard-under-fire-from-opposition-over-abortion-claim/4747738>
, “women don't vote as a bloc anyhow.”

Gillard warned the issue of abortion would become the "political plaything of 
men" if Tony Abbott became prime minister, and invited us to imagine him as a 
man with a blue tie who goes on holidays to be replaced by another man in a 
blue tie. It seemed an odd request, even for someone who made their 
international political mark with her much praisedmisogyny speech 
<http://media.smh.com.au/news/national-times/julia-gillards-misogyny--speech-in-full-3701787.html>
.

The Liberal party, for its part, has denied it would change abortion laws and 
observers have called the prime minister’s 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/desparate-pms-war-has-failed-her-own-gender/story-fn7078da-1226537935706>
 speech “desperate”, and accused her of “playing the gender card.” Deputy 
opposition Julie Bishop retorted that "we would expect a PM to seek to unite 
the country, not divide it through some false gender war.”

But it’s hard to fathom how we can have our first female prime minister and 
not have gender be an issue, especially while "Julia Kentucky fried quail" is 
is still on the menu. While the barriers to entry may have seemingly been 
broken down with Gillard assuming the role of PM, the rules of engagement are 
still those drawn up by men.

In a piece for The Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/marie-wilson/playing-the-gender-card-t_b_72178.html>
 on the "gender card”, Marie Wilson writes:

What does it mean to be the 'one and only' woman? It means being forced to 
both live with the continuing stereotypes of being a woman while simultaneously 
defying them. It means being "tough" without losing your appeal as a woman. And 
it means being an "insider" (one of the boys) while also demonstrating that you 
have the freshness of an "outsider."

Wilson notes that former congresswoman Patricia Schroeder had to persistently 
confront the issue of gender when she ran for US Senate. When asked whether she 
was "running as a woman," she would reply "do I have a choice?"

And with menugate in mind, I concede that Gillard has none either.

I’m not advocating that identity politics become the staple of the next 
election. The depressing spectacle that become a race v gender war between the 
US first black candidate and the first female one in 2008 should be enough of a 
turn-off to avoid that. But if the cost to us as a society is accepting blatant 
sexism over discussing unresolved issues of gender, then we will never progress 
as a country.

Gillard needs to rise above the fray, not invoke it. The Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> appears to be better 
at exposing itself than anyone else. There’s no need for talk of blue ties when 
they’re offering her political weaponry on a plate. 
 