
Senior Palestinian officials have warned that the Palestine Liberation 
Organisation’s recognition of Israel – one of the key pillars of the moribund
Oslo peace agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/sep/10/israel-plo-oslo-agreement-1993>
 – is in danger of being revoked if Donald Trumpmoves the US embassy from Tel 
Aviv to Jerusalem. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>

The Palestinian leadership is also calling for protests in mosques and 
churches on Friday and Sunday to object to the move, calling for opposition to 
the plan “from Pakistan to Tehran, from Lebanon to Oman”.

Moving the US embassy to Jerusalem is highly contentious as it would recognise 
Israel’s exclusive claim to the city, most of which was annexed illegally after 
the 1967 war. The Palestinians also see it as their future capital.

Moving US embassy to Jerusalem could provoke violent 'chaos', experts warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
Senior Palestinian negotiator Mohammed Shtayyeh told reporters on Tuesday that 
any move to relocate the US embassy would provoke a reaction. “One of the 
measures we are considering seriously is the issue of mutual recognition 
between the PLO andIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. [It] is 
not valid any more doing this,” he said referring to the proposed embassy move.

The warning came amid increasingly stark warnings over the risk of an 
“explosion of violence” in the region if the US embassy is moved, and after 
Abbas himself wrote to Trump to reconsider, citing the dangers in the move.


In his letter – disclosed on Monday and also copied to other world leaders – 
Abbas told Trump moving the embassy “will likely have [a] disastrous impact on 
the peace process, on the two-state solution and on the stability and security 
of the entire region, since Israel’s decision to annex East Jerusalem 
contradicts with international law”.

The comments came after the officials said they had been told by diplomatic 
contacts that Trump may be preparing to announce the relocation of the US 
embassy during his inauguration speech on 20 January. CNN reported on Monday 
that Trump’s transition team had told “allies” thatit plans to go ahead with 
the relocation <http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/10/politics/trump-israel-embassy/>. 

That fear follows the introduction of new legislation in Congress a week ago 
by three Republican Senators, including Ted Cruz,demanding the embassy be 
located in Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/us-embassy-israel-jerusalem-republican-bill>
.


Palestinians have also been alarmed by Trump’s appointment of figures who have 
supported Jewish settlement building in the occupied territories.


That includes Trump’s proposed new ambassador to Israel, David Friedman, who 
has questioned the two-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
, and most recently Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner,whose family charity has 
given money to one of the West Bank’s most hardline settlements. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>

Friedman himself – an extreme rightwinger who has compared liberal US Jews to 
kaposor concentration camp guards chosen from among the prisoners – made clear 
on his appointment that he looked forward to taking up his post in Jerusalem.

Donald Trump's Israel ambassador is hardline pro-settler lawyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
The chief Palestinian negotiator, Saeb Erekat, had floated the idea of 
revoking recognition of Israel at a conference in Washington last month, a 
proposal that has gained momentum ahead of a peace conference in Paris on 
Sunday on the Middle East peace process.

Briefing journalists on diplomatic moves ahead of that gathering of some 70 
countries in the French capital, Shtayyeh reinforced recent statements by other 
senior Palestinian politicians and warned that the two-state solution would not 
be able to survive a move by the Trump administration that would be seen in the 
Arab world as a unilateral recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.

Shtayyeh also suggested that such a move would also be a breach of US 
commitments under the 1995 Oslo peace agreement. “The US is a witness to the 
Oslo agreement, signed in the White House in front of President Clinton. This 
is an international commitment.”

While Palestinian officials had been careful to be diplomatic following 
Trump’s election, in recent weeks they have become more and more explicit about 
their concerns.


Asked about officials in Trump’s team who would deal with the 
Israeli-Palestinian question, Shtayyeh was pessimistic.

“The indications are negative,” Shtayyeh said of Trump’s recent appointments, 
adding: “If Trump moves the [US] embassy to Jerusalem that would be the end of 
the two-state solution. Trump would be giving away something that is not his to 
give.”

Shtayyeh said that the Palestinian leadership had received warnings that Trump 
might announce the relocation on inauguration days from “American circles and 
diplomatic friends”.

Shtayyeh’s remarks came following the leak of the draft resolution text to be 
considered in Paris on Sunday, which suggests participantswill be asked to bind 
themselves to opposing any unilateral moves on changing Israel’s pre-1967 
borders <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.763974>, including on 
the final status of Jerusalem that was left to be negotiated after the Oslo 
peace accords were signed.


The draft text – leaked to the Israeli newspaper Haaretz – suggests that moves 
that began with the adoption by the UN security council of a resolution 
condemning Israeli settlement building, seem set to continue right up to 
Trump’s inauguration.

The US embassy has been located on Tel Aviv’s HaYarkon Street for half a 
century. US state department policy has long held that the status of Jerusalem 
will only be determined in final talks between Israel and the Palestinians.

Although the US Congress passed a law ordering the move to Jerusalem in 1995, 
every president since then has exercised a six-month waiver to prevent it 
taking place, usually citing “national security concerns”.

The Palestinian comments also join warnings from other international officials 
in recent days alerting to the dangers in moving the American embassy.

A Jordanian government spokesman warned last week that the move would have 
“catastrophic implications on several levels, including the regional situation” 
warning it could also affect bilateral relations with the US.

On Friday, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, echoed that view in an 
interview with CBS, warning that the plan, outlined by Trump on the campaign 
trail and reiterated by members of his team since,could cause an “an explosion, 
an absolute explosion in the region 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/john-kerry-warns-some-of-trumps-foreign-policy-could-be-explosive/>
, not just in the West Bank, and perhaps even in Israel itself, but throughout 
the region”.

Kerry also warned that It would “have profound impact on the readiness of 
Jordan and Egypt to be able to be supportive and engaged with Israel as they 
are today”, he warned.

 