
Your editorial (A weakened left is allowing France to slide towards populism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/the-guardian-view-on-france-a-weak-left-and-the-rise-of-populism>
, 27 September) could just as easily apply to Britain, but an additional factor 
in France has given aid and comfort to the Front National. It polled only 0.3% 
of the parliamentary vote in 1973, but in 1986 it polled 9.8% and won 35 seats 
under a proportional electoral system. The mainstream parties took fright and 
abandoned PR and the FN won no seats at the following election. This trickery 
merely aided the party and its support increased in 1993 and 1997. Marine Le 
Pen reached 17.9% in the 2012 presidential election, and two years later the FN 
gained control of 14 local councils.

The lesson is that relying on electoral sleight of hand rather than argument 
and debate helps populist parties. It is no use the established parties here 
breathing a sigh of relief when first-past-the-post punishes Ukip voters with 
only one seat for almost 3m votes. The far right has a superficial appeal until 
and unless it is rigorously exposed. The rise of such parties is a reproach to 
all the others.
Michael Meadowcroft
Leeds

• Florence Ingram (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/why-computers-cant-create-constituencies>
, 21 September) is wrong to blame proportional representation for the rise of 
Hitler. In the 1933 general election, the Nazis had the most votes and won the 
most seats but, because the election was by PR and they did not have a majority 
of votes, they did not have a majority of seats so Hitler formed a minority 
government. At his trial after the war, Goering gave evidence that the Nazis 
would have won every seat if the election had been by FPTP. Unable to achieve 
complete power by a democratic PR election, Hitler and the Nazis subsequently 
seized power illegally.
Anthony Tuffin
Chichester, West Sussex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 