
Few artists cast a shadow over contemporary music quite like Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>. Disco, funk, pop, hip-hop, house, 
electro – nothing would sound the way it does today without him.

Musicians who defined an era in pop and hip-hop, such as superstar producers 
the Neptunes and Timbaland, took cues from him; listen to Pharrell William’s 
Frontin’ and the Prince influence is clear. Prince was Timbaland’s idol and 
like his hero he tried to operate in that colourful area between R&B’s sensuous 
sexuality and the unbridled machismo that hip-hop can exude.

Talking about the first time he heard I Wanna Be Your Lover, Timbaland said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/15/urban.timbaland>: “To this day, 
I don’t really know how he created this unique sound, and that’s why it’s so 
dope. He’s in his own world and nobody else can get there, although I’ve 
tried.” Another group to operate in this space were the otherworldly Atlanta 
residents Outkast, who played with sexuality, fashion and consistently pushed 
the boundaries of 00s hip-hop.

Dam-Funk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/03/dam-funk-snoop-dogg-stones-throw-hudson-mohawke-ariel-pink>
’s revival of funk also comes back to the purple one. When I spoke to Dam-Funk 
last year he said the brand of funk that Prince traded in – flamboyant, 
forward-thinking and Zapp-like – was “too black” for some crate-digging hip-hop 
types.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20performing%20While%20My%20Guitar%20Gently%20Weeps%20at%20Rock%20and%20Roll%20Hall%20of%20Fame%20induction%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20performing%20While%20My%20Guitar%20Gently%20Weeps%20at%20Rock%20and%20Roll%20Hall%20of%20Fame%20induction%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video&media=>
Prince performing While My Guitar Gently Weeps at Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 
induction – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/apr/22/prince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video>
But even among the most diehard heads Prince commanded respect. The music 
platformBoiler Room 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BEf2ks8v5xs/?taken-by=boilerroomtv&hl=en> paid 
homage to him by posting a clip of the moment when Ben UFO mixed I Would Die 4 
U into dread-soaked dubstep from Pinch. In a world where chin stroking rules, 
Prince still reigned supreme.

His uncompromising approach to the music industry set the blueprint for 
artists such as Daft Punk, who in a Princean move struck a deal with Virgin 
that gave them total control over their music and imagery, setting them on a 
path that made them cool, cult and commercially viable. And that’s before 
mentioning the debt that the group owe to him for the sound ofDiscovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/29/10-things-we-learned-from-daft-punk-unchained>
, which has so many hat tips to Dirty Mind-era Prince it’s enough to give you 
neckache.

Purple tributes to Prince – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/apr/22/purple-tributes-to-prince-in-pictures>
Kanye West’s constant tinkering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/18/kanye-west-album-the-life-of-pablo-william-doyle-east-india-youth>
 with The Life of Pablo and insistence on it being exclusively available on the 
struggling streaming site Tidal for more than a month had a purple tinge, as 
did his 30-minute video for Runaway.

Then, take one look at the duelling R&B stars Miguel and Frank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/07/frank-ocean-miguel-rivalry-music>
 and you see two artists who play with the concepts of sexuality, blackness and 
style in a way that simply would not exist without Prince.Ocean wrote yesterday 
on Tumblr that “My assessment is that he learned early on how little value to 
assign to someone else’s opinion of you… An infectious sentiment that seemed 
soaked into his clothes, his hair, his walk, his guitar, and his primal 
scream,” this coming from a man who came out just before he released one of the 
most important R&B records of the last decade.

Mark Ronson might have had to share writing credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/01/mark-ronson-uptown-funk-gains-five-new-writers>
 for Uptown Funk with the Gap Band because of the similarities to Oops Up Side 
Your Head, but he owed a debt to the Minneapolis sound that Prince, along with
Jam and Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/22/janet-jackson-superproducers-jimmy-jam-and-terry-lewis>
 helped create. Trap giants such as Future pay homage (his latest mixtape was 
called Purple Reign), contemporary indie acts such as Neon Indian still take 
their cues from him, and he never stopped paying attention to artists he found 
interesting (just ask Lianne La Havas). As Aretha Franklin said: “Prince is 
gone, but the music will go on.”

As will his influence.
 