
A white ruffled shirt that was worn by Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> in the film Purple Rain has sold at 
auction for 32 times its asking price, fetching nearly $100,000.

Prince's final days: few clues pointed to secret behind star's untimely death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/prince-final-days-death-percocet>
The New Romantic-style ivory silk shirt and a black-and-white blazer from the 
1984 film sold for $96,000 (£72,300) each at the sale in California. Profiles 
in History founder Joe Maddalena said the blazer – which had an asking price of 
$6,000-$8,000 (£4,500-£6,000) – was scheduled to be sold before Prince’s sudden 
death in April.

The signature shirt worn by Prince’s character the Kid had an asking price of 
$3,000-$5,000 (£2,300-£3,800) before the auction.

Prince, 57, was found dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/prince-final-days-death-percocet>
 at his Paisley Park compound in Minnesota on 21 April, from what was later 
found to be an accidental overdose of a powerful painkiller, Fentanyl.

Also in this week’s auction, a pair of knee-length high-heeled boots from the 
1988 Lovesexy tour sold for $17,920 (£13,500), while a necklace from his 
Diamonds and Pearls music video fetched $8,320 (£6,300). A white ruffled shirt 
from the Purple Rain tour sold for $32,000 (£24,100).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fprince-purple-rain-shirt-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bb9cdd0cdb0043c646d256bdf1c7a19f7fc8f7%2F14_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince's%20Purple%20Rain%20shirt%20fetches%20almost%20%24100%2C000%20at%20California%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fprince-purple-rain-shirt-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%27s%20Purple%20Rain%20shirt%20fetches%20almost%20%24100%2C000%20at%20California%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fprince-purple-rain-shirt-auction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bb9cdd0cdb0043c646d256bdf1c7a19f7fc8f7%2F14_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
 A handout photo of the white ruffled shirt. Photograph: Profiles in History/PA 
Speaking before the sale, Maddalena said a makeup artist was given the blazer 
after she worked on Purple Rain.

“It just happened to be one of those coincidences that unfortunately he passed 
away,” he said. “Probably the signature thing he is known for is Purple Rain. 
It’s what made his career. It’s probably what he’ll be remembered for always. 
To have an important piece like this is pretty astonishing and an amazing 
opportunity.”

A spokesman for Profiles in History refused to reveal who bought the items 
from the Icons of Hollywood sale. A Swarovski crystal-studded glove worn by 
Michael Jackson on his 1992 Dangerous world tour was also due to auctioned but 
was removed.

Last week, a yellow Cloud electric guitar that Prince played in concerts was 
sold at auction to the owner of the Indianapolis Colts, Jim Irsay. Prince used 
the guitar at gigs until the mid-1990s.

Mr Irsay, who collects musical instruments, paid $137,500 (£103,000) for the 
guitar when it went on sale at Heritage Auctions in Beverley Hills, California.
 