
Prince’s siblings say a woman and girl purported to be his niece and 
grand-niece have no genetic connection to the late superstar.

The musician, who died on 21 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-dead-music-superstar-57> 
of a drug overdose, left no known will. His estate has been estimated at 
between $100m and $300m.

According to court documents made public on Tuesday, attorneys for Prince’s 
siblings and half-siblings argued that Brianna Nelson and Victoria Nelson 
should not be named asheirs to his estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/30/prince-judge-rules-out-30-potential-heirs-to-singers-estate>
, as they are not legally Prince’s heirs. A hearing on the issue is set for 
Friday.

Brianna Nelson and her niece Victoria have filed court documents claiming they 
are descendants of the late Duane Nelson Sr, who they say was Prince’s 
half-brother. While the pair do not claim a genetic link to the singer, they 
say Prince’s biological father considered Duane as his own son, and thatPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> treated him like a brother. Duane 
died in 2011.


However, Prince’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/13/prince-unreleased-music-buyers-35m-warner-universal-sony>
 siblings believe this emotional validation isn’t enough to prove heirship 
under Minnesota law.


'Wow, Prince is here': musician's Paisley Park estate reopens as a museum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/06/prince-paisley-park-estate-museum-minnesota>
“If an heirship claim could rely on behaviour alone as a basis, it would open 
the floodgates to individuals claiming they were treated ‘like a brother’ or 
‘like a son’,” attorneys wrote. They argued that with no known will, a 
parent-child relationship must be proven through genetics, adoption, assisted 
reproduction or an established presumption of parentage laws. In Minnesota, 
however, there are circumstances in which someone can be considered a parent 
if, for example, they raise a non-biological child as their own.

Attorneys said that Brianna and Victoria Nelson are asking the court “to 
casually sweep aside these well-established tenets of Minnesota law and instead 
seek to base their claim entirely on behavioural and anecdotal evidence”.

The judge overseeing Prince’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/23/the-a-to-z-of-prince> estate 
will have to sort out a complex interplay between probate and parentage laws 
that appears to be unique to Minnesota.


Prince: judge rules out 30 potential heirs to singer's estate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/30/prince-judge-rules-out-30-potential-heirs-to-singers-estate>
At present, Prince’s sister, Tyka Nelson, and the musician’s five 
half-siblings are in line to split Prince’s estate six ways. Should the court 
count Duane Nelson as another half-sibling, Brianna and Victoria Nelson – and 
possibly a man who recently claimed to be Duane Nelson’s son – would be 
entitled to one-seventh of the estate.
 