
Online spending on films, music and games in the UK has bounced back, thanks to
Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> and consumers buying 
the back catalogues of David Bowie and Prince.


More than a third of shoppers in the physical entertainment market bought a 
product with the online retailerAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> in the 12 weeks to 3 June. This 
helped the company to achieve its highest ever share of spending on DVDs, 
Blu-rays, CDs and games outside the Christmas period, according to Kantar 
Worldpanel.

Online sales of physical entertainment products stuttered during 2015 as the 
high street, led by HMV, made a fightback. Consumers, however, have turned back 
to Amazon and other online sites because of the size of their catalogue as they 
look for classic songs and albums byPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> and David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>, who both died this year. 

Prince sold more albums during the 12-week period than any artist apart from 
Adele. Sales of CDs more than six months old grew by 9% year on year, helped by
Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> and Bowie.

No music titles, however, made it into the top 30 entertainment products for 
the quarter. Following its box office success, the latest Star Wars movie was 
the bestselling title in the entertainment market, with 1.8 million shoppers 
picking up a copy of the DVD or Blu-ray. Tesco was the big winner, taking 
nearly a third of all spending on the product.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c2385e75fc487be2838a75aca513abbdffccb%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20and%20Bowie%20drive%20rise%20in%20entertainment%20spending%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20and%20Bowie%20drive%20rise%20in%20entertainment%20spending%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c2385e75fc487be2838a75aca513abbdffccb%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Star Wars: The Force Awakens, released in cinemas last year, has sold more 
than 1.8 million copies on DVD or Blu-ray in the UK. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
Tesco’s overall sales fell 0.5% in the entertainment sector, meaning its 
market share dropped slightly to 15.2%. On the high street, HMV’s sales rose 
2.3% year on year, increasing its market share from 14% to 16.3%. Amazon’s 
sales rose 0.5%, increasing its share of spending from 22.5% to 23%.

Fiona Keenan, Kantar’s strategic insight director, said: “Star Wars: The Force 
Awakens has become the biggest Blu-ray film title since Avatar over six years 
ago and there are signs it has helped get people back into the market – 
encouraging, given the competition Blu-ray and DVDs face from digital streaming 
services such as Netflix.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24aaeb48ffc7ddb240aaaf6956261eeaf0dbf921%2F0_0_943_432%2F943.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20and%20Bowie%20drive%20rise%20in%20entertainment%20spending%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20and%20Bowie%20drive%20rise%20in%20entertainment%20spending%20online&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fprince-and-bowie-drive-rise-in-entertainment-spending-online%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24aaeb48ffc7ddb240aaaf6956261eeaf0dbf921%2F0_0_943_432%2F943.jpg>
 Spending on physical entertainment market. Photograph: Kantar Worldpanel 
“Online spend across the industry has bounced back from declines over the past 
year and now accounts for over a third of spend – the highest it has been since 
this time in 2015.

“Having the availability of a wide back catalogue means online retailers are 
extremely well placed to cater to changes in consumer demand, as exemplified by 
the recent surge in sales of Bowie and Prince albums following the death of 
both iconic artists earlier this year.”
 