
It was the summer of 1989 in suburban Oxnard, California, and I got my dad to 
drive me to K-Mart so that I could use my allowance to buy Prince’s new album,
Batman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srb4H0WynBU>. I hadn’t been allowed to 
seePurple Rain <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AuXK8ZbTmLk> a few years 
earlier – my folks said it was too adult – but I did get to seethe Tim Burton 
Batman movie <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0096895/reference>. I wanted the 
soundtrack, and when I heard it, I had questions about just what Prince was 
alluding to.

“What does Prince mean 
<https://play.google.com/music/preview/Thvmtsw4ugwi3wy22otqpggpo3u?lyrics=1&utm_source=google&utm_medium=search&utm_campaign=lyrics&pcampaignid=kp-lyrics&u=0#>
 when he says, ‘Let me stick the 7in in the computer’ when there’s no such 
thing’?” I asked my dad on the car drive home as we listened to the tape’s main 
trackBatdance <https://vimeo.com/138482649>, given the discs for our Apple IIGS 
were only available in 3.5in and 5.25in. (Also, of the Jack Nicholson line he 
samples in the song, “What does it mean when he says, ‘This town needs an 
enema’?”)

Prince: his 10 greatest songs from Head to Cream (and Purple Rain in between)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/21/prince-10-best-purple-rain-1999-when-doves-cry>
When I got home, I danced in our garage to Batdance, Party Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=69g0BAET-Hk> and Electric Chair 
<http://www.mojvideo.com/video-prince-electric-chair-snl-1989/a528943aaed639b51cba>
. I didn’t want anyone seeing me dancing in such a queeny fashion to these 
songs, and I didn’t want anyone looking at me in general. I was a biracial 
child, often criticized for not being black enough, and I was going to grow up 
to be gay – though I didn’t know this yet, or even the language to question 
being straight. I didn’t want to be stared at in my confusion, or to be 
reminded of how I had no idea what was happening to my pubescent body.

Prince repelled and fascinated me because he represented every side of all the 
contradictions I felt. I felt nervous even looking at him, and yet I couldn’t 
look away. What would it mean if I opened myself up to the letting go of all 
those rules he seemed to have dispensed with? That purple clothing, those high 
heels and ruffled shirts: was he proudly feminine, or so secure in his 
masculinity he didn’t mind others questioning it? That small frame and that 
tight, small butt that seemed to leave him “shaking that ass, shaking that ass” 
for men and women alike? Who was he trying to turn on withSexy MF 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B4oDcsaEvEE> or Cream – and what if someone 
thought I wasn’t getting turned on by his big-haired dancers, but by the artist 
himself?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20his%20extraordinary%20career%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20his%20extraordinary%20career%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video&media=>
Prince: a look back at his extraordinary career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/apr/21/prince-dies-music-career-video>
Prince was a paradox in that he expanded the concept of what it meant to be a 
man while also deconstructing the entire idea of gender. Like Michael Jackson,
Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> seemed to perform a kind of 
black masculinity that was neither neutered nor completely in line with the 
hypermasculinity so common in the rap coming out of nearby Los Angeles at the 
same time. It was as fluid and luscious as his long eyelashes, and as delicious 
looking as those lips of his – and it seemed to welcome everyone. His gaze was 
as slippery, self-assured and questioning as his music itself. And when those 
eyes of his (paired with the light scruff around his mouth) caught yours from 
an album cover, almost daring you to look away with their confidence, they also 
seemed to know you’d be powerless not to.

Sexy motherfucker, shaking that ass, shaking that ass, shaking that ass …

Of course, if you could manage to close your eyes while listening to Prince 
(though why would you want to?), you could get lost in the music itself. While 
I wasn’t keyed in to rap when I was in junior high, I loved the black music 
that wasn’t so in fashion right then: gospel, Motown, jazz and R&B. And I loved 
Prince. I could listen toSexy MF 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=Sexy+MF>
 on repeat all day long: those R&B beats, with the lush bass line and those big 
Memphis-flavored horns. That flaring organ could be right out of a Harlem 
church on a Sunday morning. And when Prince purrs, “Come here, baby,” he 
combines the sexual and the sublime as effortlessly as gospel masters likeAndre 
Crouch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jan/09/andrae-crouch-dead-five-songs-michael-jackson>
 or Kirk Franklin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91b6587d8b1727e1a8564d2478697476740d6a5%2F0_0_6201_4134%2F6201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91b6587d8b1727e1a8564d2478697476740d6a5%2F0_0_6201_4134%2F6201.jpg>
 Shakin’ that ass: Prince at the Zenith in Paris. Photograph: Pascal 
George/AFP/Getty Images 
But if I was a little apprehensive by what Prince was doing sexually, I was 
outright terrified of what he did racially. In school I dreaded to be accused 
of “acting white”, but I also knew that being labeled an angry black man was 
dangerous, too. And so when Prince changed his name to a symbol, told Warner 
Brothers to go to hell,wrote the word “slave” on his cheek 
<http://www.showbiz411.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/prince.slave_-660x352.jpg>
 and became the Artist Formerly Known As Prince, I was terrified for him – and 
absolutely thrilled.

Prince was someone you just couldn't understand | Alexis Petridis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand>
My father was a loud and outspoken black man, but he didn’t have much material 
wealth to show for it. Black people who’d “made it”, I was starting to see, 
were supposed to be as grateful as Oprah Winfrey to the corporate machine that 
gave them wealth. But like baseball player Curt Flood,who famously said 
<http://www.jerryjazzmusician.com/2008/02/brad-snyder-author-of-a-well-paid-slavecurt-floods-fight-for-free-agency-in-professional-sports/>
 “a well-paid slave is still a slave”, Prince was willing to talk about the 
exploitation of the professional black artist and he refused to play anyone’s 
game or to act with gratitude. Choosing a symbol, (and one that fused the icons 
for male and female), meant journalists couldn’t even print his old name 
anymore. It was, in retrospect, the first time I experienced someone refusing 
to live under the oppressive binary regime of gender, or to submit to the 
dominant power’s rules.

Shaking that ass, shaking that ass …

In college, when most of my classmates were white, I noticed that Prince was 
often their connection to black America. For straight, white fanboys (I went to 
film school in the late 90s), liking Prince gave them a claim to understanding 
blackness much the way liking Beyoncé does today (at least, beforeFormation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/beyonce-formation-black-american-narrative-the-margins>
).

By day, I was taking a class with Donald Bogel, the author of Toms, Bucks, 
Mulattoes, Mammies and Coons 
<http://www.amazon.com/Toms-Coons-Mulattoes-Mammies-Bucks/dp/082641267X>, which 
taught me how to start deconstructing the five primary archetypes used to 
represent black people in mass media. Prince did not fit into these molds – 
particularly in the way he owned his sexuality positively, and because he 
refused to play the grateful court jester in loudly defying his studio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb706ee9519ccc7051727debb4ff8c249778137%2F0_0_3000_2114%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb706ee9519ccc7051727debb4ff8c249778137%2F0_0_3000_2114%2F3000.jpg>
 Prince: refusing to play the court jester. Photograph: Michael Ochs 
Archives/Getty Images 
By night, I was rooming with my best friend Peter, a white guy from New Jersey 
who adored Prince and who was my partner in crime. Prince was the soundtrack of 
our dorm room, our films, and the huge parties we threw when we moved into our 
off-campus apartment. Let’s Go Crazy scored our victory videos after we wrapped 
a shoot.Little Red Corvette 
<http://www.jukebo.com/prince/music-clip,little-red-corvette,surq0.html> belted 
as we set up the bar before a raging party. And 1999 was spun often as if 
talking about a fantasy in the distant future. (The only fun thing about 
considering Y2K doomsday scenarios was imagining so many people experiencing 
Prince as the last music they heard.)

A lot of those straight, white film boys loved Prince with an affection that 
seemed pretty gay. I remember asking my friend Jason why he loved Prince so. 
“He’s so sexy,” he said, “that you want to stand near him, because you’re 
hoping a little of what makes him so attractive will splash onto you, and then 
it will work for you.” Black, white, gay, straight, male, female – it seemed 
everyone I knew either wanted to sleep with Prince or wanted to be him, or both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6587a3b96991622a3a536a9e24554bce0bf121b%2F0_0_3536_5310%2F3536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20broke%20all%20the%20rules%20about%20what%20black%20American%20men%20should%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6587a3b96991622a3a536a9e24554bce0bf121b%2F0_0_3536_5310%2F3536.jpg>
 Prince lifts off in 1986. Photograph: NILS JORGENSEN/REX/Shutterstock 
But my sweetest memory of listening to Prince in my college years is of 
listening to Peter’s Purple Rain album late at night, which concludes with the 
nine-minute title song. Sometimes it would be on as I fell asleep in my lumpy 
dorm bed. Thesingle edit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F8BMm6Jn6oU> ends 
with Prince’s epic guitar riff that seems to go to outer space and back, which 
is beautiful in its own right. But in the full version, Purple Rain doesn’t 
come back down to earth; instead, it drifts into the cosmos into a symphonic 
orchestration, taking what is perhaps Prince’s most magisterial song and 
composing it into to the hands of an orchestra. It is the most beautiful thing; 
in my tumultuous college years, I think I felt safest and happiest drifting off 
to sleep to those violins playing the most gentle movement of Purple Rain.

In recent years, long after I figured I was gay, I started buying Prince on 
vinyl: five albums have gotten me through writing this: 1999, Parade, 
Controversy, For You, and Around the World in a Day. Prince was so ahead of me 
in my own understanding of what it means to be black in this country, to have a 
sexuality and gender expression at odds with the white men who try to tell 
everyone else how to behave – and to embrace what is amorphous, not easily 
categorized, beautiful, and yet unknown.
 