
Choosing the 10 best songs by the most ludicrously prolific – and riotously 
diverse – artist of the rock’n’roll era seems on the face to it to be flatly 
absurd. Where would you start? How could you possibly stop?

Even the most demanding of selectors could compile a suite of 10 worldbeaters 
from Prince’s pre-fame dirty mac years alone, or from songs written by Prince 
and made famous by other artists – not only Nothing Compares 2 U but also the 
Bangles’ Manic Monday and Chaka Khan’s I Feel For You. Or why not the 1999 to 
Batman Imperial period of MTV and effortless global hits? Or B-sides, album 
cuts, and songs he never even released? And what about the bewildering 
post-Emancipation years whenPrince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> 
began to write and record at a rate no record label and few fans could even 
keep up with? He was protean, a world unto himself, seemingly containing 
multitudes. For it all to end so early seems grossly unjust.


Let’s try anyway. Here is one version of 10 Best Prince songs, a tiny snapshot 
of that vast world and necessarily tilted towards the familiar. The best Prince 
song of all? It was the one he started playing in 1965 when he was seven years 
old, and which has now ended.


Head (1980)

Just your everyday story of an impromptu oral encounter with a bride-to-be who 
ends up marrying Prince in the morning instead. Lisa Coleman of Wendy & Lisa 
provides the hot-and-bothered lady vocals, but really it’s all about the 
hilariously lascivious keyboard squiggles and the irresistible microfunk 
post-disco arrangement, of which Daft Punk were clearly avid students. Almost 
the archetypal early Prince song: dirty, funny, groovy, ridiculous, utterly 
life-enhancing.

Controversy (1981)

By the time of his third album, Prince had announced himself as something both 
unprecedented in pop – the sex-drenched, post-male, polymorphous Imp of the 
Perverse – and weirdly familiar; a new, lubricious Little Richard. Meanwhile 
his new wave-funk hybrid Minneapolis sound was beginning to set the agenda of 
black music rather than following it. The sizzling disco of this title track, 
with its squelching Funkadelic electronics and cheeky, childlike arpeggios, 
carries the first real Prince manifesto of self: “Am I black or white? Am I 
straight or gay?” Sex, God, the funk and the filth: it’s all here, right in 
time to outrage the Reagan era.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dekcc2L9E_hc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dekcc2L9E_hc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dekcc2L9E_hc&media=>
Pop Life (1985)

Received wisdom has it that the dreamlike Around the World in a Day album was 
Prince’s first significant wobble. But come on. It’s got Raspberry Beret and 
The Ladder and this delicious, swaying slo-mo groover, which connects the 
mundanities of rent and crappy apartments and disappointing love lives (who 
says the Patron Saint of Fornication couldn’t empathise with earthly woes?) to 
a Warholian ideal of transformation through the titular Pop Life. Recorded 
before Purple Rain was completed yet sonically months and years ahead, it’s 
evidence of Prince’s restless spirit but primarily a pop earworm of 
showstopping beauty.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5Hn2Ipss8U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5Hn2Ipss8U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5Hn2Ipss8U&media=>
Erotic City (1984)


Prince could make sex feel like the most innocent of playtimes and its absence 
the most soul-breaking of ordeals. The B-side to Let’s Go Crazy was inspired by 
seeing Parliament-Funkadelic in Los Angeles in 1983, and this gently debauched 
bump’n’grinder manages to present the conjugal act as a purifying communion 
without losing a scrap of the necessary dirtiness. The thwacking treated drums 
of 1999-era Prince are present and correct as he rides up and down his 
register, playing male, female and all points between. A gay club favourite, 
available in 3.55 and 7.24 versions to suit your staying power.

Purple Rain (1984)

The Prince epic, a vast existential meditation on the nature of longing and 
guilt where a formally incomprehensible image – what exactly is this purple 
rain and where is it coming from? – becomes a metaphor for Prince’s mental 
universe. The arrangement is stately, merging devotional gospel with rock and 
even country tropes, and the vocal simply spine-chilling (that “HoneyI know I 
know I know …”). That such a flat-out weird piece of music could become such a 
global hit, and would set in stone a persona that would define Prince for the 
rest of his life, says much about the intensity of Prince and the Revolution’s 
performance; incredibly, they recorded it live. In life and art Prince created 
his own world. This is its national anthem.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7NN3gsSf-Ys&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7NN3gsSf-Ys>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7NN3gsSf-Ys&media=>
Prince performs Purple Rain live at the Superbowl in 2007 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7NN3gsSf-Ys#t=4m46s> 
Sometimes It Snows in April (1986)

The nearest thing in the Prince catalogue to a Bruce Springsteen song, this 
closer to the restitutory Parade album eulogises a dead friend called Tracy in 
a stark and emotionally naked performance. The subject is actually the 
fictional Christopher Tracy from Prince’s incomprehensible movie Under the 
Cherry Moon, but the sentiment is raw and real and it’s unclear if Prince is 
singing as himself, as a man or as a woman. It is probable that fans will be 
turning to this song right now: “Sometimes I wish life was never ending / and 
all good things they say never last.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOaL4DCseY4Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOaL4DCseY4Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOaL4DCseY4Y&media=>
Kiss (1986)


Though a prolific writer for others, Prince’s persona was so singular – and 
his musical powers so versatile – that it’s hard to imagine anyone else singing 
most of the songs he reserved for himself. Kiss, however, is Prince’s one 
unimpeachable standard, a throwaway demo that became a planet-sized hit that 
anyone can sing even if they tend to miss the point of the lyric’s sweet, 
funny, randy sex comedy. In the best-in-class video, a shirtless Prince puts 
the Pan in pansexual by gyrating around a clearly-not-interested Wendy Melvoin 
(punchline delivered years later: she was a lesbian all along!). It all 
underscores a gentle humour perhaps missing in Sir Tom Jones’ rutting prize 
bull version.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaPsgmDexno&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaPsgmDexno>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbaPsgmDexno&media=>
Sign O’ the Times (1987)

The What’s Goin’ On of the 1980s, an apocalyptic vision that reaches from the 
TV news to the Aids clinics to the gang-banging city corners to an exploding 
shuttle on the fringes of space. Having created one sound – the gleaming 
edifice of Minneapolis super-synth soul – Prince blows it up to create yet 
another for his best album, a minimalist, hallucinatory world of echoes where 
images of a panicking world crowd in. The answer? Love and sex, of course. This 
is Prince, after all. Get married, have a baby, call him Nate (if it’s a boy) – 
and you might live 2 see the dawn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7JEtpdBNIU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7JEtpdBNIU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH7JEtpdBNIU&media=>
If I Was Your Girlfriend (1987)

The most famous of Prince’s sonic signatures – those slablike yet somehow 
subtle electronic drums, the understated keyboards, the tiny vocal scats and 
embellishments that transform everything – reaches its apogee on this 
beseeching role-reversal psychodrama. Prince pitches his voice up until he 
really is your girlfriend. An unsettling wow effect of a warped record is 
artificially introduced, years before Portishead, to heighten the dream-state. 
And it all comes together on that devastating moment when he loses control and 
screams “could we just hang out … could we go to a movie and CRYYYYYYYY 
together?” All your genderqueer thought experiment requirements are here.

Cream (1991)

You got the horn so why don’t you blow it? As adept as Kenneth Williams with a 
winning double entendre, Prince enters his post-Imperial years – when a hit was 
a delightful surprise rather than a matter of course – with this engagingly 
mucky, Bolanesque swaggerer. A showcase for the moans, groans, whimpers and 
squeals of Prince’s overtly priapic guitar, it’s also surprisingly warm of 
spirit, restating the core Prince belief that sex heals everything and 
everyone. His final US No 1, Prince is reputed to have written it while looking 
at the sexiest thing he could imagine: himself, in a mirror.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4oBAK8qTUBU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4oBAK8qTUBU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4oBAK8qTUBU&media=> 