
Prince’s estate have revealed a formerly unreleased song which appears on his 
greatest hits collection, Prince 4ever, due out in the coming days. Entitled 
Moonbeam Levels, the track was originally recorded in 1982 and was premiered at 
a private listening party that was hosted by ABC News. The video of which you 
can view viatheir website 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/princes-vault-releases-song-photos/story?id=43705362>
.

According to the news station, the song was first recorded while Prince was 
working on his 1999 album, with some bootleg versions of the track in 
circulation. The song – a dream-like, slow burgeoning funk ballad – wascovered 
by Elvis Costello 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xya1eh_elvis-costello-moonbeam-levels-6-3-13_music>
 at 2013’s The Music of Prince tribute concert at Carnegie Hall.

Moonbeam Levels was reportedly previously included as the final track on the 
aborted album Rave Unto the Joy Fantastic before being shelved forPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> to work on the Batman soundtrack.

Since Prince’s death in April, aged 57, of an opioid overdose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/prince-died-opioid-overdose-tests>
, his estate has gradually unveiled plans for his posthumous releases. The 
drip-feed from thevast amount of unreleased music in his vault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/i-would-hide-4-u-whats-in-princes-secret-vault>
 has started with Prince 4ever, the 40-track album, which was released on 
Tuesday via NPG and Warner Bros Records and will be widely available from 25 
November, followed in 2017 by a reissue of his 1984 albumPurple Rain as a 
deluxe, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/21/prince-vaults-purple-rain-expanded-album-edition-4ever>
 remastered version, featuring a second disc of previously unreleased material.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fprince-estate-releases-first-song-from-paisley-park-vaults-moonbeam-levels-prince4ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F061287ae0c62f297df4f36716ab04b5f67e1b150%2F0_0_3010_2010%2F3010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20estate%20releases%20first%20song%20from%20Paisley%20Park%20vaults%2C%20Moonbeam%20Levels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fprince-estate-releases-first-song-from-paisley-park-vaults-moonbeam-levels-prince4ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20estate%20releases%20first%20song%20from%20Paisley%20Park%20vaults%2C%20Moonbeam%20Levels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fprince-estate-releases-first-song-from-paisley-park-vaults-moonbeam-levels-prince4ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F061287ae0c62f297df4f36716ab04b5f67e1b150%2F0_0_3010_2010%2F3010.jpg>
 Deluxe … Prince in the 1980s. Photograph: Liu Heung Shing/AP 
Ownership of his music has not all been straightforward, however. Last week 
Prince’s label NPG Records and hisestate announced they are suing Jay Z’s 
management firm Roc Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/16/prince-estate-sues-tidal-music-access-jay-z>
 over a disagreement about how much of the pop star’s back catalogue streaming 
serviceTidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/07/tidal-uploads-rarities-from-prince-back-catalogue>
 made available to its customers. They claim the tech company “is exploiting 
many copyrighted Prince works” and may have breached exclusivity agreements and 
copyright in a suit filed in Minnesota.Roc Nation 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/331086218/Prince-Tidal> claims to have “the 
right to exclusively stream [Prince’s] entire catalogue of music, with certain 
limited exceptions”, and that it has written and oral licences to stream the 
late star’s music.
 