
One of Prince’s representatives has denied reports that his legendary vault of 
unreleased music is being put on sale for $35m (£29m). According toBillboard 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7541106/prince-music-vault-shopped-purple-rain-deluxe-edition>
, the three major music labels Warner, Universal and Sony have been in talks to 
secure rights to the music. Billboard said the sale was being handled by estate 
advisers Charles Koppelman and L Londell McMillan.

However, McMillan took to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/LondellMcMillan/status/786348711668436992> to hit back at 
Billboard, insisting: “Please don’t believe that absurd article on the vault. 
There are so many false rumours.” He agreed with one tweeter’s insistence that 
the quoted price was too low, calling it “unacceptable 
<https://twitter.com/LondellMcMillan/status/786350793616011265>”, and called on 
Billboard to “correct your ‘vault’ story 
<https://twitter.com/LondellMcMillan/status/786353306142519296>. Please get 
your facts together.”
L Londell McMillan (@LondellMcMillan) 
Irresponsible journalism on #Prince 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Prince?src=hash> should be a crime. Don't put out 
garbage please! ☔️
 <https://twitter.com/LondellMcMillan/status/786361376226676736> October 13, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/LondellMcMillan/status/786361376226676736> 
The contents of Prince’s vault have long been the stuff of musical legend. It 
is believed that it contains thousands of hours of recorded music spanning the 
length of his 40-year career before his unexpected death in April 2016. Owing 
to the conplicated series of contractsPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> had with different labels, there are 
likely to be significant disputes over who owns the right to certain pieces of 
music, depending on who he was signed to at the time of recording.

I would hide 4 U: what’s in Prince’s secret vault?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/i-would-hide-4-u-whats-in-princes-secret-vault>
It has also been reported that the deluxe edition of Purple Rain, announced as 
part ofthe artist’s 2014 Warner Bros deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/18/prince-re-signs-deal-with-warner-bros-records-after-18-year-split>
, could be released in early 2017, along with a new greatest hits compilation 
later this year. Other deluxe reissues of Prince’s classic albums are expected 
to follow.

Prince appears on Forbes’ current list of the top-earning dead celebrities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/12/michael-jackson-dead-celebrity-earnings-prince-david-bowie>
. Sales of his music soared following his death from an accidental drug 
overdose, placing him in fifth on the list with estimated earnings of $25m. The 
only musicians above him are Elvis Presley with $27 and Michael Jackson, who 
topped the list with $825m earnings.

A judge is still to rule over which family members will be officially declared 
heirs to Prince’s estate.
 