
Paisley Park, the private estate and studio complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/prince-estate-case-to-be-held-behind-closed-doors>
 of the late rock superstar Prince, will open for daily public tours starting 6 
October, the trust company overseeing his estate announced on Wednesday . The 
company that runs Elvis Presley’s Graceland will manage it.

Prince estate case to be held behind closed doors as media denied access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/26/prince-estate-case-to-be-held-behind-closed-doors>
Bremer Trust said in a statement that millions of Prince fans will get the 
chance to tour the 65,000-square-foot complex in the Minneapolis suburb of 
Chanhassen, where Prince collapsed in an elevator anddied of an accidental 
overdose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/prince-died-opioid-overdose-tests>
 of the painkiller fentanyl in April.

“Opening Paisley Park is something that Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> always wanted to do and was actively 
working on,” Prince’s sister, Tyka Nelson, said in the statement. “Only a few 
hundred people have had the rare opportunity to tour the estate during his 
lifetime. Now, fans from around the world will be able to experience Prince’s 
world for the first time as we open the doors to this incredible place.”

The tours will be run by Graceland Holdings, which has overseen Graceland in 
Memphis, Tennessee, since 1982, according to the museum’s business plan. 
Graceland, where Presley died in 1977, has welcomed more than 20 million 
visitors since opening to the public, averaging more than 600,000 annually in 
recent years. Graceland is providing the initial funds for capital improvements 
and operating costs.

The plan says the tours will include studios where Prince recorded, produced 
and mixed most of his biggest hits, and the soundstage where he rehearsed for 
tours and hosted exclusive private concerts. Also featured will be thousands of 
artifacts from his personal archives, “including iconic concert wardrobe, 
awards, musical instruments, artwork, rare music and video recordings, concert 
memorabilia, automobiles and motorcycles”.

Prince's final days: few clues pointed to secret behind star's untimely death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/prince-final-days-death-percocet>
Tickets go on sale online only on Friday at 2pm CDT. Standard tickets will 
cost $38.50, but VIP tours will be offered for small groups priced at $100 or 
more. Tours will last about 70 minutes, starting every 10 minutes, and each 
group is expected to include 25-30 guests. Graceland officials expect 1,500 to 
2,000 guests on peak days. No walk-up sales will be allowed.

The plan requires rezoning approval from the city, which posted documents 
about the plan on its website. The planning commission hearing is scheduled for 
20 September, and the city council will consider it on 3 October.

“Chanhassen will be pleased to demonstrate to the thousands of visitors to 
Paisley Park the same hospitality and respect that Prince enjoyed during his 
time in Chanhassen,” Mayor Denny Laufenburger said in a statement.

Prince, 57, left no known will. The judge overseeing the case has not ruled on 
who his heirs will be. But court filings indicate they will probably include 
Tyka Nelson and five half-siblings because Prince was divorced, his parents are 
dead and he had no confirmed children. Bremer Trust said the family supports 
the museum plan. The court has not ruled on whether a woman and girl who say 
they are Prince’s niece and grandniece are entitled to share in the estate, 
which Bremer Trust has said could be worth up to $300m.

The criminal investigation is continuing. Some of the pills taken Paisley Park 
after his death were counterfeit drugs that actually contained fentanyl, a 
synthetic opioid 50 times more powerful than heroin, an official close to the 
investigation told the Associated Press on Sunday. The official, who spoke on 
condition of anonymity because of the ongoing investigation, said records show 
Prince had no prescription for any controlled substances in the state of
Minnesota <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota> in the 12 months 
before he died. Authorities are still investigating how Prince obtained the 
drugs.
 