
The re-opening of Prince’s Paisley Park home as a museum will happen for a few 
days starting Thursday, after the city council in Chanhassen,Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota>, granted a temporary permit to 
open the facility.

The city council in the late musician’s hometown threw plans for the 
re-opening into disarray – along with perhaps hundreds of planned fan trips to 
Paisley Park for the inaugural showing – when it voted on Monday to delay the 
museum’s official debut.

During three hours of discussion on Monday at the meeting in Chanhassen, the 
board voted 3-2 to table a rezoning request that would have allowed Paisley 
Park – the late music legend’s recording studio and home – to re-open as a 
museum.

Council members and residents expressed concerns about the proposed museum’s 
impact on traffic, public safety and parking in the town of 24,000, the 
Minneapolis Star Tribunereported 
<http://www.startribune.com/chanhassen-city-council-could-unlock-the-doors-to-paisely-park-museum/395742171/>
. Councilwoman Bethany Tjornhom said the city needed to consider whether it 
wanted to be a “tourist town”, hosting upward of 600,000 visitors annually.

Prince: a shy, nonconformist, unknowable talent | Alexis Petridis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand>
“We only have one chance to get this right,” she said 
<http://www.startribune.com/chanhassen-city-council-could-unlock-the-doors-to-paisely-park-museum/395742171/>
.

A spokesperson for Paisley Park told the Guardian in an email that a preview 
for members of the media scheduled for Wednesday had been postponed.

But in a press release issued later on Tuesday, Prince’s estate said the 
temporary permit will allow the museum to open for tours on Thursday 6 October, 
Saturday 8 October and Friday 14 October, “while Paisley Park continues to work 
closely with the council on their traffic and zoning concerns”. No new tickets 
are available, and guests who pre-ordered tickets for other days can receive a 
refund or possibly be accommodated for one of the three scheduled dates. 
Information will be sent by email to those ticket holders shortly, Paisley Park 
said.

An exhibit of Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> artifacts and 
wardrobe items may open in the Mall of America by early next week, the estate 
said, following discussions with the mall.

“This exhibition will be available to all ticket holders while we continue to 
work through the Paisley Park review process with the city council,” the press 
release said.

Last month, Chanhassen’s planning commission unanimously voted to rezone the 
site. At the commission hearing, Pat Mazural, special administrator for 
Prince’s estate, said the purpose of the museum was to preserve the superstar’s 
legacy.

“He was an extraordinary talent and a unique musical artist,” Mazural said, 
according to meeting minutes.

But on Monday, when the matter came to the city council for a vote, others 
expressed concerns about the museum. The Star Tribune reported that some fans 
told the council they believed the museum was being created too soon, while 
residents raised concerns about potential traffic issues and pedestrian safety.

The Star Tribune said an email from the site to fans who bought a ticket for 
the museum’s initially planned opening on Thursday said updates would be 
forthcoming.

“The Chanhassen City Council voted late yesterday to table the measure which 
would have permitted Paisley Park to open as a museum starting this Thursday, 
October 6,”the email said 
<http://www.startribune.com/chanhassen-city-council-could-unlock-the-doors-to-paisely-park-museum/395742171/>
. “We will email you with updates very soon.”

Prince died from an accidental overdose of the opioid fentanyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/21/prince-death-cause-fentanyl-opioid-counterfeit-pills-drug-overdose>
 at his home in April.
 