
For me, Prince was part of growing up – at home my brother and sister played 
him all the time. He was always there. There was never a question of, do you 
likePrince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>? It was obvious that you 
did, at least in my world.

When my film Belle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dvi1wbbYB0o> was coming 
out in 2014 there had been some preview screenings, and Prince had seen it 
privately. Three days before the London premiere I got a call: “Prince would 
love to throw a party after the premiere and play some songs. Would that be 
OK?” I said yes, though Idefinitely didn’t think it would happen. So we did the 
screening, which is always overwhelming in itself, and we had our normal party, 
then we were ushered away to the Hippodrome. It was this beautiful room, and 
the stage was lit in purple, with scented candles and gorgeous flowers on every 
table. My heart started beating really hard when I realised this was actually 
going to happen. I hadn’t told my sister, who’s a massive Prince fan, until 
probably an hour before we left, because I didn’t want to let anybody down in 
case it didn’t happen.

I got the feeling that he didn't want awe – he just wanted to talk to me about 
my work, and about his work

After about an hour he came on stage. It was surreal that he was there and 
every so often he’d say my name, and Gugu’s [Mbatha-Raw, star ofBelle]. 
Everybody in the crowd was going mad – it was probably about 300 people, and he 
played for two hours. I know what people mean now when they say something takes 
your breath away. I remember standing up on one of the chairs and taking off my 
shoes and just surrendering to the whole thing. After the concert I ran away 
and didn’t meet him. Gugu rang me on my way home and said: “Where are you? 
Prince really wants to meet you!” And I said: “Oh God, I thought he’d be tired, 
I’ve gone.” I felt really bad, but I was actually too terrified to meet him. So 
I spoke to him the next day to thank him.

Later on I flew out to see him at Paisley Park. It was one of those really 
unexpected friendships. Once I got to know him better he was really, really 
normal. I had to tell myself, “This is OK, he’s just another human being.” But 
it was hard, because around him you did absolutely know you were in the 
presence of a genius – not because of anything he did, but the way he spoke 
about music you understood this was someone who understood it in a very special 
way. He quickly brought conversation to a level of artist-to-artist, and that 
was what he wanted from you. I got the feeling that he didn’t want awe, he just 
wanted to talk to me about my work, and about his work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fprince-remembered-by-amma-asante-genius-gentleman-feminist-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d98ae15ac8b7d3b99cc07547f2a69ccda66bde6%2F0_55_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20remembered%20by%20Amma%20Asante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fprince-remembered-by-amma-asante-genius-gentleman-feminist-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20remembered%20by%20Amma%20Asante&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fprince-remembered-by-amma-asante-genius-gentleman-feminist-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d98ae15ac8b7d3b99cc07547f2a69ccda66bde6%2F0_55_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Prince performing in California, February 1985. Photograph: Michael Ochs 
Archives/Getty Images 
We’d sit and listen to music together, talking about other artists that he 
loved. I’d listen to him play the piano. He gave me an extremely beautiful 
gift, a memory fromBelle – I don’t want to say exactly what it is, because I 
remember how much of a private man he was – which he’d had made for me. Mostly 
he was just hugely encouraging. He talked about how important he felt my work 
was, and it’s very weird when you’re sitting in front of somebody whose own 
work has been the soundtrack to your life. You have to force yourself to be in 
the moment and really listen and absorb all the wisdom you can from it.

That’s why it was such a massive shock once he was gone. I was at a big 
boardroom meeting and someone looked at their phone and said: “Prince has 
died.” I thought they meant someone from the royal family, and I remember 
saying: “You’ve got that wrong.” It didn’t make any sense to me, because he was 
so completely alive the last time I’d seen him at Paisley Park eight or nine 
months before, and well… I’m still probably a bit in shock.

What I’ll remember of him, apart from the great music, is how much of a 
gentleman he was, how kind he was, what a good human being. I was one of many 
artists that he reached out to, who he knew he could have an impact on. And he 
was a real feminist – he worked with so many amazing women. I felt really 
grateful to be one of those who he reached out to, knowing he really didn’t 
have to. I feel like we use that word genius sometimes all too often, although 
for Prince it was undeniable. We lost someone really special that we’re 
definitely all the better for having, but I didn’t expect to meet him and then 
lose him so quickly.

Main photograph by Robert Whitman 2014/WENN
 