
It seems strange to relate now, but in the early years of Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> Rogers Nelson’s career, there were 
voices that doubted whether he would ever be truly successful.

He was clearly exceptionally talented and possessed a vision for his music 
that bordered on obstinacy: not only had he produced, arranged, performed every 
instrument and composed all but one song on his 1978 debut album For You, he 
had also somehow contrived to get a record contract with Warner Brothers that 
entitled him to complete artistic control, almost unheard of for a new artist.

But he was also a strange, shy, awkward figure, apparently unwilling to play 
the promotional game. His interviews were almost wilfully unrevealing; an early 
appearance on that venerable US music TV institution American Bandstand was 
such a disaster that host Dick Clark later claimed Prince was the most 
difficult artist he’d ever encountered on the show. How could anyone so 
apparently unwilling to play the game ever hope to make it?

Prince, superstar and pioneer of American music, dies aged 57
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-dead-music-superstar-57> 
As it turned out, Prince knew exactly what he was doing, even when it looked 
like he had no idea. The way he behaved as his career began in the late 70s 
would set a pattern for the rest of his life.

He was, if anything, even more lavishly talented than the credit that claimed 
he’d played 27 different instruments on For You suggested. He went on to make 
umpteen albums in a myriad of music styles: he could, it appeared, do 
everything from rock to funk to jazz to psychedelia.

Some of the albums were better than others – his output was so torrential that 
not even he could completely maintain his quality control – but whatever they 
sounded like, they always sounded like Prince. And he was infinitely more 
obstinate than that first recording contract made him appear. For the best part 
of 40 years, he conducted his career according to a whimsical internal logic 
that seemed to baffle even his closest collaborators.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20performing%20While%20My%20Guitar%20Gently%20Weeps%20at%20Rock%20and%20Roll%20Hall%20of%20Fame%20induction%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20performing%20While%20My%20Guitar%20Gently%20Weeps%20at%20Rock%20and%20Roll%20Hall%20of%20Fame%20induction%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video&media=>
Prince performing While My Guitar Gently Weeps at Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 
induction – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/apr/22/prince-performing-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-at-rock-and-roll-hall-of-fame-induction-video>
Whole albums were inexplicably shelved, songs that could audibly have been 
huge hits confined to The Vault, the legendary space in his Paisley Park studio 
complex that apparently teemed with unreleased material. His stubbornness in 
dealing with record companies became so famous that at one point it threatened 
to overshadow the actual music he was making, a perhaps inevitable by-product 
of walking around with SLAVE written on his face to protest against the terms 
of his record deal.

Prince obituary: ‘the music flowed out in an unstoppable torrent’
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/prince-obituary> 
But the strangeness and reticence that characterised his early interactions 
with the media were anything but a hindrance: he used them entirely to his 
advantage, turning himself into a genuinely mythic, unknowable figure in the 
process. His interviews were spectacularly unforthcoming about anything other 
than his music. He developed his own shorthand in which all his songs were 
written – U for you, “eye” instead of I – and at one point, he changed his name 
to a symbol: for a time, you were either supposed to refer to him as Victor or 
The Artist Formerly Known As Prince. “I am something that you’ll never 
understand,” he sang, knowingly, on I Would Die 4 U, a single from the album 
that made him a global superstar, 1984’s Purple Rain. It wasn’t hyperbole.

The initial consensus seemed to be that Prince was a kind of Minnesotan answer 
to Motown’s Rick James, intent on dragging R&B in a darker, more viscerally 
sexual direction; a reaction to the string-laden sumptuousness of disco. James 
certainly thought so, baldly accusing Prince of stealing his act when the two 
toured together, and indeed, you could see where the confusion arose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693de0f1405f062f5a78dbe23525a531cef778fd%2F0_32_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%3A%20a%20shy%2C%20nonconformist%2C%20unknowable%20talent%20%7C%20Alexis%20Petridis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%3A%20a%20shy%2C%20nonconformist%2C%20unknowable%20talent%20%7C%20Alexis%20Petridis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F693de0f1405f062f5a78dbe23525a531cef778fd%2F0_32_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
 Prince performs during the halftime show at the Super Bowl XLI football game 
at Dolphin Stadium in Miami in 2007. Photograph: Chris O'Meara/AP 
Both had a penchant for performing in provocative outfits, both were unafraid 
of incorporating rock influences into their music – James dubbed his sound 
punk-funk, while Prince briefly and disastrously toured as a support to the 
Rolling Stones – and both were keen to parlay their success into svengali 
status: James with Teena Marie and the Mary Jane Girls, Prince with The Time 
and Vanity 6 among others.

But in retrospect, you can tell the two were cut from noticeably different 
cloth. Prince’s early albums seemed weirdly intent on picking at taboos, as if 
he were testing how far he could go, what he could get away with. It was one 
thing to write dirty funk tracks that upset the infamous Parents’ Music 
Resource Centre, quite another to write songs about incest. And his musical 
vision turned out to be vastly more complex. By the time of his 1982 commercial 
breakthrough, 1999, it encompassed everything from rockabilly to synthesised 
machine-funk he claimed was influenced by Blade Runner to piano ballads to 
unashamed pop. It might have seemed like self-indulgence and hard work had his 
songwriting not been of such an astonishingly high quality. Instead, it just 
sounded like a man with talent to burn.

Prince in his own words: 'You have to live a life to understand it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/21/prince-in-his-own-words-you-have-to-live-a-life-to-understand-it>
For the next few years, he seldom put a foot wrong, however improbable the 
paths he chose to go down, producing arguably the greatest run of albums in the 
1980s: Purple Rain, Around the World in a Day, Parade, Sign o’ the Times and 
Lovesexy. He seemed capable of perfectly balancing artistic and commercial 
concerns, never an easy trick to pull off. Every album he made was expansive, 
experimental and never the same as its predecessor, but every one came thickly 
larded with indelible hits. His live shows were spectacular: he was not merely 
a prodigiously gifted guitarist, but a hell of a performer. Moreover, they were 
never bound by the strictures of stadium pop. The setlists kept changing; there 
was always room for improvisation.

1988’s Lovesexy was the last album of his flawless imperial phase – perhaps he 
was distracted, first by his desire to make movies (as evidenced by 1990’s 
disastrous Graffiti Bridge, his ability to act and direct was always more 
questionable than his musical judgment), then by his long-running dispute with 
Warner Brothers. The hits never dried up – he scored his solitary British 
number one in 1994 with The Most Beautiful Girl in the World – but his albums 
became noticeably more uneven: there was always fantastic music on them (even 
1994’s derided Come contained a song as great as Letitgo), you just had to work 
a little harder to find it.

If he never quite regained the astonishing musical form he displayed in the 
mid-to-late-80s on record, his live performances could make you believe he was 
still an artist absolutely at the top of his game.The 21 concerts he played in 
London in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/aug/02/popandrock.alexispetridis> were 
rapturously received, and his return to the capital in 2014 with a new 
all-female backing band called 3rdEyeGirl playing “hit and run” shows at small 
venues with little warning were both a media masterstroke and a wild artistic 
success. He kept his career in constant motion: always performing, always 
touting a new-found protégé, releasing albums with a dizzying frequency, 
invariably coming up with new ideas.

Prince – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/apr/21/prince-legacy-iconic-photographs-career>
His latest was performing solo, accompanying himself on piano. “I have to 
challenge myself,” he told me late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/prince-interview-paisley-park-studios-minneapolis>
, “because I’m not one to get bad reviews.”

I’d flown to Paisley Park, his studio complex in a suburb of Minneapolis, at 
short notice without being told why, although it transpired he had decided on a 
whim that he wanted to meet the press in order to announce a European tour. It 
was all rather confusing and chaotic and strange. He elected to be interviewed 
while seated at a keyboard, with representatives of the press literally 
gathered at his feet.

The representatives of the press didn’t get a great deal out of him. If he 
didn’t like a question, he would mutely shake his head and play the theme tune 
from The Twilight Zone. They would still get quite a story: if he wasn’t going 
to tell us anything about himself, he certainly gave us something to write 
about. Later that night he played, picking songs from his back catalogue 
apparently at random: Raspberry Beret, Girls and Boys, Something in the Water 
Does Not Compute. They sounded amazing. As ever, he was simultaneously 
impossibly gifted, completely unknowable – something you could never understand 
– and a man who knew exactly what he was doing.
 