
The backstage area of the Glory, a gay bar in east London, is full of female 
performers strategically placing socks in their Calvin Klein’s and using an 
abundance of “tit tape”. It is the final of Britain’s biggest drag king night, 
Man Up, and the culmination of a weekly contest – 15 acts have made it through, 
all women performing in drag to entertain the crowds. I have been invited to 
join the judging panel alongside a lineup of gay and straight magazine editors, 
journalists and performers.

Drag queens have, of course, been on the mainstream’s radar for years, from 
Lily Savage <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/paul-o-grady> in the 90s 
to the more recentRuPaul’s Drag Race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/24/rupaul-drag-race-lgbt-impact-pop-culture-tv>
. But it is fair to say that drag kings are some way off having their own show 
on ITV2.

The Glory’s co-owner, drag queen Jonny Woo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/shortcuts/2014/nov/23/shoreditch-golden-age-of-90s-london-hipster-hangout-jonny-woo-show>
, tells me: “The acts … address gender politics.” For him, there is something 
more defiant about a woman strapping down her breasts, than a man slipping on a 
pair of heels. In a scene sometimes dominated by gay men, Woo has made it his 
mission “to do something for women. I wanted to find female performers.” And he 
has.

What is happening at the Glory is a lot more sophisticated than bulges and 
designer boxers. As 25-year-old drag king Gusher, a lip-syncing spoof of R&B’s 
Usher, explains, after taking three hours to transform herself into character, 
the biggest appeal is the feeling of liberation. “My body doesn’t belong to me 
from now until I get off that stage,” she says, and for that moment her 
identity “belongs to the drag king movement”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fput-a-sock-in-it-all-rise-for-the-uks-drag-kings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0870ba9706930b45d16920a722d82dd9c7ab4ce5%2F0_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Put%20a%20sock%20in%20it%20%E2%80%93%20all%20rise%20for%20the%20UK's%20drag%20kings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fput-a-sock-in-it-all-rise-for-the-uks-drag-kings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Put%20a%20sock%20in%20it%20%E2%80%93%20all%20rise%20for%20the%20UK%27s%20drag%20kings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fput-a-sock-in-it-all-rise-for-the-uks-drag-kings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0870ba9706930b45d16920a722d82dd9c7ab4ce5%2F0_0_3200_4000%2F3200.jpg>
 The winner of Man Up at the Glory, London. Photograph: Peter Fingleton 
That is the point: this contest isn’t just about drawing a six pack on with a 
marker pen and strapping down your chest. There is more at stake than the 
£1,000 prize. Contestants are being judged on their presence and look – not 
only how “manly” they are, but how they bring their character alive on stage, 
and comic timing is key. This is a cleverer, crop-top-free version of Girl 
Power and femininity is not at its core – by and large, these drags kings want 
to prove that gender, masculinity and other binary opposites are flimsy.

Backstage, I stumble across Boyz, a group of girls who perform as a boyband. 
Band member Hattie, 26, is a drag king by night and a geography teacher by day. 
Perhaps the contrast is part of the appeal. As Hattie tells me: “I put down my 
books at the end of the day and I don my fake eyebrows. I feel like I walk 
around differently in my costume, with socks stuffed down my pants. I don’t 
want to be a man, but it’s fun to walk with a different swagger.” And Boyz are 
clearly having fun when they take to the stage later to perform covers of 
Westlife hits.



Like songs, versions of perceived masculinity are often “covers” – male 
personas and stereotypes borrowed from different eras, recycled and repeated on 
stage. Yet each of the drag kings brings something original, teasing out their 
own versions of masculinity and blurring the lines of gender. From Manley 
Stanley, who brilliantly subverts extreme masculinity – so macho she ate raw 
steak on stage – to south London act Frankie Sinatra, who will only give away 
that she’s “younger than Madonna”, to the winner, Calvin Decline, who was 
crowned the King of all Drags Kings not just for being convincing in briefs but 
because the judges felt her performance, unlike the underwear ads she was 
spoofing, had real depth – satirising the world of fashion.

Calvin is a Californian student whose win is all the more poignant in light of 
theattack at the Pulse Night Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>. As she puts it: 
“Following the event in Orlando, I was a bit scared to get up and perform, 
[but] as an American, it felt affirming to make a statement.” The Glory is all 
about championing a stage for all.


It is still a relatively niche scene, but across the country, more drag king 
nights are cropping up. Looking around the room at the largely female crowd of 
the Glory’s grand final, you cannot help but feel drag kings and their fans are 
moving in from the fringes.
 