
With space at a premium and a workforce of 165,000, Malta is targeting 
high-value niches in manufacturing as well as developing its ICT 
infrastructure, and its education and health institutions as a way of 
attracting investment, creating jobs and growing its economy.

“Malta is small, so every square metre here has an opportunity cost,” 
emphasises Mario Vella, chairman of national development agency Malta 
Enterprise. “It really has to generate value.”

The key pillar behind this idea is developing and involving Malta’s education 
and training institutions, in order to provide the future brains and manpower 
as the island creates its next generation of industries in advanced 
manufacturing and research and development.

We need to focus on specific sectors such as electronics and pharmaceuticals
Tonio Zarb, senior partner at KPMG Malta 
At the forefront of these efforts is MCAST (Malta College of Arts, Science & 
Technology) which was established in 2001 to train and re-skill Malta’s 
workforce while collaborating with industry.

“Industry in Malta is advancing at a very fast pace and MCAST has always been 
part of this development,” highlights Silvio de Bono, the institution’s 
chairman. “We are producing students who are trained to meet these industry’s 
needs.”

The announcement in 2014 that the UK’s Barts and London School of Medicine and 
Dentistry would open a campus in Malta for 300 students was a major sign of 
confidence in Malta’s ability to attract the very best in foreign direct 
investment, and a coup for an island that is looking to become a hub for 
education as well as medical tourism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fe4966166edd3e1cf45a6f5b807b52ca71446d%2F0_113_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Quality%20over%20quantity%3A%20attracting%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Quality%20over%20quantity%3A%20attracting%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77fe4966166edd3e1cf45a6f5b807b52ca71446d%2F0_113_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Malta Enterprise provides a comprehensive incentive package with the aim of 
increasing the amount of R&D activities in Malta. Photograph: PR 
Today, around 3,000 manufacturing operations operate in Malta employing around 
15 percent of the workforce, with many cutting-edge international players among 
them such as Abertax Quality, IBG Automation, Trelleborg and Methode 
Electronics.

For Tonio Zarb, senior partner at KPMG Malta, the evolution of the country’s 
manufacturing sector is on the right track, as long as it’s relevant to 
emerging industries. “It would be good if we could see this sector contributing 
not less than 15 percent of GDP,” he says. “To achieve this, we need to 
continue building on what we’re currently doing, namely focussing on specific 
sectors such as electronics and pharmaceuticals.”

Construction is nearing completion on the Life Sciences Park, one of Malta 
Enterprise’s key projects. The new development is being built a short distance 
from the island’s main hospital, the University of Malta and the newly-built 
oncology centre, and it is hoped it will provide a focal point for creating 
synergies and collaboration between Malta’s higher education and health 
institutions with innovative companies in research and development. The park is 
particularly oriented towards advanced pharmaceutical research and business 
development.

Aviation services and manufacturing is another sector which Malta is 
developing, with the €17 million Safi Aviation Park opening its doors in 2012. 
It provides airside accommodation for aviation-related industries. Local firm 
Medavia, which provides charter flights to oil production companies as well as 
full aircraft maintenance, repairs and testing, has chosen to base itself here. 
“We are continuing to expand our strategic presence, shifting our focus from 
North Africa to take in the whole of the Mediterranean basin,” says CEO Rammah 
Ettir. Meanwhile, Lufthansa Technik has also opened a multi-million-euro 
aircraft maintenance hub here, attracted by Malta’s proximity – under three 
hours’ flight time – to most European, North Africa and Middle Eastern cities.

Internationalising Malta’s businesses 

In March 2015, the responsibility for the promotion of exports and the 
internationalisation of Maltese businesses was transferred from Malta 
Enterprise into a new public-private entity, Trade Malta.

With 51 percent of the new body now owned by the government through Projects 
Malta Ltd, and the remaining 49 percent by Malta’s Chamber of Commerce, 
Enterprise and Industry, the idea behind this change is precisely so that Trade 
Malta will be able to reach more businesses and work closer in line with the 
private sector and its interests.

What can best be done by the private sector, should be done by the private 
sector
Joseph Muscat, prime minister of Malta 
Indeed, at the inauguration ceremony Malta’s prime minister Joseph Muscat 
stated: “what can best be done by the private sector, should be done by
 the private sector.”

The creation of Trade Malta is also a key part of an internationalisation 
drive for Malta’s industries and aims to offer all kinds of assistance to 
Maltese and Maltese-based companies including forming international franchises 
and joint ventures as well as attracting businesses and trade delegations to 
the island.

As Mario Vella, chairman of Malta Enterprise highlights, “for us, 
internationalisation means more than just export promotion.”

The creation of Trade Malta represents a major initiative by the 
government-owned company Projects Malta Ltd, which works to promote and foster 
public private partnerships and all kinds of joint ventures. Projects Malta Ltd 
was also launched in early 2015 is order to bypass bureaucracy and streamline 
projects through the involvement of the private sector in service-based and 
infrastructure sectors. “Projects Malta will ensure that good ideas are never 
wasted and that plans are implemented in a timely manner,” said prime minister 
Muscat at the initiative’s inauguration.

Opinion - Mario Vella, chairman of Malta Enterprise
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd04dec1828794b52325e7bc597a45b3b3aea814%2F0_3_979_587%2F979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Quality%20over%20quantity%3A%20attracting%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Quality%20over%20quantity%3A%20attracting%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fquality-over-quantity-attracting-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd04dec1828794b52325e7bc597a45b3b3aea814%2F0_3_979_587%2F979.jpg>
 Mario Vella. Photograph: PR 
Chairman of Malta Enterprise, an agency focused on attracting inward 
investment and supporting enterprise, Dr Mario Vella shares his insights on the 
Maltese approach to investment promotion.

When compared to other European Union member states, the Maltese economy is 
doing very well indeed. According to the spring 2015 European Economic 
Forecast, Malta’s real GDP growth stood at four percent year-on-year in the 
last quarter of 2014, the highest rate of growth since 2010. After reaching 3.5 
percent for the whole year 2014, the Commission forecasts 3.6 percent in 2015. 
Malta and Ireland (also 3.6 percent) are expected to be the fastest-growing 
economies in the euro-zone.

The European Commission commented that “job creation and the unemployment rate 
are projected to outperform euro-area peers”. It also stated that “employment 
growth surprised positively”. The European Commission forecasts that Malta’s 
unemployment rate in 2015 will be 5.9 percent. When compared with the other 
euro-zone countries, this places Malta amongst the top performers, with 
Germany, Luxembourg and Austria.

In terms of success in keeping unemployment down, Malta has no peer in 
southern Europe. Compare its 5.9 percent to Greece’s 25.6 percent, Cyprus’ 16.2 
percent or France’s 10.3 percent. It is also expected to do well when compared 
to more northern member states, such as Slovakia (12.1 percent), Ireland (9.6 
percent) and Belgium (8.4 percent). All this, it must be underscored, is being 
achieved within the context of a further decline in the budget deficit.

As prime minister Joseph Muscat has already remarked, the European Commission 
may well be surprised at Malta’s economic success but we are not. Repeating his 
words, it is a question of having a bold but flexible vision, and the 
determination to go for it.

The promotion of foreign direct investment, its attraction to Malta and all 
that is needed to keep it here, is a key component of this vision. This is what 
Malta Enterprise is responsible for, what it endeavours to do so as cost 
effectively as possible and what it is, in fact, succeeding in doing.

Our success is due to our proactive approach. We do not wait for investors to 
knock on our door. We target specific potential foreign investors that are, for 
a variety of specific reasons, likely to consider a presence in Malta, and 
knock on their door.

Malta Enterprise leverages Malta’s location advantages in a broad range of 
engineering-based niches, in the more creative niches of information and 
communications technology, in higher education and training for the regional 
and European markets, in innovative niches within aviation services, in the 
creative industries generally and in the long-neglected field of international 
logistics. To this end, Malta Enterprise is leveraging the excellent reputation 
we have built within the world of shipping as Europe’s largest flag register 
and one of the world’s fastest growing ones. We are leveraging Malta’s 
tradition of medical excellence and its historical reputation as “the nurse of 
the Mediterranean” to develop it as an international health care hub.

To quote prime minister Joseph Muscat, “Opportunities are the result of 
navigating smartly in an uncertain international environment and to identify 
situations created by uncertainty itself.” 

 