
Female MPs are too often written out of political history, according to Rachel 
Reeves <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rachel-reeves>, the former Labour 
frontbencher, who has written a new biography of the pioneering parliamentarian 
Alice Bacon.

Reeves, a former shadow work and pensions secretary, said the book was her 
contribution to redressing the balance, after she followed in the footsteps of 
Bacon in 2010 to become the second female MP elected inLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds>. 


We owe a debt to Labour’s bold, pioneering Alice Bacon | Rachel Reeves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/debt-education-owes-to-alice-bacon-labour-comprehensive-schools>
The biography, Alice in Westminster, due to be published 
<http://www.ibtauris.com/books/biography%20%20true%20stories/biography%20general/biography%20historical%20political%20%20military/picking%20your%20battles%20alice%20bacon%20the%20pioneer%20politician>
 this week, charts the political life of Bacon, who was an MP for 25 years from 
1945 and campaigned strongly in favour of a comprehensive education system.


However, Bacon is little known outside Yorkshire, where she was born the 
daughter of a miner and lived for her whole career as an MP, Home Office 
minister in Harold Wilson’s government and later a peer.

“One of the reasons I started writing the book is that women MPs of that era 
tend to get written out of history,” Reeves said. “Even someone likeMargaret 
Bondfield 
<http://www.unionhistory.info/timeline/Tl_Display.php?Where=Dc1Title+contains+%27Margaret+Bondfield+(1873-1953)%27+>
, who was the first woman cabinet minister, has never had a biography of her.

“Barbara Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/may/03/obituaries.anneperkins> and 
Jennie Lee 
<http://labourlist.org/2010/11/the-labour-party-or-nothing-jennie-lee/> are 
really the only exceptions to that. This is a small step in trying to put that 
right and write them back in. Apart from the Pankhursts, who do people think 
about when think about women’s suffrage? I think the first women MPs have been 
written out of history for one reason or another.

“A lot of these women, like Alice, really made things happen. You needed Roy 
Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/19/roy-jenkins-well-rounded-life-alan-johnson-review>
 in the 1960s to make social liberal reforms, but Alice also had a key role. At 
a time in the Labour movement when there was a lot of disquiet about 
homosexuality and abortion, in the Catholic part of the party and conservative 
trade union element, Alice by being steady and calm and lowering the 
temperature made reform ever more certain.”

Reeves said Bacon’s arguments for comprehensive education still have relevance 
today, asLabour fights against Theresa May’s plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
 to lift the ban on new grammar schools.

Corbyn sets goal for 50% of Labour MPs to be women by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/12/jeremy-corbyn-sets-goal-50-per-cent-labour-mps-women-by-2020>
“[Anthony] Crosland got all the credit for comprehensive education, but it was 
Alice, plodding away in the 1940s and 50s when comprehensive education was not 
fashionable even in theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party, where there was a sort of feeling the tripartite Butler system, as long 
as properly implemented, was the right thing to do and children would get the 
education suitable for them. Alice did not believe that and was not willing to 
sit on the sidelines,” she said.


“In debate after debate, she talked about comprehensive education and helped 
changed Labour party policy on it. Unlike a lot of her colleagues, she had 
taught at an interwar secondary modern and had gone to a grammar. She said she 
knew lots of boys and girls who deserved a grammar school quality of education 
who were denied it.”


Reeves said the lives of female MPs have changed considerably since Bacon’s 
time, when few had children or wanted to be described as feminists.

However, she said female MPs still faced some inequalities, recalling the time 
one male Tory MP suggested she would not be able to do afrontbench cabinet job 
properly as a new mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/23/cameron-hits-back-tory-mps-out-maternity-leave-comments-rachel-reeves-andrew-rosindell>
.


“There are still different expectations of what women can do. And look at the 
online abuse that women get today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/18/vile-online-abuse-against-women-mps-needs-to-be-challenged-now>
. I think women suffer more from that than men do – the strongest examples 
would beLuciana Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/28/luciana-berger-i-have-been-contending-with-issues-surrounding-my-safety-and-security-for-years>
 andJess Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/16/labour-mp-jess-phillips-installing-panic-room-at-office-following-threats>
,” Reeves said. “Alice was also told to concentrate on women’s issues, rather 
than the economy or defence. That has changed, although still I think women are 
expected to champion the causes of women like childcare and the tampon tax and 
equal pay.”
 