
Jim Naughtie has recalled his colleagues on the Today programme throwing up 
their hands in mock surrender after an infamous slip of the tongue as he 
introduced then culture secretary Jeremy Hunt as “Jeremy Cunt”.


In an interview with Radio Times to mark the end of his 21 years on the Radio 4
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> programme, Naughtie said BBC 
newsreader the late Rory Morrison had come to the rescue with a faultless 
delivery of the morning news bulletin that followed the gaffe in December 2010.

“I was there with lots of bits of paper and someone was shoving headlines in 
front of me and I said, ‘After the news we’ll be talking to Jeremy C***’… And 
all I could see behind the glass were arms going up in the air, as in ‘We 
surrender’,” said Naughtie. “And the guy who was passing the news bulletins to 
the late Rory Morrison went under the table [laughing].”

He said Morrison’s coolness under pressure, which allowed the Today team to 
regain its composure, earned him a bottle of champagne as a reward from Radio 4.

Naughtie’s slip came just before the 8am news as he trailed an interview with 
Hunt about broadband access. He came back on at 8:20 to apologise to listeners, 
saying the mixup came “courtesy of Dr Spooner”, an Oxford don so famous for 
muddling his words that the habit was named a spoonerism after him.

The error was compounded later that day when Andrew Marr made the same mistake 
introducing a debate about Naughtie’s slip on the station’s Start the Week 
programme, despite promising not to repeat it “in quite the terms it happened”. 
Both Marr and Naughtie later personally apologised to Hunt.

Morrison died from cancer in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/12/bbc-radio-4-rory-morrison> after 
more than 20 years at the BBC taking in time as newsreader, continuity 
announcer and regular on Radio 4’s News Quiz. He was described at the time by 
Naughtie as “one of Radio 4’s best-loved newsreaders”.

Naughtie is leaving Today after 21 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/07/james-naughtie-bbc-radio-4-today>
 to become a special correspondent for Radio 4 and BBC books editor in the new 
year, withBBC politics editor Nick Robinson set to replace him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/09/bbc-political-editor-nick-robinson-to-become-presenter-on-today>
 this autumn. Naughtie is the programme’s second longest-serving presenter, 
after John Humphrys.

He is preparing to be part of the BBC’s commentary team for Saturday’s 70th 
anniversary VJ commemoration. He told the Guardian last month: “There is never 
a lovely time to leave, but I do think 21 years is a good innings. I will miss 
the daily kick of a live programme, but you can’t do it forever.”

Naughtie said his new job will involve on-the-road reporting covering culture 
and UK constitutional issues. He has described the change of role as “moving 
from one dream job to another” and insists it would be impossible for the 
private sector to deliver the quality of radio found on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

“Anyone who thinks that what is provided by the BBC on the radio can simply be 
farmed out and provided by the market is living in a deluded world,” he said. 
“It cannot happen.”
 