
The funeral of Iran’s former president Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani has turned 
into a rare display of public dissent as at least 2 million people packed the 
streets of Tehran to pay tribute to a man whose death has shaken the country’s 
political balance.

In what was thought to be the biggest crowd honouring a politician since the 
death in 1989 of Ayatollah Khomeini, the founder of the 1979 Islamic 
revolution, Iranians from across the political spectrum attended the funeral.

All attempted to claim Rafsanjani, who died on Sunday aged 82 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/iran-former-president-rafsanjani-dies-aged-82>
, as their own as he was buried alongside Khomeini in a sumptuous shrine in 
south Tehran.

Ebrahim Raisi: the Iranian cleric emerging as a frontrunner for supreme leader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/ebrahim-raisi-conservative-cleric-iran-supreme-leader-khamenei>
 The supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, led the funeral prayers at Tehran 
University campus as critics and supporters stood behind him, bidding farewell 
to a man who was considered a pillar of the Islamic republic, a crucial 
mediator and, more recently, an advocate of political openness and better 
relations with the west.


But in the streets outside, mourners sympathetic to the opposition and 
supporters ofIran’s pro-reform Green movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/17/green-movement-activists-iran-repression>
, which was suppressed in bloody unrest in 2009, voiced dissent, chanting in 
support of Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi,opposition leaders under 
house arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jun/14/academics-urge-rouhani-house-arrests-iranian-critics-mir-hossein-mousavi>
.


 A video taken from the funeral that was posted on social networks showed a 
group of mourners saying “death to Russia”, in unusually strident criticism of 
the state’s staunch ally. “The Russian embassy is a den of spies,” shouted 
another group, a chant reminiscent of post-revolutionary tiradespreviously 
reserved for the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/03/ayatollah-khamenei-iran-death-to-america>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7fa51f53a2af675d2e42d8b5f84d7d431990d9%2F0_157_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7fa51f53a2af675d2e42d8b5f84d7d431990d9%2F0_157_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
 A mourner holds up a picture of Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who died on 
Sunday aged 82. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
Large numbers of Iranians are critical of their country’s role in the Syrian 
war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/iran-aleppo-syria-shia-militia>, 
in which it is closely aligned with Moscow, but do not often have a chance to 
express their views.

Many mourners wore green wristbands, the emblem of the Green movement, and 
could face reprisals as a result.

Rafsanjani, who died due to heart complications, was Iran’s greatest political 
survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/akbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-obituary>
 and a leading force in its politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b6ec3c61f0dff630a40c4b7cc4bf221bc197339%2F0_99_3552_2132%2F3552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b6ec3c61f0dff630a40c4b7cc4bf221bc197339%2F0_99_3552_2132%2F3552.jpg>
 People visit Rafsanjani’s coffin. He was formerly president and de-facto 
military commander-in-chief. Photograph: Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
He was at one time the ultimate insider: a founding member of the revolution, 
a former de-facto commander-in-chief of the Iranian military during the 
Iran-Iraq war, and a two-time president seen as the country’s second-most 
powerful political figure for much of the Islamic republic’s history. His 
opponents say he jailed many of his critics.


But during his later years, his political allegiances shifted towards the 
reformists. In 2009, he sided with the Green movement and urged the state to 
release political prisoners and compensate their families.
 Qassem Suleimani, the commander of the Quds force, made a rare public 
appearance at the funeral. Photograph: Tasnim News Agency/Handout/Reuters 
As a result, he was sidelined and two of his children, including his daughter, 
Faezeh Hashemi, were imprisoned for supporting the opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/03/iran-former-president-daughter-jailed-hashimi>
. In 2013, hiscampaign for the presidency was blocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/21/iran-presidential-election-rafsanjani-disqualified>
, but he regained some of the popularity he had lost while in power, and the 
large numbers of opposition figures at his funeral showed he may have earned 
their enduring forgiveness.

Among the opposition figures with lengthy prison sentences behind them who 
attended the funeral was thestudent activist Bahareh Hedayat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/iran-refuses-free-student-activist-bahareh-hedayat-six-years-prison>
. A picture circulating online depicted Faezeh showing a victory sign, in a 
move that was seen as an indication of her continued support for change.

However, because the funeral was hosted by Khamenei, despite a rift with 
Rafsanjani in recent years, most of the people on the first row of prayers were 
Rafsanjani’s critics, including hardline clerics. Members of Rafsanjani’s 
immediate family were pushed on to the rows behind.

Iran’s establishment was out in full force, including Qassem Suleimani, the 
commander of Iran’s Quds force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/16/qassim-suleimani-iraq-iran-syria>
, the external arm of the powerful Revolutionary Guards, who made a rare public 
appearance.


The former president Mohammad Khatami, the leader of Iran’s reformist 
movement, was reportedly banned from attending the funeral.Khatami has recently 
faced restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/iranian-media-banned-from-mentioning-mohammad-khatami>
 on his movements because he is seen as a supporter of Mousavi and Karroubi. 
Local media have been banned from using his images or publishing his name.


While in power, Rafsanjani advocated better relations with Iran’s Arab 
neighbours. Officials from Turkey, Afghanistan, Bahrain – a countrycurrently at 
odds with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/bahrain-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-in-row-over-saudi-execution-of-shia-cleric>
 – and even the White House press secretary expressed condolences.


Rafsanjani’s death has caused concern among many moderates in Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> about the country’s trajectory. Many 
believe his main legacy has been Hassan Rouhani, the president seen as his 
protege.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ca08813a714d5de3e1787bf01ac2da70d388547%2F0_110_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rare%20show%20of%20dissent%20in%20Iran%20as%20millions%20mourn%20ex-president%20Rafsanjani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frafsanjani-thousands-of-iranians-mourn-wily-political-veteran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ca08813a714d5de3e1787bf01ac2da70d388547%2F0_110_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Faezeh Hashemi, Rafsanjani’s daughter, flashes a victory sign to the crowd 
from a bus during the funeral ceremony. Photograph: Vahid Salemi/AP 
Reformists believe Rafsanjani’s death has tilted the balance towards the 
hardliners and they fear its implications onIran’s presidential election in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/sep/28/ahmadinejad-blocked-running-iran-presidential-elections-ali-khamenei>
, when Rouhani would have to seek re-election.


Officials from Tehran’s municipality announced on Tuesday that a street in the 
Iranian capital would be named after Rafsanjani.
 