
A poem “from the darker side of JRR Tolkien’s imagination”, which hints at an 
early version of the elf queen Galadriel from The Lord of the Rings, is due to 
be published for the first time in more than 70 years this November.

Tolkien’s The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun, which was published in 1945 in 
literary journal The Welsh Review and has been out of print ever since, is a 
lengthy poem in the tradition of the medievallay 
<https://www.britannica.com/art/lay>, inspired by the Celtic legends of 
Brittany. It tells of a couple who are desperate for a child. Aotrou visits a 
witch “who span dark spells with spider-craft, / and as she span she softly 
laughed”. She gives him a potion and his wife bears twins. But riding through 
the forest, he meets the witch again. Now transformed from a “crone” into a 
beautiful woman, the Corrigan – a generic Breton term for a person of fairy 
race – says he must marry her or die.

JRR Tolkien's war experiences inspire novel by his grandson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/01/jrr-tolkien-war-novelgrandson-simon-tolkien-no-mans-land>
He refuses and dies three days later. His wife then dies of grief. “And if 
their children lived yet long, / or played in garden hale and strong, / they 
saw it not, nor found it sweet / their heart’s desire at last to meet.”

HarperCollins, which will publish the poem along with Tolkien’s other poems 
about the Corrigan on 3 November, called it “an important non Middle-earth work 
to set alongside his other retellings of existing myth and legend”. These 
include The Story of Kullervo, a teenage Tolkien’s retelling of a Finnish epic 
poem, and his 200-page poemThe Fall of Arthur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/09/jrr-tolkien-new-poem-king-arthur>
.

According to Humphrey Carpenter’s biography of the author, the earliest 
manuscript for The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun (Breton for “lord and lady”, 
explains Carpenter) is dated September 1930.


HarperCollins said: “The sequence shows the Corrigan’s increasingly powerful 
presence, as she takes an ever more active role in the lives of Aotrou and 
Itroun … She would finally emerge, changed in motive and character but still 
recognisable, in The Lord of the Rings as the beautiful and terrible Lady of 
the Golden Wood, the Elven queen Galadriel.” It added that the poem comes “from 
the darker side” of Tolkien’s imagination.

In the poem, the Corrigan’s voice is described as “cold / as echo from the 
world of old, / ere fire was found or iron hewn, / when young was mountain 
under moon”, echoing the cold beauty of Galadriel.

Tolkien annotated map of Middle-earth acquired by Bodleian library
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/03/jrr-tolkien-annotated-map-middle-earth-bodleian-lord-rings-hobbit>
Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger, a professor emerita at the University of 
Maryland, is editing and introducing the new edition, which also includes a new 
preface from Christopher Tolkien. Flieger called it “dark, powerful, 
compelling, a significant departure from the Tolkien we think we know”.

It is derived, said Flieger, “from a well-known folkloric tale-type of the 
human who strays into the Faerie world and who pays the price, such as the 
ballads of Tam Lin and Thomas Rhymer”. Although there are Irish and Welsh 
versions of the story, she says that Tolkien’s version is closest in subject 
matter to the Breton ballad Lord Nann and the Corrigan, which the author owned 
a copy of.

With a flurry of “new” works by Tolkien released over the last decade, from 
2007’s Middle-earth storyThe Children of Hurin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/apr/28/jrrtolkien.fiction>, to the 2014 
release of his translation of Beowulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/19/jrr-tolkien-beowulf-translation-published>
, The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun “is worthy of publication now for several 
reasons”, said Flieger. “First, it is a fine example of Tolkien’s poetic power 
and his ability to handle different verse forms – in this case the octosyllabic 
rhyming couplets of French romance, which he also used for The Lay of Leithian 
from his own legendarium.” The Lay of Leithian is a long poem telling the story 
of Tolkien’s Middle-earth characters Beren and Lúthien.

The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun, said Flieger, vividly shows the author’s 
interest “in paganism and in the dark side of what he called Faerie, the 
perilous realm or Otherworld of enchantment.” She said it will also give 
Tolkien’s readers “his most developed example of a folklore archetype I will 
call The Dark Lady, the beautiful but malevolent fay or fairy who preys upon 
humans, and thus foreshadows his Guinevere, described as ‘fair as fay-woman in 
the world walking for the woe of men’.”

In his JRR Tolkien: Author of the Century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/08/jrrtolkien.classics>, Tom 
Shippey writes that the poem is animated by the question of how far a believing 
Christian could go “in dealings with pre- or non-Christians”. While the poem is 
derived from a late Breton ballad, he writes, “what seems original to Tolkien 
is the poem’s stern morality”, because in Tolkien’s version the death of Aotrou 
“is deserved, or at least prompted by [his] attempt to sway Providence by 
supernatural forces”.

“Aotrou’s sin lay not in submitting to the Corrigan,” he writes. “It lay in 
having any dealings with her at all.”
 