
The great events of the mid-1660s are familiar to every British schoolchild: 
the fire in London that flattened most of the medieval City, the great plague 
that killed around a quarter of the capital’s inhabitants and the second 
Anglo-Dutch war. Meanwhile in a Buckinghamshire cottage, John Milton was 
polishing Paradise Lost and Isaac Newton investigating the nature of light in a 
Lincolnshire farmhouse.

The writer Rebecca Rideal had barely started work on a PhD examining how 
public spaces such as coffee houses, alehouses, theatres and the streets of 
London were changing during the Restoration, when she realised that an account 
for the general reader that knitted together the events of these extraordinary 
times simply didn’t exist. There were plenty of accounts of the fire, the 
plague and the war, shelves full of Milton and Newton biographies, but Rideal 
wanted to tell these stories together. After spending her 20s working as a TV 
producer, it seemed natural to forge these initial thoughts into a book 
proposal, and suddenly, alongside a PhD, Rideal found that she was writing a 
book.

“The thing is I’m a procrastinator,” she says, “and the way that I combat 
procrastination is by coming up with something that in my mind is even more 
important than the thing I’m supposed to be doing. So I start something and 
that takes over everything, and then I start something else.”

Sitting in the seclusion of a book-lined nook in publisher Hodder and 
Stoughton’s smart new building on London’s Victoria Embankment, Rideal clearly 
remembers the moment when she realised a job in TV wasn’t for her.

“I was sitting in a development meeting and recently there’d been those awful 
programmes on TV like Benefits Street – all of those things. The way the 
meeting was going was that they wanted to tap into those types of programmes. 
It’s not something I felt comfortable with at all,” she says. “I don’t come 
from a rich background. It wasn’t the type of television I wanted to be making, 
or even discussing from a distance, because it’s not a distance – we’re all in 
the same society together. So that kind of made me think.”

Born in Chester in 1983, Rideal studied history at Leeds and had been pursuing 
her interest alongside her TV career, first with an MA at University College 
London and then by foundingThe History Vault <http://www.thehistoryvault.co.uk/>
, an online magazine exploring less familiar corners of the past in essays, 
book reviews and interviews.

When a friend was accepted to study for a doctorate, Rideal found herself 
“green with envy”. It was enough to set thoughts of applying for a PhD herself 
in motion, and having fallen in love with 17th-century England as a 
sixth-former, the period she wanted to study was never in any doubt.

“During my English A-level, one of the plays that we focused on was The Way of 
the World. It just struck me, at that young age, the language and the way 
people were talking about different topics, the interactions between men and 
women. I thought: ‘Wow, people haven’t really changed.’ I mean, society has 
changed, but the crucial things haven’t really changed that much. Then I 
started reading the poems of the Earl of Rochester,” – she laughs at the 
thought ofCharles II’s bawdiest wordsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/12/signior-dildo-poems-valentines-day-earl-of-rochester-swearwords>
 – “and it was kind of a downwards spiral from there.”

The book begins in the spring of 1665, among London’s “barking dogs, 
clattering carts, calling pigeons and chattering early risers” on a grey 
Tuesday, just three days after a grand, trumpeted procession swept through the 
capital declaring war on the Dutch. Alongside the lords and admirals, the 
famous diarists Samuel Pepys and John Evelyn, Rideal introduces a cast of less 
familiar names – such as the Mitchells, booksellers based in Westminster Hall, 
and the Taswells, a family of merchants living in Bear Lane – which she returns 
to over the next year-and-a-half as the city is wracked by plague, war and fire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aa781e6c0cf9d18166fe4d1282328e138942705%2F0_0_5367_3078%2F5367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Rideal%3A%20'The%20time%20of%20the%20grand%20histories%20is%20coming%20to%20an%20end'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Rideal%3A%20%27The%20time%20of%20the%20grand%20histories%20is%20coming%20to%20an%20end%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aa781e6c0cf9d18166fe4d1282328e138942705%2F0_0_5367_3078%2F5367.jpg>
 An engraving by Robert Cruikshank depicts a brothel ablaze during the Great 
Fire of London. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
This method allows her to switch focus between continent-spanning questions of 
military strategy and the human tragedy at the heart of these upheavals, such 
as the woman recorded at the height of the plague by author Thomas Vincent, 
weeping as she walked alone into the graveyard next to Bethlem Hospital, a tiny 
coffin clutched under her arm. And among the stirring naval engagements and 
chilling totals on the Bills of Mortality we also hear from pioneering women 
such as Margaret Cavendish and Aphra Behn – but this isn’t a question of making 
space to fulfil some sort of quota.

“The time of the grand histories that are all about male figures is coming to 
an end,” Rideal says. “I think people are understanding now that there were 
women around, too, and they were doing important things.”

The constraints and restrictions on women in the 17th century were of course 
all too real, she continues, but the largest cultural shift over the 
intervening centuries is unquestionably the changing role of faith: “The one 
thing you have to accept is that the way people thought about life and death 
was entirely different to howwe think about it. It was completely suffused with 
religion.”

An book firmly anchored in the grain of contemporary accounts, sparking with 
the crackle of firsthand reports, is also enlivened by Rideal’s taste for the 
lively phrase – the narrow, jumbled streets of the city evoked in “a discord of 
overhanging timber-framed buildings”, or the fire “snarling” down Watling 
Street as it heads for St Paul’s cathedral – an observation that sets off a 
bout of pre-publication nerves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7e9efe76c1f22d6ecf1a015140ee26b285eeb2%2F0_0_1843_2835%2F1843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebecca%20Rideal%3A%20'The%20time%20of%20the%20grand%20histories%20is%20coming%20to%20an%20end'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebecca%20Rideal%3A%20%27The%20time%20of%20the%20grand%20histories%20is%20coming%20to%20an%20end%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Frebecca-rideal-the-time-of-the-grand-histories-is-coming-to-an-end%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda7e9efe76c1f22d6ecf1a015140ee26b285eeb2%2F0_0_1843_2835%2F1843.jpg>
“There are probably lines in there that I’ll cringe about afterwards,” she 
says. “There are certainly some that I took out because I was pushing it too 
far.” She doesn’t want to pronounce on whether colourful language is part of 
the job of writing narrative history, but is clearly uneasy about her ambition 
to add a little sparkle to her prose. “Basically I’m really, really nervous 
about this being published, because I’m so nervous about the way I’ve written 
it, the language that I’ve used, the fact that I’ve written a narrative history 
before I’ve written a PhD. I feel very, very conscious of all those things. 
It’s really frightening.”

Back in the archives once more, picking up the thread of her PhD, it’s clear 
to Rideal that she couldn’t have written 1666 without its fizz. “If it’s 
terrible and there are cringey parts then I apologise,” she shrugs, “but I 
can’t write any other way.”

• 1666 by Rebecca Rideal is published by John Murray at £20 and is available 
from the Guardian bookshop for £16.40 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/1666.html>.
 