
Lauren DeAngelus built a dinosaur sculpture using Maxi Pads. Her husband, CJ, 
went to the school where he teaches dressed as a Cyberman, a robot from Doctor 
Who. And Jonathan Reilly, along with two friends, donned tutus and tiaras, 
grabbed a magic wand, and went trick-or-treating … in August.

 This, shall we say, unusual behavior makes actor Misha Collins 
<https://twitter.com/mishacollins?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 giddy. Collins plays Castiel on the CW’s long-running fantasy series 
Supernatural, but he is also the founder ofGishwhes <https://www.gishwhes.com/>
, one of the strangest acronyms and unusual competitions in existence.

 Gishwhes stands for Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever 
Seen. This year’s event runs from 30 July to 6 August.

 The goal of Gishwhes, Collins says, “is to get people out of their comfort 
zone and to expand their vision of what is possible, which is one of the most 
important things in life”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fmisha-collins-greatest-international-scavenger-hunt-the-world-has-ever-seen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F910e1d8cc80decd3e3236e2c9f0a9c880905ee27%2F0_38_654_392%2F654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rejoice!%20Misha%20Collins'%20Greatest%20International%20Scavenger%20Hunt%20the%20World%20Has%20Ever%20Seen%20is%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fmisha-collins-greatest-international-scavenger-hunt-the-world-has-ever-seen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rejoice%21%20Misha%20Collins%27%20Greatest%20International%20Scavenger%20Hunt%20the%20World%20Has%20Ever%20Seen%20is%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fmisha-collins-greatest-international-scavenger-hunt-the-world-has-ever-seen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F910e1d8cc80decd3e3236e2c9f0a9c880905ee27%2F0_38_654_392%2F654.jpg>
 A Gishwhes participants on a paddleboard. Photograph: Handout 
 Reilly, a biomedical engineering consultant who first tried Gishwhes in 2012, 
initially agreed to the invitation without knowing what he was actually getting 
into. “All the best things happen when you just say yes,” says Reilly. He lives 
in Los Angeles but ended up with team-mates in Canada, England and even 
Thailand.

 “When I first saw the list of tasks, I knew it was going to be fantastic but 
I couldn’t imagine people doing some of the things on there,” he says. “You had 
to convince somebody’s grandparents to mud-wrestle and get a picture of a Star 
Wars stormtrooper working as a bartender in a New York bar.”

 Reilly liked tasks that required creativity: no one would actually launch a 
bus into a volcano (presumably), so his team built a miniature version. They 
built a Flea Strip Club (instead of a Flea Circus), complete with a spinning 
pole. He not only dressed in a tutu, he also went into a Starbucks as a robot 
to give out hugs and found that “even the police wanted selfies”.

There are less than 24 hours left to register for GISHWHES.com! I know, I 
know... You're a procrastinator. You're the kind of person that likes to wait 
until the clock reads 00:01 before you cut the wire to defuse the bomb. You 
thrive under pressure. Well, this is it. It's time to act! In less than 24 
hours, it'll be too late. I don't want you to miss out on GISHWHES! I want you 
to be able to take part in a week of weird, amazing adventures with thousands 
of people in hundreds of countries. Let's make the world wobble on its axis and 
change it for the weirder together! It's down to the wire now. Take action! 
Join gishwhes.com today! PS: any GISHWHES virgins have questions? Post them 
below and either me or past gishers will reply with words of wisdom. (Past 
gishers, help a brother out here.) <https://www.instagram.com/p/BIJJkPNA_qa/>

A photo posted by Misha Collins (@misha) on Jul 21, 2016 at 5:04pm PDT

 Acting strangely, creating art and spreading good humor are all part of the 
mission for Collins, 41, who started the event as a lark. Collins had appeared 
on shows like 24, ER and NCIS but became a star on Supernatural. He was 
“cajoled” into starting a Twitter account for publicity purposes, “but did not 
have warm feelings about it so I used it to satirize the self-important 
celebrity Twitter voice”.

 Eventually he realized Supernatural’s passionate fandom – he has 2.45 million 
Twitter followers and 2.6 million likes on his Facebook page – could be 
mobilized for good. He startedRandom Acts <http://www.randomacts.org/>, a 
non-profit organization that began building schools and orphanages in places 
such as Nicaragua and Haiti while also tackling smaller projects.

 The charity was inspired by Collins’s own childhood – he was homeless and on 
welfare at some points and had to rely on the kindness of strangers. “When I 
was in first grade another kid’s mom gave my mom $100 just so she could buy us 
some Christmas presents,” he says. “That kind of generosity can make a profound 
difference.”

 The growth of Random Acts led to Gishwhes, and in 2011, 6,200 people from 65 
countries signed up. By 2012, there were more than 14,000 participants.

Each year, the winning team takes a special trip with him: this year’s winners 
will go dog-sledding on a glacier in Iceland; when Reilly and the DeAngeluses 
won in 2012, their team spent a weekend in a Scottish castle.
NASA (@NASA) 
Looks like the #GISHWHES <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GISHWHES?src=hash> fun 
has spread to Mars! Seehttp://t.co/f0whYNaH2U <http://t.co/f0whYNaH2U> The best 
to the teams! cc:@gishwhes <https://twitter.com/gishwhes> 
pic.twitter.com/5iHIbGE1Nx <http://t.co/5iHIbGE1Nx>
 <https://twitter.com/NASA/status/497923589610684417> August 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/NASA/status/497923589610684417> 
 Collins has had to hire staff to help run Gishwhes, though he says: “To be 
perfectly honest, it still takes up too much of my time.” But it has been worth 
it, he says, in part because it inspired him to go back to producing art on his 
own and gave him a platform to encourage people to break out of their routines, 
even if that simply means getting Nasa to name a rock after the event or 
creating a salt-and-pepper portrait of Robert Downey Jr. (Nasa initially asked 
Gishwhes to stop including the organization on its list buthas since embraced 
the event <https://twitter.com/nasa/status/497923589610684417?lang=en>; only a 
few others, such as author Neil Gaiman, haverefused its charms 
<http://www.themarysue.com/gishwhes-bothers-sci-fi-authors/>.)

 “We are so bound up by the conventions handed to us and this gives people a 
break from that,” he says. “It reminds people that it’s OK to be weird. After 
the week ends there’s a latent power in knowing you can walk into the grocery 
dressed as a superhero even if you’re not going to do it.”

 Cynthia Egan, a high school teacher in Los Angeles, was a rookie last year 
and says she made new friends and liked being forced to think on her feet: her 
favorite assignment was creating a landmark out of food; she made the Hollywood 
sign out of what was in her house – soy sauce, rice and dehydrated fruit. Egan 
says: “I was not someone who asked people for favors but since doing Gishwhes I 
certainly feel more comfortable asking for help.”

 Lauren DeAngelus, a teacher who recently moved from Los Angeles to Redding, 
California, says Gishwhes had a definite impact. “I used to get very anxious 
trying new things, but after doing Gishwhes being outside of my comfort zone 
feels normal,” she says, “and that helped a lot when we moved to a new city and 
I started a new job.”

New Yorkers embark on scavenger hunt for cash hidden by @HiddenCash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/15/new-york-scavenger-hunt-cash-hidden-cash>
 Collins loves the idea of individual growth but remains committed to the idea 
of connecting people with their society, so every year the hunt features tasks 
that either involve acts of kindness or charity: hugging someone holding a 
positive message for the world; getting long-married couples to tell their 
stories on video, performing a puppet show at a children’s hospital, or 
donating home furnishings for a struggling veteran.

“People sometimes think about charity as a chore but we are able to find ways 
to make it fun, without any heaviness attached,” Collins says.

 Sometimes, the silliness of Gishwhes can even bring families together. Lauren 
DeAngelus says she was never particularly close with her sister but invited her 
to join in the building of the Maxi Pad dinosaur. “We really bonded over that,” 
DeAngelus says. “Afterward she looked at the extras and asked: ‘Do you want to 
make a pterodactyl?’ Without hesitating I said: ‘Yes, I do.’”
 