
Educational watchdogs are warning that newly emboldened Republican leaderships 
at the state level are ramping up pressure on universities to curb programs 
they claim “advance the politically correct agenda of liberal administrators 
and staff”.


The latest row over academic freedom erupted at the University of Wisconsin at 
Madison in December when a Republican state senator, Steve Nass, launched an 
attack on the chancellor and regents over anundergraduate program on masculinity
 <https://msc.wisc.edu/unpacking-masculinity-with-the-mens-project/> that Nass 
claims “declares war on men 
<http://www.rawstory.com/2017/01/theyve-declared-war-on-men-and-masculinity-gop-lawmaker-freaks-out-over-universitys-gender-class/>
”.

The latest assault follows threats from conservative Wisconsin legislators 
last month to cut funds from the university for offering a course on race 
relations titledThe Problem of Whiteness. 
<http://african.wisc.edu/content/problem-whiteness>

Campuses are places for open minds – not where debate is closed down | 
Jonathan Haidt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/10/students-censorship-safe-places-platforming-free-speech>
Last July, lawmakers threatened to cut the University of Wisconsin System’s 
budget over an “obscene” course reading assignment about gay men’s sexual 
preferences that was required as part of a sociology course titledProblems of 
American Racial and Ethnic Minorities 
<https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/soc/courses/syllabi/134Turley0910S.pdf>.

 In the most recent salvo in the long war between the university and state 
lawmakers over academic freedom, Nasssaid in an email 
<http://host.madison.com/wsj/news/local/education/university/gop-legislator-rips-uw-program-questioning-masculinity/article_26f6a2e1-a134-5264-860e-62cdafee5fff.html>
 to the Capital Times: “Our friends at UW Madison, not happy enough with 
labeling ‘whiteness’ as a societal problem, now are attacking another societal 
ill … men and their masculinity.”

Joe Cohn, legislative and policy director of the Foundation for Individual 
Rights in Education, a group dedicated to defending individual rights at US 
colleges and universities, said: “Whether or not criticism of individual 
courses is warranted, the threat to withdraw funding has a chilling effect on 
academic freedom.


“Once you allow legislators to dictate budgets based on course offerings, you 
are effectively saying that if it isn’t OK with a majority of people as 
represented by their elected officials, then research and academia can be shut 
down.”

Groups tracking the interplay of educators and elected officials say they are 
monitoring whether the election of Donald Trump will embolden conservative 
lawmakers to ramp up their attacks in an effort to exert influence on academic 
structures.

Cohn’s group, known by its acronym, Fire, maintains that censorship of 
academic freedom comes from both sides of the political spectrum. “Censorship 
isn’t a partisan issue,” he said. “Both sides try to censor who they disagree 
with.”

But with Republicans controlling more legislatures, he expects to see more 
legislative efforts at academic control coming from the right. Nass, Cohn said, 
had every right to criticize a university’s educational content. But by 
wielding the power of a legislator, “he’s doing more harm than good”.

UW-Madison administrators have stated their intention to resist political 
pressure to end the Men’s Project, which includes a six-week voluntary 
discussion program that “aims to explore masculinity and the problems 
accompanied by simplified definitions of it”.

Information posted on UW-Madison’s Multicultural Student Center website 
defined “media, hook-up culture, alcohol, violence, and pop culture” as 
cultural influences distorting ideas of masculinity.

“The Men’s Project aims help our male students make healthy, positive choices 
during their college experience,” spokesperson Meredith Mcglone said in a 
statement. “Research has shown that expectations around masculinity influence 
the decisions college men make – they believe they need to act a certain way to 
be accepted.”

Nass explicitly threatened UW-Madison over its whiteness and masculinity 
programs, echoing previous positions that course offerings will play a role in 
evaluating the university’s budget. Last week, a Nass spokesman, Mike Mikalsen, 
said rather than rethinking its spending, the university was asking lawmakers 
for more state money.

“They continue to believe they can operate as they always have with 
personalized agendas,” Mikalsen said.

But Nass’s latest attack has been met with a vigorous pushback from activists. 
Last week, advocates for survivors of sexual and domestic abuse called on Nass 
to withdraw his criticism.

Patti Seger, executive director of End Domestic Abuse Wisconsin, has said the 
lawmaker should be praising the efforts of young men to be part of the 
solution. Seger told theJournal Times 
<http://journaltimes.com/news/state-and-regional/advocates-for-survivors-of-sexual-abuse-blast-steve-nass-for/article_6af586e3-6ef8-516e-8476-e948c44663a5.html>
 her group planned to explain to the senator why programs like the Men’s 
Project are “so vital, especially to the safety of women and girls in 
Wisconsin”.

Wisconsin’s academia is not alone in facing down conservative lawmakers. 

In 2014, legislators in South Carolina campaigned to reduce funding 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/03/09/politics/university-budget-cuts-gay-literature-south-carolina/>
 for the College of Charleston and the University of South Carolina for 
assigning materials that dealt with gay and lesbian themes.

In March last year, Fire reported on pressure facing the City University of 
New York (Cuny) system to respond to antisemitism on campus resulting from 
calls by a pro-Israel organization to banish chapters of Students for Justice 
in Palestine (SJP) from all Cuny campuses. The New York state senate threatened 
to withhold as much as $485m in funding unless Cuny responded with a plan. 
“There is more than a passing concern that the funding threats – if not Cuny’s 
efforts to quickly respond to the criticism – could lead to censorship or have 
a chilling effect on campus activists,” warned Fire.

In April, Tennessee lawmakers voted 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2016/05/20/university-tennessee-diversity-funding-bill-allowed-become-law/84650208/>
 to cut the entire $436,000 state appropriation for an office at the University 
of Tennessee at Knoxville promoting diversity. State lawmakers also pushed for 
legislation to prevent the university from spending school dollars on 
student-organized “Sex Week” events.

Despite the apparent upswing in efforts to exercise control over academic 
freedoms, many of these are longstanding battles and not necessarily part of a 
new trend, said Cohn.

Virginia teachers may have to warn parents of any 'sexually explicit' reading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/04/virginia-teachers-may-have-to-warn-parents-of-any-sexually-explicit-reading>
“It’s been a persistent threat ever since there have been publicly funded 
universities – people have wanted to exercise more control over content than 
they should probably have.”

Critics say there is a substantive difference between a legislature deciding 
to fund a medical school and wanting to provide a liberal arts education that 
could suffer gravely when legislators try to interfere with content.

“That is a dangerous, big-picture consequence, larger than whether or not an 
individual course happens to be a waste of time or offensive to some people,” 
Cohn said.

Nass’s attacks on the University of Wisconsin’s whiteness program were picked 
up by white nationalists after course professor Damon Sajnani used the hashtag 
#TrumpKluxKlan to describe Trump and his followers.
 