
The harm we cause one another – casually, accidentally, deliberately, 
unknowingly – haunts Rowan Hisayo Buchanan’s mind. Her debut novel, Harmless 
Like You, which sparked a fierce bidding war among publishers, takes its title 
from a photography series that Yuki, one of Buchanan’s main characters, puts 
together in the early 1970s. The series is made up of pictures taken on the sly 
of girls around New York City: brown, black, Asian girls, and one of a white 
American darling, complete with ringlets, rosy cheeks and a copy of the 11 June 
1972 edition of the New York Times, with the now-famousNapalm Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/30/40-years-since-saigons-fall-napalm-attack-haunts-woman-in-iconic-image>
, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, on the front cover.

The title of Yuki’s series, in turn, comes from something her lover Lou says 
to her: “I think the real cowards are the ones over there killing harmless 
little girls like you.” It is a painful comparison; not only is Yuki Japanese, 
not Vietnamese, but he is grossly underestimating her.

“The idea of harmlessness is fascinating to me,” Buchanan says. “A bully will 
call something harmless teasing or a little harmless fun, when actually it’s 
hugely harmful.” Lou is a bully, but familiar pain is far more comforting to 
Yuki than unfamiliar tenderness. Though Yuki spends most of her youth in the 
US, her Japanese father spent time in an internment camp, and still hates the 
States.

“A lot of what the book is about is how pain shape-shifts down the 
generations. There is nothing more personal than family, and yet families are 
so profoundly affected by political decisions,” Buchanan says. Yuki, an 
American citizen, remains in the US when her parents return to Japan, 
determined to finish high school and attend college, but instead drops out and 
begins a job that fills her days with fluff. She is rootless, even when she 
finds herself a home of sorts with Lou, surrounded by people who look nothing 
like her.

Buchanan, daughter of a Japanese-Chinese American mother and white British 
father, used to only write white characters. “The standard character was a 
white person,” she says. “I get really excited when I read writers who write 
people who, let’s be honest, don’t have my exact racial makeup but who are 
mixed-up in that way. I wanted to start writing characters like that.” But she 
discovered an unseen challenge while writing short stories: a simple last name 
provided no clues for readers to imagine ethnicity or background. “You end up 
having to give these mini-histories. It can be quite challenging, especially in 
a short story, to get that information across in a way that feels natural.”

In Harmless Like You, Buchanan had a whole novel in which to explore 
Japanese-American Yuki and her son, Jay. Both characters look for ways to 
reconcile themselves with their histories, though in vastly different and 
sometimes opposing ways. Yuki left her parents voluntarily; but Jay, a toddler 
when Yuki leaves, is half-orphaned through no choice of his own. Where Yuki’s 
introspection is focused on the harm she causes to the world, even while being 
harmed constantly, Jay sees the harm others inflict on him – his mother, his 
father, his wife, even his newborn daughter.

When asked whether the political messaging that comes through from these 
events – hereditary trauma, the politics of motherhood, the gender politics 
that shadow women who leave their family and men who become a single dad – 
Buchanan demurs: “To borrow the 1960s and 70s feminist slogan, the personal is 
political. It wasn’t that I tied the personal to the political, it was that I 
couldn’t tear them apart.”

Like her characters, Buchanan inherited her sense of home from her family. Her 
father, of Scottish heritage, grew up in England. Her Japanese and Chinese 
grandparents met in the US and stayed there, as in their countries it would 
have been harder to get married, unlike in New York where, as Buchanan’s 
grandmother put it, “Jews were marrying Catholics”. Her American mother moved 
to England to be with Buchanan’s father, and she “missed New York a lot. A lot, 
a lot,” Buchanan stresses.

And so Buchanan spent her life living alternately in London and New York, each 
time missing the other place, feeling as if there was more home there than 
here. “On the good days, I feel like I have many homes. On the bad days, I feel 
like I have no home,” she says. When she talks, her speech works musically 
between accents, often affected by the country she’s in (though she does, she 
admits, sound more British when cross).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frowan-hisayo-buchanan-interview-harmless-like-you-debut-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20d97b8a1f6da22781e5cde9b060c68e06e8124f%2F1442_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rowan%20Hisayo%20Buchanan%3A%20%E2%80%98Pain%20shape-shifts%20down%20the%20generations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frowan-hisayo-buchanan-interview-harmless-like-you-debut-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rowan%20Hisayo%20Buchanan%3A%20%E2%80%98Pain%20shape-shifts%20down%20the%20generations%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Frowan-hisayo-buchanan-interview-harmless-like-you-debut-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20d97b8a1f6da22781e5cde9b060c68e06e8124f%2F1442_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
 Rowan Hisayo Buchanan, pictured at the 2016 Edinburgh international books 
festival. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Several years ago, Buchanan’s mother was affected by something called 
transient global amnesia. “She woke up one morning and forgot where she was, 
her age, the year, the country. She was in London. I was in New York. We didn’t 
know it was TGA then.” Buchanan laughs; once they found out what it was, she 
and her family agreed that it sounded like “a really bad budget airline”. TGA 
causes sudden memory loss and symptoms similar to an epileptic seizure or 
stroke. The syndrome’s name is strangely apt: Buchanan’s mother, like her 
daughter, is transient, visiting the US often, travelling across the globe 
between each of the two places she’s called home. But it wasn’t so much her 
life – though Yuki is Buchanan’s mother’s age – but rather the fear of her 
mother not existing any more that began the gestation of Harmless Like You.

“I thought I might have lost my mother,” Buchanan says. “I couldn’t leave the 
apartment. I sat by my phone and freaked out. I didn’t understand who I would 
be if she’d never been in my life. Later, when I found out my mother was OK, I 
started to write a very different story – one where the mother does leave.”

In the month since the novel came out in the UK, Buchanan has been 
experiencing her own desertion issues. The book’s cover features Yuki’s face 
with a paint splatter blurring out her eyes. “Every time I see her in a 
bookshop, I feel like I’m abandoning her. That I’ve left her exposed in the 
playground, to see if people will like her, want to be her friend or ignore her 
and leave her alone,” Buchanan laughs. “I recognise this is totally 
psychologically revealing of me more than of her.”

 * Harmless Like You (Sceptre, RRP £14.99) is available from the Guardian 
Bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/harmless-like-you.html> for £12.29.  