
There’s a dilapidated bangla (bungalow) in the grounds of the Sir JJ School of 
Art in Mumbai that commemorates the nearby birthplace of Rudyard Kipling. But 
it’s not the actual spot where one of India’s greatest English language writers 
(arguably the greatest) was born to the school’s principal, John Lockwood 
Kipling and his wife Alice, 150 years ago this month, on 30 December 1865 – 
that has long since disappeared. And, apart from a plaque that seems to have a 
shifting presence, there’s really not much to show for Rudyard himself. Efforts 
by the Indian and state governments, as well as private foundations, to turn 
the place into a museum, or something appropriate to Kipling, have foundered, 
largely because Indians can never quite decide what they think about him.

They are not alone. Kipling, the “bard of empire”, has always been difficult 
to place in the cultural pantheon. Britain, too, has done remarkably little to 
officially mark the sesquicentenary of its first winner (in 1907) of the Nobel 
prize for literature (and still the youngest ever from anywhere).

Indian-born, yet British? We are already entering the muddy field of 
contradictions that sometimes bog down the reputation of this mild-mannered 
man. Yet it is these that make him uniquely appealing and that, belying 
top-level institutional indifference, are sparking an unexpected revival 
of interest in him, and in particular in his role as a commentator on the 
origins of an integrated global culture.

A few more of those apparent incongruities spring easily to mind: 
the propagandist for Britain’s colonial ventures, as well as for the Boer and 
first world wars, who could sympathise with the plight of the women left behind 
in“Harp Song of the Dane Women” <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/177162>: 
“What is a woman that you forsake her, / And the hearth-fire and the home-acre, 
/ To go with the old grey Widow-maker?”; the opponent of Indian 
self-determination who wrote sensitively of individual Indians in stories such 
as “Lisbet” and“Beyond the Pale” <http://readbookonline.net/readOnLine/2460/>; 
the conservative supporter of the established order who poked fun at the 
hypocrisies of the Raj establishment in hisPlain Tales from the Hills 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/plain-tales-from-the-hills-2.html>.

One clue to these anomalies is found in his troubled childhood, when he was 
plucked from the warmth of his native Bombay and transported halfway across the 
world to live with foster parents on the dank south coast of England. He 
recalled in his memoir, appropriately titledSomething of Myself 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/something-of-myself-and-other-autobiographical-writings.html>
, about his love of being wheeled round Bombay in his pram by his ayah, taking 
in the colours of the marketplace and listening to the gentle sounds of the 
wind whistling through the palm trees overlooking the Indian Ocean. But then he 
was whisked off to Southsea, where, along with the miserable weather, he 
discovered the severities of monotheistic English religious fundamentalism and 
was subjected to physical and psychological tortures by his Evangelical foster 
mother, Mrs Holloway, in the excruciating manner later brought to life in his 
story“Baa Baa Black Sheep” 
<http://www.telelib.com/authors/K/KiplingRudyard/prose/WeeWillieWinkie/blacksheep.html>
. He noted that his experiences there gave him “the habit of observation, and 
the attendance on moods and tempers”. More generally, his early years nurtured 
the ecumenism of his 1912 poem“The Two-Sided Man” 
<http://www.poetryloverspage.com/poets/kipling/two_sided_man.html>: “Much I owe 
to the Lands that grew – /More to the Lives that fed – / But most to Allah Who 
gave me two / Separate sides to my head.”

During the 20th century, attitudes to Kipling were shaped in a negative 
fashion byGeorge Orwell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>, who 
commented in a famous essay in 1942 that, over the previous 50 years or so,
“every enlightened person has despised him” 
<http://georgeorwellnovels.com/essays/rudyard-kipling/>, though he had the good 
grace to add “and at the end of that time nine-tenths of those enlightened 
persons are forgotten and Kipling is in some sense still there”.

Orwell, who was born in India and worked in Burma, was part of a generation 
that had grown up with the empire, and that either supported its practices and 
values in knee-jerk fashion (and so regarded Kipling as its literary 
mouthpiece) or took a determined stand against it, based largely on the need to 
confront fascism in Europe (in which case, he was a demon).

This coolness towards Kipling was first engendered by GK Chesterton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gk-chesterton>, who attacked him in 1905 
from a conservative Roman Catholic perspective, not just for being a vulgar 
rabble-rouser (Kipling had recently been stoking up support for the Boer war), 
but, more lastingly, for being a rootless cosmopolitan with a penchant for 
innovation and no real love for England. Later, the literary critic Edward Said 
suggested in his bookOrientalism 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/orientalism-2.html> (1978), in an argument 
developed in his 1987 Penguin introduction toKim 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kim-17.html>, that Kipling was part of a 
western movement that sought to subordinate the cultures of India and the east 
to its own.

Each generation seems to get the Kipling criticism it deserves. But while the 
issues raised by Said continue to inform present-day conversations on 
multiculturalism and Islam, the underlying reality is that the people who felt 
most strongly for and against Kipling have passed on. It is now possible to 
look at Kipling without historical prejudice, and the result is a growth of 
objective interest in his work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Frudyard-kipling-unexpected-revival-150-years-after-birth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aca874917157c444cf5fdad9a467df139d9c998%2F0_0_1708_2547%2F1708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rudyard%20Kipling%3A%20an%20unexpected%20revival%20for%20the%20%E2%80%98bard%20of%20empire%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Frudyard-kipling-unexpected-revival-150-years-after-birth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rudyard%20Kipling%3A%20an%20unexpected%20revival%20for%20the%20%E2%80%98bard%20of%20empire%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F26%2Frudyard-kipling-unexpected-revival-150-years-after-birth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4aca874917157c444cf5fdad9a467df139d9c998%2F0_0_1708_2547%2F1708.jpg>
 Rudyard Kipling in 1930. Photograph: PA 
Chesterton’s objections are being turned on their head. Yes, Kipling was a 
cosmopolitan, but that is a virtue. He introduced Britain to the wider world. 
Far from being the typical reactionary, Kipling espoused technology and 
modernity. He wrote approvingly about machines; he referred to the cinema; he 
trumpeted the deep-sea cables and aeroplanes that linked different parts of the 
empire. Chesterton the conservative didn’t like that; such innovations 
threatened the settled England he loved. So he argued that Kipling’s love of 
engineers and soldiers betrayed an unseemly enthusiasm for order, which tipped 
too easily into militarism.

The new Kipling is regarded positively as a decorous bridge between the 19th 
and 20th centuries (someone born in 1865, who died in 1936, couldn’t have 
better straddled the two).

It used to be argued that the boy wonder who knocked off the Barrack-Room 
Ballads, shortly after returning to London from India in 1889, had written 
himself out by 1900. But Daniel Karlin, a professor at Bristol University, has 
shown how cleverly stories such as“An Habitation Enforced” 
<http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/rg_habitation1.htm> and “The House Surgeon” 
<http://americanliterature.com/author/rudyard-kipling/short-story/the-house-surgeon>
 in Kipling’s 1909 collectionActions and Reactions 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/actions-and-reactions.html> convey the 
changes beneath the surface of English Edwardian society.Philip Hensher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philiphensher> recently included “The 
Village That Voted the Earth Was Flat” 
<http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/rg_villagevoted1.htm> from 1913 in The Penguin 
Book of the British Short Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344745/s/the-penguin-book-of-the-british-short-story-i/>
, describing this satire on incipient mass media as “the howling artificial 
pinnacle of Kipling’s genius” and applauding its “consideration of hysteria and 
wildness in the public mind”.

Kipling’s fiction also bears witness to the unease of the years following 
the first world war. After losing his son, John, at the battle of Loos in 1915, 
he channelled his grief into stories such as“The Gardener” 
<http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/rg_gardener1.htm>. He was also one of the 
first writers to deal with post-traumatic stress syndrome in“A Madonna of the 
Trenches” <http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/rg_madonna1.htm> and “A Woman in His 
Life”.

That conflict is also at the centre of a reassessment of Kipling’s poetry. You 
can’t ignore his doggerel and propaganda. But he was also a sensitive war poet, 
whose“Mesopotamia” <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/248674> (1917) laments 
the consequences of a notable British defeat at Kut el-Amara in 1915 – “They 
shall not return to us, the resolute, the young” – while indicting those 
responsible: “When the storm is ended shall we find / How softly but how 
swiftly they have sidled back to power / By the favour and contrivance of their 
kind?” This anger is taken up in his“Epitaphs of the War” 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/248628> (1914-18). The critic Harry 
Ricketts has charted the debt owed to Kipling by war poets such asRupert Brooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/12/rupert-brooke-the-soldier> and 
Edward Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edward-thomas>, and has 
sought, more widely, to present him as an unacknowledged modernist.

Kipling’s capacity for sober scutiny has also helped revive his reputation 
among Indian critics. As the exploitative nature of Britain’s colonial rule has 
come more into the historical frame, his often condescending attitude to their 
political aspirations is not condoned. But they can commend him as a 
commentator on their own past, when the subcontinent was making its first 
tentative steps from colonial dependency to self-rule.

There are, currently, two new big-screen animated versions of his timeless 
classic The Jungle Book in the works

Meanwhile, Kipling’s Englishness, or “albinism”, is being rediscovered. 
It is ironic that in 1906, the year after Chesterton criticised him for not 
being English enough, he publishedPuck of Pook’s Hill 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/puck-of-pook-s-hill.html>, his sublime 
meditation on the interplay between England’s history, countryside and 
identity. In his ongoing search for a new England, the singerBilly Bragg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/billy-bragg> often includes a growling 
version of“A Pict Song” <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176156> from the 
book in his sets.

Puck of Pook’s Hill was followed four years later by Rewards and Fairies, with 
its evocative poem“The Way Through the Woods” 
<http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_woods.htm> (with the more populist “The 
Glory of the Garden” <http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_garden.htm> 
appearing in 1911). Kipling said of this latter collection that he “worked on 
the material in three or four overlaid tints and textures, which might or might 
not reveal themselves according to the shifting light of sex, youth, and 
experience”. One young musician who has been inspired by the different layers 
of meaning isOlivia Chaney <http://www.oliviachaney.net/>, who, drawing on the 
folk tradition of the long-established Kipling enthusiastPeter Bellamy 
<https://mainlynorfolk.info/peter.bellamy/records/rudyardkiplingmadeexceedinglygoodsongs.html>
, performs“Brookland Road” <http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_brookland.htm>
 from it.

On a wider stage, an indicator of Kipling’s popularity is Hollywood, where, 
currently, there are not one but two new big-screen animated versions of his 
timeless classicThe Jungle Book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-jungle-book.html> in the works – one due 
in the spring from Disney using the voices ofBill Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/04/bill-murray-baloo-jungle-book-remake>
 (Baloo) and Scarlett Johansson (Kaa), and the other the following year from 
Warner Brothers, withBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/20/benedict-cumberbatch-shere-khan-to-battle-idris-elbas-rival-moggy>
 (Shere Khan) andCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/christian-bale-cate-blanchett-jungle-book-origins-andy-serkis-benedict-cumberbatch>
 (Kaa).

Next December the Victoria and Albert Museum will stage an exhibition centred 
on Kipling’s father, Lockwood 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/j/john-lockwood-kipling-the-international-legacy-of-arts-and-crafts/>
, whose decorative sculpture is still visible on the railway station and in 
Crawford Market in Mumbai. Lockwood’s meticulous drawings of Indian craftsmen 
are well represented in the museum, while his illustrations adorn the first 
(1901) edition ofKim.

Kipling’s own gifts of inventiveness and observation provide challenges and 
paradoxes for our troubled times. It is worth recalling how often they are 
underscored by the humour and humanity found in“We and They” 
<http://www.kiplingsociety.co.uk/poems_wethey.htm>, a late poem that deserves 
to be better known:
 All good people agree, 
And all good people say, 
All nice people, like Us, are We, 
And everyone else is They: 
But if you cross over the sea, 
Instead of over the way, 
You may end by (think of it) looking on 
We 
As only a sort of They! 
• Andrew Lycett’s biography Rudyard Kipling 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/358329/> has been 
reissued by Weidenfeld & Nicolson with a new introduction. His collection
Kipling and War 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327207/> was recently 
published by IB Tauris.
 