
In the tail of the afternoon, when the ice takes on a lilac tinge and thoughts 
turn to fireside beers, I’m riding a final line over soft powder-puff mounds of 
snow – corpulent, buried trees hibernating beneath a deep white cover.

There is no one else around, and as my friend and I dodge between the frosted 
branches of sparse woodland, descending towards the glowing yellow windows of 
the village, the only sound is that swoosh-splatter of fresh powder and the 
occasional “Whoop!” we can’t help but let out as we fly off the next natural 
jump.

It’s a euphoric but strangely peaceful end to a day during which we have skied 
all over one of the world’s biggest and busiest mega-resorts,the Four Valleys 
<http://www.4vallees.ch/?lang=en>. But, cleverly, instead of staying in the 
pricey hotels of the super-rich, we are staying inLa Tzoumaz 
<http://www.latzoumaz-en.com/>, one of the Alps’ satellite ski resorts: small, 
lesser-known villages that connect to famous resorts via a lift link-up.

Some small villages have been linked up for decades, but their numbers are 
constantly growing, as resorts and lift companies seek to expand and put in new 
connections to grow business. La Tzoumaz is a relatively new proposition. A 
gondola connecting it to the Savoleyres ski area was built in 2008, and a 
chairlift into the Four Valleys ski area followed.

As we unclip our gear, undisturbed, and stroll in the fading light to ViTho 
<http://www.vitho.ch/>, a cute little après-ski bar with outdoor sofas covered 
in sheepskins, for a couple of quiet drinks among locals, we spare a thought 
for the ski comrades with whom we shared chairlifts a few hours ago, who must 
by now be amid the mayhem and crowds of Verbier in the neighbouring valley, 
paying a tenner for a beer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797372524%2F7f09f9a2-4265-416a-a3dd-a659d558aa0b-2060x1509.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797372524%2F7f09f9a2-4265-416a-a3dd-a659d558aa0b-2060x1509.jpeg>
 Chalet Auriane in traditional La Tzoumaz Photograph: PR 
Although ViTho does host DJs, and it stays open late, the limited nightlife in 
the handful of bars in La Tzoumaz is a world away from après-ski chez Verbs, 
where loaded Made in Chelsea-type 18-year-olds spray thousands of pounds worth 
of champagne onto the floor of theFarinet bar 
<http://www.hotelfarinet.com/lounge>.

Verbier’s resort base may be off-puttingly glitzy and expensive now, but there 
is no questioning the awesomeness of its ski area, and thousands of skiers who 
detest the social scene still want to ski here. Off-piste terrain around 
Tortin, Mont Fort, Vallon D’Arby and Mont Gelé provides a giant theme park of 
expert routes, above 410km of pistes across the Four Valleys area.

Poor little La Tzoumaz has just 12 runs, covering 54km, but there is some fun, 
mellow off-piste to be had, which we happily spend a day lapping, and you are 
quickly up into the Four Valleys terrain in 15 minutes – without having to 
touch down in queue-snaked Verbier proper.

You don’t have to, though. Another advantage of staying in a satellite resort 
is that many have their own lift pass, so some days you can stay local and not 
bother buying a more expensive pass for the entire network. A La 
Tzoumaz/Savoleyrespass costs CHF58 
<http://www.televerbier.ch/en/domaine-skiable/tarifs/savoleyres-tzoumaz-0-924> 
(£38) a day, compared with £47 for the entire Four Valleys pass (also including 
Nendaz, Veysonnaz, Verbier and Thyon), or £44 for Verbier alone.

Accommodation is more affordable too, of course. While Verbier is full of 
ridiculously lavish chalets and hotels such asRichard Branson’s The Lodge 
<http://www.thelodge.virgin.com/>, and the W 
<http://www.wverbier.com/en?PS=LGEN_AA_DEMA_CGGL_TPRP>, Tzoumaz offers simple 
apartments and unreconstructed, classic Alpine hotels, such as thePost Hotel 
<http://www.post-hotel.ch/index.html> and Les Fougères Hotel & Harry’s Bar 
<http://www.fougeres.ch/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797949809%2Fa654cad6-a8b6-4cc8-9135-0ce2f3720ff0-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797949809%2Fa654cad6-a8b6-4cc8-9135-0ce2f3720ff0-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Piste marker above La Tzoumaz. Photograph: Bridget Clyde/Alamy 
Even the smart option, Chalet Auriane <http://www.chaletauriane.com/>, is half 
the price it would be in Verbier. This catered pad has an outdoor hot tub, 
sauna, art, excellent food, and a private mini-funicular lift shared with 
surrounding chalets, to ferry guests up to the nearest run and save them 
trudging through the snow. Rental is £825pp per week (it sleeps 12), including 
all meals (with unlimited wine), plus afternoon tea, canapes, aperitifs and 
champagne every day. Try finding something similar in Verbier for that price.

But that’s not to say La Tzoumaz is a poor relation of its rich neighbour. Its 
views of the Rhône valley are tremendous, it’s pretty, and it boasts a natural 
ice rink, heated public swimming pool, and the longest floodlit toboggan run 
in, ahem, western Switzerland (woo!) – all huge advantages for those with kids, 
or reluctant skiers, in tow.


Our day with ski guide David Perraudin of Perraudin Sports 
<http://www.perraudinsports.ch/> ends magically, in a mountain hut at sundown, 
for glasses of local Fendant white. This is followed by a torch-lit descent 
back to La Tzoumaz, hot, dripping wax from our giant candles spattering over 
our boards as we swerve merrily through the dark.

Inevitably, the links between these satellite resorts and the main resorts 
will strengthen. Another lift that will bring skiers back to La Tzoumaz from 
Verbier is in the pipeline (rumoured to open by 2016), and could lead to more 
development there.

Last season, one of Verbier’s other “secret” satellites, Bruson, formerly a 
little-known spot where powder-hungry locals went for tree skiing on 
bad-weather days, was connected to the network by a new lift. And though there 
has been little impact so far (tourists aren’t using it much yet), some locals 
predict it could go the way of Nendaz, which 15 years ago was a small, quiet 
enclave, but has become huge – transformed by luxury self-catering developments 
and hotels.

Whether La Tzoumaz will follow suit once the new lift opens, only time will 
tell. The villagers want La Tzoumaz to develop, says Auriane’s owner, Paul, but 
carefully and slowly, though he admits developers are always sniffing around.

“La Tzoumaz isn’t the new Nendaz, or the new Verbier,” he says. “It’s a 
quieter alternative, it’s real mountains … the people here care about their 
mountain community.”

More satellite resorts to try, and future ones to look out for

Established
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797490864%2Fd1391f31-bc1d-4eaf-8fe1-4915a9091c75-2060x1519.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797490864%2Fd1391f31-bc1d-4eaf-8fe1-4915a9091c75-2060x1519.jpeg>
 The Ardent lift into the Portes du Soleil. Photograph: Alamy 
• Stuben in Austria, the smallest of five villages in the Arlberg 
<http://www.austria.info/au/nature-and-adventure/arlberg-skiing-at-its-best-1308504.html>
 ski area, is a good base in order to access St Anton’s epic terrain. Not only 
do you get to avoid the drunken hordes who patrol the main town at night, but 
it has some of the area’s best off-piste on north-facing slopes right above it. 
You can find hotels there atultimate-ski.com <http://www.ultimate-ski.com/>.

• Try the Peisey-Vallandry <http://en.peisey-vallandry.com/> villages as a 
quainter alternative to unattractive Les Arcs or La Plagne, in the Paradiski 
area. They’re high enough for decent snow, with traditional chalets, and the 
Vanoise Express lift between the two bigger resorts stops off there at 
Plan-Peisey. Other satellite villages you’ll want to check out are
Montchavin-Les Coches <http://www.montchavin-lescoches.com/en/winter/> and 
Champagny <http://www.champagny.com/en/winter/>.

• Les Gets and Chatel aren’t the only satellite options for skiing in Avoriaz 
and Morzine, and the Portes du Soleil. The lesser-known option isArdent, a 
hamlet with low-cost family chalets available throughFamily Ski 
<http://www.familyski.co.uk/resorts/portes-du-soleil-ardent/>.

• It’s not just Courchevel, Méribel and Val Thorens; eight different resorts 
make up Les Trois Vallées, and half of them are much smaller than their flash 
neighbours. TeenyOrelle 
<http://www.les3vallees.com/en/the-resorts-orelle.23.s5/> feels like a proper 
French village; it’s very quiet, but there is a lift to Val Thorens, which 
takes just three minutes. Apartments can be booked throughPeak Retreats 
<http://www.peakretreats.co.uk/ski/orelle.htm>.

Future link-ups
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797624931%2F8c632d0a-e243-44a0-9e1f-3c200e58c41f-1020x742.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Satellite%20ski%20resorts%20%E2%80%93%20how%20to%20get%20Verbier%20snow%20for%20half%20the%20dough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsatellite-ski-resorts-verbier-four-valleys-switzerland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417797624931%2F8c632d0a-e243-44a0-9e1f-3c200e58c41f-1020x742.jpeg>
 Boarding at Kappl. Photograph: Christoph Jorda/Getty Images/LOOK 
• Change is afoot in Austria. Kappl, not far from Ischgl, is rumoured to be 
getting a new link to the Rendl pistes of St Anton, which would be a major deal 
for the little resort.

• Warth and Schröcken <http://www.warth-schroecken.com/en/> are unknown to 
Brits, though they usually get more snow than anywhere else in the Alps (11m, 
typically), but since last year have been linked to Lech-Zürs via a 10-seater 
gondola with heated seats.

• There are plans to (eventually) link Zürs to Stuben (again, no date has been 
set), so you could then ski Kappl to St Anton, and St Anton all the way to 
Warth, via Stuben, Zürs and Lech. A vast ski area with a huge variety of runs 
and off-piste.

• Last year the pretty Swiss village of Arosa was linked to bigger Lenzerheide 
<http://www.arosalenzerheide.ch/en> by a new cable car, doubling the rewards 
for a stay in either of those bases, and bringing the total runs to 225km.

• Authentic and family-friendly Bonneval sur Arc 
<http://en.haute-maurienne-vanoise.com/>, in France’s unspoilt Haute-Maurienne, 
could be getting a long-talked about link-up to Val d’Isère. It has applied for 
permission for a lift, though environmentalists and some local residents are 
opposed to the plans, as it may affect an area of national park.

• It is a shame, perhaps … but the stunning and wonderfully empty Utah resort 
ofSolitude <http://www.skisolitude.com/> may link up to the massive areas at 
Park City and Canyons 
<http://www.realvail.com/vails-park-citycanyons-deal-ushers-era-interconnect/a1065>
, though no date has been announced for this.
 