
With his ready self-deprecation and an ability to mock inoffensively, Terry 
Wogan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/terry-wogan>, who has died aged 77 
after suffering from cancer, was for several decades one of the most popular 
personalities on both radio and television in Britain – in his words, a jobbing 
broadcaster. When he was in charge of the television game show Blankety Blank 
for four years from 1979, audiences exceeded 20 million. His weekday breakfast 
programme on Radio 2 (1972-84 and 1993-2009) reached 8 million listeners. And 
quite certainly some of the many millions who watched the Eurovision Song 
Contest, which he covered on radio and then TV from the early 1970s to 2008, 
did so more for his facetious commentaries than for the music.

Wogan began his broadcasting career in his native Ireland, but secured his 
status as a British audience-magnet with his eponymous television chat show, 
which ran for up to three times a week for a decade from 1982. His many guests 
included Rock Hudson, Dolly Parton, Raquel Welch, Lee Marvin, Mel Brooks and
Anne Bancroft <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jun/08/obituaries.news>.
 Sir Terry Wogan appearing on the Kenny Everett Show in 1975. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
All his shows, from playing music to radio listeners at breakfast time to 
television in the evening, were exploitations of a personality that managed to 
be reassuring and yet also sharp-witted. With Wogan there was banter, but it 
was not always bland. And he was no pushover to those in power. When in 1975BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> officials told him to tone down his 
quips at the expense of the director general, he immediately inflated them with 
even more surreal splendour: “I have the ultimate sanction. I can walk out.”

Born in Limerick, Terry was the son of Michael, who worked in a branch of the 
grocers Leverett and Frye, and Rose. He grew up with the BBC radio Light 
Programme and its comedy shows.

At the age of five he went to Ferrybank prep school, which was run by nuns, 
but after 10 minutes walked home, and soon decided he was an atheist. When he 
was nine he went to Crescent College, Limerick, which was “not really 
nightmarish but the end of innocence”, where he was taught by Jesuits. At 15, 
as a result of his father’s promotion, the family moved to Dublin, where Terry 
attended Belvedere college, alma mater of James Joyce.

As a child Terry tended to withdraw from any group after a certain time, and 
admitted to being rather the same as an adult. During the various runs of the 
Wogan television chat show he later declared that, for him, the high point of 
the evening was dinner at home with his wife, Helen (nee Joyce). Having seen 
himself as “a well-behaved, conventional little mother’s boy, afraid of his own 
shadow”, once he had left Limerick he did not return until he was a star of the 
newly formed Irish radio and television service,Raidío Telefís Éireann (RTÉ) 
<http://www.rte.ie/news/2016/0131/764223-terry-wogan-death/>, and was judging 
beauty contests.
 Sir Terry Wogan with his wife, Helen, as Royal Ascot in 2014. Photograph: 
Steve Parsons/PA 
Though he had vaguely wanted to be a journalist, his first jobs were with 
branches of the Royal Bank ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>
. After four years with the bank, he saw an advertisement in the Irish 
Independent: the radio service wanted announcer-newsreaders. There was a 
training course of five evenings a week and 10,000 applicants, but Wogan had 
found “the only thing I could be good at”. He especially relished a turn of 
duty that came round every four or five weeks. This was hospital requests, 
through which he discovered that ad-libbing from postcards and letters in 
between records was something he could do easily.
 Sir Terry Wogan presenting the BBC’s Children in Need with Tess Daly in 2012. 
Photograph: Ian West/PA 
This ease became his trademark. When RTÉ opened its television service on New 
Year’s Eve 1961, he was an obvious recruit, and soon found his face so 
irritatingly famous that he could no longer go into pubs. He began to form the 
view that, unlike radio, where listeners got to know and cherish their 
favourite personalities, television was instant fame that was instantly 
forgotten the moment a face disappeared. However, the television quiz show 
Jackpot, which he chaired, topped the ratings.

When he sent a tape of his radio work to the BBC Light Programme, the 
assistant head of the gramophone records department,Mark White 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2264422/Terry-Wogan-simple-act-kindness-BBC-producer-helped-achieve-ambition.html>
 – who was to become a mentor – offered him the chair of Midday Spin, a 
half-hour selection of records, which was made and broadcast from London, with 
his own commentary being inserted from RTÉ in Dublin.

Alternating between Dublin and London was congenial to him, but not to RTÉ. 
When he began Late Night Extra on Wednesdays for BBC Radio 1 and 2, flying back 
to Dublin afterwards, RTÉ told him to concentrate on his work for them – or 
else. Wogan opted for the “or else”; his first appearance on British television 
consisting of presenting a beauty contest withDavid Vine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/13/obituary-david-vine-bbc-sports>
 in 1973. He then took over fromPeter West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/sep/03/broadcasting.guardianobituaries> 
for seven seasons of Come Dancing.

In 1974 he launched his first chat show, Wogan’s World, for BBC Midlands from 
Pebble Mill. After he had started presenting his Wogan chat show from the 
Shepherd’s Bush Empire, a former variety theatre in west London, he took a 
break from breakfast radio. Not all guests were easy:George Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/nov/25/guardianobituaries.football> came 
on in a “footless” condition, and he found David Icke “a ranting demagogue”, 
but kept his good humour. In 1978 Wogan was his usual ironic self when he 
appeared on Top of the Pops singing the Cornish folk song The Floral Dance. 
Surprisingly it reached No 21 in the charts.
 Terry Wogan singing The Floral Dance on Top of the Pops 
Wogan also presented Auntie’s Bloomers (1991-2001), the resurrection of BBC 
broadcasting fluffs and disasters, leaving when he thought it had no more to 
offer. By then he was mediating between the corporation and its deeply involved 
and demanding audience on Points of View (1999-2007).

For UKTV Gold he presented Wogan Now and Then from 2006, and for BBC1 he 
looked back over the previous 40 years in a two-part programme, Wogan’s Ireland 
(2011). Last year he teamed up with London cabbie Mason McQueen for Terry and 
Mason’s Great Food Trip, a culinary tour around Britain shown in half-hour 
episodes on BBC2. OnRadio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2>, he was 
back with a Sunday morning programme, from 2010 until last November.
 Terry Wogan in the BBC’s Auntie’s Bloomers 
During his days with Blankety Blank, the Christmas show of 1979 topped the 
seasonal ratings. He regarded the show as his lucky emblem, since it led to his 
receiving 10 TV Times awards in succession as most popular television 
personality; he then asked not to be entered again so that someone else could 
have a chance. He also had numerous Sony and Variety Club of Great Britain 
awards, and in 2010 the Television and Radio Industries Club gave him a 
lifetime achieve <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00y44gx>ment award. When 
Radio 2 turned 40 in 2007, he was voted its Ultimate Icon.

A succession of cheerful books included two memoirs, Is it Me? (2000) and 
Mustn’t Grumble (2006). The Little Book of Common Sense (2014) shared some 
general observations along the lines ofRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2’s Pause for Thought. He was 
appointed OBE in 1997 and KBE in 2005. Dual citizenship made it possible for 
him to use the title Sir.

In addition to his regular shows over the years, he was on ready call for the 
“big occasion” and presented the 1976 and 1984 Olympic games.
 Sir Terry Wogan with Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. Photograph: PA 
Wogan was never touched by scandal. No one had an anecdote that showed him as 
ill-natured. One of the rare occasions on which he showed that he could put a 
heavy boot in when required came after a critic in the Times savaged his annual 
Children in Need fundraising programme (which he presented every year from 
1980) by contending that “November is short of ersatz national days, except for 
the annual BBC Children in Need atrocity, an event better calculated than any 
other to make me contemplate self-harm.”

Wogan, who was passionately protective of good causes, retorted in Mustn’t 
Grumble 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=IVuc4SkJ1FsC&pg=PT93&lpg=PT93&dq=Wogan+%E2%80%9CDon%E2%80%99t+contemplate+it,+chum,+do+it.+Start+with+your+heart,+if+you+can+find+it.%E2%80%9D&source=bl&ots=g5mnDJ-zYz&sig=P2ov5IVxSiFgIdmDqgLLZ0gr9Sw&hl=en&sa=X&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=Wogan%20%E2%80%9CDon%E2%80%99t%20contemplate%20it%2C%20chum%2C%20do%20it.%20Start%20with%20your%20heart%2C%20if%20you%20can%20find%20it.%E2%80%9D&f=false>
: “Don’t contemplate it, chum, do it. Start with your heart, if you can find 
it.” He was patently on genuinely easy terms with his own.

He is survived by Helen, whom he married in 1965, two sons and a daughter. 
Another daughter died in infancy.

• Terry (Michael Terence) Wogan, broadcaster, born 3 August 1938; died 31 
January 2016

• Dennis Barker died last year
 