
• Chalet Finder (chaletfinder.co.uk <http://www.chaletfinder.co.uk/>) has a 
good selection of catered and self-catered places in Europe, the US and Canada, 
plus several ski resort hotels. Here are some examples: inChamonix, Chamois 
Blanc 7 <http://www.chaletfinder.co.uk/gopropertyimages.htm?pid=29367> is a 
cute little apartment, with modern decor and lots of pine panelling, sleeping 
four from €600 in February and March, or €500 in April; while in the 
Tarentaise, 20 minutes from lovelySainte-Foy, which has nice runs, great hiking 
into the backcountry and is within a short drive of La Rosière and Les Arcs,La 
Tillette 
<http://www.chaletfinder.co.uk/goproperty.htm?pid=30574#viewavailability> is a 
super-stylish modern chalet sleeping eight, with massive windows and white 
interiors, L'Occitane toiletries and off-piste skiing to the door. A week 
half-board costs from £525pp for the rest of the season. For aCourchevel 
bargain,Apartment Le Tremplin 
<http://www.chaletfinder.co.uk/goproperty.htm?pid=30554> has a double room plus 
a living area that can sleep three. Compact but not too shabby, it has pine 
furnishings, is near the Olympic ski jump, and costs around €600 in March, or 
€385 for the last two weeks of April.

• Iglu Ski (igluski.com <http://www.igluski.com/>) has an accommodation-only 
search function under its "departure airport" drop-down menu to narrow things 
down. We found loads of options includingChalet Christophorus 
<http://www.igluski.com/obergurgl/chalet-christophorus_p26887?holidayid=59452833>
 inObergurgl, Austria, with catered shared chalet accommodation for £419pp 
departing 20 January. It also has catered chalets in Italy, such asChalet Heidi 
<http://www.igluski.com/arabba/chalet-heidi_p30704?holidayid=59682973> in Arabba
, in the Dolomites, catered for the week 3 February for £629pp.

• The website of morzinelets.com <http://www.morzinelets.com> doesn't look 
great, but we still found some good deals, especially on apartments such as
Studio Le Plein Soleil 
<https://www.morzinelets.com/property/overview.asp?PropertyID=28>, which can 
sleep four if two don't mind kipping on the sofabed in the lounge. A week in 
March costs £205pp. Also for self-caterers,Chalet Arthur Avoriaz 
<https://www.morzinelets.com/property/overview.asp?PropertyID=111> in central 
Morzine sleeps 10, has a DVD player, flatscreen telly and simple traditional 
decor. It is available for a week from 9 March, for £3,267 (just £326pp if 
there are 10 of you).
 Chalet Amber, Morzine, France 
• Also in Morzine, Chalet Amber, sleeping 10-14, is one of two seriously 
gorgeous catered chalets offered by an outfit calledSnowy Trees (snowytrees.com 
<http://snowytrees.com/chalet-amber>). The whole thing is available for five 
nights from 26 January for £300pp, or three rooms for five nights from 
4 February for £389pp. Whole weeks in March are available for £549pp. It also 
has a hot tub and a private minibus to the slopes.

• Les3Chalets.com <http://www.les3chalets.com/>, with properties in Les Trois 
Vallées, has a discount on charming Chalet Phoenix 
<http://www.les3chalets.com/chalet-phoenix.html> in Les Allues, near Méribel, 
sleeping 10, departing 2 February, The £3,000 cost usually just covers the 
accommodation but as a last-minute deal they're including half-board catering. 
There's a woodburning stove in the sitting room, and sloping wooden ceilings in 
the upper rooms.

• For a boutique chalet, The Alpine Club (thealpineclub.co.uk 
<http://www.thealpineclub.co.uk>) has Chalet Abode, sleeping 10 in St Martin de 
Belleville, a satellite resort below Les Trois Vallées, available for Easter, 
for £12,555 for a week starting 31 March, or £10,755 starting 7 April. Its 
brand-new sister chalet, Chamois Lodge, sleeping nine, is available for £9,335 
for the week starting 7 April, and has "witty, mountain chic decor" with 
cowhide rugs, sheepskins, antiques and art, and a hot tub. Prices include 
six-course dinners paired with wines, breakfast and afternoon tea, tea in bed, 
champagne on arrival, and an on-demand 4x4 chauffeur service.

• Independent Mountain (independentmountain.com 
<http://www.independentmountain.com/>) has more than 1,000 chalets, and a cool 
countdown deals slot which shows you the very latest offers so you can get 
last-minute bargains.Chalet La Falaise 
<http://www.independentmountain.com/ski-chalet/france/le-grand-massif/les-carroz/self-catered/chalet-la-falaise/prices-availability>
 inLes Carroz <http://www.lescarroz.com/>, which has 144 pistes in Le Grand 
Massif, sleeps 10 in four bedrooms, and costs £1,600 for the whole 
self-catering property for the weeks starting 2 and 9 March. It's all smart 
pale pine inside, and there's a free shuttle bus to the gondola, which accesses 
thelinked areas 
<http://www.lescarroz.com/the-les-carroz-grand-massif-interactive-pistes-map-cp523-me524-151.aspx>
 of Grand Massif, Flaine, Samoëns, Morillon and Sixt. In Switzerland, wonderful
Grimentzis home to the Près des Pistes 
<http://www.independentmountain.com/ski-chalet/switzerland/les-4-vallees/grimentz/self-catered/pres-des-pistes/gallery>
 self-catering apartments, sleeping six in two bedrooms, and available for the 
week starting 2 February for £146pp, or 16 March for £183pp. The flats are 
spacious with tiled floors and right on the slopes: the bubble lift practically 
passes the window.

• Snow Trex (snowtrex.co.uk 
<http://www.snowtrex.co.uk/?code=4645&kwtype=b&pop=no&gclid=CKLJuI_P7bQCFQ7LtAod4EMAGw>
) helpfully includes the price of the lift-pass in its prices. InLivigno, 
Italy, a week including lift-pass starts from around £348pp in February at the 
Casa Jojoma apartments, which sleeps four.
 