
‘We’ll have eight beers, a jug of fermented mare’s milk and a plate of the 
horsemeat sausage please.” As après-ski rounds go, it’s an unusual one. But 
then a truck stop in rural Kyrgyzstan is far from your average slope-side bar. 
And instead of the Alpine offering ofvin chaud, tartiflette and herbal liqueur 
génépi, it serves Kymyz (also called kumis, a bitter, alcoholic concoction made 
of horse’s milk) andbeşbarmaq (horse sausage served with noodles). The 
clientele, mostly lorry drivers, seem slightly bemused by our presence, and 
grin as we take turns trying the strange fare.

But if the restaurants around the Suusamyr Freeride Lodge lack the 
sophistication of those in Alpe d’Huez, the area makes up for it with the 
quality of the skiing. Our group of 15 have enjoyed fresh powder every single 
day. Each morning, we’ve tackled a different zone of the mountain range around 
our lodge and we’ve come across no one’s tracks but our own.

Kyrgyzstan’s extreme continental climate means that the snow that falls on 
this former Soviet state is particularly light and fluffy. This, combined with 
the country’s mountainous geography, makes it something of a paradise for 
powder-loving backcountry skiers and snowboarders.

Until recently, though, the problem was getting to it. If Kyrgyzstan’s Tien 
Shan range lags behind the Alps or the Rockies when it comes to après 
facilities, it’s arguably even more backward in terms of resort infrastructure. 
There are a few ski hills scattered around but their lift systems, often relics 
from the Soviet era, are limited. However, in the past few years several 
pioneering operations have sprung up, offering solutions to this lack of access.

Each morning we’ve tackled a different zone of the mountains around our lodge 
and we’ve seen no one’s tracks but our own

“There are maybe five or six piste-bashers in Kyrgyzstan,” says Azret 
Daniiarov, owner and manager of Suusamyr Lodge, “and we have two of them.” His 
lodge is the first (and, so far, only) outfit in the country to offer 
“cat-skiing” – using modified piste-bashers with passenger cabins to shuttle 
groups of skiers and snowboarders up the hill. Dubbed “the poor man’s 
heli-skiing”, the system was invented in North America, where piste-bashers are 
known as snowcats. It makes perfect sense here in Kyrgyzstan, especially in the 
broad Suusamyr valley, where relatively gentle slopes make cat access easy.

In fact, the site wasn’t picked with skiing in mind, Azret says. He and his 
father built the lodge as a paragliding base for the summer season. But their 
first snowcat, imported three years ago, proved popular with their friends and, 
last winter, their first full season in operation, they had around six or seven 
groups from Europe. “Most came from Germany, some from Norway. Some of those 
Norwegians, they were really crazy,” he laughs.
 Suusamyr Lodge uses modified piste-bashers with passenger cabins to take 
groups of skiers to the piste. Photograph: Dan Medhurst 
Like my group, the Germans and Norwegians were doubtless attracted not just by 
the promise of incredible snow and the sense of adventure, but also by the 
price. Our group is big enough to fill the place and so the week, including six 
days’ cat time, food and accommodation, comes to just £620 a head. With 
flights, the whole adventure costs around the same as an average chalet holiday 
in the Alps, once lift-passes have been factored in.

Of course, it’s not quite the luxury Canadian cat-skiing experience. The 
lodge, which Azret helped build himself, is functional rather than stylish. But 
the rooms are warm and cosy and the central area, with its TV, ping-pong, and 
table football, is a fun place to spend the evenings.

The food is similarly simple – hearty Kyrgyz fare with lots of rice, noodles 
and kebabs – but it’s tasty and exactly what you need after a day on the hill. 
And there are always the three “restaurants” (two of them are little more than 
shipping containers) clustered around the petrol station down the road, if you 
fancy an equine-flavoured alternative.

Dubbed “the poor man’s heli-skiing”, cat-skiing makes perfect sense in a 
country with few ski lifts

Our evening in the truck stop certainly reinforces how remote Suusamyr is but, 
of course, that’s why we’re here. If anything, the feeling is more pronounced 
up the mountain. The cat-access areas that Azret uses on regular rotation offer 
fairly easy riding and are relatively safe as far as backcountry goes (although 
carrying avalanche safety equipment and knowing how to use it are essential).

On the penultimate day, however, a small, experienced group of us decide to 
hike higher than the cat can drive in search of steeper, more challenging 
terrain. This whole stretch of mountains is so remote that the lines we’re 
taking are not just unridden this week, they’ve never been ridden by anyone 
before.

In a more popular (or populous) mountain range, only the very best skiers 
would get to open up new routes. Yet out here, they’re there for the taking. 
There are real dangers though. When I trigger an avalanche on the 
second-to-last run down, it’s a scary reminder of how far we are from home – or 
the nearest hospital.

If that slide serves as a bit of a wake-up call, it doesn’t put the group off 
their stride for long. Our final day sees us back in the cat, riding until the 
sun dips behind the western ridge, but still clamouring for more as we head 
homewards.

As long as you’re careful, the snow in Suusamyr is simply too good not to 
enjoy. And if those après shots taste like gone-off yoghurt? Well, at least 
they’re notgénépi.

Way to go


Turkish Airlines 
<http://www.turkishairlines.com/en-int/flights-tickets/bishkek/istanbul> flies 
from London to Bishkek (Manas airport) via Istanbul for £330 return. Visitors 
to Kyrgyzstan from the UK, US, Australia and most European countries don’t 
require a visa. The Suusamyr Freeride Lodge can arrange a minibus transfer from 
the airport (170km) which seats 15 people and is included in the price for the 
week. ContactAzret Danliarov <> (azret@fly.kg, +996 550 198 899) at the 
Suusamyr Freeride Lodge for bookings
 