
Stop the press. Hold the front page. An 18-year-old girl likes to dance!

If this doesn’t sound particularly newsworthy, it’s because it isn’t. Or, at 
least, it shouldn’t be. But when you are a young black woman and your father is 
the president of the United States, all the usual rules about privacy, respect 
and general common sense apparently disappear.

So Malia Obama, who has shown extraordinary grace while growing up in the 
media spotlight, found herself plastered across the internet for the cardinal 
sin of dancing at a concert.

Less than a month after her 18th birthday, as Malia hung out at a festival 
with friends, she gave the briefest of shimmies, which was immediately captured 
on video and translated into:“Malia Obama Caught on Video Twerking and Flashing 
the Crowd” 
<https://pjmedia.com/lifestyle/2016/07/31/malia-obama-caught-on-video-twerking-and-flashing-the-crowd-a-lollapalooza/>
 and“President Obama’s daughter flashes her undies at a camera” 
<https://au.be.yahoo.com/entertainment/celebrity/a/32201775/malia-obama-at-a-music-festival/#page1>
. Taking the public shaming one step further, social media users were quick to 
complain thatMalia’s trip to the Lollapalooza festival coincided with the 
Democratic national convention 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/malia-obama-dnc-lollapalooza_us_579cadd3e4b08a8e8b5e4b32>
, a major event in the political calendar that, of course, as an unelected 
citizen, she had absolutely no responsibility to attend.

It wasn’t the first time that Obama’s daughters have experienced high-profile 
public attacks. In 2014, Elizabeth Lauten, a spokesperson for a Republican 
congressman,resigned after comments she made on Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/01/republican-aide-resigns-obama-sisters-facebook-viral>
 about Sasha and Malia Obama went viral. Criticising the girls for apparently 
not looking enthusiastic enough when they appeared alongside their father at a 
televised event, Lauten suggested they: “try showing a little class. At least 
respect the part you play.” It was a casual occasion (the annual Thanksgiving 
turkey “pardon” ceremony), but Lauten castigated the Obama girls for wearing 
skirts she deemed too short, writing: “Dress like you deserve respect, not a 
spot at a bar.”

Perhaps the most insidious aspect of these attacks is that the real target is 
never the “shamed” woman or girl, but the political man to whom they are 
related. Lauten’s true intent was revealed when her post continued: “Then 
again, your mother and father don’t respect their positions very much, or the 
nation for that matter … So I’m guessing you’re coming up a little short in the 
‘good role model’ department.” Her mean and inappropriate public derision of 
two teenage girls was a veil for the real mark: their political parents.

This week, Melania Trump, wife of Republican presidential nominee Donald, was 
slut-shamed in order to criticise her husband. Decades-old nude photographs of 
her were splashed across thefront pages of the New York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2016/08/01/melania-trumps-girl-on-girl-photos-from-racy-shoot-revealed/>
. Under the headline “Melania Trump’s girl-on-girl photos from racy shoot 
revealed”, they reprinted a number of images from a 1995 photoshoot, which had 
featured in a now-defunct French magazine.

To dig up ancient “racy” photographs of Trump’s wife adds absolutely nothing 
to the political conversation other than the heavy implication that such 
conduct is ill-befitting of a first lady, and might therefore reflect poorly on 
Trump’s candidacy.

Women whose fathers, brothers or husbands happen to have political careers are 
treated as mere appendages of their male relatives – to be judged, critiqued 
and shamed for the sole purpose of reflecting embarrassment back on to the male 
politician. Just consider themedia treatment of Justine Miliband 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2990810/Why-kitchen-tells-need-know-mirthless-Milibands-s-suggest-Ed-Justine-not-fact-aliens.html>
, who was torn down for not having a homely enough kitchen, orSamantha Cameron, 
who was eviscerated for wearing a sleeveless dress to a church service 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3637442/WILLIAM-HANSON-Samantha-Cameron-covered-St-Paul-s.html>
.

Malia and Sasha Obama have not only experienced this suffocating scrutiny 
throughout eight years of their childhood and teenage years, but have also 
endured horrifying racist abuse – from accusations that Malia only won her 
place at university because she is black, to commentators describing her with 
racial slurs online. The same kind of abuse has dogged Michelle Obama 
throughout two terms as first lady, most recently in a repugnantcartoon 
comparing her unfavourably to Melania Trump 
<http://www.clutchmagonline.com/2016/05/racist-cartoon-attacks-michelle-obama-praises-melania-trump/>
.

Of course, some public comment comes with the territory for adult women who 
choose to become involved in their husbands’ political careers. It was right 
thatMelania Trump’s Republican convention speech was criticised for its 
plagiarism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-speech-republican-national-convention>
, for example, just as it is reasonable to discuss and critique any political 
speech made by Michelle Obama. But the criticism should focus on their politics 
and views. Neither racism, slut-shaming nor moral policing have any place in 
the political arena. Nor should any suchcriticism focus on children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/03/sasha-and-malia-obama-why-criticising-the-first-children-is-off-limits>
 who have made no attempt to step into the political spotlight.

To tear down wives and daughters as if they are empty vessels of family honour 
is dangerous and demeaning. But it also distracts us from the real issues. Most 
political men offer ample opportunities for criticism, all by themselves.
 