
JK Rowling has sprung to the defence of Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> fans said to have been banned 
from a UK wand shop because they are not real wizards.

The novelist tweeted a link to a story in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/harry-potter-fans-banned-from-wand-shop-for-not-being-real-wizards-a7177666.html>
 about Richard Carter, owner of the shop Mystical Moments in Huddersfield. 
Carter, who supplies handmade wands, was quoted as saying that “Harry Potter is 
for children”, and that “if I had someone come in wanting a wand just because 
they liked Harry Potter I would not sell them one, no matter how much they were 
offering”.

“You wouldn’t believe how many real witches and wizards there are knocking 
about. You would be amazed,” he said. “They know they can come here and reveal 
themselves without people thinking they’re mental. I don’t have customers who 
have been Harry Potterfied.”

Rowling tweeted in response on Sunday: “Oh yeah? Well, I don’t think they’re 
real wands.” Her comment was liked by more than 15,000 people, but some 
criticised her on Twitter for making fun of pagan religions.
J.K. Rowling (@jk_rowling) 
Oh yeah? Well, I don't think they're real wands. https://t.co/CkiavJyDLu 
<https://t.co/CkiavJyDLu>
 <https://twitter.com/jk_rowling/status/764756755368800256> August 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jk_rowling/status/764756755368800256> 
The Sun reported 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1567895/man-who-runs-magic-wand-shop-in-huddersfield-bans-harry-potter-fans-for-not-taking-magic-seriously/?CMP=spklr-_-Editorial-_-TWITTER-_-TheSunNewspaper-_-20160807-_-News-_-538959160>
 he had banned Potter fans from his shop, but Carter told the Huddersfield 
Daily Examiner that his comments had been taken out of context.

Harry Potter's 20th birthday to be marked with British Library show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/08/harry-potters-20th-birthday-to-be-marked-with-british-library-show>
“I said that if Harry Potter fans wanted a wand they should go on eBay because 
what they’re basically after is a toy. But I have not banned them from the 
shop,”he told the local paper 
<http://www.examiner.co.uk/news/west-yorkshire-news/slaithwaite-wand-maker-speaks-out-11726060>
. “I have nothing against Harry Potter and actually liked the films. The wands 
I make, though, whether you believe it or not, are real and spiritual. If a 
Harry Potter fan came to the shop, whether they would be able to buy a wand 
would depend on why they want one. If for a toy, then no, but if they had 
watched Harry Potter and been inspired to start their own spiritual journey, 
then yes.”
 