
Many families must have huddled around the kitchen table to nail those crucial 
decisions in the heyday of Spot the Ball. Ours can’t have been the only one. 
Biros hovering, working up the courage to commit a nib to the centre of an X, 
and pinpoint the likeliest whereabouts of the ball. It was always hard. The nib 
was too thick. Usually two players were looking in different directions. I 
don’t remember any of us winning. Now, apparently, nobody does. SoPeter Cook 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/youre-not-winning-any-more-4968466>, 66, 
who plays each week, has discovered. The correct position of the ball was last 
identified in 2004. No jackpot has been paid out since, although prizes 
amounting to £16m have been awarded.

This seems less of a surprise than the fact that people are still weekly 
pinning their hopes to their nibs for a small fortune. And it is small: 
£250,000, compared to this week’s EuroMillions jackpot of £19m.

Actually, what players are trying to do each week is not identify the 
factually correct whereabouts of the ball, but the whereabouts of a fictional 
ball determined by a miniconference between two former players (also with a 
late-60s/early-70s heyday), Liverpool’sIan Callaghan 
<http://www.liverpoolfc.com/history/past-players/ian-callaghan>, and David 
Sadler 
<http://www.mufcinfo.com/manupag/a-z_player_archive/a-z_player_archive_pages/sadler_david.html>
 ofManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. 
How do they do that? Unfortunately, Callaghan answers the phone only to say 
that he doesn’t want to talk and he doesn’t have five minutes. Presumably they 
don’t actually meet up to decide?

“Oh they do!” says Ian Penrose, chief executive of Sportech, which owns Spot 
the Ball. “They meet every Saturday.” They study a photo “with the ball taken 
away. They sit and deliberate and decide where the centre of the ball should 
be, and that’s then marked with a pin.” The deliberations take up to an hour. 
The process is unchanged in more than two decades. (This must be Cook’s dream 
job.)
 A Spot the Ball coupon. Photograph: PR 
Essentially, players have to second-guess Callaghan and Sadler’s best guess. 
This is clearly a guessing game, which is why Sportech, which acquired the 
Classic Pools and Spot the Ball from Littlewoods in 2000, is currently awaiting 
a court of appeal hearing to determine whether it needs to repay a £93mVAT claim
 <http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/10/13/sportech-brief-idUKFWN0S503V20141013>
. (If the court of appeal decides that Spot the Ball is a game of skill rather 
than a game of chance, the VAT bill stands.)

Spot the Ball was once played by three million people a week. Now only 14,000 
play, all in the UK, “predominantly in the north-west”. Sportech says it pays 
out £8,500 weekly in prize money. Given the average spend is £1, that seems a 
pretty high return per player. On that basis, the economics of Spot the Ball 
sound a little unhealthy, especially given that Sportech’s main business is 
processing “some $13bn worth of horse racing bets globally a year”. So is Spot 
the Ball about to be killed off, rubbed out with one giant X?

“The game is important,” says Penrose. “It’s been around for half a century. 
It’s a game with very loyal players, that’s played on paper.” For some this 
will sound like the death knell. “We are looking at introducing a digital 
version to attract a new and younger audience.”
 