
Stevie Wonder <https://www.theguardian.com/music/steviewonder> and members of 
Prince’s inner circle will highlight a family-sanctioned Prince tribute concert 
in St Paul, Minnesota on 13 October, organisers announced on Thursday.

Prince’s family originally planned to hold the show at the new NFL stadium in 
his hometown of Minneapolis. However, organisers said that it will be at the 
smaller, 20,000 capacity Xcel Energy Center in St Paul. Tickets will go on sale 
on Monday, with some will cost $19.99 in tribute to Prince’s hit song.

Prince: ‘Transcendence. That’s what you want. When that happens – Oh, boy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/prince-interview-paisley-park-studios-minneapolis>
The lineup also includes Christina Aguilera, Chaka Khan, John Mayer, Tori 
Kelly, Anita Baker, Doug E Fresh, Luke James, Bilal and Mint Condition. 
Prince’s inner circle will be represented by Morris Day and the Time, Judith 
Hill and Liv Warfield. The New Power Generation, led by Morris Hayes, as well 
as members of 3rdEyeGirl, also will perform.

“It’s an all-star mix of classic and new artists – Prince-inspired as well as 
Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> family-type artists,” said 
organiser L Londell McMillan, a former lawyer for the late musician, now 
helping to manage his estate’s entertainment assets.

Prince’s family first announced the show in late July, after his death of an 
accidental painkiller overdose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-dead-music-superstar-57> 
in April. McMillan said it took a lot of work and time to put the details 
together because so many artists were involved. He also held out the 
possibility of additional tribute shows at some point.

The change of venue was a “business and creative decision”, McMillan told the 
Associated Press. He said he thought they could have sold enough seats at the 
stadium, but the decision wasn’t just about selling tickets. Another factor was 
that they wanted to stick with the date announced by the family because so many 
fans had already made travel plans.

“For this kind of show, you want it to be intimate. You want it to be right,” 
he said.

Prince held the record for most sell-outs at the Xcel at three in 2004 until 
Taylor Swift tied him last September, according to the arena’s website.
 