
Ten years ago this month Philip Green had something to celebrate. The 
retailer, who used to be as famous for his lavish parties as he is now for his 
disastrousassociation with BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/12/sir-philip-green-sells-off-lossmaking-bhs>
, had just been granted a knighthood in the Queen’s birthday honours. In the 
years that followed, Sir Philip Green – ashe may not be for much longer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/philip-green-knighthood-integrity-bhs-john-collins-forfeiture-committee>
 if a swelling chorus of MPs get their way – employed thousands of low-paid 
workers while spending a reputed£6m on a 60th birthday bash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/mar/22/guests-philip-green-6m-party>
 for 150 friends in Mexico.

MPs draw up penalties for Philip Green if he fails to attend inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/mps-penalties-philip-green-attend-inquiry>
Now he’s facing calls to be stripped of his “K” (as people who know how to 
work the honours system call it) in the middle of a high-stakes game of chicken 
with backbench MPs. The flamboyant retailer is threatening torefuse to appear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/mps-penalties-philip-green-attend-inquiry>
 before Wednesday’s joint session of two parliamentary committees inquiring 
into the failure of BHS – which he used to own – with the loss of 11,000 jobs.

In an extraordinary snub, Green has accused the Labour MP Frank Field, who 
chairs the joint committee, of trying to destroy his reputation, and“requires” 
Field to resign from the inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/11/philip-green-calls-for-frank-field-resign-bhs-topshop>
. The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, has launched a scathing attack on 
Green, joining a group of critics that is said to include several unnamed but 
“very angry” Tory backbenchers.

Demands for someone in public life to be stripped of a knighthood are not new. 
The ex-knights’ club is a motley crew of individuals who have fallen out of 
favour for one reason or another, the most recent example beingFred “the Shred” 
Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/31/fred-goodwin-loses-knighthood>
, former boss of RBS. The overseas branch of the club, consisting of foreigners 
who have been granted and stripped of honorary knighthoods, includes some real 
corkers: the Romanian dictatorNicolae Ceausescu, for instance, and Italy’s 
fascist dictator, Benito Mussolini. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/31/goodwin-mugabe-mussolini-ceausescu-disgraced>

Robert Mugabe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/31/goodwin-mugabe-mussolini-ceausescu-disgraced>
 didn’t just have a common-or-garden K; the Zimbabwean tyrant was a Knight 
Commander of the Order of the Bath until 2008, which seems a little late even 
for the glacially slow British honours system to creak into action. There is 
one conspicuous absence from the lists of the ex-great and good: Sir James 
Savile, who was knighted on the personal insistence of Margaret Thatcher and 
went to his grave with his honour intact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fstripping-philip-green-knighthood-honours-system-bhs-mussolini-mugabe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26eabea86ba246c32284eb555c0c85cb55444797%2F0_0_2287_1372%2F2287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stripping%20Philip%20Green%20of%20a%20knighthood%20won%E2%80%99t%20purify%20our%20honours%20system%20%7C%20Joan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fstripping-philip-green-knighthood-honours-system-bhs-mussolini-mugabe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stripping%20Philip%20Green%20of%20a%20knighthood%20won%E2%80%99t%20purify%20our%20honours%20system%20%7C%20Joan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fstripping-philip-green-knighthood-honours-system-bhs-mussolini-mugabe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26eabea86ba246c32284eb555c0c85cb55444797%2F0_0_2287_1372%2F2287.jpg>
 ‘Foreigners who have been granted and stripped of knighthoods include some 
real corkers’ – like Mussolini, pictured here with Hitler in 1940. Photograph: 
Alamy 
How the hell, you might ask, did some of these people come to be honoured in 
the first place? Thatcher is said to havestruggled to get her mate Savile 
through the scrutiny process <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-23355531>, 
which is entirely lacking in anything resembling accountability or 
transparency. People get gongs for vague things such as “services to retail”, 
something that appears to translate as “making lots of money”. I’m sureAnt and 
Dec are nice blokes but I’ve no idea why they got OBEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/10/arise-sir-rod-stewart-rock-star-knighted-queen-birthday-honours>
 in the Queen’s birthday honours. Services to Saturday night?

The scrutiny process is supposed to weed out two groups: individuals who might 
turn out to be an embarrassment to Her Maj, and a smaller bunch of lefties who 
wouldn’t touch the system with a barge pole. It doesn’t seem to be very good at 
doing either, bearing in mind that I was once sent a letter asking if I’d like 
an MBE. I didn’t even need to look at the motto – “For God and the Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/10/an-mbe-hairdressing-why-not>
” – to say no thanks.

An MBE for hairdressing? Why not – but the honours system really won't do | 
Ian Jack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/10/an-mbe-hairdressing-why-not>
There is something called an honours forfeiture committee 
<https://www.gov.uk/honours/having-honours-taken-away>, but John Major 
confirmed in 1994 that it has no set guidelines for cancellations. Discussions 
are confidential, and honours are removed only in cases that threaten to bring 
the system into disrepute, which rather assumes that it isn’t in disrepute 
already. In the absence of any democratic mechanism, the body that decides who 
loses their baubles is not so much this secretive committee as the press – 
which has the capacity to mobilise public opinion against someone like Goodwin 
or Green.

There is an element of ritual about these occasional hot pursuits and I’m not 
sure how much of a punishment they involve. If you have sufficient brass neck, 
and an extremely healthy bank account, losing an honour need not involve any 
greater inconvenience than having to order a new set of stationery. Green is so 
famously thin-skinned that becoming plain “Mr” again might well dent his ego, 
but it amounts to little more than sticking a plaster on the festering wound of 
the honours system.

It reached its nadir last year when the Queen officially presented her husband 
with an Australian knighthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/22/queen-presents-prince-philip-with-australian-knighthood>
, granted in a career-ending move by the then prime minister Tony Abbott, in 
addition to all his other titles. Arise, Sir Prince Philip? In an ethical 
universe, or even just a sane one, this tottering edifice would be given the 
final push it so richly deserves. There’s nothing wrong with governments 
honouring citizens who have done outstanding things, but a modern democracy 
doesn’t need the snobbish gradations of MBEs, knighthoods and peerages.

If we stopped giving out so many baubles just for being rich and famous, we 
wouldn’t need to go to so much trouble to get them back.
 