
The University of California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, 
Berkeley has suspended a course dedicated to studying Palestine “through the 
lens of settler colonialism”, sparking international debate about academic 
freedom.

The course at UC Berkeley – entitled Palestine: A Settler Colonial Analysis – 
faced intense backlash this week from Jewish organizations, whichargued 
<http://www.amchainitiative.org/letter-to-uc-berkeley-chancellor-dirks> that 
the class was “anti-Israel and antisemitic” and “intended to indoctrinate 
students to hate the Jewish state”.

After a stream of negative news stories 
<http://www.algemeiner.com/2016/09/01/campus-watchdog-upcoming-palestine-course-will-increase-antisemitic-atmosphere-at-uc-berkeley/#>
 andeditorials 
<http://observer.com/2016/09/cal-berkeleys-latest-effort-to-erase-jewish-history-from-israel/>
, the northern California school, considered the top public university in the 
US, announced that it was suspending the class because it “did not receive a 
sufficient degree of scrutiny to ensure that the syllabus met Berkeley’s 
academic standards”.

Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> advocates and antisemitism 
watchdog groups applauded the decision and called for an overview of the course 
review process. But pro-Palestine organizations, along with some faculty 
members at UC Berkeley, have criticized the suspension, arguing that 
administrators were silencing viewpoints and prioritizing public relations over 
academic discourse.

The dispute comes at a time of increasing tensions between pro-Israel and 
pro-Palestine university activists, with Jewish donors and organizations 
launchingcoordinated campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/05/sheldon-adelson-looks-to-stamp-out-growing-us-movement-to-boycott-israel>
 to counter a growing Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) movement across 
the US.

The “colonialism” course <http://www.decal.org/courses/4237>, which already 
had its first class this fall, was part of an acclaimed UC Berkeley program 
calledDeCal <http://www.decal.org/>, which allows students to propose and teach 
courses to their peers with guidance from a faculty member.

Hatem Bazian, the faculty sponsor of the course, proposed by undergraduate 
Paul Hadweh, said the class went through standard review procedures and was 
approved on multiple occasions before it was abruptly suspended this week 
without warning or discussion.

“This was disheartening and insulting and shameful of the university,” said 
Bazian, a lecturer in Middle Eastern studies and ethnic studies. “They are 
essentially throwing the student under the bus and responding to political 
pressure.”

Bazian said the course was designed to offer a “comparative approach” and that 
respected scholars have used the “colonialism” lens to study the region.

UC Berkeley dean who violated sexual harassment policies returns to campus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/berkeley-sexual-harassment-sujit-choudhry-tyann-sorrell>
“The fact that something is controversial does not mean it’s antisemitic. It 
does not demean any Jewish person,” he said.

Hadweh said no one from the administration contacted him before publicly 
announcing the suspension.

“I couldn’t believe it. I was devastated,” said the 22-year-old senior. “I 
knew I followed all the policies and procedures.”

But in a letter 
<http://www.amchainitiative.org/letter-to-uc-berkeley-chancellor-dirks> to UC 
Berkeley chancellor Nicholas Dirks, the AMCHA Initiative, an organization 
dedicated to “protecting Jewish students”, attacked Hadweh and Bazian and cited 
the course’s connection to the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) movement.

“It was completely one-sided,” the AMCHA director, Tammi Rossman-Benjamin, 
said in an interview. “The perspective was one that … is a hateful one.”

BDS and SJP leaders have argued that they are not antisemetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/07/to-support-the-boycott-divestment-and-sanctions-movement-is-not-anti-semitic>
 and that they are pushing for a boycott of Israel in response to human rights 
abuses associated with the occupation of Palestinian territories.

Critics, however, contend that those groups want to dismantle the Jewish 
state, and AMCHA cited thesyllabus <http://www.decal.org/courses/4237>’s goal 
to “explore the possibilities of a decolonized Palestine” asevidence 
<http://www.amchainitiative.org/letter-to-uc-berkeley-chancellor-dirks> of an 
effort to “eliminate” Israel.

At UC Berkeley, where student activists launched the Free Speech Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2014/nov/15/berkeley-a-history-of-disobedience-in-pictures>
 in the 1960s, a group of Jewish professors have called on administrators to 
reinstate the course. They argued that critics are misrepresenting the class 
and that the university was stifling academic freedom in response to demands 
from Israel advocacy groups.

Regarding the notion that “any reference to settler colonialism is 
anti-Semitic”, the professors wrote: “This claim is patently false, a recent 
innovation on the part of those seeking to suppress open intellectual inquiry 
on Zionism, Israel, Palestine, and the occupation. A great number of 
publications, many emerging from within the State of Israel, have considered 
settler colonialism to be a proper framework for studying the area.”

Michael Burawoy, a sociology professor who signed the letter, said it was 
obvious that the university was concerned about losing funding in the wake of 
the backlash: “This was an arbitrary administrative intervention brought about 
by pressure.”

Bazian added that he felt the situation was particularly unfair to Hadweh and 
the 28 students enrolled in the course. “I’m completely saddened.”

The students in the class published a public letter 
<https://medium.com/@ethnicstudies198/an-open-letter-to-the-uc-berkeley-administration-regarding-academic-freedom-1bf60c9a040e#.ynmvrkyu>
 on Thursday condemning the suspension as “an act of discrimination against 
students who wanted to debate and discuss this contentious issue”.

Rossman-Benjamin said her group wasn’t trying to target the specific student, 
but wanted to push for an improved review system for DeCal curricula. “The 
student did nothing wrong … The process broke down.”

A UC Berkeley spokesman, Dan Mogulof, claimed that a dean was not properly 
notified of the course and said administrators are considering multiple 
options, including canceling the course altogether or reinstating it with 
modifications.

“It should also be noted that the dean is very concerned about a course, even 
a student-run course, which espouses a single political viewpoint and/or 
appears to offer a forum for political organizing rather than an opportunity 
for the kind of open academic inquiry that Berkeley is known for,” he said in a 
statement.
 