
The Swiss National Bank has abandoned the currency cap with the euro, making a 
visit toSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> yet more 
expensive.

What does it mean for a holiday? 

The price of a ski pass in Switzerland’s most popular ski resort, Verbier, has 
just gone from silly to plain insane. At Wednesday’s rate a week-long lift pass 
for one person would have cost around £290 in sterling terms. Whenthe Swiss 
franc soared on Thursday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/15/currency-markets-switzerland-franc>
 the same pass would at one point have been heading towards £400. Even after 
currency markets settled down (a bit) it will now set you back around £320. 
Throw in boot and ski hire and a family of four could pay more than £1,750 for 
a week as well as their flights, accommodation and food.

Crystal Ski, one of the larger ski operators, said most holidaymakers will 
already have purchased in advance in sterling, so they would be protected. “The 
main impact will be the cost of lunch on the mountain,” said a spokeswoman.

Is this the death-knell for the Swiss tourist industry? 

Possibly. The number of Brits travelling to Switzerland for ski holidays has 
been tumbling for years, down to just 5.5% of the 867,000 UK holidaymakers who 
hit the slopes last year. Austria – which is in the euro – now attracts five 
times as many British skiers as Switzerland. Crystal Ski stopped offering 
chalet holidays in Switzerland this year because sky-high wages for staff made 
it uneconomic – it said rates were approaching £30 an hour. Sterling has risen 
strongly against the euro over the past year, making holidays in France and 
Austria cheaper.

Is it now the most expensive place in the world?




No one heads to the mountains or lakes knowing it will be cheap, but prices 
still have the power to shock. Bananas are four times the price of those in the 
UK and a burger and fries is typically SFr20 – now £13.30. The top-rated hotel 
on TripAdvisor in Geneva is the Four Seasons, and its basic room rate is now 
£449 a night.

Is Switzerland now only for the royals (and hedge fund managers?)




Prince Andrew and his ex-wife Sarah Ferguson may be rueing their recent 
purchase of a luxury chalet in Verbier thought to be worth up to £13m. It is 
understood it was bought with a multimillion-pound mortgage, believed to be at 
least £8m. If the mortgage is in Swiss francs, then the monthly payments will 
now soar in sterling terms.

Zug, the Swiss canton that plays host to hedge fund managers attracted by its 
low income tax rate, may now see something of an exodus. Each time theSwiss 
franc <https://www.theguardian.com/business/swiss-franc> climbs, so does the 
cost for overseas firms of hiring employees, paying for offices – and paying 
mortgages if they are in local currency.

Who else does this affect?




Apart from Swiss watchmakers and other industries, whose products will now 
look seriously overpriced on world markets, one of the more unexpected 
casualties will be homebuyers in Hungary and Poland. Hundreds of thousands 
foolishly took out mortgages denominated in Swiss francs because at the time it 
meant super-low interest rates. In effect, a 30% increase in the Swiss franc 
against, say, the Hungarian forint means that the monthly cost of servicing the 
loan also goes up 30%. Many were already in arrears before the leap in the 
Swiss franc (although compensation arrangements have mostly been put in place); 
if more and more default it could put intense pressure on the local banking 
system.

• This article was amended on 15 January 2015 to correct some exchange rates

 