
The Syrian opposition says it will attend peace talks sponsored by Turkey and 
Russia inKazakhstan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kazakhstan> next week, 
in a key step in the latest attempt to end the six-year civil war in Syria.

It is set to decide the makeup of its delegation on Monday. The negotiations 
in Astana will bring together representatives of the opposition and the regime 
of Bashar al-Assad, as well Russia,Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and Iran. Donald Trump’s incoming 
administration has also been invited.

The talks, which are expected to begin on 23 January, come weeks into a 
ceasefire negotiated by Ankara and Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
 that has largely held across the country. The opposition’s High Negotiations 
Committee said it would back the talks, and Mohammed Alloush, its lead 
negotiator, confirmed that a delegation would be attending.

Related: Syria ceasefire appears to hold after rivals sign Russia-backed deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>

“All the rebel groups are going to Astana. Everyone has agreed,” said Alloush, 
a leading figure in the Jaish al-Islam rebel group, in an interview with AFP. 
“Astana is a process to end the bloodletting by the regime and its allies. We 
want to end this series of crimes.”

A senior Turkish official said the opposition was committed to the talks. “As 
we get ready for the Astana talks, we are trying our best to make sure that the 
ceasefire holds, and so we’re talking to the Russians to keep the regime in 
check, because most of the violations so far have been made by the regime in 
certain parts ofSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>,” said İbrahim 
Kalın, a spokesman for the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. “But we are 
also talking to the opposition to remain committed to the Astana process, and 
they’ve been very helpful and cooperative so far.”

The talks are the first serious effort in months to put a stop to the carnage 
in Syria, which has killed nearly half a million people, displaced half its 
population and left much of the country in ruins.

Russia, whose intervention was crucial in rescuing the Assad regime and 
turning the tide of the war in its favour, and Turkey, a stalwart backer of the 
opposition, normalised their relations last summer. That rapprochement bore 
fruit in December when the two nations brokered a ceasefire in the city of 
Aleppo,allowing the evacuation of tens of thousands of civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/syria-ambulances-on-the-move-as-aleppo-evacuation-operation-begins>
 who were besieged in a shrinking patch of rebel-held territory.
 Mohammed Alloush. Photograph: Denis Balibouse/Reuters 
Now both are pushing the peace talks, with Moscow working to anchor its 
position as a global superpower and limit the costs of its intervention in the 
war, and Ankara hoping to stem an influx of refugees, 2 million of whom have 
fled to Turkey.

The opposition’s participation is a boost to the talks, but key issues remain 
that could derail them, including disagreements over the future of Assad, the 
shape of a transitional government, and rivalries within both camps – 
particularly the competing interests ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the other key backer of the 
Syrian regime, Iran.

Although the talks are being launched without any preconditions, the rebels 
are keen to demand that Assad is ousted, and that a transitional government is 
appointed, a key sticking point that Assad’s representatives will not agree to 
without significant pressure. The regime has been emboldened by recent 
battlefield victories that have left the opposition without any major urban 
centres under its control.

“Our position on Assad is clear,” said Kalin. “We don’t believe that a united, 
peaceful Syria will be possible with Assad remaining in power. But as I said, 
we will see how Astana talks go. We want to go step by step at this point.”

Osama Abu Zeid, an opposition negotiator and a legal adviser to the Free 
Syrian Army, told the Guardian the talks in Astana had a limited aim – to 
ensure that the ceasefire continues.
 Osama Abu Zaid, a spokesman for the Free Syrian Army rebel alliance. 
Photograph: Umit Bektas/Reuters 
“The participation in Astana is supported by all the factions and the High 
Negotiations Committee, and we want through it to reaffirm the ceasefire,” he 
said. “We decided to go to Astana primarily to reaffirm the ceasefire after the 
Russians promised to look into practical ways to enforce it.”

He added: “There won’t be political negotiations, so we have created a 
military delegation [for the Astana talks].”

Abu Zeid said the first round of talks would be short and will help determine 
whether the Russians were serious about putting a halt to all the fighting in 
the country, particularly in areas besieged by the Assad regime. If the first 
round succeeds, the opposition was prepared to proceed to a second round of 
discussions, he said.

Some rebel groups have refused to attend the talks, saying they do not believe 
the Russians are honest brokers.

“We have decided not to attend these negotiations because we still doubt the 
seriousness of the Russians and their ability to instil an atmosphere conducive 
to a political solution,” said Bassam Mustafa, a member of the political office 
of Noureddine al-Zinki, a rebel group influential in Aleppo and its 
countryside, who cited numerous ceasefire violations by the regime and its 
allied militias.

Still, sources with knowledge of the negotiations have said they could not 
have succeeded without Moscow’s dogged insistence in the face of objections by 
Tehran, which appears to be less willing to compromise on Assad’s fate.

A source with knowledge of the Aleppo negotiations in December said the 
Russians often worked around the clock to ensure their success, and made sure 
that fighters leaving the city in private cars during the evacuation were not 
hindered. Their intervention prevented a final assault by the regime and its 
militias on the rebel enclave, the source added.

Related: Iran repopulates Syria with Shia Muslims to help tighten regime's 
control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/irans-syria-project-pushing-population-shifts-to-increase-influence>

Meanwhile, the Iranians raised additional issues to derail the evacuation, 
presenting what one rebel official at the time described as a “Christmas list” 
of demands that included the full evacuation of two Shia villages besieged by 
fighters linked to al-Qaida.

“This perennial ambiguity of the Iranians always pops up in these talks and 
negotiations,” said one official. “The Russians I think are more pragmatic when 
it comes to the future of Assad. Iranians seem to have a more ideological 
commitment to him staying.”

Tehran has deployed thousands of Shia militia fighters from Iran, Iraq and 
Lebanon in an effort to shore up the regime and to maintain a supply route 
through the country and into neighboring Lebanon, where Iran’s proxy Hezbollah 
holds sway. Much of the rhetoric of the militias’ leaders in publicly available 
recordings has sectarian undertones, and the Islamic Republic is seeking to 
cement its influence in a regional tussle with its Sunni rivals, Saudi Arabia 
and its allies.

The Iranians have also been accused of abetting demographic change in Syria, 
reportedly clearing areas reclaimed by the regime from their Sunni inhabitants 
and settling Shia residents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/irans-syria-project-pushing-population-shifts-to-increase-influence>
 there instead.
 