
A ceasefire across Syria appeared to be holding on Friday as its brokers, 
Russia andTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, sought support at 
the UN security council for the plan it hopes will trump failed peace proposals 
and end the six-year conflict.

Despite violations blamed on both sides in parts of the country, there were no 
reported civilian casualties by Friday night and diplomats were hopeful that 
the fragile truce would take root, despite allother attempts failing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/23/syria-heavy-clashesmark-end-to-aleppo-ceasefire>
.

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, which has invested much 
political stock in ending the fighting after bombing the opposition 
relentlessly for the past 15 months, said it would ask the security council on 
Saturday to endorse a resolution backing its bilateral pact with Turkey – which 
makes aid access to besieged areas conditional on all protagonists downing 
weapons.
Wadi Barada map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-30T15:28:18.html> 
The truce, which is the third announced this year, came into effect at 
midnight on Thursday and follows the evacuation of Aleppo and the city’s 
surrender to forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad. It covers all areas of the 
country except those under Islamic State control.

Asaad Hanna, a political officer in the Free Syrian Army, said violence had 
reduced on Friday but had not stopped. “We cannot be optimistic about someone 
like the Russians who used to kill us for six years ... they are not angels,” 
Hanna said. “But we are happy because we are reducing the violence and working 
to find a solution for the current situation.”

The fall of Syria’s industrial capital, the last major city in which the 
rebels had a presence, was aseminal moment in the conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/what-next-for-syria-its-allies-and-foes-after-fall-of-aleppo>
, which allowed the Syrian leader to claim ascendancy on the battlefield and 
Russia and Turkey to take the initiative on the diplomatic front.

The momentum of the war has since tipped strongly in favour of Assad and his 
backers. The rebels have made no significant gains for much of the past year, 
their firepowerblunted by Russia’s air campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/ground-down-by-savagery-the-agony-of-aleppo>
.

All previous attempts at establishing a ceasefire in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> have failed within days of being 
announced. The US has been a key broker in several attempts, and partnered with 
Russia in the autumn to establish a joint control room to agree on targets.

Why Russia-brokered Syrian ceasefire has chance of succeeding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/russia-calling-shots-middle-east-syria>
Significant elements of the ceasefire plan were discussed earlier this year by 
the US secretary of state, John Kerry, and his Russian counterpart, Sergei 
Lavrov. However, Washington’s means to end the conflict have steadily 
evaporated asBarack Obama’s administration grinds to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/russia-calling-shots-middle-east-syria>
 and an alliance between Moscow and Ankara continues to grow.

Negotiations have effectively sidelined Washington, which has angered Turkey 
over its alliance with Kurdish groups in Syria in the war against Isis. Russian 
tensions with the USare at their most serious in years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
, after Obama imposed sanctions on senior Russian spy chiefs over allegations 
of cyber-attacks to influence the outcome of the US presidential election.

Iran has also thrown its weight behind the ceasefire, with the Iranian foreign 
minister, Javad Zarif, hailing the lull in fighting as a major achievement. 
Russia said on Thursday the deal had been signed by seven major opposition 
groups, although one of the most powerful, Ahrar al-Sham, denied having done so 
on Friday.

“Ahrar al-Sham has a number of reservations on the proposed agreement and the 
negotiations are linked to that, and we have therefore not signed it,” said 
Ahmad Qaran Ali, a spokesman for the group, raising doubts about the truce’s 
long-term viability.

'I couldn't take anything except dignity': stories of the leaving of Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
Concerns were also raised by activists’ reports that, despite the downturn in 
fighting, the Wadi Barada valley, a rebel-held area north-west of Damascus that 
supplies nearly three-quarters of the capital’s water, had been targeted by 
artillery and helicopters throughout Thursday night and into Friday morning.

A central element in the momentum of the ceasefire plan has been the 
involvement of Turkey, which had been at odds with Moscow for the first six 
months of its intervention, but which is now on side with much of Russia’s 
agenda for Syria.

Key to the change has been Moscow’s stance towards the Syrian Kurds, whom both 
sides view as using the conflict to advance their territorial ambitions. In 
July, Vladimir Putin told the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, that he 
supported Syria’s territorial integrity, meaning he did not support any attempt 
to use the war to advance a claim on sovereignty, which would directly impact 
Turkey’s four-decade war with Kurdish militants.

Erdoğan said at a press conference on Thursday night: “I would like to thank 
all those who supported the ceasefire process, especially my valuable friend 
Putin. Turkey will continue to make every effort to ensure the peace [and] 
stability of our region and Syria.”

Officials from all sides said they hoped the pact would hold in the run-up to 
negotiations next month in Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, which could 
establish a path to peace.

Diplomats said that Russia has requested that the 15-member council vote on 
the resolution at 11am local time (4pm GMT) on Saturday. It is not clear how 
much support there is for the resolution. The text would be closely studied 
overnight, one Western diplomat said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
 