
Governments must take the lead on reducing gender inequality to unlock almost 
£10tn of additional global economic output, a report argues.

Closing the gender gap on employment, pay and business leadership is an 
important source of growth in an environment of persistently sluggish figures, 
UBS Wealth Management says.

If countries increase national female participation rates to match the best in 
their region it could add $12tn (£9.9tn), or 11%, to the world economy by 2025, 
a recent McKinsey study found.But a report by the World Economic Forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/gender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality>
 found the gender gap had widened in the past four years and predicted it could 
take 170 years for women to reach parity.

Sir Philip Hampton to lead push for more women in top jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/07/sir-philip-hampton-push-more-women-top-jobs-review>
To remove obstacles, governments need to make hard choices and think long-term 
by providing adequate maternity and paternity leave and high quality subsidised 
childcare as well as promoting employment policies that encourage women to 
succeed, UBS said in its report,Women as a force for economic change 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jUbkd_-tE8>.

Only half the world’s women are gainfully employed, compared with 75% for men, 
and women earn on average 24% less than men globally, the report said, citing 
OECD figures.

UBS said to address the imbalance, governments needed to change the ways 
companies behave, getting them to remove the so-called glass ceiling that 
prevents women from reaching the top of organisations.

The biggest barrier to equality was the lack of choice for women who have 
children, who are forced to leave their job or work part time, the report said. 
Women also take fewer advanced degrees than men so that they make up just 30% 
of science researchers and a third of IT workers.

Tan Min Lan, who co-wrote the report at UBS, said: “Despite the evidence 
linking gender diversity to significant gains in economic growth and company 
profitability, women are still largely under-represented in the workforce 
worldwide and continue to face daunting obstacles in corporate environments.”

UBS said it was in companies’ self interest to treat women equally and promote 
their advancement because businesses with women in their senior ranks are more 
profitable.

In the UK there has been some progress but senior business roles remain 
heavily dominated by men.

Emma Walmsley will be the most powerful woman in the FTSE 100 when she takes 
over as chief executive of GlaxoSmithKline at the end of March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/glaxosmithkline-names-emma-walmsley-new-ceo-gsk>
. But she will be one of only seven women running FTSE 100 companies on current 
numbers.

Sir Philip Hampton, GSK’s chairman, is leading a government-commissioned 
review into increasing the number of female senior executives at Britain’s top 
companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/07/sir-philip-hampton-push-more-women-top-jobs-review>
. Part of the plan is to promote more women into management positions who can 
go on to lead Britain’s biggest companies.

Tan said: “Getting more women into work is only a partial victory if they are 
confined to lower levels of the corporate hierarchy. Companies have to realise 
that there are tangible benefits to increasing gender diversity in senior 
positions.”

Hampton’s review follows progress made since the 2011 Davies report that asked 
FTSE 100 companies to ensure a quarter of their directors were women.That goal 
was achieved last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/women-in-uk-boardrooms-still-low-equalities-nicky-morgan-female-ftse100-davies>
 but the increase was mainly among non-executive directors and increases have 
since stalled.

Parliament’s women and equalities committee criticised the government in March 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/gender-pay-gap-has-barely-shrunk-in-four-years-say-mps>
for lack of action on closing the gender pay gap. The committee said the 19.2% 
gap had barely improved in four years despite a pledge to eradicate it within a 
generation.
 