
1969 Frank Kermode

The first judges were Rebecca West, Stephen Spender, David Farrer and WL Webb, 
at that time literary editor of the Guardian. We were handsomely treated: in 
London we haunted Bertorelli's, but we spent more than one weekend at Michael 
Astor's beautiful Cotswold house, where Dame Rebecca strode the grounds 
authoritatively between bouts of laying down the law. There were perhaps 60 
books, which seemed a lot, though modern judges are said to read twice as many. 
Getting through the 60 was made easier by our not daring to take on Dame 
Rebecca. "Miss Murdoch writes good and bad novels in alternate years," she 
said. "This is a bad year." Muriel Spark: "clever but too playful." And out 
they went.

Two of us favoured Nicholas Mosley's Impossible Object, but were soon 
silenced. The choice of PH Newby's Something to Answer For was the result of a 
compromise. Dame Rebecca didn't dislike it as much as nearly all the others. 
Surveyors of the prize's history have spoken ill of this good book, perhaps 
without reading it, or by being too ready to suppose that this industrious 
writer could manage a novel a year as well as running the Third Programme. 
Anyway, I remember this, my one experience of judging, with much pleasure and 
amusement.

1970 Antonia Fraser

The judging of the 1970 prize was a low-key affair except for the feisty 
behaviour of Dame Rebecca West, a judge for the second year running. At one 
point she denounced Margaret Drabble for her novels of domestic life on the 
grounds that "Anyone can do the washing-up; just get a big bowl and some 
liquid; so why complain about it?" The novel in question was The Waterfall, 
which both Richard Hoggart and I admired greatly (and didn't think was about 
washing-up). I knew Rebecca West, since she was a friend and neighbour of my 
parents in Sussex, and was very fond of her; all the same, it occurred to me 
that she was possibly one of the brilliant old ladies who felt threatened by a 
brilliant young one in the shape of Maggie Drabble. In the end we were split 
between William Trevor's Mrs Eckdorf in O'Neill's Hotel and Bernice Rubens's 
The Elected Member. I voted for Rubens but today would vote for Trevor.

1971 was much more exacting. The most exciting thing that happened to me as a 
Booker Judge for the second time was not controversial. I shared a taxi back 
with fellow judge Saul Bellow on a long, long ride from somewhere in the City: 
he was nattily dressed in a pale green shantung suit, blue shirt, green tie 
with large blue dots on it; his silver hair and slanting, large dark eyes made 
him look like a 30s film star playing a refined gangster. Suddenly he leaned 
forward and asked: "Has anyone ever told you that you're a very handsome 
woman?" I pondered on a suitable reply, modest yet encouraging. But having 
spoken, the Great Man closed his eyes and remained apparently asleep for the 
rest of the journey.

1971 John Gross

A faint aroma of the Nobel prize - or of Nobel prizes yet to come - hangs over 
the 1971 Booker. First, the award went to VS Naipaul (who was to be Nobel 
laureate in 2001) for In a Free State. It was a result with which I agreed. 
Second, the organisers had succeeded in persuading a distinguished writer from 
abroad to be one of the judges: Saul Bellow (who was to be Nobel laureate in 
1976). It seemed a thrilling prospect.

In the event, one of the things I remember most clearly about Bellow is that 
he insisted on being put up at the Ritz (which must have burned a big hole in 
the budget), and then complained because he hadn't been given a room 
overlooking Green Park.

Another recollection is his response when I advanced the claims of Elizabeth 
Taylor's Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont, which apart from the Naipaul was the 
book on the shortlist I most favoured. "Oh," he said, "that's one of those 
little tinkling teacup things that the British always do well." He was quite 
wrong - Mrs Palfrey is a work of deep feeling - but his dismissiveness 
effectively put paid to its chances.

1972 George Steiner

It was the most illustrious panel in the Booker's history. Both the other 
judges, Cyril Connolly and Elizabeth Bowen, were too ill to attend the 
ceremony. I fought very hard forJohn Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-berger> to win for G, and then he threw 
it in my face by giving half the prize money to the Black Panthers. It was a 
very grim experience. I was in a very precarious position at the time and I 
literally thought it was the end for me in this country. I thought I would have 
to pack my bags and go.

1973 Edna O'Brien

Mary McCarthy and I were the judges, with Karl Miller presiding as chairman. 
Disputes were negligible. From a batch of about 20, it was whittled down to two 
contenders - The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell and The Black Prince by Iris 
Murdoch, with Farrell winning by a whisker. Next day, Mary changed her mind and 
it was left to Miller to cast the deciding vote, which he did with alacrity and 
no rancour. The prize has changed as the literary/publishing world has 
undergone a radical and not always edifying sea change: the celebrity virus now 
infects authors and judges alike.

1974 Ion Trewin

We were three judges - AS Byatt, Elizabeth Jane Howard and me. At the 
shortlist meeting, Jane remarked that she thought Ending Up by Kingsley Amis 
(then her husband) was his best book and should go on the shortlist. I looked 
first at Antonia, and then at Martyn Goff, the prize's administrator - both 
remained impassive. We broke for a breather. Martyn said that as chairman it 
was up to me. Antonia liked the novel (as did I). On literary grounds neither 
of us had problems about shortlisting it, but what would the press say?

The Booker was already familiar with controversies. Martyn, I know, was not 
averse to the publicity that our decision would inevitably bring. (This was to 
centre around a vituperative correspondence in the Times.) But would the 
burgeoning reputation of the prize be damaged? He thought not. More important 
was our choice of winner. Antonia and I spoke up for Nadine Gordimer's The 
Conservationist, but Jane was less impressed. She remained keen on Ending Up, 
but realising that neither Antonia nor I would countenance it winning, she 
concentrated on Stanley Middleton's Holiday, a study of middle England that she 
saw as a "perfect miniature".

With only three judges, it seemed important to me that we did not compromise 
or produce a two-one verdict. Might we split the prize between Middleton and 
Gordimer? Martyn said he knew of no reason why not. We were vindicated by The 
Conservationist being selected this year for the Best of the Booker shortlist.

My favourite Booker winner remains Schindler's Ark (1982) by Thomas Keneally 
(but I must declare my interest and say that I was its editor).

1975 Susan Hill

Peter Ackroyd was the young, newly appointed literary editor of the Spectator. 
Roy Fuller was a distinguished older poet. Angus Wilson was in his years as 
founder of the creative writing course at UEA and one of the elder statesmen of 
the contemporary novel. It was a daunting experience to join them as a judge. I 
took the mountain of submitted novels on my honeymoon, and our first meeting 
was scheduled for the day I returned. I discovered that Angus had spent a 
holiday at the same Italian hotel a few weeks earlier. So we should all have 
been in mellow mood, and three of us were. But Roy Fuller was not the easiest 
man to work with. He was acerbic and disliked being contradicted, and when it 
came to choosing a shortlist he refused to join in, on the grounds that we had 
agreed on our winner, so a shortlist was superfluous. The Booker management 
committee was, rightly, having none of this and insisted.

I had been shortlisted myself three years earlier, and it had given my career 
a huge boost. I fought hard. We all did. Fuller grudgingly agreed to allowing a 
shortlist of two - the winner and one runner-up. Otherwise, he was going to 
walk. It was tricky and it spoiled what should have been an enjoyable 
experience. I was very happy with our winner, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's Heat and 
Dust, but I wish we had stood up to Fuller and if he had walked out, so be it.

My personal Best of Bookers is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The 
omission of Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece The Blue Flower even from the 
shortlist in 1995 I find quite inexplicable.

1976 Francis King

There is a vast difference of scale between the prize as I experienced it as a 
judge and how it is now. Then the prize money was far less generous, and the 
fee for the judging was an honorarium. There were only three judges: our 
chairman Walter Allen, an admirable novelist and critic, then confined to a 
wheelchair, so that I had to read out his presentation speech for him; Mary 
Wilson, the wife of the prime minister; and me. Despite his failing health, 
Allen was, unlike me, immensely conscientious in reading every submission from 
cover to cover. Mary Wilson, a lover of poetry and herself an artless but often 
touching poet, was at the disadvantage of having read few novels in the course 
of her life - so that she was clearly puzzled when I referred to one of the 
submissions as "Kafkaesque".

My sister Elizabeth looked through the piles of books awaiting my reading, and 
eventually held up David Storey's Saville. With a colleague, John Guest, she 
had already put in a lot of robust work as one of its two editors. "This will 
be the winner," she announced. It was, she explained, an epic about a north 
country mining community and was therefore exactly what would appeal to Allen, 
a lifetime socialist, and to the wife of a Labour PM. She was right. I battled 
for Julian Rathbone's King Fisher Lives, to no avail. Mary Wilson was obdurate: 
"I couldn't be party to giving the prize to a book about cannibalism."

For me far and away the best Booker winner in the whole history of the Prize 
is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The best of all the novels that ought 
to have won the Prize but failed to do so is Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece 
The Blue Flower

1977 Beryl Bainbridge

Making a choice was very difficult - because it was this great prize of the 
world, one had to be very careful. Since I was published by Duckworth, it was 
very peculiar to have a Duckworth novel - Great Granny Webster by Caroline 
Blackwood - included in the vote. I put my vote forward - for Blackwood - but 
the discussion on it lasted only about three minutes, because it was such a 
short book. So nobody was really interested in that. All I can remember of the 
final meeting is that I got terribly tired, I literally sank lower and lower 
under the table. Brendan Gill, who I thought was American, went towards the 
balcony saying he was going to throw himself off, he was so fed up. Philip 
Larkin was completely silent most of the time. Nobody dared say a word to him 
and he never said a word back. The only one who was in total control of 
everything was Robin Ray. He was so clever that we all went along with whatever 
he said, and he wanted Staying On by Paul Scott to win. Poor Scott was too ill 
to collect the prize.

I've been shortlisted for the Booker five times and never won. I'm just very 
pleased to have been noticed.

1978 Derwent May

In 1978, all the five jury members had a different first choice, and they were 
all sticking to it. Suddenly someone suggested a compromise candidate that we 
all quite liked, but it seemed to me that we were now heading for disaster. 
Freddie Ayer, the chairman, had more or less pulled out, saying that the only 
novels he enjoyed reading were crime novels. So I went round the jury - the 
other three were all novelists, PH Newby, Angela Huth and Clare Boylan - and 
said to them in turn "Is this book your first choice?" All, rather sheepishly, 
said "No". I said, "The winner must surely be at least one person's first 
choice", and I saw it was the moment for me to push what I thought was 
unmistakably the best book, Iris Murdoch's The Sea, The Sea - which I knew was 
at least one juror's second choice (the other shortlisted authors were Kingsley 
Amis, André Brink, Penelope Fitzgerald, Jane Gardam and Bernice Rubens). I'm 
glad to say it won.

The best three winners have, I think, been the Murdoch, William Golding's 
Rites of Passage and Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. The prize has 
always lurched too much in favour of writers with unpromising backgrounds or 
good liberal attitudes, but it has unfailingly provided an excellent focus on 
the year's new novels.

1979 Hilary Spurling 

I loved my Booker summer, which boils down in my memory to long, hot, hazy 
days spent lying under a tree in the garden reading novels and saying to anyone 
who tried to interrupt: "Go away, I'm working." It was a strong field and the 
bookies' favourite was VS Naipaul's A Bend in the River. Its opponents on the 
panel argued that the book shouldn't strictly be classified as a novel, and in 
any case he'd won the prize before. The Naipaul lobby (including me) snapped 
back that the novel was doomed if it couldn't expand to include this sort of 
documentary fiction, and that our job was to pick the year's best book, 
regardless of its author.

The final verdict was as much of a shock to the judges as it was to everybody 
else. We'd spent the entire afternoon at loggerheads, and in the end 
compromised by giving the prize to everybody's second choice, Penelope 
Fitzgerald's small, slight, melancholy but beautifully judged and executed 
Offshore. Her recently published collected letters make it clear that her 
triumph - and the general incredulity that greeted it - caused her humiliation 
ever after.

1980 Claire Tomalin

I was determined that Alice Munro should be on the shortlist, and stuck my 
heels in to get her there. There were two real contenders for the prize, I 
believed, Anthony Burgess's Earthly Powers and William Golding's Rites of 
Passage, and the night before the final judging session I lay awake debating 
with myself: the Golding beautifully written and constructed, but with a 
slightly musty feel about it; Burgess a magnificent entertainer, overflowing 
with good humour, sometimes tipping into the slapdash. Both books thoroughly 
deserving. The next morning David Daiches, our chairman, began: "We'll go 
through the list in alphabetical order. I take it no one consider Burgess a 
possible winner?" Silence from the others. I exploded into a eulogy of 
Burgess's energy, invention and comic gift. I saw I had convinced no one, and 
felt that left only Golding. And so it was. Burgess sent a message saying he 
would not come to the dinner unless he won. I don't blame him. I saw a tear 
trickle down Golding's cheek when the announcement was made. I have re-read 
neither book, and I have rejoiced to see Alice Munro win the recognition she 
deserves.

1981 Hermione Lee

Salman Rushdie has won the Booker of Bookers and the Best of all Bookers, with 
his lastingly dazzling, deep and splendid novel, now a classic of world 
literature, Midnight's Children. But over a quarter of a century ago, when I 
was one of the judges who gave him the prize, his book was by no means an easy 
winner. Not many people had heard of Rushdie, unless they'd read a weird piece 
of science fiction called Grimus or seen the stunning extracts from the new 
novel in Granta. Our panel of judges (Samuel Hynes, Joan Bakewell, Brian Aldiss 
and me, with Malcolm Bradbury as chair) were pulling in different ways. We were 
reading many writers with more established reputations, and much more 
experience, than Rushdie - such as Muriel Spark. (To my lasting regret, we 
overlooked one of Nadine Gordimer's best novels, July's People.) Brian Aldiss 
was especially keen on Doris Lessing's "space fiction" The Sirian Experiments, 
Malcolm on Ian McEwan's The Comfort of Strangers.

We all jumped at the late arrival of the almost forgotten Anglo-Irish writer 
Molly Keane, the short-listing of whose wicked and eccentric novel Good 
Behaviour gained her a devoted new following. But our final discussion was 
painfully split between Midnight's Children and The White Hotel, DM Thomas's 
psychoanalytical erotic novel, centring on the massacre at Babi Yar, which made 
a strong impression on me at the time but now, looking back, seems to me 
sensationalist and exploitative. Sam Hynes, Joan Bakewell and I were firmly on 
the side of Rushdie; Brian Aldiss was passionately keen on Thomas, and so was 
Malcolm Bradbury, who tried at the very end of the discussion to argue that the 
chair should have a casting, and over-ruling vote. This was not allowed, 
Rushdie won by 3 votes to 2, and Brian Aldiss (whose intensity impressed me) 
left the room with tears in his eyes. When the 1981 prize was announced, a 
mighty career was launched. It would have taken off anyway, but it was helped 
by the prize. Chairing the prize 25 years on, I felt happy to be helping on 
Kiran Desai, a literary descendant of Rushdie's.

1982 Paul Bailey

There are many things I regret doing, and being a judge for the Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> is one of them. For some years 
after I was associated with two novels I absolutely loathed and would not have 
even started reading in other circumstances (on the shortlist that year were 
Thomas Keneally's Schindler's Ark, John Arden's Silence Among the Weapons, 
William Boyd's An Ice-Cream War, Lawrence Durrell's Constance or Solitary 
Practices, Alice Thomas Ellis's The 27th Kingdom and Timothy Mo's Sour Sweet). 
They are history now and are likely to remain so. My one good deed was to 
ensure a place on the shortlist for Sour Sweet, consequently bringing his work 
to a larger audience. But otherwise it was a dispiriting experience. The 
winner, by a single vote, was Schindler's Ark, a controversial but ultimately 
very popular choice.

The prize was founded, in part, to encourage competitiveness. Which of the six 
novelists will make it to the finishing post? This grisly notion constitutes a 
perfect recipe for envy, back-biting and self-glorification. The Booker has 
certainly mirrored fashion - the collapse of the empire; post-modernist 
Victorian pastiche; New Age sentimentality. Several stinkers have been 
honoured, but there have been some glorious losers: Alice Munro's The Beggar 
Maid, John McGahern's Amongst Women and Edward St Aubyn's Mother's Milk. A 
wonderful book such as Penelope Fitzgerald's The Blue Flower was completely 
ignored, and I hope the judges for 1995 are blushing now to be reminded of 
their grotesque oversight.

1983 Fay Weldon

A lively year, as Booker prizes go. We had a distinguished set of judges and 
some terrific books. The panel was finally split between a Coetzee and a 
Rushdie - a clash of continents. As the chairperson I had the casting vote - 
which is not saying "oh, I like that one best", but weighing up the arguments 
of one set of judges against the others and deciding which are the most 
convincing. The Coetzee (Life & Times of Michael K) got it, and Rushdie was 
really annoyed.

As a fervent feminist (25 years back), and taking time to make up my mind, I 
made a joke: "I haven't got my husband here to help me decide." But one should 
never make jokes in the presence of the police, security or at a Booker prize 
judging, and word got round that I meant it. Then I had to deliver the 
customary chairperson's speech. After I sat down, the then president of the 
Publishers Association got to his feet, crossed the room and hit my agent Giles 
Gordon, second best thing to hitting me. I'd used the speech to reproach the 
publishers for giving such rotten deals to writers. Since the BBC was working 
to rule, they cut the cameras at 10pm precisely: I was using transparent 
screens from which to make the speech (a Thatcher trick), and they went blank 
before I had time to finish with the usual pacifying bit about how you are all 
honourable men and none of what I say applies to you. Instead, I just had to 
sit down and all hell broke loose.

I had actually shown the speech to the organisers earlier, but I suppose they 
hadn't bothered to read it. I hadn't thought it was all that inflammatory. 
Michael Caine, charismatic chairman of Bookers, came up to me years later, when 
I had been inadvertently invited to one of the subsequent dinners, and said: 
"It is not by any wish of mine you are here tonight."

It's all got rather dull since: the prize tends to go to well-behaved and 
deserving writers: no subversion allowed. No one hits anyone.

1984 John Fuller

This was the year when the hot favourite, JG Ballard (Empire of the Sun), was 
passed over for a relative newcomer, Anita Brookner (Hotel du Lac). Hardly a 
scandal, but in a strong year we had already discarded some big names (Burgess, 
Golding, Spark, Bainbridge, two Amises, etc) before reaching the shortlist, so 
that journalistic antennae were twitching, and the outcome was felt to be a 
further surprise. The judges got on pretty well together. We were somewhat 
exercised by the question of whether Julian Barnes's Flaubert's Parrot was 
really a novel, while in the final judging session Anthony Curtis continued to 
argue forDavid Lodge <https://www.theguardian.com/books/davidlodge> (Small 
World), and Ted Rowlands stuck out for the Ballard. I thought that the Brookner 
was, in its economy and elegance, a small triumph of moral insight worthy of 
the tradition of James and Forster to which it belonged. I was relieved to have 
support from Polly Devlin and the somewhat eccentric Richard Cobb in this, and 
pleased at the nudge to her career that the prize must have given.

1985 Marina Warner

Norman St John Stevas was our chair, and early on that summer he picked out a 
number of books which he recommended his panel to read. Among them was a 
surprise, a bulky novel called The Bone People by Keri Hulme. Alongside the 
many gleamingly designed offerings from the major publishing houses, it had the 
distinction of being published by a women's cooperative in New Zealand, who, 
when the book won the prize against very high odds, came up in full island 
dress to collect it, chanting a Maori praise song.

Feelings in the final meeting - and afterwards - ran very high about this 
novel, but St John Stevas unexpectedly championed it throughout. Nina Bawden 
opposed it very strongly on the grounds of its violence (the novel tells a 
terrifying story of child-beatings), and wrote later publicly to distance 
herself from the decision. Nina found herself significantly outnumbered in her 
opposition, because Joanna Lumley didn't attend the final judging. She sent a 
message to say she was in rehearsal and that her nominated winner was Doris 
Lessing, for The Good Terrorist. When she heard The Bone People had won, she 
too dissociated herself from the judgment. JW Lambert and I supported the book.

I think that the best argument for the whole cruel and unfair business of 
prizes is that they can lead readers to writers who wouldn't otherwise be read 
much or perhaps at all. I didn't think Lessing needed the prize (and she would 
agree) and certainly not for a novel that is not her best (though it's a 
feature of prizes that authors often win for their weakest works).

1986 Anthony Thwaite

My chairing of the 1986 judges was marred, or enlivened, by several scandals 
or leaks or items of gossip. I was said (wrongly) to have lectured my fellow 
judges on "how to read a novel". I unwisely wrote to Julian Barnes to 
commiserate with him about his non-appearance on the shortlist: I was quoted as 
blaming it on "all those women" (my four fellow judges were Edna Healey, Isabel 
Quigly, Gillian Reynolds and Bernice Rubens).

It was a splendid shortlist: Kingsley Amis, Margaret Atwood, Paul Bailey, 
Robertson Davies, Kazuo Ishiguro, Timothy Mo. We were still going to and fro up 
until 10 minutes before the press announcement had to be made: two strongly for 
Amis, two equally strongly for Davies (What's Bred in the Bone), and a wobbler 
in the middle. At the last moment the wobbler came down on the side of The Old 
Devils, and Amis had won. A very satisfactory result, I thought.

1987 PD James

I look back on my chairmanship in 1987 as a very happy experience, 
particularly as I had as my colleagues four hardworking, enthusiastic and 
knowledgeable judges: Lady Selina Hastings, Allan Massie, Trevor McDonald and 
John B Thompson. I did have a fear at the time - and still do - that to ask the 
panel to read more than 100 novels in a comparatively short time can result in 
a literary surfeit which makes the final judgment more difficult. Choosing the 
winner was a long process, and I remember scurrying to the dinner table a 
little after the meal had started. At the end, however, the vote was unanimous 
- Penelope Lively won, for Moon Tiger - which is what I had hoped for. The 
Booker may at times have tended to increase the unhelpful dichotomy between 
popular storytelling and books which are classified as literary novels, but 
most of the winners have combined high literary achievement with compelling 
storytelling.

1988 Blake Morrison

We were a jury of writers that year: Sebastian Faulks, Rose Tremain, Philip 
French and, in the chair, Michael Foot, who seemed keener to talk about Byron 
than to reminisce about leading the Labour party. As early as our first 
meeting, Peter Carey's Oscar and Lucinda was the clear frontrunner. The only 
arguments were about which novels should be with him on the shortlist. I read 
the bulk of the 100 or so entries during a fortnight's holiday with two small 
children in Wales, rising early and retiring late. Those we finally settled on 
were Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses (which I read with innocent pleasure - 
the controversy over it didn't erupt till the following year), Bruce Chatwin's 
Utz (his last novel - his funeral was the day of the fatwa), David Lodge's Nice 
Work (one of his best), Penelope Fitzgerald's The Beginning of Spring (one of 
her best) and Marina Warner's The Lost Father.

My biggest regret was failing to get Doris Lessing's The Fifth Child on the 
shortlist - though in retrospect Alan Hollinghurst's first novel, The 
Swimming-Pool Library, was a graver omission. The final meeting lasted 25 
minutes: Foot was for Rushdie, the rest of us were for Carey, so that was that. 
Rushdie has sometimes been caricatured as a bad loser, but at the ceremony he 
behaved impeccably and was generous in his praise of the winning book. All in 
all, a pleasing outcome. My other experiences of sitting on prize juries have 
been grisly in comparison.

1989 David Lodge

Our shortlist meeting was the longest to date, and much of it was taken up 
with discussion of Martin Amis's London Fields. It is public knowledge that two 
of the judges on the panel, Maggie Gee and Helen McNeil, successfully resisted 
its inclusion on the shortlist, an outcome I still regret. The final judging 
session was uncontroversial - all but one of us were unequivocally in favour of 
Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. I consider it one of the best Booker 
winners I have read.

The success of the prize has had an enormous impact on the reception of 
literary fiction and other kinds of writing, not only directly, but also 
indirectly through the proliferation of new prizes that have imitated it. But 
the overtly competitive nature of these prizes, heightened by the publication 
of longlists and shortlists, takes its psychological toll on writers; and, 
given the large element of chance in the composition and operation of judging 
panels, the importance now attached to prizes in our literary culture seems 
excessive. A committee is a blunt instrument of literary criticism.

1990 Hilary Mantel 

Not a discourteous word was exchanged between the hardworking 1990 judges - 
much to the disappointment of the administrator Martyn Goff, who praised us to 
our faces and later whined that we were boring. Denis Forman ran the meetings 
with smooth expertise, and largely kept his own opinions dark until he cast the 
final vote.

Weeks before I was appointed a judge, I'd read John McGahern's Amongst Women 
and said, reaching page 20, "This will win the Booker". So I was disappointed, 
but AS Byatt's Possession was a good book and a popular choice, and the 
discussion was fair. The process exhausted me, and I declined to do it a second 
time. What I despised was the leaking by the publicity machine of trivial 
non-stories to the press - I felt the prize had enough status and news value 
without that. I also believe the judges shouldn't review the books under 
consideration or talk about them in public, and in 1990 we didn't.

I'm glad I was a Booker judge relatively early in my career. It stopped me 
thinking that literary prizes are about literary value. Even the most correct 
jury goes in for horsetrading and gamesmanship, and what emerges is a 
compromise.

For me the best of the Bookers is The Siege of Krishnapur. I read it again a 
few months ago and its supple humour, its insight, economy and narrative drive 
make it an enduring delight.

1991 Nicholas Mosley

I was asked to be a judge probably because I had just won the Whitbread the 
previous year. This had itself been a surprise, because it seemed I was out of 
favour with the literary establishment, having been labelled a "novelist of 
ideas" while what was in favour was "style". And style seemed most easily to be 
exhibited in stories that were outlandish, or grim, or quaint. I looked forward 
to judging the Booker because I thought I might give a boost to "ideas". There 
were five judges, and we had to choose six books out of 100 for the shortlist. 
I thought - well, surely, with this set-up I'll be able to squeeze in one 
choice of mine. But, in the event, I got none of my choices on to the list, 
because of the inflexibility of the voting system and of the other four judges, 
who were devotees of "style". So I resigned, partly in a huff, but also because 
I thought that by so doing I might still be able to strike a blow for "ideas", 
as I might be asked to explain myself in the press - which I did.

The winner chosen by the remaining judges was Ben Okri's The Famished Road - a 
beautifully written (yes) story of a boy in a west African village who goes to 
and fro between his family and the local witchdoctor. My choice would have been 
Allan Massie's The Sins of the Father, which confronted the issue of what was 
possible or impossible if the child of a notorious ex-Nazi and the child of a 
Jewish victim fell in love after the second world war. What could be forgiven, 
and by whom, and what could not. But these are controversial questions, and 
thus conventionally to be avoided.

1992 Victoria Glendinning

My fellow judges were John Coldstream, literary editor of the Telegraph, 
Harriet Harvey-Wood, literary director of the British Council, Valentine 
Cunningham and Mark Lawson. We became intimate in the way of people thrown 
together in a scary but non-fatal railway accident. John dreamt one night that 
he was Spartacus, with the Roman legions advancing on him in the form of piles 
of new titles. It was a vintage year for rent-a-sneer in the media. Prominent 
journalists whinged chauvinistically about "far-flung authors", deaf to the 
explosion of energy from Commonwealth novelists, which has been the most 
significant feature of the Booker's 40 years. The prize was "essentially 
trivial", pontificated AN Wilson in contemptuous mode in the Evening Standard; 
and, enraged, I wrote to the Guardian letters page to contest Richard Gott's 
clichés about the decline of the novel and what he called the "tokenism" of the 
inclusion of Michèle Roberts on the shortlist.

Every book on our shortlist had one passionate supporter and one furious 
antagonist. When at the final meeting we locked horns over the frontrunners, it 
was suggested that we should reach our decision by taking into account second 
choices - proportional representation. This procedure gave Michael Ondaatje 
(The English Patient) and Barry Unsworth (Sacred Hunger) equal points. I turned 
to Martyn Goff, sitting behind me discreetly - or as discreetly as anyone can 
who is wearing a gold satin tie - and asked if we could share the prize between 
the two. He conceded there was no rule against it. So that's what we did.

Before the meeting, I was so unnerved that I left my bag with all my notes in 
it at the bank. When stressed I become sharp-tongued, and at one point told a 
fellow judge that he was a condescending bastard. My notes on our sessions are, 
at this distance in time, enigmatic. What in the world, for example, was Val 
Cunningham on about when he said: "I am very interested in Huntley & Palmer's 
biscuits and their role in literature"?

1993 Gillian Beer

Olivier Todd, the French novelist, shrugged his shoulders at our second 
judges' meeting: no lunches with publishers, no approaches from agents, he 
complained - what an odd English bubble of propriety we were gathered inside. 
He was joking, but only just. And it is one of the remarkable things about 
being a Booker judge that no one tempts you with hospitality. You simply sit 
and read, and talk, and read again, over several months. The pleasure is in the 
reading, and in the talk. One of the rewards of going to see a new film is the 
conversation straight after, but reading new novels can be a lonely business. 
Not in this case. In 1993 I remember impassioned defences of books one of us 
had grown attached to, but no quarrels, just engrossing talk. Our chair, Grey 
Gowrie, came up with an ingenious criterion: novels must have "radioactivity" 
to stay in the running. He meant we must remember them weeks, months later. 
They mustn't fade. A self-proving criterion perhaps, but reassuring.

One novel that certainly had that quality and yet just missed the shortlist 
was Trainspotting and it was in arguing about Irvine Welsh's book that we came 
nearest to quarrelling. Getting from long to shortlist was painful, worse than 
sorting out the winner among that final six. Some wanted the prize to go to 
David Malouf's Remembering Babylon, while Caryl Phillips's Crossing the River 
and Carol Shields's The Stone Diaries had strong support as well. But Roddy 
Doyle's Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha won the day with its extraordinary technical 
achievement and its emotional force, taking us inside the voice and experience 
of a 10-year-old boy in the midst of family break-up.

1994 James Wood

After serving on the 1994 Booker prize committee, I made a pledge never to 
judge a big fiction prize again, and I have so far honoured it. We were a 
congenial group, and our chairman was not a former politician or bureaucrat but 
a distinguished literary critic (John Bayley); our meetings were friendly, and 
surely no less or more argumentative than those of other years. But the 
absurdity of the process was soon apparent: it is almost impossible to persuade 
someone else of the quality or poverty of a selected novel (a useful lesson in 
the limits of literary criticism). In practice, judge A blathers on about his 
favourite novel for five minutes, and then judge B blathers on about her 
favourite novel for five minutes, and nothing changes: no one switches sides. 
That is when the horse-trading begins. I remember that one of the judges phoned 
me and said, in effect: "I know that you especially like novel X, and you know 
that I especially like novel Y. It would be good if both those books got on to 
the shortlist, yes? So if you vote for my novel, I'll vote for yours, OK?"

That is how our shortlist was patched together, and it is how our winner was 
chosen. It is how every shortlist is chosen, whether the premises are as 
explicit or not. I liked the winning book a great deal (James Kelman's How Late 
It Was, How Late) - it was one of my choices - and would have been happy with 
either that book or Alan Hollinghurst's The Folding Star. But I intensely 
disliked the way we reached that verdict, and felt that the arbitrary, utterly 
political process discredited the whole project.

Since then, prizes have become a form of reviewing: it is prize-lists that 
select what people read, prize-lists that make literary careers. Bookshops 
order novels based on the prizes they have won or been shortlisted for. 
Nowadays, a whole month before the shortlist is announced, scores of novelists 
are effectively told that their books have not been the "big books" of the 
year, because they are not to be found on the longlist. Soon, no doubt, we will 
have the long-longlist, and the long-long longlist. Some wonderful books win 
the Booker, of course, just as the flypaper occasionally catches some really 
large flies. But it means - or should mean - nothing in literary terms.

1995 Ruth Rendell

I was always being asked what it was like to be on the Booker "jury". But I 
could never see us as that. Jurors have to decide between guilt and innocence 
while we had to pick the best. The best of 140 in our case - or 6.3 books a 
week. Reading that number is normal for me, but books I want to read, not ones 
I have to. It makes a big difference. We got on well, we judges. We disagreed 
but never quite quarrelled. I used to lie and say I read every word of every 
book. The truth is that I did my best, but I am a judicious skipper. Going home 
to Suffolk, I finished a novel and left it in the train. A man called out to me 
that I'd forgotten it, but when I said to keep it he was delighted. I hope he 
liked it better than I did.

So what did I get out of being a judge? The pleasure of giving the prize to 
Pat Barker's The Ghost Road, my choice, not one I was persuaded into. A mild 
antipathy to new novels so that now I tend to read more non-fiction. And my 
friendship with Peter Kemp, a fellow judge, which began in those Booker days.

1996 Jonathan Coe

How very arbitrary it seems, in retrospect. There was nothing wrong with our 
shortlist, and nothing wrong with our winner (Last Orders, by Graham Swift), 
but at 12 years' distance, it feels as though we could easily have chosen 
another six novels altogether. Our discussions were lengthy - and amicable, for 
the most part (until the final session, when tempers started to fray) - but 
what strikes me now about the whole process was how entirely subjective it was. 
Anyone who sets great store by the choices of Booker prize panels should 
remember this: the process consists of nothing more rigorous than five people 
sitting in a room together for a few hours, swapping personal opinions. And as 
far as I remember, not a single judge (including me) ever changed his or her 
mind, or shifted his or her position, in response to an argument put forward by 
a colleague. In the midst of it all, the novel which I now remember as being 
the finest of all - Asylum, by Patrick McGrath - slipped through our net, and 
failed to make the shortlist by a whisker. If it had reached the shortlist, 
such is the randomness of the final selection process, it might easily have won 
the prize itself.

1997 Jason Cowley

Before the longlist was made public, if you wanted to know which books were in 
contention you would usually be able to find out by having a discreet lunch 
with Martyn Goff, the charming and mischievous prize administrator who used to 
operate his own idiosyncratic system of leaks, withholding and revealing in 
equal measure. I remember turning up to the meeting at which our shortlist 
would be decided to be received with suspicion by our chairman, Gillian Beer. 
She wanted to know how our longlist was being discussed in the papers, and I 
was pretty sure by the way she looked at me that she thought I was responsible. 
Certainly I'd been having fun writing polemical pieces about the state of the 
British novel.

I believed then as I do now that the Booker is essentially a jamboree, little 
more than a kind of sport, with its own roster of winners and losers. It 
shouldn't be dignified or taken too seriously. But I wasn't the leaker. As we 
sat down for the lunch that preceded our discussions, and with Gillian Beer 
still grumbling about the longlist leaking out, I heard Goff say: "It's quite 
extraordinary. I don't know how it happened." He then, winningly, glanced at me 
and winked.

I often think that I've never quite recovered from my experience of being a 
judge. I began the year as an enthusiastic and engaged reader and reviewer of 
contemporary fiction, and ended it much more interested in non-fiction and 
narrative journalism. And of all the novels I read that year there are perhaps 
only two that I could ever imagine rereading: Arundhati Roy's The God of Small 
Things (our unfairly maligned winner) and Ian McEwan's Enduring Love (which 
just missed out on being shortlisted and divided the judges more than any other 
entry).

1998 Douglas Hurd

This was a quiet year. There were no sensational or overpowering entries, and 
no passionate disputes among the judges. The crafty device of holding the final 
meeting of the judges immediately before the award dinner certainly 
concentrated the mind. The prize went to Amsterdam by Ian McEwan, not because 
we thought it was about time he won the Booker, but because in a mild year most 
people (though not the chairman) thought his offering finished just ahead of
Beryl Bainbridge <https://www.theguardian.com/books/berylbainbridge>, riding 
Master Georgie

1999 Shena Mackay

It was a very strong year for fiction. When I was a judge - alongside Boyd 
Tonkin, Natasha Walter and John Sutherland, with Gerald Kaufman in the chair - 
several books assumed to be shoo-ins weren't on the shortlist, which caused 
dismay, as did the discovery by some authors that their books had not been 
entered, on the presumption that the judges would call them in. We failed to do 
so. Sorry. Pressures of time and books arriving late.

Our shortlisted authors were JM Coetzee, Anita Desai, Michael Frayn, Andrew 
O'Hagan, Ahdaf Soueif and Colm Tóibín. We gave the prize - controversially 
because he had won in 1983 - to Coetzee for Disgrace. We were vindicated 
recently when it was shortlisted for the Best of Bookers. John Sutherland was a 
strong advocate of Salman Rushdie (The Ground Beneath Her Feet) in our year, 
and he must be delighted that Midnight's Children has won the Booker of Bookers 
for the second time.

Our chief dispute arose from John's gadfly comments in this newspaper. As far 
as I remember, it was the suggestion that Natasha Walter and I had a feminist 
agenda which prompted Natasha to write a letter to the Guardian, which I 
signed. Being a judge gave me much more anxiety than being on the shortlist 
myself, even with the horrible bookies' odds and the risk of being depicted as 
a cartoon racehorse, because as a judge you are responsible for disappointing a 
lot of people.

2000 Rose Tremain

My second stint as a Booker prize judge contrasted with the first in one 
important respect: we had an extremely effective and powerful chair in Simon 
Jenkins. In 1988, the lovable Michael Foot had been hampered, as chair, by 
diary overspill. But Simon's influence on the 2000 jury was impressive. 
Meetings were held at his rooms in Albany, rather than at Martyn Goff's 
preferred venue of the Savile Club. Despite the constant lamentations of his 
fax machine, Simon's attention never strayed from the tasks in hand, the first 
of which was to kick out the dross. Roy Foster, Caroline Gascoigne, Mariella 
Frostrup and I were a vocal team and we each had our favourites. Mariella was 
able to squeeze Matthew Kneale's English Passengers on to the list, and 
Caroline's advocacy for Kazuo Ishiguro's When We Were Orphans was duly 
recognised. Roy Foster and I lost our battle for Anne Enright's What Are You 
Like?, but my call-in title, Trezza Azzopardi's The Hiding Place, scraped home.

What is really interesting is that nobody thought Margaret Atwood's The Blind 
Assassin was her best book. Where Simon's mental agility paid off was in 
persuading us all (except Mariella) that Atwood deserved the prize anyway - for 
all the times she'd nearly won it and had been pipped at the post by a lesser 
writer.

2001 Philip Hensher

It's an unusual experience, reading for the Booker. For once in your life you 
take a synchronic slice through the English-language novel, and see exactly 
what's interesting it at that moment. I was lucky in having an excellent 
chairman in Kenneth Baker, unprejudiced, interested and diligent, and fellow 
judges who really knew about the novel - Kate Summerscale was particularly good 
to argue with. I think we made a good choice with Peter Carey's substantial 
True History of the Kelly Gang, but the whole shortlist was, in my view, 
exceptional. I regretted that media excitement over Beryl Bainbridge actually 
damaged her chances with According to Queeney. We realised that if we 
shortlisted her, she had to win. There was no point in blotting out the 
winner's publicity with a storm of "Beryl Bridesmaid Again" headlines. I wanted 
to do more for Nick Hornby's How to Be Good, and it was a relief that the 
Whitbread rewarded Philip Pullman's The Amber Spyglass, which we could easily 
have shortlisted. It was a good-humoured, interesting experience, but what I 
got most out of it was being introduced to new novelists - Zvi Jagendorf, 
Ciaran Carson, Jamie O'Neill - however far they got in the judging process.

The best novel to have been given the prize is, I think, Naipaul's In a Free 
State in 1971.

2002 Salley Vickers

I was a judge the year Life of Pi won, and there is no doubt that our choice 
was a rip-roaring popular success. The booksellers loved us for it. It was me, 
in fact, who first drew the other judges' attention to the novel. I was given 
it while on tour in Canada, by a Winnipeg bookseller, and read it excitedly on 
the plane home. We used to have extra meetings at the home of our chair, Lisa 
Jardine, and I recall telling all the other judges - Erica Wagner, Russell 
Celyn Jones and David Baddiel - about the book, which at that time had not been 
entered by Canongate. I was very glad to see it on to the shortlist, but it was 
not my final choice (the other books on the shortlist were Rohinton Mistry's 
Family Matters, Carol Shields's Unless, William Trevor's The Story of Lucy 
Gault, Sarah Waters's Fingersmith and Tim Winton's Dirt Music). However, Lisa 
was a skilled chair. She wanted a unanimous verdict and, much as I admired the 
book, I couldn't give her that. So she said, "Salley, it was you who brought 
the book to our attention. Will you give the decision your blessing?" Well, I 
couldn't refuse.

2003 DJ Taylor

I can't say that I enjoyed reading all the books - 113 of them, I believe, in 
that year - but there was a certain amount of pleasure to be gained from the 
attendant razzmatazz, the thought that for a very brief period in the year an 
artefact routinely overlooked by large swathes of an indifferent media was 
suddenly news. There were several memorable clashes of opinion, the funniest by 
far coming when the chair, John Carey, trying desperately to persuade us of the 
merits of Martin Amis's Yellow Dog, read aloud from a paragraph describing the 
death-throes of a dying fly, at which point Francine Stock and I caught each 
other's eye across the table and began to giggle. The judging process was 
pretty much a waste of time as all four of the other judges arrived at the 
longlist meeting convinced that DBC Pierre's Vernon God Little was one of the 
great masterpieces of the early 21st century, whereas I thought that it was a 
promising first novel. This meant that the final judging session lasted a bare 
10 minutes, after which I had to sit discussing the existence (or 
non-existence) of God with AC Grayling, a subject on which both of us hold 
strong views.

2004 Tibor Fischer

I'd heard the rumours. The hair-pulling, the eye-gouging, the shameful 
flouncing. I was, however, extremely impressed by the rigour of my fellow 
judges, who, unlike me, had proper jobs and families to distract them from the 
mound of books. What did I learn? Discussion is futile. No one changes their 
mind about a book. You might as well have a show of hands straight away. There 
aren't many bad books (only one novel ended up in the bin after two pages), but 
there are a lot of so-so, nondescript novels that leave no trace. Publishers 
are idiots. I was very pleased Alan Hollinghurst won. But I wouldn't say The 
Line of Beauty is a better novel than David Mitchell's very different Cloud 
Atlas (which came in second) or Neil Cross's Always the Sun (or others on the 
longlist).

There are good reasons why Midnight's Children has been chosen as the Best of 
the Bookers (although every novelist I know rates Shame as Rushdie's best 
book), but it would have been a more interesting exercise to have chosen the 
best of the shortlisted novels. It's a pity that Beryl Bainbridge has always 
been pipped, and my favourite novel in the Booker annals (I've read it at least 
a dozen times) is Derek Robinson's Goshawk Squadron

2005 John Sutherland

When I chaired year 37, it more or less, as airline pilots say, flew by wire. 
The year was, by general agreement, a bumper one for fiction. As usual, no 
minds were much changed by the panel discussions - candidate B merely came 
forward when one judge's candidate A was voted down. John Banville came out top 
with The Sea. King of the As and Bs. Teeth were gnashed in the press the next 
day; but they would be if Jesus Christ had written the winning novel. I spoke 
to Kazuo Ishiguro (shortlisted for Never Let Me Go) shortly after. "The 
goalkeeper jumped the wrong way", he sportingly said. I wish I'd been 
quick-witted enough to rejoin "not even Petr Cech has to save five penalty 
shots all coming at him at once". Julian Barnes, in an interview for the New 
York Times, was more savage (he had been shortlisted for Arthur & George). Not, 
he felt, a bumper year for judges. Perhaps he was right. But posterity will 
forget us. Barnes, Ishiguro and - I believe - Banville they'll remember. And 
make their own judgments.

2006 Anthony Quinn

I enjoyed every moment of the 2006 Booker until the very last minutes of our 
final meeting in the Guildhall. That was when I realised that the novel which I 
had set my heart on would not be the winner. On anecdotal evidence from friends 
who had judged the prize in previous years, I gathered that there was usually 
someone on the jury who would be a complete pest and make the whole process as 
awkward as possible. Not this time: our chairman, Hermione Lee, set a tone of 
almost heartless conviviality that Candia McWilliam, Fiona Shaw and Simon 
Armitage consistently upheld. Indeed, we had been so likeminded in the final 
reckoning of our shortlist that I must have blanked the ominous build-up of 
support for Kiran Desai's The Inheritance of Loss and assumed that everyone 
would come round to what was clearly the best book, Edward St Aubyn's Mother's 
Milk. When I was outvoted 4-1 I was surprised, and appalled. Six months of 
reading and re-reading - only to be thwarted at the last! I asked for a 
recount, which at least got a laugh. It's not an exaggeration to say that I 
felt sick to my stomach. I was pleased for Kiran Desai, who'd spent eight years 
writing it. But we chose the wrong book.

2007 Giles Foden

Everyone expected arguments, and we had them, but with dignity (my fellow 
judges were Howard Davies, Wendy Cope, Ruth Scurr and Imogen Stubbs). We never 
fell out. In fact, we are meeting up this autumn for a drink. Some had their 
favourites that others couldn't stand; others tried to hold up yardsticks 
against which all books might be measured. The favourite supporters made 
persuasive cases for AN Wilson and Nicola Barker, but only Barker got through 
to the shortlist, despite an unfortunate error in transmission - not the 
judges' fault - which suggested Wilson had. The longlist is where the real 
argy-bargy takes place.

Once an author is on the shortlist anything can happen. In our case we arrived 
at a situation in which every judge had mutually exclusive first and last 
choices. Luckily, in Howard Davies we had a competent chairman, who helped us 
mathematically towards a choice of winner with which everyone was happy. PS: 
note to publishers, try not to write call-in letters with spelling mistakes, or 
one that make foolish claims. Some of these letters looked as if they were 
written in haste. Then again, so did some of the novels submitted.

2008 Alex Clark

Before I was asked to judge this year's prize, I had been on several literary 
prize panels and I felt I had enough experience to know roughly what I was 
doing. But little can prepare you for the Booker: not just the sheer volume of 
books submitted, but the sense that you are about to be partly responsible for 
making an indelible mark on the literary landscape. Now, with the final hurdle 
fast approaching, I can say that it's been not only an enjoyable process but 
also an instructive one. Reading is, of course, a solitary affair, and book 
reviewing not much less so. But anatomising one's taste and judgment and then 
communicating it to a group of people with equally strong views has been a 
wonderful challenge - not least because it makes for scrutiny of what it is 
that one values in fiction. And, gruelling though it was, I wouldn't give up 
those late nights and early mornings spent poring over novels.

And the winner was ... Booker prize winners

1969 Something to Answer For by PH Newby

1970 The Elected Member by Bernice Rubens

1971 In a Free State by VS Naipaul

1972 G by John Berger

1973 The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell

1974 Holiday by Stanley Middleton and The Conservationist by Nadine Gordimer

1975 Heat and Dust by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala

1976 Saville by David Storey

1977 Staying On by Paul Scott

1978 The Sea The Sea by Iris Murdoch

1979 Offshore by Penelope Fitzgerald

1980 Rites of Passage by William Golding

1981 Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie

1982 Schindler's Ark by Thomas Keneally

1983 Life & Times of Michael K by JM Coetzee

1984 Hotel du Lac by Anita Brookner

1985 The Bone People by Keri Hulme

1986 The Old Devils by Kingsley Amis

1987 Moon Tiger by Penelope Lively

1988 Oscar and Lucinda by Peter Carey

1989 The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro

1990 Possession by AS Byatt

1991 The Famished Road by Ben Okri

1992 The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje and Sacred Hunger by Barry 
Unsworth

1993 Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha by Roddy Doyle

1994 How Late It Was How Late by James Kelman

1995 The Ghost Road by Pat Barker

1996 Last Orders by Graham Swift

1997 The God of Small Things by Arundhati Roy

1998 Amsterdam by Ian McEwan

1999 Disgrace by JM Coetzee

2000 The Blind Assassin by Margaret Atwood

2001 True History of the Kelly Gang by Peter Carey

2002 Life of Pi by Yann Martel

2003 Vernon God Little by DBC Pierre

2004 The Line of Beauty by Alan Hollinghurst

2005 The Sea by John Banville

2006 The Inheritance of Loss by Kiran Desai

2007 The Gathering by Anne Enright

· "The Booker 40 at the V&A" is at the V&am

1969 Frank Kermode

The first judges were Rebecca West, Stephen Spender, David Farrer and WL Webb, 
at that time literary editor of the Guardian. We were handsomely treated: in 
London we haunted Bertorelli's, but we spent more than one weekend at Michael 
Astor's beautiful Cotswold house, where Dame Rebecca strode the grounds 
authoritatively between bouts of laying down the law. There were perhaps 60 
books, which seemed a lot, though modern judges are said to read twice as many. 
Getting through the 60 was made easier by our not daring to take on Dame 
Rebecca. "Miss Murdoch writes good and bad novels in alternate years," she 
said. "This is a bad year." Muriel Spark: "clever but too playful." And out 
they went.

Two of us favoured Nicholas Mosley's Impossible Object, but were soon 
silenced. The choice of PH Newby's Something to Answer For was the result of a 
compromise. Dame Rebecca didn't dislike it as much as nearly all the others. 
Surveyors of the prize's history have spoken ill of this good book, perhaps 
without reading it, or by being too ready to suppose that this industrious 
writer could manage a novel a year as well as running the Third Programme. 
Anyway, I remember this, my one experience of judging, with much pleasure and 
amusement.

1970 Antonia Fraser

The judging of the 1970 prize was a low-key affair except for the feisty 
behaviour of Dame Rebecca West, a judge for the second year running. At one 
point she denounced Margaret Drabble for her novels of domestic life on the 
grounds that "Anyone can do the washing-up; just get a big bowl and some 
liquid; so why complain about it?" The novel in question was The Waterfall, 
which both Richard Hoggart and I admired greatly (and didn't think was about 
washing-up). I knew Rebecca West, since she was a friend and neighbour of my 
parents in Sussex, and was very fond of her; all the same, it occurred to me 
that she was possibly one of the brilliant old ladies who felt threatened by a 
brilliant young one in the shape of Maggie Drabble. In the end we were split 
between William Trevor's Mrs Eckdorf in O'Neill's Hotel and Bernice Rubens's 
The Elected Member. I voted for Rubens but today would vote for Trevor.

1971 was much more exacting. The most exciting thing that happened to me as a 
Booker Judge for the second time was not controversial. I shared a taxi back 
with fellow judge Saul Bellow on a long, long ride from somewhere in the City: 
he was nattily dressed in a pale green shantung suit, blue shirt, green tie 
with large blue dots on it; his silver hair and slanting, large dark eyes made 
him look like a 30s film star playing a refined gangster. Suddenly he leaned 
forward and asked: "Has anyone ever told you that you're a very handsome 
woman?" I pondered on a suitable reply, modest yet encouraging. But having 
spoken, the Great Man closed his eyes and remained apparently asleep for the 
rest of the journey.

1971 John Gross

A faint aroma of the Nobel prize - or of Nobel prizes yet to come - hangs over 
the 1971 Booker. First, the award went to VS Naipaul (who was to be Nobel 
laureate in 2001) for In a Free State. It was a result with which I agreed. 
Second, the organisers had succeeded in persuading a distinguished writer from 
abroad to be one of the judges: Saul Bellow (who was to be Nobel laureate in 
1976). It seemed a thrilling prospect.

In the event, one of the things I remember most clearly about Bellow is that 
he insisted on being put up at the Ritz (which must have burned a big hole in 
the budget), and then complained because he hadn't been given a room 
overlooking Green Park.

Another recollection is his response when I advanced the claims of Elizabeth 
Taylor's Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont, which apart from the Naipaul was the 
book on the shortlist I most favoured. "Oh," he said, "that's one of those 
little tinkling teacup things that the British always do well." He was quite 
wrong - Mrs Palfrey is a work of deep feeling - but his dismissiveness 
effectively put paid to its chances.

1972 George Steiner

It was the most illustrious panel in the Booker's history. Both the other 
judges, Cyril Connolly and Elizabeth Bowen, were too ill to attend the 
ceremony. I fought very hard for John Berger to win for G, and then he threw it 
in my face by giving half the prize money to the Black Panthers. It was a very 
grim experience. I was in a very precarious position at the time and I 
literally thought it was the end for me in this country. I thought I would have 
to pack my bags and go.

1973 Edna O'Brien

Mary McCarthy and I were the judges, with Karl Miller presiding as chairman. 
Disputes were negligible. From a batch of about 20, it was whittled down to two 
contenders - The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell and The Black Prince by Iris 
Murdoch, with Farrell winning by a whisker. Next day, Mary changed her mind and 
it was left to Miller to cast the deciding vote, which he did with alacrity and 
no rancour. The prize has changed as the literary/publishing world has 
undergone a radical and not always edifying sea change: the celebrity virus now 
infects authors and judges alike.

1974 Ion Trewin

We were three judges - AS Byatt, Elizabeth Jane Howard and me. At the 
shortlist meeting, Jane remarked that she thought Ending Up by Kingsley Amis 
(then her husband) was his best book and should go on the shortlist. I looked 
first at Antonia, and then at Martyn Goff, the prize's administrator - both 
remained impassive. We broke for a breather. Martyn said that as chairman it 
was up to me. Antonia liked the novel (as did I). On literary grounds neither 
of us had problems about shortlisting it, but what would the press say?

The Booker was already familiar with controversies. Martyn, I know, was not 
averse to the publicity that our decision would inevitably bring. (This was to 
centre around a vituperative correspondence in the Times.) But would the 
burgeoning reputation of the prize be damaged? He thought not. More important 
was our choice of winner. Antonia and I spoke up for Nadine Gordimer's The 
Conservationist, but Jane was less impressed. She remained keen on Ending Up, 
but realising that neither Antonia nor I would countenance it winning, she 
concentrated on Stanley Middleton's Holiday, a study of middle England that she 
saw as a "perfect miniature".

With only three judges, it seemed important to me that we did not compromise 
or produce a two-one verdict. Might we split the prize between Middleton and 
Gordimer? Martyn said he knew of no reason why not. We were vindicated by The 
Conservationist being selected this year for the Best of the Booker shortlist.

My favourite Booker winner remains Schindler's Ark (1982) by Thomas Keneally 
(but I must declare my interest and say that I was its editor).

1975 Susan Hill

Peter Ackroyd was the young, newly appointed literary editor of the Spectator. 
Roy Fuller was a distinguished older poet. Angus Wilson was in his years as 
founder of the creative writing course at UEA and one of the elder statesmen of 
the contemporary novel. It was a daunting experience to join them as a judge. I 
took the mountain of submitted novels on my honeymoon, and our first meeting 
was scheduled for the day I returned. I discovered that Angus had spent a 
holiday at the same Italian hotel a few weeks earlier. So we should all have 
been in mellow mood, and three of us were. But Roy Fuller was not the easiest 
man to work with. He was acerbic and disliked being contradicted, and when it 
came to choosing a shortlist he refused to join in, on the grounds that we had 
agreed on our winner, so a shortlist was superfluous. The Booker management 
committee was, rightly, having none of this and insisted.

I had been shortlisted myself three years earlier, and it had given my career 
a huge boost. I fought hard. We all did. Fuller grudgingly agreed to allowing a 
shortlist of two - the winner and one runner-up. Otherwise, he was going to 
walk. It was tricky and it spoiled what should have been an enjoyable 
experience. I was very happy with our winner, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's Heat and 
Dust, but I wish we had stood up to Fuller and if he had walked out, so be it.

My personal Best of Bookers is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The 
omission of Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece The Blue Flower even from the 
shortlist in 1995 I find quite inexplicable.

1976 Francis King

There is a vast difference of scale between the prize as I experienced it as a 
judge and how it is now. Then the prize money was far less generous, and the 
fee for the judging was an honorarium. There were only three judges: our 
chairman Walter Allen, an admirable novelist and critic, then confined to a 
wheelchair, so that I had to read out his presentation speech for him; Mary 
Wilson, the wife of the prime minister; and me. Despite his failing health, 
Allen was, unlike me, immensely conscientious in reading every submission from 
cover to cover. Mary Wilson, a lover of poetry and herself an artless but often 
touching poet, was at the disadvantage of having read few novels in the course 
of her life - so that she was clearly puzzled when I referred to one of the 
submissions as "Kafkaesque".

My sister Elizabeth looked through the piles of books awaiting my reading, and 
eventually held up David Storey's Saville. With a colleague, John Guest, she 
had already put in a lot of robust work as one of its two editors. "This will 
be the winner," she announced. It was, she explained, an epic about a north 
country mining community and was therefore exactly what would appeal to Allen, 
a lifetime socialist, and to the wife of a Labour PM. She was right. I battled 
for Julian Rathbone's King Fisher Lives, to no avail. Mary Wilson was obdurate: 
"I couldn't be party to giving the prize to a book about cannibalism."

For me far and away the best Booker winner in the whole history of the Prize 
is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The best of all the novels that ought 
to have won the Prize but failed to do so is Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece 
The Blue Flower

1977 Beryl Bainbridge

Making a choice was very difficult - because it was this great prize of the 
world, one had to be very careful. Since I was published by Duckworth, it was 
very peculiar to have a Duckworth novel - Great Granny Webster by Caroline 
Blackwood - included in the vote. I put my vote forward - for Blackwood - but 
the discussion on it lasted only about three minutes, because it was such a 
short book. So nobody was really interested in that. All I can remember of the 
final meeting is that I got terribly tired, I literally sank lower and lower 
under the table. Brendan Gill, who I thought was American, went towards the 
balcony saying he was going to throw himself off, he was so fed up. Philip 
Larkin was completely silent most of the time. Nobody dared say a word to him 
and he never said a word back. The only one who was in total control of 
everything was Robin Ray. He was so clever that we all went along with whatever 
he said, and he wanted Staying On by Paul Scott to win. Poor Scott was too ill 
to collect the prize.

I've been shortlisted for the Booker five times and never won. I'm just very 
pleased to have been noticed.

1978 Derwent May

In 1978, all the five jury members had a different first choice, and they were 
all sticking to it. Suddenly someone suggested a compromise candidate that we 
all quite liked, but it seemed to me that we were now heading for disaster. 
Freddie Ayer, the chairman, had more or less pulled out, saying that the only 
novels he enjoyed reading were crime novels. So I went round the jury - the 
other three were all novelists, PH Newby, Angela Huth and Clare Boylan - and 
said to them in turn "Is this book your first choice?" All, rather sheepishly, 
said "No". I said, "The winner must surely be at least one person's first 
choice", and I saw it was the moment for me to push what I thought was 
unmistakably the best book, Iris Murdoch's The Sea, The Sea - which I knew was 
at least one juror's second choice (the other shortlisted authors were Kingsley 
Amis, André Brink, Penelope Fitzgerald, Jane Gardam and Bernice Rubens). I'm 
glad to say it won.

The best three winners have, I think, been the Murdoch, William Golding's 
Rites of Passage and Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. The prize has 
always lurched too much in favour of writers with unpromising backgrounds or 
good liberal attitudes, but it has unfailingly provided an excellent focus on 
the year's new novels.

1979 Hilary Spurling 

I loved my Booker summer, which boils down in my memory to long, hot, hazy 
days spent lying under a tree in the garden reading novels and saying to anyone 
who tried to interrupt: "Go away, I'm working." It was a strong field and the 
bookies' favourite was VS Naipaul's A Bend in the River. Its opponents on the 
panel argued that the book shouldn't strictly be classified as a novel, and in 
any case he'd won the prize before. The Naipaul lobby (including me) snapped 
back that the novel was doomed if it couldn't expand to include this sort of 
documentary fiction, and that our job was to pick the year's best book, 
regardless of its author.

The final verdict was as much of a shock to the judges as it was to everybody 
else. We'd spent the entire afternoon at loggerheads, and in the end 
compromised by giving the prize to everybody's second choice, Penelope 
Fitzgerald's small, slight, melancholy but beautifully judged and executed 
Offshore. Her recently published collected letters make it clear that her 
triumph - and the general incredulity that greeted it - caused her humiliation 
ever after.

1980 Claire Tomalin

I was determined that Alice Munro should be on the shortlist, and stuck my 
heels in to get her there. There were two real contenders for the prize, I 
believed, Anthony Burgess's Earthly Powers and William Golding's Rites of 
Passage, and the night before the final judging session I lay awake debating 
with myself: the Golding beautifully written and constructed, but with a 
slightly musty feel about it; Burgess a magnificent entertainer, overflowing 
with good humour, sometimes tipping into the slapdash. Both books thoroughly 
deserving. The next morning David Daiches, our chairman, began: "We'll go 
through the list in alphabetical order. I take it no one consider Burgess a 
possible winner?" Silence from the others. I exploded into a eulogy of 
Burgess's energy, invention and comic gift. I saw I had convinced no one, and 
felt that left only Golding. And so it was. Burgess sent a message saying he 
would not come to the dinner unless he won. I don't blame him. I saw a tear 
trickle down Golding's cheek when the announcement was made. I have re-read 
neither book, and I have rejoiced to see Alice Munro win the recognition she 
deserves.

1981 Hermione Lee

Salman Rushdie has won the Booker of Bookers and the Best of all Bookers, with 
his lastingly dazzling, deep and splendid novel, now a classic of world 
literature, Midnight's Children. But over a quarter of a century ago, when I 
was one of the judges who gave him the prize, his book was by no means an easy 
winner. Not many people had heard of Rushdie, unless they'd read a weird piece 
of science fiction called Grimus or seen the stunning extracts from the new 
novel in Granta. Our panel of judges (Samuel Hynes, Joan Bakewell, Brian Aldiss 
and me, with Malcolm Bradbury as chair) were pulling in different ways. We were 
reading many writers with more established reputations, and much more 
experience, than Rushdie - such as Muriel Spark. (To my lasting regret, we 
overlooked one of Nadine Gordimer's best novels, July's People.) Brian Aldiss 
was especially keen on Doris Lessing's "space fiction" The Sirian Experiments, 
Malcolm on Ian McEwan's The Comfort of Strangers.

We all jumped at the late arrival of the almost forgotten Anglo-Irish writer 
Molly Keane, the short-listing of whose wicked and eccentric novel Good 
Behaviour gained her a devoted new following. But our final discussion was 
painfully split between Midnight's Children and The White Hotel, DM Thomas's 
psychoanalytical erotic novel, centring on the massacre at Babi Yar, which made 
a strong impression on me at the time but now, looking back, seems to me 
sensationalist and exploitative. Sam Hynes, Joan Bakewell and I were firmly on 
the side of Rushdie; Brian Aldiss was passionately keen on Thomas, and so was 
Malcolm Bradbury, who tried at the very end of the discussion to argue that the 
chair should have a casting, and over-ruling vote. This was not allowed, 
Rushdie won by 3 votes to 2, and Brian Aldiss (whose intensity impressed me) 
left the room with tears in his eyes. When the 1981 prize was announced, a 
mighty career was launched. It would have taken off anyway, but it was helped 
by the prize. Chairing the prize 25 years on, I felt happy to be helping on 
Kiran Desai, a literary descendant of Rushdie's.

1982 Paul Bailey

There are many things I regret doing, and being a judge for the Booker prize 
is one of them. For some years after I was associated with two novels I 
absolutely loathed and would not have even started reading in other 
circumstances (on the shortlist that year were Thomas Keneally's Schindler's 
Ark, John Arden's Silence Among the Weapons, William Boyd's An Ice-Cream War, 
Lawrence Durrell's Constance or Solitary Practices, Alice Thomas Ellis's The 
27th Kingdom and Timothy Mo's Sour Sweet). They are history now and are likely 
to remain so. My one good deed was to ensure a place on the shortlist for Sour 
Sweet, consequently bringing his work to a larger audience. But otherwise it 
was a dispiriting experience. The winner, by a single vote, was Schindler's 
Ark, a controversial but ultimately very popular choice.

The prize was founded, in part, to encourage competitiveness. Which of the six 
novelists will make it to the finishing post? This grisly notion constitutes a 
perfect recipe for envy, back-biting and self-glorification. The Booker has 
certainly mirrored fashion - the collapse of the empire; post-modernist 
Victorian pastiche; New Age sentimentality. Several stinkers have been 
honoured, but there have been some glorious losers: Alice Munro's The Beggar 
Maid, John McGahern's Amongst Women and Edward St Aubyn's Mother's Milk. A 
wonderful book such as Penelope Fitzgerald's The Blue Flower was completely 
ignored, and I hope the judges for 1995 are blushing now to be reminded of 
their grotesque oversight.

1983 Fay Weldon

A lively year, as Booker prizes go. We had a distinguished set of judges and 
some terrific books. The panel was finally split between a Coetzee and a 
Rushdie - a clash of continents. As the chairperson I had the casting vote - 
which is not saying "oh, I like that one best", but weighing up the arguments 
of one set of judges against the others and deciding which are the most 
convincing. The Coetzee (Life & Times of Michael K) got it, and Rushdie was 
really annoyed.

As a fervent feminist (25 years back), and taking time to make up my mind, I 
made a joke: "I haven't got my husband here to help me decide." But one should 
never make jokes in the presence of the police, security or at a Booker prize 
judging, and word got round that I meant it. Then I had to deliver the 
customary chairperson's speech. After I sat down, the then president of the 
Publishers Association got to his feet, crossed the room and hit my agent Giles 
Gordon, second best thing to hitting me. I'd used the speech to reproach the 
publishers for giving such rotten deals to writers. Since the BBC was working 
to rule, they cut the cameras at 10pm precisely: I was using transparent 
screens from which to make the speech (a Thatcher trick), and they went blank 
before I had time to finish with the usual pacifying bit about how you are all 
honourable men and none of what I say applies to you. Instead, I just had to 
sit down and all hell broke loose.

I had actually shown the speech to the organisers earlier, but I suppose they 
hadn't bothered to read it. I hadn't thought it was all that inflammatory. 
Michael Caine, charismatic chairman of Bookers, came up to me years later, when 
I had been inadvertently invited to one of the subsequent dinners, and said: 
"It is not by any wish of mine you are here tonight."

It's all got rather dull since: the prize tends to go to well-behaved and 
deserving writers: no subversion allowed. No one hits anyone.

1984 John Fuller

This was the year when the hot favourite, JG Ballard (Empire of the Sun), was 
passed over for a relative newcomer, Anita Brookner (Hotel du Lac). Hardly a 
scandal, but in a strong year we had already discarded some big names (Burgess, 
Golding, Spark, Bainbridge, two Amises, etc) before reaching the shortlist, so 
that journalistic antennae were twitching, and the outcome was felt to be a 
further surprise. The judges got on pretty well together. We were somewhat 
exercised by the question of whether Julian Barnes's Flaubert's Parrot was 
really a novel, while in the final judging session Anthony Curtis continued to 
argue for David Lodge (Small World), and Ted Rowlands stuck out for the 
Ballard. I thought that the Brookner was, in its economy and elegance, a small 
triumph of moral insight worthy of the tradition of James and Forster to which 
it belonged. I was relieved to have support from Polly Devlin and the somewhat 
eccentric Richard Cobb in this, and pleased at the nudge to her career that the 
prize must have given.

1985 Marina Warner

Norman St John Stevas was our chair, and early on that summer he picked out a 
number of books which he recommended his panel to read. Among them was a 
surprise, a bulky novel called The Bone People by Keri Hulme. Alongside the 
many gleamingly designed offerings from the major publishing houses, it had the 
distinction of being published by a women's cooperative in New Zealand, who, 
when the book won the prize against very high odds, came up in full island 
dress to collect it, chanting a Maori praise song.

Feelings in the final meeting - and afterwards - ran very high about this 
novel, but St John Stevas unexpectedly championed it throughout. Nina Bawden 
opposed it very strongly on the grounds of its violence (the novel tells a 
terrifying story of child-beatings), and wrote later publicly to distance 
herself from the decision. Nina found herself significantly outnumbered in her 
opposition, because Joanna Lumley didn't attend the final judging. She sent a 
message to say she was in rehearsal and that her nominated winner was Doris 
Lessing, for The Good Terrorist. When she heard The Bone People had won, she 
too dissociated herself from the judgment. JW Lambert and I supported the book.

I think that the best argument for the whole cruel and unfair business of 
prizes is that they can lead readers to writers who wouldn't otherwise be read 
much or perhaps at all. I didn't think Lessing needed the prize (and she would 
agree) and certainly not for a novel that is not her best (though it's a 
feature of prizes that authors often win for their weakest works).

1986 Anthony Thwaite

My chairing of the 1986 judges was marred, or enlivened, by several scandals 
or leaks or items of gossip. I was said (wrongly) to have lectured my fellow 
judges on "how to read a novel". I unwisely wrote to Julian Barnes to 
commiserate with him about his non-appearance on the shortlist: I was quoted as 
blaming it on "all those women" (my four fellow judges were Edna Healey, Isabel 
Quigly, Gillian Reynolds and Bernice Rubens).

It was a splendid shortlist: Kingsley Amis, Margaret Atwood, Paul Bailey, 
Robertson Davies, Kazuo Ishiguro, Timothy Mo. We were still going to and fro up 
until 10 minutes before the press announcement had to be made: two strongly for 
Amis, two equally strongly for Davies (What's Bred in the Bone), and a wobbler 
in the middle. At the last moment the wobbler came down on the side of The Old 
Devils, and Amis had won. A very satisfactory result, I thought.

1987 PD James

I look back on my chairmanship in 1987 as a very happy experience, 
particularly as I had as my colleagues four hardworking, enthusiastic and 
knowledgeable judges: Lady Selina Hastings, Allan Massie, Trevor McDonald and 
John B Thompson. I did have a fear at the time - and still do - that to ask the 
panel to read more than 100 novels in a comparatively short time can result in 
a literary surfeit which makes the final judgment more difficult. Choosing the 
winner was a long process, and I remember scurrying to the dinner table a 
little after the meal had started. At the end, however, the vote was unanimous 
- Penelope Lively won, for Moon Tiger - which is what I had hoped for. The 
Booker may at times have tended to increase the unhelpful dichotomy between 
popular storytelling and books which are classified as literary novels, but 
most of the winners have combined high literary achievement with compelling 
storytelling.

1988 Blake Morrison

We were a jury of writers that year: Sebastian Faulks, Rose Tremain, Philip 
French and, in the chair, Michael Foot, who seemed keener to talk about Byron 
than to reminisce about leading the Labour party. As early as our first 
meeting, Peter Carey's Oscar and Lucinda was the clear frontrunner. The only 
arguments were about which novels should be with him on the shortlist. I read 
the bulk of the 100 or so entries during a fortnight's holiday with two small 
children in Wales, rising early and retiring late. Those we finally settled on 
were Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses (which I read with innocent pleasure - 
the controversy over it didn't erupt till the following year), Bruce Chatwin's 
Utz (his last novel - his funeral was the day of the fatwa), David Lodge's Nice 
Work (one of his best), Penelope Fitzgerald's The Beginning of Spring (one of 
her best) and Marina Warner's The Lost Father.

My biggest regret was failing to get Doris Lessing's The Fifth Child on the 
shortlist - though in retrospect Alan Hollinghurst's first novel, The 
Swimming-Pool Library, was a graver omission. The final meeting lasted 25 
minutes: Foot was for Rushdie, the rest of us were for Carey, so that was that. 
Rushdie has sometimes been caricatured as a bad loser, but at the ceremony he 
behaved impeccably and was generous in his praise of the winning book. All in 
all, a pleasing outcome. My other experiences of sitting on prize juries have 
been grisly in comparison.

1989 David Lodge

Our shortlist meeting was the longest to date, and much of it was taken up 
with discussion of Martin Amis's London Fields. It is public knowledge that two 
of the judges on the panel, Maggie Gee and Helen McNeil, successfully resisted 
its inclusion on the shortlist, an outcome I still regret. The final judging 
session was uncontroversial - all but one of us were unequivocally in favour of 
Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. I consider it one of the best Booker 
winners I have read.

The success of the prize has had an enormous impact on the reception of 
literary fiction and other kinds of writing, not only directly, but also 
indirectly through the proliferation of new prizes that have imitated it. But 
the overtly competitive nature of these prizes, heightened by the publication 
of longlists and shortlists, takes its psychological toll on writers; and, 
given the large element of chance in the composition and operation of judging 
panels, the importance now attached to prizes in our literary culture seems 
excessive. A committee is a blunt instrument of literary criticism.

1990 Hilary Mantel 

Not a discourteous word was exchanged between the hardworking 1990 judges - 
much to the disappointment of the administrator Martyn Goff, who praised us to 
our faces and later whined that we were boring. Denis Forman ran the meetings 
with smooth expertise, and largely kept his own opinions dark until he cast the 
final vote.

Weeks before I was appointed a judge, I'd read John McGahern's Amongst Women 
and said, reaching page 20, "This will win the Booker". So I was disappointed, 
but AS Byatt's Possession was a good book and a popular choice, and the 
discussion was fair. The process exhausted me, and I declined to do it a second 
time. What I despised was the leaking by the publicity machine of trivial 
non-stories to the press - I felt the prize had enough status and news value 
without that. I also believe the judges shouldn't review the books under 
consideration or talk about them in public, and in 1990 we didn't.

I'm glad I was a Booker judge relatively early in my career. It stopped me 
thinking that literary prizes are about literary value. Even the most correct 
jury goes in for horsetrading and gamesmanship, and what emerges is a 
compromise.

For me the best of the Bookers is The Siege of Krishnapur. I read it again a 
few months ago and its supple humour, its insight, economy and narrative drive 
make it an enduring delight.

1991 Nicholas Mosley

I was asked to be a judge probably because I had just won the Whitbread the 
previous year. This had itself been a surprise, because it seemed I was out of 
favour with the literary establishment, having been labelled a "novelist of 
ideas" while what was in favour was "style". And style seemed most easily to be 
exhibited in stories that were outlandish, or grim, or quaint. I looked forward 
to judging the Booker because I thought I might give a boost to "ideas". There 
were five judges, and we had to choose six books out of 100 for the shortlist. 
I thought - well, surely, with this set-up I'll be able to squeeze in one 
choice of mine. But, in the event, I got none of my choices on to the list, 
because of the inflexibility of the voting system and of the other four judges, 
who were devotees of "style". So I resigned, partly in a huff, but also because 
I thought that by so doing I might still be able to strike a blow for "ideas", 
as I might be asked to explain myself in the press - which I did.

The winner chosen by the remaining judges was Ben Okri's The Famished Road - a 
beautifully written (yes) story of a boy in a west African village who goes to 
and fro between his family and the local witchdoctor. My choice would have been 
Allan Massie's The Sins of the Father, which confronted the issue of what was 
possible or impossible if the child of a notorious ex-Nazi and the child of a 
Jewish victim fell in love after the second world war. What could be forgiven, 
and by whom, and what could not. But these are controversial questions, and 
thus conventionally to be avoided.

1992 Victoria Glendinning

My fellow judges were John Coldstream, literary editor of the Telegraph, 
Harriet Harvey-Wood, literary director of the British Council, Valentine 
Cunningham and Mark Lawson. We became intimate in the way of people thrown 
together in a scary but non-fatal railway accident. John dreamt one night that 
he was Spartacus, with the Roman legions advancing on him in the form of piles 
of new titles. It was a vintage year for rent-a-sneer in the media. Prominent 
journalists whinged chauvinistically about "far-flung authors", deaf to the 
explosion of energy from Commonwealth novelists, which has been the most 
significant feature of the Booker's 40 years. The prize was "essentially 
trivial", pontificated AN Wilson in contemptuous mode in the Evening Standard; 
and, enraged, I wrote to the Guardian letters page to contest Richard Gott's 
clichés about the decline of the novel and what he called the "tokenism" of the 
inclusion of Michèle Roberts on the shortlist.

Every book on our shortlist had one passionate supporter and one furious 
antagonist. When at the final meeting we locked horns over the frontrunners, it 
was suggested that we should reach our decision by taking into account second 
choices - proportional representation. This procedure gave Michael Ondaatje 
(The English Patient) and Barry Unsworth (Sacred Hunger) equal points. I turned 
to Martyn Goff, sitting behind me discreetly - or as discreetly as anyone can 
who is wearing a gold satin tie - and asked if we could share the prize between 
the two. He conceded there was no rule against it. So that's what we did.

Before the meeting, I was so unnerved that I left my bag with all my notes in 
it at the bank. When stressed I become sharp-tongued, and at one point told a 
fellow judge that he was a condescending bastard. My notes on our sessions are, 
at this distance in time, enigmatic. What in the world, for example, was Val 
Cunningham on about when he said: "I am very interested in Huntley & Palmer's 
biscuits and their role in literature"?

1993 Gillian Beer

Olivier Todd, the French novelist, shrugged his shoulders at our second 
judges' meeting: no lunches with publishers, no approaches from agents, he 
complained - what an odd English bubble of propriety we were gathered inside. 
He was joking, but only just. And it is one of the remarkable things about 
being a Booker judge that no one tempts you with hospitality. You simply sit 
and read, and talk, and read again, over several months. The pleasure is in the 
reading, and in the talk. One of the rewards of going to see a new film is the 
conversation straight after, but reading new novels can be a lonely business. 
Not in this case. In 1993 I remember impassioned defences of books one of us 
had grown attached to, but no quarrels, just engrossing talk. Our chair, Grey 
Gowrie, came up with an ingenious criterion: novels must have "radioactivity" 
to stay in the running. He meant we must remember them weeks, months later. 
They mustn't fade. A self-proving criterion perhaps, but reassuring.

One novel that certainly had that quality and yet just missed the shortlist 
was Trainspotting and it was in arguing about Irvine Welsh's book that we came 
nearest to quarrelling. Getting from long to shortlist was painful, worse than 
sorting out the winner among that final six. Some wanted the prize to go to 
David Malouf's Remembering Babylon, while Caryl Phillips's Crossing the River 
and Carol Shields's The Stone Diaries had strong support as well. But Roddy 
Doyle's Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha won the day with its extraordinary technical 
achievement and its emotional force, taking us inside the voice and experience 
of a 10-year-old boy in the midst of family break-up.

1994 James Wood

After serving on the 1994 Booker prize committee, I made a pledge never to 
judge a big fiction prize again, and I have so far honoured it. We were a 
congenial group, and our chairman was not a former politician or bureaucrat but 
a distinguished literary critic (John Bayley); our meetings were friendly, and 
surely no less or more argumentative than those of other years. But the 
absurdity of the process was soon apparent: it is almost impossible to persuade 
someone else of the quality or poverty of a selected novel (a useful lesson in 
the limits of literary criticism). In practice, judge A blathers on about his 
favourite novel for five minutes, and then judge B blathers on about her 
favourite novel for five minutes, and nothing changes: no one switches sides. 
That is when the horse-trading begins. I remember that one of the judges phoned 
me and said, in effect: "I know that you especially like novel X, and you know 
that I especially like novel Y. It would be good if both those books got on to 
the shortlist, yes? So if you vote for my novel, I'll vote for yours, OK?"

That is how our shortlist was patched together, and it is how our winner was 
chosen. It is how every shortlist is chosen, whether the premises are as 
explicit or not. I liked the winning book a great deal (James Kelman's How Late 
It Was, How Late) - it was one of my choices - and would have been happy with 
either that book or Alan Hollinghurst's The Folding Star. But I intensely 
disliked the way we reached that verdict, and felt that the arbitrary, utterly 
political process discredited the whole project.

Since then, prizes have become a form of reviewing: it is prize-lists that 
select what people read, prize-lists that make literary careers. Bookshops 
order novels based on the prizes they have won or been shortlisted for. 
Nowadays, a whole month before the shortlist is announced, scores of novelists 
are effectively told that their books have not been the "big books" of the 
year, because they are not to be found on the longlist. Soon, no doubt, we will 
have the long-longlist, and the long-long longlist. Some wonderful books win 
the Booker, of course, just as the flypaper occasionally catches some really 
large flies. But it means - or should mean - nothing in literary terms.

1995 Ruth Rendell

I was always being asked what it was like to be on the Booker "jury". But I 
could never see us as that. Jurors have to decide between guilt and innocence 
while we had to pick the best. The best of 140 in our case - or 6.3 books a 
week. Reading that number is normal for me, but books I want to read, not ones 
I have to. It makes a big difference. We got on well, we judges. We disagreed 
but never quite quarrelled. I used to lie and say I read every word of every 
book. The truth is that I did my best, but I am a judicious skipper. Going home 
to Suffolk, I finished a novel and left it in the train. A man called out to me 
that I'd forgotten it, but when I said to keep it he was delighted. I hope he 
liked it better than I did.

So what did I get out of being a judge? The pleasure of giving the prize to 
Pat Barker's The Ghost Road, my choice, not one I was persuaded into. A mild 
antipathy to new novels so that now I tend to read more non-fiction. And my 
friendship with Peter Kemp, a fellow judge, which began in those Booker days.

1996 Jonathan Coe

How very arbitrary it seems, in retrospect. There was nothing wrong with our 
shortlist, and nothing wrong with our winner (Last Orders, by Graham Swift), 
but at 12 years' distance, it feels as though we could easily have chosen 
another six novels altogether. Our discussions were lengthy - and amicable, for 
the most part (until the final session, when tempers started to fray) - but 
what strikes me now about the whole process was how entirely subjective it was. 
Anyone who sets great store by the choices of Booker prize panels should 
remember this: the process consists of nothing more rigorous than five people 
sitting in a room together for a few hours, swapping personal opinions. And as 
far as I remember, not a single judge (including me) ever changed his or her 
mind, or shifted his or her position, in response to an argument put forward by 
a colleague. In the midst of it all, the novel which I now remember as being 
the finest of all - Asylum, by Patrick McGrath - slipped through our net, and 
failed to make the shortlist by a whisker. If it had reached the shortlist, 
such is the randomness of the final selection process, it might easily have won 
the prize itself.

1997 Jason Cowley

Before the longlist was made public, if you wanted to know which books were in 
contention you would usually be able to find out by having a discreet lunch 
with Martyn Goff, the charming and mischievous prize administrator who used to 
operate his own idiosyncratic system of leaks, withholding and revealing in 
equal measure. I remember turning up to the meeting at which our shortlist 
would be decided to be received with suspicion by our chairman, Gillian Beer. 
She wanted to know how our longlist was being discussed in the papers, and I 
was pretty sure by the way she looked at me that she thought I was responsible. 
Certainly I'd been having fun writing polemical pieces about the state of the 
British novel.

I believed then as I do now that the Booker is essentially a jamboree, little 
more than a kind of sport, with its own roster of winners and losers. It 
shouldn't be dignified or taken too seriously. But I wasn't the leaker. As we 
sat down for the lunch that preceded our discussions, and with Gillian Beer 
still grumbling about the longlist leaking out, I heard Goff say: "It's quite 
extraordinary. I don't know how it happened." He then, winningly, glanced at me 
and winked.

I often think that I've never quite recovered from my experience of being a 
judge. I began the year as an enthusiastic and engaged reader and reviewer of 
contemporary fiction, and ended it much more interested in non-fiction and 
narrative journalism. And of all the novels I read that year there are perhaps 
only two that I could ever imagine rereading: Arundhati Roy's The God of Small 
Things (our unfairly maligned winner) and Ian McEwan's Enduring Love (which 
just missed out on being shortlisted and divided the judges more than any other 
entry).

1998 Douglas Hurd

This was a quiet year. There were no sensational or overpowering entries, and 
no passionate disputes among the judges. The crafty device of holding the final 
meeting of the judges immediately before the award dinner certainly 
concentrated the mind. The prize went to Amsterdam by Ian McEwan, not because 
we thought it was about time he won the Booker, but because in a mild year most 
people (though not the chairman) thought his offering finished just ahead of 
Beryl Bainbridge, riding Master Georgie

1999 Shena Mackay

It was a very strong year for fiction. When I was a judge - alongside Boyd 
Tonkin, Natasha Walter and John Sutherland, with Gerald Kaufman in the chair - 
several books assumed to be shoo-ins weren't on the shortlist, which caused 
dismay, as did the discovery by some authors that their books had not been 
entered, on the presumption that the judges would call them in. We failed to do 
so. Sorry. Pressures of time and books arriving late.

Our shortlisted authors were JM Coetzee, Anita Desai, Michael Frayn, Andrew 
O'Hagan, Ahdaf Soueif and Colm Tóibín. We gave the prize - controversially 
because he had won in 1983 - to Coetzee for Disgrace. We were vindicated 
recently when it was shortlisted for the Best of Bookers. John Sutherland was a 
strong advocate of Salman Rushdie (The Ground Beneath Her Feet) in our year, 
and he must be delighted that Midnight's Children has won the Booker of Bookers 
for the second time.

Our chief dispute arose from John's gadfly comments in this newspaper. As far 
as I remember, it was the suggestion that Natasha Walter and I had a feminist 
agenda which prompted Natasha to write a letter to the Guardian, which I 
signed. Being a judge gave me much more anxiety than being on the shortlist 
myself, even with the horrible bookies' odds and the risk of being depicted as 
a cartoon racehorse, because as a judge you are responsible for disappointing a 
lot of people.

2000 Rose Tremain

My second stint as a Booker prize judge contrasted with the first in one 
important respect: we had an extremely effective and powerful chair in Simon 
Jenkins. In 1988, the lovable Michael Foot had been hampered, as chair, by 
diary overspill. But Simon's influence on the 2000 jury was impressive. 
Meetings were held at his rooms in Albany, rather than at Martyn Goff's 
preferred venue of the Savile Club. Despite the constant lamentations of his 
fax machine, Simon's attention never strayed from the tasks in hand, the first 
of which was to kick out the dross. Roy Foster, Caroline Gascoigne, Mariella 
Frostrup and I were a vocal team and we each had our favourites. Mariella was 
able to squeeze Matthew Kneale's English Passengers on to the list, and 
Caroline's advocacy for Kazuo Ishiguro's When We Were Orphans was duly 
recognised. Roy Foster and I lost our battle for Anne Enright's What Are You 
Like?, but my call-in title, Trezza Azzopardi's The Hiding Place, scraped home.

What is really interesting is that nobody thought Margaret Atwood's The Blind 
Assassin was her best book. Where Simon's mental agility paid off was in 
persuading us all (except Mariella) that Atwood deserved the prize anyway - for 
all the times she'd nearly won it and had been pipped at the post by a lesser 
writer.

2001 Philip Hensher

It's an unusual experience, reading for the Booker. For once in your life you 
take a synchronic slice through the English-language novel, and see exactly 
what's interesting it at that moment. I was lucky in having an excellent 
chairman in Kenneth Baker, unprejudiced, interested and diligent, and fellow 
judges who really knew about the novel - Kate Summerscale was particularly good 
to argue with. I think we made a good choice with Peter Carey's substantial 
True History of the Kelly Gang, but the whole shortlist was, in my view, 
exceptional. I regretted that media excitement over Beryl Bainbridge actually 
damaged her chances with According to Queeney. We realised that if we 
shortlisted her, she had to win. There was no point in blotting out the 
winner's publicity with a storm of "Beryl Bridesmaid Again" headlines. I wanted 
to do more for Nick Hornby's How to Be Good, and it was a relief that the 
Whitbread rewarded Philip Pullman's The Amber Spyglass, which we could easily 
have shortlisted. It was a good-humoured, interesting experience, but what I 
got most out of it was being introduced to new novelists - Zvi Jagendorf, 
Ciaran Carson, Jamie O'Neill - however far they got in the judging process.

The best novel to have been given the prize is, I think, Naipaul's In a Free 
State in 1971.

2002 Salley Vickers

I was a judge the year Life of Pi won, and there is no doubt that our choice 
was a rip-roaring popular success. The booksellers loved us for it. It was me, 
in fact, who first drew the other judges' attention to the novel. I was given 
it while on tour in Canada, by a Winnipeg bookseller, and read it excitedly on 
the plane home. We used to have extra meetings at the home of our chair, Lisa 
Jardine, and I recall telling all the other judges - Erica Wagner, Russell 
Celyn Jones and David Baddiel - about the book, which at that time had not been 
entered by Canongate. I was very glad to see it on to the shortlist, but it was 
not my final choice (the other books on the shortlist were Rohinton Mistry's 
Family Matters, Carol Shields's Unless, William Trevor's The Story of Lucy 
Gault, Sarah Waters's Fingersmith and Tim Winton's Dirt Music). However, Lisa 
was a skilled chair. She wanted a unanimous verdict and, much as I admired the 
book, I couldn't give her that. So she said, "Salley, it was you who brought 
the book to our attention. Will you give the decision your blessing?" Well, I 
couldn't refuse.

2003 DJ Taylor

I can't say that I enjoyed reading all the books - 113 of them, I believe, in 
that year - but there was a certain amount of pleasure to be gained from the 
attendant razzmatazz, the thought that for a very brief period in the year an 
artefact routinely overlooked by large swathes of an indifferent media was 
suddenly news. There were several memorable clashes of opinion, the funniest by 
far coming when the chair, John Carey, trying desperately to persuade us of the 
merits of Martin Amis's Yellow Dog, read aloud from a paragraph describing the 
death-throes of a dying fly, at which point Francine Stock and I caught each 
other's eye across the table and began to giggle. The judging process was 
pretty much a waste of time as all four of the other judges arrived at the 
longlist meeting convinced that DBC Pierre's Vernon God Little was one of the 
great masterpieces of the early 21st century, whereas I thought that it was a 
promising first novel. This meant that the final judging session lasted a bare 
10 minutes, after which I had to sit discussing the existence (or 
non-existence) of God with AC Grayling, a subject on which both of us hold 
strong views.

2004 Tibor Fischer

I'd heard the rumours. The hair-pulling, the eye-gouging, the shameful 
flouncing. I was, however, extremely impressed by the rigour of my fellow 
judges, who, unlike me, had proper jobs and families to distract them from the 
mound of books. What did I learn? Discussion is futile. No one changes their 
mind about a book. You might as well have a show of hands straight away. There 
aren't many bad books (only one novel ended up in the bin after two pages), but 
there are a lot of so-so, nondescript novels that leave no trace. Publishers 
are idiots. I was very pleased Alan Hollinghurst won. But I wouldn't say The 
Line of Beauty is a better novel than David Mitchell's very different Cloud 
Atlas (which came in second) or Neil Cross's Always the Sun (or others on the 
longlist).

There are good reasons why Midnight's Children has been chosen as the Best of 
the Bookers (although every novelist I know rates Shame as Rushdie's best 
book), but it would have been a more interesting exercise to have chosen the 
best of the shortlisted novels. It's a pity that Beryl Bainbridge has always 
been pipped, and my favourite novel in the Booker annals (I've read it at least 
a dozen times) is Derek Robinson's Goshawk Squadron

2005 John Sutherland

When I chaired year 37, it more or less, as airline pilots say, flew by wire. 
The year was, by general agreement, a bumper one for fiction. As usual, no 
minds were much changed by the panel discussions - candidate B merely came 
forward when one judge's candidate A was voted down. John Banville came out top 
with The Sea. King of the As and Bs. Teeth were gnashed in the press the next 
day; but they would be if Jesus Christ had written the winning novel. I spoke 
to Kazuo Ishiguro (shortlisted for Never Let Me Go) shortly after. "The 
goalkeeper jumped the wrong way", he sportingly said. I wish I'd been 
quick-witted enough to rejoin "not even Petr Cech has to save five penalty 
shots all coming at him at once". Julian Barnes, in an interview for the New 
York Times, was more savage (he had been shortlisted for Arthur & George). Not, 
he felt, a bumper year for judges. Perhaps he was right. But posterity will 
forget us. Barnes, Ishiguro and - I believe - Banville they'll remember. And 
make their own judgments.

2006 Anthony Quinn

I enjoyed every moment of the 2006 Booker until the very last minutes of our 
final meeting in the Guildhall. That was when I realised that the novel which I 
had set my heart on would not be the winner. On anecdotal evidence from friends 
who had judged the prize in previous years, I gathered that there was usually 
someone on the jury who would be a complete pest and make the whole process as 
awkward as possible. Not this time: our chairman, Hermione Lee, set a tone of 
almost heartless conviviality that Candia McWilliam, Fiona Shaw and Simon 
Armitage consistently upheld. Indeed, we had been so likeminded in the final 
reckoning of our shortlist that I must have blanked the ominous build-up of 
support for Kiran Desai's The Inheritance of Loss and assumed that everyone 
would come round to what was clearly the best book, Edward St Aubyn's Mother's 
Milk. When I was outvoted 4-1 I was surprised, and appalled. Six months of 
reading and re-reading - only to be thwarted at the last! I asked for a 
recount, which at least got a laugh. It's not an exaggeration to say that I 
felt sick to my stomach. I was pleased for Kiran Desai, who'd spent eight years 
writing it. But we chose the wrong book.

2007 Giles Foden

Everyone expected arguments, and we had them, but with dignity (my fellow 
judges were Howard Davies, Wendy Cope, Ruth Scurr and Imogen Stubbs). We never 
fell out. In fact, we are meeting up this autumn for a drink. Some had their 
favourites that others couldn't stand; others tried to hold up yardsticks 
against which all books might be measured. The favourite supporters made 
persuasive cases for AN Wilson and Nicola Barker, but only Barker got through 
to the shortlist, despite an unfortunate error in transmission - not the 
judges' fault - which suggested Wilson had. The longlist is where the real 
argy-bargy takes place.

Once an author is on the shortlist anything can happen. In our case we arrived 
at a situation in which every judge had mutually exclusive first and last 
choices. Luckily, in Howard Davies we had a competent chairman, who helped us 
mathematically towards a choice of winner with which everyone was happy. PS: 
note to publishers, try not to write call-in letters with spelling mistakes, or 
one that make foolish claims. Some of these letters looked as if they were 
written in haste. Then again, so did some of the novels submitted.

2008 Alex Clark

Before I was asked to judge this year's prize, I had been on several literary 
prize panels and I felt I had enough experience to know roughly what I was 
doing. But little can prepare you for the Booker: not just the sheer volume of 
books submitted, but the sense that you are about to be partly responsible for 
making an indelible mark on the literary landscape. Now, with the final hurdle 
fast approaching, I can say that it's been not only an enjoyable process but 
also an instructive one. Reading is, of course, a solitary affair, and book 
reviewing not much less so. But anatomising one's taste and judgment and then 
communicating it to a group of people with equally strong views has been a 
wonderful challenge - not least because it makes for scrutiny of what it is 
that one values in fiction. And, gruelling though it was, I wouldn't give up 
those late nights and early mornings spent poring over novels.

And the winner was ... Booker prize winners

1969 Something to Answer For by PH Newby

1970 The Elected Member by Bernice Rubens

1971 In a Free State by VS Naipaul

1972 G by John Berger

1973 The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell

1974 Holiday by Stanley Middleton and The Conservationist by Nadine Gordimer

1975 Heat and Dust by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala

1976 Saville by David Storey

1977 Staying On by Paul Scott

1978 The Sea The Sea by Iris Murdoch

1979 Offshore by Penelope Fitzgerald

1980 Rites of Passage by William Golding

1981 Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie

1982 Schindler's Ark by Thomas Keneally

1983 Life & Times of Michael K by JM Coetzee

1984 Hotel du Lac by Anita Brookner

1985 The Bone People by Keri Hulme

1986 The Old Devils by Kingsley Amis

1987 Moon Tiger by Penelope Lively

1988 Oscar and Lucinda by Peter Carey

1989 The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro

1990 Possession by AS Byatt

1991 The Famished Road by Ben Okri

1992 The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje and Sacred Hunger by Barry 
Unsworth

1993 Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha by Roddy Doyle

1994 How Late It Was How Late by James Kelman

1995 The Ghost Road by Pat Barker

1996 Last Orders by Graham Swift

1997 The God of Small Things by Arundhati Roy

1998 Amsterdam by Ian McEwan

1999 Disgrace by JM Coetzee

2000 The Blind Assassin by Margaret Atwood

2001 True History of the Kelly Gang by Peter Carey

2002 Life of Pi by Yann Martel

2003 Vernon God Little by DBC Pierre

2004 The Line of Beauty by Alan Hollinghurst

1969 Frank Kermode

The first judges were Rebecca West, Stephen Spender, David Farrer and WL Webb, 
at that time literary editor of the Guardian. We were handsomely treated: in 
London we haunted Bertorelli's, but we spent more than one weekend at Michael 
Astor's beautiful Cotswold house, where Dame Rebecca strode the grounds 
authoritatively between bouts of laying down the law. There were perhaps 60 
books, which seemed a lot, though modern judges are said to read twice as many. 
Getting through the 60 was made easier by our not daring to take on Dame 
Rebecca. "Miss Murdoch writes good and bad novels in alternate years," she 
said. "This is a bad year." Muriel Spark: "clever but too playful." And out 
they went.

Two of us favoured Nicholas Mosley's Impossible Object, but were soon 
silenced. The choice of PH Newby's Something to Answer For was the result of a 
compromise. Dame Rebecca didn't dislike it as much as nearly all the others. 
Surveyors of the prize's history have spoken ill of this good book, perhaps 
without reading it, or by being too ready to suppose that this industrious 
writer could manage a novel a year as well as running the Third Programme. 
Anyway, I remember this, my one experience of judging, with much pleasure and 
amusement.

1970 Antonia Fraser

The judging of the 1970 prize was a low-key affair except for the feisty 
behaviour of Dame Rebecca West, a judge for the second year running. At one 
point she denounced Margaret Drabble for her novels of domestic life on the 
grounds that "Anyone can do the washing-up; just get a big bowl and some 
liquid; so why complain about it?" The novel in question was The Waterfall, 
which both Richard Hoggart and I admired greatly (and didn't think was about 
washing-up). I knew Rebecca West, since she was a friend and neighbour of my 
parents in Sussex, and was very fond of her; all the same, it occurred to me 
that she was possibly one of the brilliant old ladies who felt threatened by a 
brilliant young one in the shape of Maggie Drabble. In the end we were split 
between William Trevor's Mrs Eckdorf in O'Neill's Hotel and Bernice Rubens's 
The Elected Member. I voted for Rubens but today would vote for Trevor.

1971 was much more exacting. The most exciting thing that happened to me as a 
Booker Judge for the second time was not controversial. I shared a taxi back 
with fellow judge Saul Bellow on a long, long ride from somewhere in the City: 
he was nattily dressed in a pale green shantung suit, blue shirt, green tie 
with large blue dots on it; his silver hair and slanting, large dark eyes made 
him look like a 30s film star playing a refined gangster. Suddenly he leaned 
forward and asked: "Has anyone ever told you that you're a very handsome 
woman?" I pondered on a suitable reply, modest yet encouraging. But having 
spoken, the Great Man closed his eyes and remained apparently asleep for the 
rest of the journey.

1971 John Gross

A faint aroma of the Nobel prize - or of Nobel prizes yet to come - hangs over 
the 1971 Booker. First, the award went to VS Naipaul (who was to be Nobel 
laureate in 2001) for In a Free State. It was a result with which I agreed. 
Second, the organisers had succeeded in persuading a distinguished writer from 
abroad to be one of the judges: Saul Bellow (who was to be Nobel laureate in 
1976). It seemed a thrilling prospect.

In the event, one of the things I remember most clearly about Bellow is that 
he insisted on being put up at the Ritz (which must have burned a big hole in 
the budget), and then complained because he hadn't been given a room 
overlooking Green Park.

Another recollection is his response when I advanced the claims of Elizabeth 
Taylor's Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont, which apart from the Naipaul was the 
book on the shortlist I most favoured. "Oh," he said, "that's one of those 
little tinkling teacup things that the British always do well." He was quite 
wrong - Mrs Palfrey is a work of deep feeling - but his dismissiveness 
effectively put paid to its chances.

1972 George Steiner

It was the most illustrious panel in the Booker's history. Both the other 
judges, Cyril Connolly and Elizabeth Bowen, were too ill to attend the 
ceremony. I fought very hard for John Berger to win for G, and then he threw it 
in my face by giving half the prize money to the Black Panthers. It was a very 
grim experience. I was in a very precarious position at the time and I 
literally thought it was the end for me in this country. I thought I would have 
to pack my bags and go.

1973 Edna O'Brien

Mary McCarthy and I were the judges, with Karl Miller presiding as chairman. 
Disputes were negligible. From a batch of about 20, it was whittled down to two 
contenders - The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell and The Black Prince by Iris 
Murdoch, with Farrell winning by a whisker. Next day, Mary changed her mind and 
it was left to Miller to cast the deciding vote, which he did with alacrity and 
no rancour. The prize has changed as the literary/publishing world has 
undergone a radical and not always edifying sea change: the celebrity virus now 
infects authors and judges alike.

1974 Ion Trewin

We were three judges - AS Byatt, Elizabeth Jane Howard and me. At the 
shortlist meeting, Jane remarked that she thought Ending Up by Kingsley Amis 
(then her husband) was his best book and should go on the shortlist. I looked 
first at Antonia, and then at Martyn Goff, the prize's administrator - both 
remained impassive. We broke for a breather. Martyn said that as chairman it 
was up to me. Antonia liked the novel (as did I). On literary grounds neither 
of us had problems about shortlisting it, but what would the press say?

The Booker was already familiar with controversies. Martyn, I know, was not 
averse to the publicity that our decision would inevitably bring. (This was to 
centre around a vituperative correspondence in the Times.) But would the 
burgeoning reputation of the prize be damaged? He thought not. More important 
was our choice of winner. Antonia and I spoke up for Nadine Gordimer's The 
Conservationist, but Jane was less impressed. She remained keen on Ending Up, 
but realising that neither Antonia nor I would countenance it winning, she 
concentrated on Stanley Middleton's Holiday, a study of middle England that she 
saw as a "perfect miniature".

With only three judges, it seemed important to me that we did not compromise 
or produce a two-one verdict. Might we split the prize between Middleton and 
Gordimer? Martyn said he knew of no reason why not. We were vindicated by The 
Conservationist being selected this year for the Best of the Booker shortlist.

My favourite Booker winner remains Schindler's Ark (1982) by Thomas Keneally 
(but I must declare my interest and say that I was its editor).

1975 Susan Hill

Peter Ackroyd was the young, newly appointed literary editor of the Spectator. 
Roy Fuller was a distinguished older poet. Angus Wilson was in his years as 
founder of the creative writing course at UEA and one of the elder statesmen of 
the contemporary novel. It was a daunting experience to join them as a judge. I 
took the mountain of submitted novels on my honeymoon, and our first meeting 
was scheduled for the day I returned. I discovered that Angus had spent a 
holiday at the same Italian hotel a few weeks earlier. So we should all have 
been in mellow mood, and three of us were. But Roy Fuller was not the easiest 
man to work with. He was acerbic and disliked being contradicted, and when it 
came to choosing a shortlist he refused to join in, on the grounds that we had 
agreed on our winner, so a shortlist was superfluous. The Booker management 
committee was, rightly, having none of this and insisted.

I had been shortlisted myself three years earlier, and it had given my career 
a huge boost. I fought hard. We all did. Fuller grudgingly agreed to allowing a 
shortlist of two - the winner and one runner-up. Otherwise, he was going to 
walk. It was tricky and it spoiled what should have been an enjoyable 
experience. I was very happy with our winner, Ruth Prawer Jhabvala's Heat and 
Dust, but I wish we had stood up to Fuller and if he had walked out, so be it.

My personal Best of Bookers is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The 
omission of Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece The Blue Flower even from the 
shortlist in 1995 I find quite inexplicable.

1976 Francis King

There is a vast difference of scale between the prize as I experienced it as a 
judge and how it is now. Then the prize money was far less generous, and the 
fee for the judging was an honorarium. There were only three judges: our 
chairman Walter Allen, an admirable novelist and critic, then confined to a 
wheelchair, so that I had to read out his presentation speech for him; Mary 
Wilson, the wife of the prime minister; and me. Despite his failing health, 
Allen was, unlike me, immensely conscientious in reading every submission from 
cover to cover. Mary Wilson, a lover of poetry and herself an artless but often 
touching poet, was at the disadvantage of having read few novels in the course 
of her life - so that she was clearly puzzled when I referred to one of the 
submissions as "Kafkaesque".

My sister Elizabeth looked through the piles of books awaiting my reading, and 
eventually held up David Storey's Saville. With a colleague, John Guest, she 
had already put in a lot of robust work as one of its two editors. "This will 
be the winner," she announced. It was, she explained, an epic about a north 
country mining community and was therefore exactly what would appeal to Allen, 
a lifetime socialist, and to the wife of a Labour PM. She was right. I battled 
for Julian Rathbone's King Fisher Lives, to no avail. Mary Wilson was obdurate: 
"I couldn't be party to giving the prize to a book about cannibalism."

For me far and away the best Booker winner in the whole history of the Prize 
is JG Farrell's The Siege of Krishnapur. The best of all the novels that ought 
to have won the Prize but failed to do so is Penelope Fitzgerald's masterpiece 
The Blue Flower

1977 Beryl Bainbridge

Making a choice was very difficult - because it was this great prize of the 
world, one had to be very careful. Since I was published by Duckworth, it was 
very peculiar to have a Duckworth novel - Great Granny Webster by Caroline 
Blackwood - included in the vote. I put my vote forward - for Blackwood - but 
the discussion on it lasted only about three minutes, because it was such a 
short book. So nobody was really interested in that. All I can remember of the 
final meeting is that I got terribly tired, I literally sank lower and lower 
under the table. Brendan Gill, who I thought was American, went towards the 
balcony saying he was going to throw himself off, he was so fed up. Philip 
Larkin was completely silent most of the time. Nobody dared say a word to him 
and he never said a word back. The only one who was in total control of 
everything was Robin Ray. He was so clever that we all went along with whatever 
he said, and he wanted Staying On by Paul Scott to win. Poor Scott was too ill 
to collect the prize.

I've been shortlisted for the Booker five times and never won. I'm just very 
pleased to have been noticed.

1978 Derwent May

In 1978, all the five jury members had a different first choice, and they were 
all sticking to it. Suddenly someone suggested a compromise candidate that we 
all quite liked, but it seemed to me that we were now heading for disaster. 
Freddie Ayer, the chairman, had more or less pulled out, saying that the only 
novels he enjoyed reading were crime novels. So I went round the jury - the 
other three were all novelists, PH Newby, Angela Huth and Clare Boylan - and 
said to them in turn "Is this book your first choice?" All, rather sheepishly, 
said "No". I said, "The winner must surely be at least one person's first 
choice", and I saw it was the moment for me to push what I thought was 
unmistakably the best book, Iris Murdoch's The Sea, The Sea - which I knew was 
at least one juror's second choice (the other shortlisted authors were Kingsley 
Amis, André Brink, Penelope Fitzgerald, Jane Gardam and Bernice Rubens). I'm 
glad to say it won.

The best three winners have, I think, been the Murdoch, William Golding's 
Rites of Passage and Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. The prize has 
always lurched too much in favour of writers with unpromising backgrounds or 
good liberal attitudes, but it has unfailingly provided an excellent focus on 
the year's new novels.

1979 Hilary Spurling 

I loved my Booker summer, which boils down in my memory to long, hot, hazy 
days spent lying under a tree in the garden reading novels and saying to anyone 
who tried to interrupt: "Go away, I'm working." It was a strong field and the 
bookies' favourite was VS Naipaul's A Bend in the River. Its opponents on the 
panel argued that the book shouldn't strictly be classified as a novel, and in 
any case he'd won the prize before. The Naipaul lobby (including me) snapped 
back that the novel was doomed if it couldn't expand to include this sort of 
documentary fiction, and that our job was to pick the year's best book, 
regardless of its author.

The final verdict was as much of a shock to the judges as it was to everybody 
else. We'd spent the entire afternoon at loggerheads, and in the end 
compromised by giving the prize to everybody's second choice, Penelope 
Fitzgerald's small, slight, melancholy but beautifully judged and executed 
Offshore. Her recently published collected letters make it clear that her 
triumph - and the general incredulity that greeted it - caused her humiliation 
ever after.

1980 Claire Tomalin

I was determined that Alice Munro should be on the shortlist, and stuck my 
heels in to get her there. There were two real contenders for the prize, I 
believed, Anthony Burgess's Earthly Powers and William Golding's Rites of 
Passage, and the night before the final judging session I lay awake debating 
with myself: the Golding beautifully written and constructed, but with a 
slightly musty feel about it; Burgess a magnificent entertainer, overflowing 
with good humour, sometimes tipping into the slapdash. Both books thoroughly 
deserving. The next morning David Daiches, our chairman, began: "We'll go 
through the list in alphabetical order. I take it no one consider Burgess a 
possible winner?" Silence from the others. I exploded into a eulogy of 
Burgess's energy, invention and comic gift. I saw I had convinced no one, and 
felt that left only Golding. And so it was. Burgess sent a message saying he 
would not come to the dinner unless he won. I don't blame him. I saw a tear 
trickle down Golding's cheek when the announcement was made. I have re-read 
neither book, and I have rejoiced to see Alice Munro win the recognition she 
deserves.

1981 Hermione Lee

Salman Rushdie has won the Booker of Bookers and the Best of all Bookers, with 
his lastingly dazzling, deep and splendid novel, now a classic of world 
literature, Midnight's Children. But over a quarter of a century ago, when I 
was one of the judges who gave him the prize, his book was by no means an easy 
winner. Not many people had heard of Rushdie, unless they'd read a weird piece 
of science fiction called Grimus or seen the stunning extracts from the new 
novel in Granta. Our panel of judges (Samuel Hynes, Joan Bakewell, Brian Aldiss 
and me, with Malcolm Bradbury as chair) were pulling in different ways. We were 
reading many writers with more established reputations, and much more 
experience, than Rushdie - such as Muriel Spark. (To my lasting regret, we 
overlooked one of Nadine Gordimer's best novels, July's People.) Brian Aldiss 
was especially keen on Doris Lessing's "space fiction" The Sirian Experiments, 
Malcolm on Ian McEwan's The Comfort of Strangers.

We all jumped at the late arrival of the almost forgotten Anglo-Irish writer 
Molly Keane, the short-listing of whose wicked and eccentric novel Good 
Behaviour gained her a devoted new following. But our final discussion was 
painfully split between Midnight's Children and The White Hotel, DM Thomas's 
psychoanalytical erotic novel, centring on the massacre at Babi Yar, which made 
a strong impression on me at the time but now, looking back, seems to me 
sensationalist and exploitative. Sam Hynes, Joan Bakewell and I were firmly on 
the side of Rushdie; Brian Aldiss was passionately keen on Thomas, and so was 
Malcolm Bradbury, who tried at the very end of the discussion to argue that the 
chair should have a casting, and over-ruling vote. This was not allowed, 
Rushdie won by 3 votes to 2, and Brian Aldiss (whose intensity impressed me) 
left the room with tears in his eyes. When the 1981 prize was announced, a 
mighty career was launched. It would have taken off anyway, but it was helped 
by the prize. Chairing the prize 25 years on, I felt happy to be helping on 
Kiran Desai, a literary descendant of Rushdie's.

1982 Paul Bailey

There are many things I regret doing, and being a judge for the Booker prize 
is one of them. For some years after I was associated with two novels I 
absolutely loathed and would not have even started reading in other 
circumstances (on the shortlist that year were Thomas Keneally's Schindler's 
Ark, John Arden's Silence Among the Weapons, William Boyd's An Ice-Cream War, 
Lawrence Durrell's Constance or Solitary Practices, Alice Thomas Ellis's The 
27th Kingdom and Timothy Mo's Sour Sweet). They are history now and are likely 
to remain so. My one good deed was to ensure a place on the shortlist for Sour 
Sweet, consequently bringing his work to a larger audience. But otherwise it 
was a dispiriting experience. The winner, by a single vote, was Schindler's 
Ark, a controversial but ultimately very popular choice.

The prize was founded, in part, to encourage competitiveness. Which of the six 
novelists will make it to the finishing post? This grisly notion constitutes a 
perfect recipe for envy, back-biting and self-glorification. The Booker has 
certainly mirrored fashion - the collapse of the empire; post-modernist 
Victorian pastiche; New Age sentimentality. Several stinkers have been 
honoured, but there have been some glorious losers: Alice Munro's The Beggar 
Maid, John McGahern's Amongst Women and Edward St Aubyn's Mother's Milk. A 
wonderful book such as Penelope Fitzgerald's The Blue Flower was completely 
ignored, and I hope the judges for 1995 are blushing now to be reminded of 
their grotesque oversight.

1983 Fay Weldon

A lively year, as Booker prizes go. We had a distinguished set of judges and 
some terrific books. The panel was finally split between a Coetzee and a 
Rushdie - a clash of continents. As the chairperson I had the casting vote - 
which is not saying "oh, I like that one best", but weighing up the arguments 
of one set of judges against the others and deciding which are the most 
convincing. The Coetzee (Life & Times of Michael K) got it, and Rushdie was 
really annoyed.

As a fervent feminist (25 years back), and taking time to make up my mind, I 
made a joke: "I haven't got my husband here to help me decide." But one should 
never make jokes in the presence of the police, security or at a Booker prize 
judging, and word got round that I meant it. Then I had to deliver the 
customary chairperson's speech. After I sat down, the then president of the 
Publishers Association got to his feet, crossed the room and hit my agent Giles 
Gordon, second best thing to hitting me. I'd used the speech to reproach the 
publishers for giving such rotten deals to writers. Since the BBC was working 
to rule, they cut the cameras at 10pm precisely: I was using transparent 
screens from which to make the speech (a Thatcher trick), and they went blank 
before I had time to finish with the usual pacifying bit about how you are all 
honourable men and none of what I say applies to you. Instead, I just had to 
sit down and all hell broke loose.

I had actually shown the speech to the organisers earlier, but I suppose they 
hadn't bothered to read it. I hadn't thought it was all that inflammatory. 
Michael Caine, charismatic chairman of Bookers, came up to me years later, when 
I had been inadvertently invited to one of the subsequent dinners, and said: 
"It is not by any wish of mine you are here tonight."

It's all got rather dull since: the prize tends to go to well-behaved and 
deserving writers: no subversion allowed. No one hits anyone.

1984 John Fuller

This was the year when the hot favourite, JG Ballard (Empire of the Sun), was 
passed over for a relative newcomer, Anita Brookner (Hotel du Lac). Hardly a 
scandal, but in a strong year we had already discarded some big names (Burgess, 
Golding, Spark, Bainbridge, two Amises, etc) before reaching the shortlist, so 
that journalistic antennae were twitching, and the outcome was felt to be a 
further surprise. The judges got on pretty well together. We were somewhat 
exercised by the question of whether Julian Barnes's Flaubert's Parrot was 
really a novel, while in the final judging session Anthony Curtis continued to 
argue for David Lodge (Small World), and Ted Rowlands stuck out for the 
Ballard. I thought that the Brookner was, in its economy and elegance, a small 
triumph of moral insight worthy of the tradition of James and Forster to which 
it belonged. I was relieved to have support from Polly Devlin and the somewhat 
eccentric Richard Cobb in this, and pleased at the nudge to her career that the 
prize must have given.

1985 Marina Warner

Norman St John Stevas was our chair, and early on that summer he picked out a 
number of books which he recommended his panel to read. Among them was a 
surprise, a bulky novel called The Bone People by Keri Hulme. Alongside the 
many gleamingly designed offerings from the major publishing houses, it had the 
distinction of being published by a women's cooperative in New Zealand, who, 
when the book won the prize against very high odds, came up in full island 
dress to collect it, chanting a Maori praise song.

Feelings in the final meeting - and afterwards - ran very high about this 
novel, but St John Stevas unexpectedly championed it throughout. Nina Bawden 
opposed it very strongly on the grounds of its violence (the novel tells a 
terrifying story of child-beatings), and wrote later publicly to distance 
herself from the decision. Nina found herself significantly outnumbered in her 
opposition, because Joanna Lumley didn't attend the final judging. She sent a 
message to say she was in rehearsal and that her nominated winner was Doris 
Lessing, for The Good Terrorist. When she heard The Bone People had won, she 
too dissociated herself from the judgment. JW Lambert and I supported the book.

I think that the best argument for the whole cruel and unfair business of 
prizes is that they can lead readers to writers who wouldn't otherwise be read 
much or perhaps at all. I didn't think Lessing needed the prize (and she would 
agree) and certainly not for a novel that is not her best (though it's a 
feature of prizes that authors often win for their weakest works).

1986 Anthony Thwaite

My chairing of the 1986 judges was marred, or enlivened, by several scandals 
or leaks or items of gossip. I was said (wrongly) to have lectured my fellow 
judges on "how to read a novel". I unwisely wrote to Julian Barnes to 
commiserate with him about his non-appearance on the shortlist: I was quoted as 
blaming it on "all those women" (my four fellow judges were Edna Healey, Isabel 
Quigly, Gillian Reynolds and Bernice Rubens).

It was a splendid shortlist: Kingsley Amis, Margaret Atwood, Paul Bailey, 
Robertson Davies, Kazuo Ishiguro, Timothy Mo. We were still going to and fro up 
until 10 minutes before the press announcement had to be made: two strongly for 
Amis, two equally strongly for Davies (What's Bred in the Bone), and a wobbler 
in the middle. At the last moment the wobbler came down on the side of The Old 
Devils, and Amis had won. A very satisfactory result, I thought.

1987 PD James

I look back on my chairmanship in 1987 as a very happy experience, 
particularly as I had as my colleagues four hardworking, enthusiastic and 
knowledgeable judges: Lady Selina Hastings, Allan Massie, Trevor McDonald and 
John B Thompson. I did have a fear at the time - and still do - that to ask the 
panel to read more than 100 novels in a comparatively short time can result in 
a literary surfeit which makes the final judgment more difficult. Choosing the 
winner was a long process, and I remember scurrying to the dinner table a 
little after the meal had started. At the end, however, the vote was unanimous 
- Penelope Lively won, for Moon Tiger - which is what I had hoped for. The 
Booker may at times have tended to increase the unhelpful dichotomy between 
popular storytelling and books which are classified as literary novels, but 
most of the winners have combined high literary achievement with compelling 
storytelling.

1988 Blake Morrison

We were a jury of writers that year: Sebastian Faulks, Rose Tremain, Philip 
French and, in the chair, Michael Foot, who seemed keener to talk about Byron 
than to reminisce about leading the Labour party. As early as our first 
meeting, Peter Carey's Oscar and Lucinda was the clear frontrunner. The only 
arguments were about which novels should be with him on the shortlist. I read 
the bulk of the 100 or so entries during a fortnight's holiday with two small 
children in Wales, rising early and retiring late. Those we finally settled on 
were Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses (which I read with innocent pleasure - 
the controversy over it didn't erupt till the following year), Bruce Chatwin's 
Utz (his last novel - his funeral was the day of the fatwa), David Lodge's Nice 
Work (one of his best), Penelope Fitzgerald's The Beginning of Spring (one of 
her best) and Marina Warner's The Lost Father.

My biggest regret was failing to get Doris Lessing's The Fifth Child on the 
shortlist - though in retrospect Alan Hollinghurst's first novel, The 
Swimming-Pool Library, was a graver omission. The final meeting lasted 25 
minutes: Foot was for Rushdie, the rest of us were for Carey, so that was that. 
Rushdie has sometimes been caricatured as a bad loser, but at the ceremony he 
behaved impeccably and was generous in his praise of the winning book. All in 
all, a pleasing outcome. My other experiences of sitting on prize juries have 
been grisly in comparison.

1989 David Lodge

Our shortlist meeting was the longest to date, and much of it was taken up 
with discussion of Martin Amis's London Fields. It is public knowledge that two 
of the judges on the panel, Maggie Gee and Helen McNeil, successfully resisted 
its inclusion on the shortlist, an outcome I still regret. The final judging 
session was uncontroversial - all but one of us were unequivocally in favour of 
Kazuo Ishiguro's The Remains of the Day. I consider it one of the best Booker 
winners I have read.

The success of the prize has had an enormous impact on the reception of 
literary fiction and other kinds of writing, not only directly, but also 
indirectly through the proliferation of new prizes that have imitated it. But 
the overtly competitive nature of these prizes, heightened by the publication 
of longlists and shortlists, takes its psychological toll on writers; and, 
given the large element of chance in the composition and operation of judging 
panels, the importance now attached to prizes in our literary culture seems 
excessive. A committee is a blunt instrument of literary criticism.

1990 Hilary Mantel 

Not a discourteous word was exchanged between the hardworking 1990 judges - 
much to the disappointment of the administrator Martyn Goff, who praised us to 
our faces and later whined that we were boring. Denis Forman ran the meetings 
with smooth expertise, and largely kept his own opinions dark until he cast the 
final vote.

Weeks before I was appointed a judge, I'd read John McGahern's Amongst Women 
and said, reaching page 20, "This will win the Booker". So I was disappointed, 
but AS Byatt's Possession was a good book and a popular choice, and the 
discussion was fair. The process exhausted me, and I declined to do it a second 
time. What I despised was the leaking by the publicity machine of trivial 
non-stories to the press - I felt the prize had enough status and news value 
without that. I also believe the judges shouldn't review the books under 
consideration or talk about them in public, and in 1990 we didn't.

I'm glad I was a Booker judge relatively early in my career. It stopped me 
thinking that literary prizes are about literary value. Even the most correct 
jury goes in for horsetrading and gamesmanship, and what emerges is a 
compromise.

For me the best of the Bookers is The Siege of Krishnapur. I read it again a 
few months ago and its supple humour, its insight, economy and narrative drive 
make it an enduring delight.

1991 Nicholas Mosley

I was asked to be a judge probably because I had just won the Whitbread the 
previous year. This had itself been a surprise, because it seemed I was out of 
favour with the literary establishment, having been labelled a "novelist of 
ideas" while what was in favour was "style". And style seemed most easily to be 
exhibited in stories that were outlandish, or grim, or quaint. I looked forward 
to judging the Booker because I thought I might give a boost to "ideas". There 
were five judges, and we had to choose six books out of 100 for the shortlist. 
I thought - well, surely, with this set-up I'll be able to squeeze in one 
choice of mine. But, in the event, I got none of my choices on to the list, 
because of the inflexibility of the voting system and of the other four judges, 
who were devotees of "style". So I resigned, partly in a huff, but also because 
I thought that by so doing I might still be able to strike a blow for "ideas", 
as I might be asked to explain myself in the press - which I did.

The winner chosen by the remaining judges was Ben Okri's The Famished Road - a 
beautifully written (yes) story of a boy in a west African village who goes to 
and fro between his family and the local witchdoctor. My choice would have been 
Allan Massie's The Sins of the Father, which confronted the issue of what was 
possible or impossible if the child of a notorious ex-Nazi and the child of a 
Jewish victim fell in love after the second world war. What could be forgiven, 
and by whom, and what could not. But these are controversial questions, and 
thus conventionally to be avoided.

1992 Victoria Glendinning

My fellow judges were John Coldstream, literary editor of the Telegraph, 
Harriet Harvey-Wood, literary director of the British Council, Valentine 
Cunningham and Mark Lawson. We became intimate in the way of people thrown 
together in a scary but non-fatal railway accident. John dreamt one night that 
he was Spartacus, with the Roman legions advancing on him in the form of piles 
of new titles. It was a vintage year for rent-a-sneer in the media. Prominent 
journalists whinged chauvinistically about "far-flung authors", deaf to the 
explosion of energy from Commonwealth novelists, which has been the most 
significant feature of the Booker's 40 years. The prize was "essentially 
trivial", pontificated AN Wilson in contemptuous mode in the Evening Standard; 
and, enraged, I wrote to the Guardian letters page to contest Richard Gott's 
clichés about the decline of the novel and what he called the "tokenism" of the 
inclusion of Michèle Roberts on the shortlist.

Every book on our shortlist had one passionate supporter and one furious 
antagonist. When at the final meeting we locked horns over the frontrunners, it 
was suggested that we should reach our decision by taking into account second 
choices - proportional representation. This procedure gave Michael Ondaatje 
(The English Patient) and Barry Unsworth (Sacred Hunger) equal points. I turned 
to Martyn Goff, sitting behind me discreetly - or as discreetly as anyone can 
who is wearing a gold satin tie - and asked if we could share the prize between 
the two. He conceded there was no rule against it. So that's what we did.

Before the meeting, I was so unnerved that I left my bag with all my notes in 
it at the bank. When stressed I become sharp-tongued, and at one point told a 
fellow judge that he was a condescending bastard. My notes on our sessions are, 
at this distance in time, enigmatic. What in the world, for example, was Val 
Cunningham on about when he said: "I am very interested in Huntley & Palmer's 
biscuits and their role in literature"?

1993 Gillian Beer

Olivier Todd, the French novelist, shrugged his shoulders at our second 
judges' meeting: no lunches with publishers, no approaches from agents, he 
complained - what an odd English bubble of propriety we were gathered inside. 
He was joking, but only just. And it is one of the remarkable things about 
being a Booker judge that no one tempts you with hospitality. You simply sit 
and read, and talk, and read again, over several months. The pleasure is in the 
reading, and in the talk. One of the rewards of going to see a new film is the 
conversation straight after, but reading new novels can be a lonely business. 
Not in this case. In 1993 I remember impassioned defences of books one of us 
had grown attached to, but no quarrels, just engrossing talk. Our chair, Grey 
Gowrie, came up with an ingenious criterion: novels must have "radioactivity" 
to stay in the running. He meant we must remember them weeks, months later. 
They mustn't fade. A self-proving criterion perhaps, but reassuring.

One novel that certainly had that quality and yet just missed the shortlist 
was Trainspotting and it was in arguing about Irvine Welsh's book that we came 
nearest to quarrelling. Getting from long to shortlist was painful, worse than 
sorting out the winner among that final six. Some wanted the prize to go to 
David Malouf's Remembering Babylon, while Caryl Phillips's Crossing the River 
and Carol Shields's The Stone Diaries had strong support as well. But Roddy 
Doyle's Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha won the day with its extraordinary technical 
achievement and its emotional force, taking us inside the voice and experience 
of a 10-year-old boy in the midst of family break-up.

1994 James Wood

After serving on the 1994 Booker prize committee, I made a pledge never to 
judge a big fiction prize again, and I have so far honoured it. We were a 
congenial group, and our chairman was not a former politician or bureaucrat but 
a distinguished literary critic (John Bayley); our meetings were friendly, and 
surely no less or more argumentative than those of other years. But the 
absurdity of the process was soon apparent: it is almost impossible to persuade 
someone else of the quality or poverty of a selected novel (a useful lesson in 
the limits of literary criticism). In practice, judge A blathers on about his 
favourite novel for five minutes, and then judge B blathers on about her 
favourite novel for five minutes, and nothing changes: no one switches sides. 
That is when the horse-trading begins. I remember that one of the judges phoned 
me and said, in effect: "I know that you especially like novel X, and you know 
that I especially like novel Y. It would be good if both those books got on to 
the shortlist, yes? So if you vote for my novel, I'll vote for yours, OK?"

That is how our shortlist was patched together, and it is how our winner was 
chosen. It is how every shortlist is chosen, whether the premises are as 
explicit or not. I liked the winning book a great deal (James Kelman's How Late 
It Was, How Late) - it was one of my choices - and would have been happy with 
either that book or Alan Hollinghurst's The Folding Star. But I intensely 
disliked the way we reached that verdict, and felt that the arbitrary, utterly 
political process discredited the whole project.

Since then, prizes have become a form of reviewing: it is prize-lists that 
select what people read, prize-lists that make literary careers. Bookshops 
order novels based on the prizes they have won or been shortlisted for. 
Nowadays, a whole month before the shortlist is announced, scores of novelists 
are effectively told that their books have not been the "big books" of the 
year, because they are not to be found on the longlist. Soon, no doubt, we will 
have the long-longlist, and the long-long longlist. Some wonderful books win 
the Booker, of course, just as the flypaper occasionally catches some really 
large flies. But it means - or should mean - nothing in literary terms.

1995 Ruth Rendell

I was always being asked what it was like to be on the Booker "jury". But I 
could never see us as that. Jurors have to decide between guilt and innocence 
while we had to pick the best. The best of 140 in our case - or 6.3 books a 
week. Reading that number is normal for me, but books I want to read, not ones 
I have to. It makes a big difference. We got on well, we judges. We disagreed 
but never quite quarrelled. I used to lie and say I read every word of every 
book. The truth is that I did my best, but I am a judicious skipper. Going home 
to Suffolk, I finished a novel and left it in the train. A man called out to me 
that I'd forgotten it, but when I said to keep it he was delighted. I hope he 
liked it better than I did.

So what did I get out of being a judge? The pleasure of giving the prize to 
Pat Barker's The Ghost Road, my choice, not one I was persuaded into. A mild 
antipathy to new novels so that now I tend to read more non-fiction. And my 
friendship with Peter Kemp, a fellow judge, which began in those Booker days.

1996 Jonathan Coe

How very arbitrary it seems, in retrospect. There was nothing wrong with our 
shortlist, and nothing wrong with our winner (Last Orders, by Graham Swift), 
but at 12 years' distance, it feels as though we could easily have chosen 
another six novels altogether. Our discussions were lengthy - and amicable, for 
the most part (until the final session, when tempers started to fray) - but 
what strikes me now about the whole process was how entirely subjective it was. 
Anyone who sets great store by the choices of Booker prize panels should 
remember this: the process consists of nothing more rigorous than five people 
sitting in a room together for a few hours, swapping personal opinions. And as 
far as I remember, not a single judge (including me) ever changed his or her 
mind, or shifted his or her position, in response to an argument put forward by 
a colleague. In the midst of it all, the novel which I now remember as being 
the finest of all - Asylum, by Patrick McGrath - slipped through our net, and 
failed to make the shortlist by a whisker. If it had reached the shortlist, 
such is the randomness of the final selection process, it might easily have won 
the prize itself.

1997 Jason Cowley

Before the longlist was made public, if you wanted to know which books were in 
contention you would usually be able to find out by having a discreet lunch 
with Martyn Goff, the charming and mischievous prize administrator who used to 
operate his own idiosyncratic system of leaks, withholding and revealing in 
equal measure. I remember turning up to the meeting at which our shortlist 
would be decided to be received with suspicion by our chairman, Gillian Beer. 
She wanted to know how our longlist was being discussed in the papers, and I 
was pretty sure by the way she looked at me that she thought I was responsible. 
Certainly I'd been having fun writing polemical pieces about the state of the 
British novel.

I believed then as I do now that the Booker is essentially a jamboree, little 
more than a kind of sport, with its own roster of winners and losers. It 
shouldn't be dignified or taken too seriously. But I wasn't the leaker. As we 
sat down for the lunch that preceded our discussions, and with Gillian Beer 
still grumbling about the longlist leaking out, I heard Goff say: "It's quite 
extraordinary. I don't know how it happened." He then, winningly, glanced at me 
and winked.

I often think that I've never quite recovered from my experience of being a 
judge. I began the year as an enthusiastic and engaged reader and reviewer of 
contemporary fiction, and ended it much more interested in non-fiction and 
narrative journalism. And of all the novels I read that year there are perhaps 
only two that I could ever imagine rereading: Arundhati Roy's The God of Small 
Things (our unfairly maligned winner) and Ian McEwan's Enduring Love (which 
just missed out on being shortlisted and divided the judges more than any other 
entry).

1998 Douglas Hurd

This was a quiet year. There were no sensational or overpowering entries, and 
no passionate disputes among the judges. The crafty device of holding the final 
meeting of the judges immediately before the award dinner certainly 
concentrated the mind. The prize went to Amsterdam by Ian McEwan, not because 
we thought it was about time he won the Booker, but because in a mild year most 
people (though not the chairman) thought his offering finished just ahead of 
Beryl Bainbridge, riding Master Georgie

1999 Shena Mackay

It was a very strong year for fiction. When I was a judge - alongside Boyd 
Tonkin, Natasha Walter and John Sutherland, with Gerald Kaufman in the chair - 
several books assumed to be shoo-ins weren't on the shortlist, which caused 
dismay, as did the discovery by some authors that their books had not been 
entered, on the presumption that the judges would call them in. We failed to do 
so. Sorry. Pressures of time and books arriving late.

Our shortlisted authors were JM Coetzee, Anita Desai, Michael Frayn, Andrew 
O'Hagan, Ahdaf Soueif and Colm Tóibín. We gave the prize - controversially 
because he had won in 1983 - to Coetzee for Disgrace. We were vindicated 
recently when it was shortlisted for the Best of Bookers. John Sutherland was a 
strong advocate of Salman Rushdie (The Ground Beneath Her Feet) in our year, 
and he must be delighted that Midnight's Children has won the Booker of Bookers 
for the second time.

Our chief dispute arose from John's gadfly comments in this newspaper. As far 
as I remember, it was the suggestion that Natasha Walter and I had a feminist 
agenda which prompted Natasha to write a letter to the Guardian, which I 
signed. Being a judge gave me much more anxiety than being on the shortlist 
myself, even with the horrible bookies' odds and the risk of being depicted as 
a cartoon racehorse, because as a judge you are responsible for disappointing a 
lot of people.

2000 Rose Tremain

My second stint as a Booker prize judge contrasted with the first in one 
important respect: we had an extremely effective and powerful chair in Simon 
Jenkins. In 1988, the lovable Michael Foot had been hampered, as chair, by 
diary overspill. But Simon's influence on the 2000 jury was impressive. 
Meetings were held at his rooms in Albany, rather than at Martyn Goff's 
preferred venue of the Savile Club. Despite the constant lamentations of his 
fax machine, Simon's attention never strayed from the tasks in hand, the first 
of which was to kick out the dross. Roy Foster, Caroline Gascoigne, Mariella 
Frostrup and I were a vocal team and we each had our favourites. Mariella was 
able to squeeze Matthew Kneale's English Passengers on to the list, and 
Caroline's advocacy for Kazuo Ishiguro's When We Were Orphans was duly 
recognised. Roy Foster and I lost our battle for Anne Enright's What Are You 
Like?, but my call-in title, Trezza Azzopardi's The Hiding Place, scraped home.

What is really interesting is that nobody thought Margaret Atwood's The Blind 
Assassin was her best book. Where Simon's mental agility paid off was in 
persuading us all (except Mariella) that Atwood deserved the prize anyway - for 
all the times she'd nearly won it and had been pipped at the post by a lesser 
writer.

2001 Philip Hensher

It's an unusual experience, reading for the Booker. For once in your life you 
take a synchronic slice through the English-language novel, and see exactly 
what's interesting it at that moment. I was lucky in having an excellent 
chairman in Kenneth Baker, unprejudiced, interested and diligent, and fellow 
judges who really knew about the novel - Kate Summerscale was particularly good 
to argue with. I think we made a good choice with Peter Carey's substantial 
True History of the Kelly Gang, but the whole shortlist was, in my view, 
exceptional. I regretted that media excitement over Beryl Bainbridge actually 
damaged her chances with According to Queeney. We realised that if we 
shortlisted her, she had to win. There was no point in blotting out the 
winner's publicity with a storm of "Beryl Bridesmaid Again" headlines. I wanted 
to do more for Nick Hornby's How to Be Good, and it was a relief that the 
Whitbread rewarded Philip Pullman's The Amber Spyglass, which we could easily 
have shortlisted. It was a good-humoured, interesting experience, but what I 
got most out of it was being introduced to new novelists - Zvi Jagendorf, 
Ciaran Carson, Jamie O'Neill - however far they got in the judging process.

The best novel to have been given the prize is, I think, Naipaul's In a Free 
State in 1971.

2002 Salley Vickers

I was a judge the year Life of Pi won, and there is no doubt that our choice 
was a rip-roaring popular success. The booksellers loved us for it. It was me, 
in fact, who first drew the other judges' attention to the novel. I was given 
it while on tour in Canada, by a Winnipeg bookseller, and read it excitedly on 
the plane home. We used to have extra meetings at the home of our chair, Lisa 
Jardine, and I recall telling all the other judges - Erica Wagner, Russell 
Celyn Jones and David Baddiel - about the book, which at that time had not been 
entered by Canongate. I was very glad to see it on to the shortlist, but it was 
not my final choice (the other books on the shortlist were Rohinton Mistry's 
Family Matters, Carol Shields's Unless, William Trevor's The Story of Lucy 
Gault, Sarah Waters's Fingersmith and Tim Winton's Dirt Music). However, Lisa 
was a skilled chair. She wanted a unanimous verdict and, much as I admired the 
book, I couldn't give her that. So she said, "Salley, it was you who brought 
the book to our attention. Will you give the decision your blessing?" Well, I 
couldn't refuse.

2003 DJ Taylor

I can't say that I enjoyed reading all the books - 113 of them, I believe, in 
that year - but there was a certain amount of pleasure to be gained from the 
attendant razzmatazz, the thought that for a very brief period in the year an 
artefact routinely overlooked by large swathes of an indifferent media was 
suddenly news. There were several memorable clashes of opinion, the funniest by 
far coming when the chair, John Carey, trying desperately to persuade us of the 
merits of Martin Amis's Yellow Dog, read aloud from a paragraph describing the 
death-throes of a dying fly, at which point Francine Stock and I caught each 
other's eye across the table and began to giggle. The judging process was 
pretty much a waste of time as all four of the other judges arrived at the 
longlist meeting convinced that DBC Pierre's Vernon God Little was one of the 
great masterpieces of the early 21st century, whereas I thought that it was a 
promising first novel. This meant that the final judging session lasted a bare 
10 minutes, after which I had to sit discussing the existence (or 
non-existence) of God with AC Grayling, a subject on which both of us hold 
strong views.

2004 Tibor Fischer

I'd heard the rumours. The hair-pulling, the eye-gouging, the shameful 
flouncing. I was, however, extremely impressed by the rigour of my fellow 
judges, who, unlike me, had proper jobs and families to distract them from the 
mound of books. What did I learn? Discussion is futile. No one changes their 
mind about a book. You might as well have a show of hands straight away. There 
aren't many bad books (only one novel ended up in the bin after two pages), but 
there are a lot of so-so, nondescript novels that leave no trace. Publishers 
are idiots. I was very pleased Alan Hollinghurst won. But I wouldn't say The 
Line of Beauty is a better novel than David Mitchell's very different Cloud 
Atlas (which came in second) or Neil Cross's Always the Sun (or others on the 
longlist).

There are good reasons why Midnight's Children has been chosen as the Best of 
the Bookers (although every novelist I know rates Shame as Rushdie's best 
book), but it would have been a more interesting exercise to have chosen the 
best of the shortlisted novels. It's a pity that Beryl Bainbridge has always 
been pipped, and my favourite novel in the Booker annals (I've read it at least 
a dozen times) is Derek Robinson's Goshawk Squadron

2005 John Sutherland

When I chaired year 37, it more or less, as airline pilots say, flew by wire. 
The year was, by general agreement, a bumper one for fiction. As usual, no 
minds were much changed by the panel discussions - candidate B merely came 
forward when one judge's candidate A was voted down. John Banville came out top 
with The Sea. King of the As and Bs. Teeth were gnashed in the press the next 
day; but they would be if Jesus Christ had written the winning novel. I spoke 
to Kazuo Ishiguro (shortlisted for Never Let Me Go) shortly after. "The 
goalkeeper jumped the wrong way", he sportingly said. I wish I'd been 
quick-witted enough to rejoin "not even Petr Cech has to save five penalty 
shots all coming at him at once". Julian Barnes, in an interview for the New 
York Times, was more savage (he had been shortlisted for Arthur & George). Not, 
he felt, a bumper year for judges. Perhaps he was right. But posterity will 
forget us. Barnes, Ishiguro and - I believe - Banville they'll remember. And 
make their own judgments.

2006 Anthony Quinn

I enjoyed every moment of the 2006 Booker until the very last minutes of our 
final meeting in the Guildhall. That was when I realised that the novel which I 
had set my heart on would not be the winner. On anecdotal evidence from friends 
who had judged the prize in previous years, I gathered that there was usually 
someone on the jury who would be a complete pest and make the whole process as 
awkward as possible. Not this time: our chairman, Hermione Lee, set a tone of 
almost heartless conviviality that Candia McWilliam, Fiona Shaw and Simon 
Armitage consistently upheld. Indeed, we had been so likeminded in the final 
reckoning of our shortlist that I must have blanked the ominous build-up of 
support for Kiran Desai's The Inheritance of Loss and assumed that everyone 
would come round to what was clearly the best book, Edward St Aubyn's Mother's 
Milk. When I was outvoted 4-1 I was surprised, and appalled. Six months of 
reading and re-reading - only to be thwarted at the last! I asked for a 
recount, which at least got a laugh. It's not an exaggeration to say that I 
felt sick to my stomach. I was pleased for Kiran Desai, who'd spent eight years 
writing it. But we chose the wrong book.

2007 Giles Foden

Everyone expected arguments, and we had them, but with dignity (my fellow 
judges were Howard Davies, Wendy Cope, Ruth Scurr and Imogen Stubbs). We never 
fell out. In fact, we are meeting up this autumn for a drink. Some had their 
favourites that others couldn't stand; others tried to hold up yardsticks 
against which all books might be measured. The favourite supporters made 
persuasive cases for AN Wilson and Nicola Barker, but only Barker got through 
to the shortlist, despite an unfortunate error in transmission - not the 
judges' fault - which suggested Wilson had. The longlist is where the real 
argy-bargy takes place.

Once an author is on the shortlist anything can happen. In our case we arrived 
at a situation in which every judge had mutually exclusive first and last 
choices. Luckily, in Howard Davies we had a competent chairman, who helped us 
mathematically towards a choice of winner with which everyone was happy. PS: 
note to publishers, try not to write call-in letters with spelling mistakes, or 
one that make foolish claims. Some of these letters looked as if they were 
written in haste. Then again, so did some of the novels submitted.

2008 Alex Clark

Before I was asked to judge this year's prize, I had been on several literary 
prize panels and I felt I had enough experience to know roughly what I was 
doing. But little can prepare you for the Booker: not just the sheer volume of 
books submitted, but the sense that you are about to be partly responsible for 
making an indelible mark on the literary landscape. Now, with the final hurdle 
fast approaching, I can say that it's been not only an enjoyable process but 
also an instructive one. Reading is, of course, a solitary affair, and book 
reviewing not much less so. But anatomising one's taste and judgment and then 
communicating it to a group of people with equally strong views has been a 
wonderful challenge - not least because it makes for scrutiny of what it is 
that one values in fiction. And, gruelling though it was, I wouldn't give up 
those late nights and early mornings spent poring over novels.

2009 John Mullan

My fellow judges were Lucasta Miller Jim Naughtie, Sue Perkins and Michael 
Prodger. I do confess that I already knew, at least slightly, all the other 
judges. Did this make it too cosy? Maybe, but the process is enough of a 
challenge to make conviviality a useful blessing. It felt as if there was 
rather little disagreement until the end, when suddenly it was sharp. On the 
very day of the dinner, you get shut in a room with sandwiches and orange 
juice, and chip away at your short list. I would have been happy to see Sarah 
Waters's The Little Stranger win, and I think in another year it might have 
done. But it came down to Wolf Hall versus Summertime: Mantel versus Coetzee.

Two of the other judges, Lucasta and Sue, have written elsewhere of their
preference for Coetzee, so the voting can hardly be a secret. What I had not 
expected was that my cards would be the last to go on the table.

Being a natural loudmouth, I had been trying to speak judiciously, and had 
ended up seeming to be biding my moment. Coetzee is, with Roth, maybe the 
greatest living novelist in the English Language. He could win almost any year 
he publishes a novel. But Wolf Hall was something extraordinary. After the 
meeting, Lucasta and Sue did both say "agenbite of inwit" to me a few times. If 
you've read the opening of Summertime,
you'll understand.

And the winner was ... Booker prize winners

1969 Something to Answer For by PH Newby

1970 The Elected Member by Bernice Rubens

1971 In a Free State by VS Naipaul

1972 G by John Berger

1973 The Siege of Krishnapur by JG Farrell

1974 Holiday by Stanley Middleton and The Conservationist by Nadine Gordimer

1975 Heat and Dust by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala

1976 Saville by David Storey

1977 Staying On by Paul Scott

1978 The Sea The Sea by Iris Murdoch

1979 Offshore by Penelope Fitzgerald

1980 Rites of Passage by William Golding

1981 Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie

1982 Schindler's Ark by Thomas Keneally

1983 Life & Times of Michael K by JM Coetzee

1984 Hotel du Lac by Anita Brookner

1985 The Bone People by Keri Hulme

1986 The Old Devils by Kingsley Amis

1987 Moon Tiger by Penelope Lively

1988 Oscar and Lucinda by Peter Carey

1989 The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro

1990 Possession by AS Byatt

1991 The Famished Road by Ben Okri

1992 The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje and Sacred Hunger by Barry 
Unsworth

1993 Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha by Roddy Doyle

1994 How Late It Was How Late by James Kelman

1995 The Ghost Road by Pat Barker

1996 Last Orders by Graham Swift

1997 The God of Small Things by Arundhati Roy

1998 Amsterdam by Ian McEwan

1999 Disgrace by JM Coetzee

2000 The Blind Assassin by Margaret Atwood

2001 True History of the Kelly Gang by Peter Carey

2002 Life of Pi by Yann Martel

2003 Vernon God Little by DBC Pierre

2004 The Line of Beauty by Alan Hollinghurst

2005 The Sea by John Banville

2006 The Inheritance of Loss by Kiran Desai

2007 The Gathering by Anne Enright

2008The White Tiger by Aravind Adiga

2009 Wolf Hall by Hilary Mantel

Andrew Motion reports on chairing this year's judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/11/booker-prize-andrew-motion-judging>
 