
One of the shocks of thinking about doing English Literature at university is 
having to read poetry.

Teen opinion: in praise of writing poetry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jul/01/teen-opinion-in-praise-of-writing-poetry>
I haven’t read poetry for fun (Lewis Carrol’s Jabberwocky excepted) since I 
was in primary school and had a copy of Julia Donaldson’sCrazy Mayonaissy Mum 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308718/> – an 
anthology containing some very silly poems.

My impression, formed from lazy prejudices and GCSE English Literature, was 
that great poetry was slightly soppy and about nature or incredibly depressing 
andabout the horrific conditions of the first world war trenches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/aug/04/first-world-war-remember-need-literature>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-get-teenagers-reading-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ea5e5663aae31a2da5b22bbb18bf6e3f8dd305%2F0_0_1421_2000%2F1421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Hughes%20and%20Simon%20Armitage%3A%20How%20to%20get%20teenagers%20reading%20poetry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-get-teenagers-reading-poetry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Hughes%20and%20Simon%20Armitage%3A%20How%20to%20get%20teenagers%20reading%20poetry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-get-teenagers-reading-poetry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ea5e5663aae31a2da5b22bbb18bf6e3f8dd305%2F0_0_1421_2000%2F1421.jpg>
 Ted Hughes, husband of Sylvia Plath. Photograph: AP/Fay Godwin/British Library 
Fortunately, I’ve now started to read Simon Armitage’s Box of Matches 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/selected-poems-79.html> and Ted Hughes’ 
Birthday Letters <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/birthday-letters.html>. For 
the first time, I’ve realised how desire and lust and bitterness and guilt can 
be wrought from an assemblage of so few words and sounds in such a small space.

Reading poetry has fallen out of fashion as a leisure activity. In the 
twenty-first century, we primarily access literature through novels, or perhaps 
watching film adaptations. Of course, the explosive spread of social media 
means we are not entirely unaccustomed to cramming meaning into a small space. 
However, reading poetry has for me, so far, been a little like a sort of 
therapy, cross-pollinated with spring cleaning for the brain.

The presentation of words on the page, the structure, as well as the marriage 
of sounds which binds the whole thing together, is so crucial, and utterly 
missing from, say, a tweet.

In The Great Gatsby <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/great-gatsby-43.html>, F 
Scott Fitzgerald writes: “No amount of fire or freshness can challenge what a 
man can store in his ghostly heart”. I’m starting to think of poems as little 
pieces of “fire or freshness” which we can carry around with us, or as candles 
you light and renew with a prayer, or, if you’re secular-minded like me, a 
thought of the rest of humanity.

What's the best poetry for children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/05/what-is-the-best-poetry-for-children>
I’m beginning to think reading poetry for pleasure may be the challenge of the 
next generation of pedagogues. I just hope this doesn’t extinguish the pleasure 
for ever.

Read more Teen opinion pieces on books topics here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/series/teen-opinion>.
 