
While the needle is moving in the right direction, the lack of women at the 
top of the creative tree is still a huge problem for the creative industries:as 
of 2014 only 13% of women occupied creative director roles 
<http://www.brandrepublic.com/article/1380684/women-creative-who-what-where-when>
.

In an attempt to inspire the next generation of creative leaders, creative 
networking platformThe Dots <http://www.the-dots.com/> asked women making waves 
in the creative industries for advice, woman to woman. Leaders in fashion, 
advertising, illustration, tech, film, arts and social enterprise shared some 
candid words of wisdom for future creative leaders.

Perfect your craft

Never stop learning – soak up the new – whether you’re an art director, 
graphic designer or producer. Ali Hannah, creative director at Blippar and 
founder ofCreative Equals <http://www.the-dots.com/CreativeEquals> says: “Like 
a good athlete, flex your creative muscles every day. Hone your skills, perfect 
your craft, and sharpen up your book until you think it’s perfect. Even now, 
I’m always learning, so think you’re always in beta.”

Work outside your comfort zone

Emma Perkins, executive creative director at MullenLowe Open and co-creator of 
Token Man, an initiative to give men a better understanding of the challenges 
women face in the industry, is an advocate of doing things outside your comfort 
zone. “The scariest things I’ve put myself forward for have been the best 
things,” she says.


Surround yourself with positive people

Positivity breeds positivity. Gemma Greaves 
<http://www.the-dots.com/GemmaGreaves>, managing director of The Marketing 
Society and the first female president of the Solus Club highlights this as a 
crucial way of achieving your goals: “Surround yourself with people who make 
you better and complement you – those who radiate energy. Always avoid the 
drains.”

Work for people you respect

Even the most desirable places to work can become competitive. Holly Hay 
<http://www.the-dots.co.uk/HollyHay>, photographic editor of AnOther magazine, 
has a great solution for overcoming this: “Work for people you respect and make 
yourself indispensable.”


Be your own boss

One way to carve your own niche in the creative industries is to start your 
own business. That’s whatKathryn Parsons 
<http://www.the-dots.com/KathrynParsons>, co-CEO of Decoded did. She says: 
“Entrepreneurship is a huge focus for my creativity. Dreaming up ideas and 
making them a reality in the world. I am excited to see a growing wave of 
female entrepreneurs, imagining how they might make a difference in the world, 
and manifesting that creativity through the medium of business.”

Harriet Vine, who co-founded British jewellery Tatty Devine 
<http://www.the-dots.com/TattyDevine> with Rosie Wolfenden, who both recently 
received MBE’s for their Services to the Fashion Industry, shared some 
fantastic advice for creative entrepreneurs: “Never wait for permission. Work 
with a friend to share your dreams with, do what you want, not what you should 
do.”

Know your worth

It’s important not forget your own worth. Melanie Eusebe 
<http://www.the-dots.com/MelanieEusebe>, a board member of the Creative 
Industries Federation and founder of The Black British Business Awards 
reiterats this. “This industry is famous for unpaid work and low wages at 
entry. Apprenticeships and interning may be necessary when starting out, but be 
sure that you are getting something from it and that you teach yourself how to 
negotiate for what you want,” she says.

Network like crazy

It comes naturally to some, and is like pulling teeth for others. Either way, 
getting yourself out there is the most important way of creating opportunities.
Jane Scherbaum <http://www.the-dots.com/jscherbaum>, deputy head of Design at 
the V&A <http://www.the-dots.com/VandA>: “Build your profile, your network and 
your portfolio. Never think Why?, ask yourself Why not?”. Go forth and network, 
you never know what might come out of it.

Find a role model

Women today are fortunate to be following in the footsteps of pioneers before 
them.Nadra Shah <http://www.the-dots.com/nadrashah>, director of culture at The 
House of St Barnabas <http://www.the-dots.com/HOSB>, says we should all “find a 
role model and watch, listen and emulate”. There are plenty of women out there, 
so find one and even approach them for mentorship.


Break the mould

It’s all well and good looking for role models for inspiration, but in an 
increasingly fast moving world it’s important to carve your own niche, 
especially in male dominated industries such as advertising.Cindy Gallop 
<http://www.the-dots.com/CindyGallop>, advertising legend, entrepreneur and 
activist puts it brilliantly: “You don’t want to have to ‘break into’ the 
industry. You want to reinvent the industry so you can own it.”


Support the next generation

As we climb the ladder, we all have a responsibility to support the next 
generation of talent. Kate Dale, strategic lead of brand and digital at Sport 
England and the force behind multi-award winning campaignThis Girl Can 
<http://www.the-dots.com/charliecampbell/portfolio/this-girl-can-sport-england/197274>
, sums this up perfectly: “Support other women and once you’ve started climbing 
the ladder, reach down and give those below you a hand up. Be generous with 
your interest, time and expertise; you’ll be someone people want to work with.”


Pip Jamieson is an entrepreneur and founder of creative professional 
networking siteThe Dots <http://www.the-dots.co.uk>.


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter.
 