
1. Alta Terra, Lavigerie, France
 Alta Terra mountain retreat, Lavigerie, France 
A stone's throw from the laid-back village of Lavigerie, in the volcanic 
Auvergne region - one of France's most undiscovered ski destinations - this 
lodge ticks all the boxes. Once a faded 1920s hotel, it is now a cool, 
eco-friendly B&B, renovated using local materials (wood abounds). Kick back in 
the sauna, hammam and outdoor hot tub after a hard day's cross-country skiing 
or snowshoeing, before re-fuelling on local, organic food (every other night 
the table d'hote menu is vegetarian). Next morning, expect a feast of cheese, 
ham and yogurt from a neighbouring farm.

• Book it: +33 4 71 20 83 03; altaterra-cantal.com 
<http://www.altaterra-cantal.com>; doubles from €65 per night, including 
breakfast.

Get there: Ryanair (0871 246 0000; ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) flies 
from London Stansted to Rodez from around £28 return; from the airport it is 
about three hours' drive to Alta Terra. To plan your trip by train seeseat61.com
 <http://www.seat61.com/>.

2. Monte Rosa Mountain Refuge, Zermatt, Switzerland
 Monte Rosa Mountain Refuge, Zermatt, Switzerland 
Tucked below the mighty Matterhorn, with jaw-dropping views over the Gorner, 
Grenz and Mount Rose glaciers, this metallic, angular building looks more like 
some futuristic space station than a mountain lodge. Sleeping up to 120 hikers 
and climbers, the state-of-the-art refuge is decked out in local wood and is 
designed to obtain 90% of the power it needs from the sun. It will reopen from 
10 March to mid-May, with the summer season starting in mid-June. This is a 
lodge for serious skiers, and is reached by a three-hour hike from Rotenboden, 
including a glacier traverse (crampons recommended).

• Book it: +41 44 632 70 82; neuemonterosahuette.ch 
<http://www.neuemonterosahuette.ch>; monterosa.sac@rhone.ch 
<mailto:monterosa.sac@rhone.ch>; from CHF35.50 per night, room only.

Get there: easyJet (as before) flies from 10 UK airports to Geneva from around 
£40 return; from the airport it's a four-hour train journey to Zermatt. To plan 
your trip by train seeseat61.com <http://www.To plan your trip by train see 
seat61.com.> or Rail Europe <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>.

3. Maison Coutin, Tarentaise Valley, France 
 Maison Coutin mountain lodge, Tarentaise Valley, France 
This small, family-run lodge is situated in the charming village of 
Peisey-Nancroix in the heart of the Tarentaise Valley, but comes with peace and 
quiet you don't get in the crowded resorts. With an eco-friendly ethos, it has 
just three rooms (sleeping up to three, four and six) all with mountain views, 
and serves hearty organic suppers (the fruit and veg come straight from the 
garden), cooked in the outdoor wood oven. Go cross-country skiing, snow-walking 
or take the ski lift, 500m away, to the vast ski area of Les Arcs.

• Book it: +33 4 79 07 93 05; maison-coutin.fr 
<http://www.monterosa.sac@rhone.ch>; one week's stay from €558 for two people, 
including breakfast.

Get there: easyJet (as before) flies from London Gatwick and Stansted to Lyon 
from around £40 return; from the airport it's an hour-and-a-half drive to 
Peisey-Nancroix. Or take the train from Lyon to Landry, where the owners will 
collect you.

4. Chic Choc Mountain Lodge, Quebec, Canada
 Chic Chocs Mountain Lodge, Quebec, Canada 
This ski-in ski-out mountain hideaway, located in the vast Matane Wildlife 
Reserve, is as remote as ski lodges get: in winter, it is only reachable by 
snowcat from Cap-Chat. Pronounced "shick shock", the 18-room, heavily insulated 
lodge has been designed as an energy-saving building, though it's not without 
its share of apres-ski comforts, from the log-fire lounge to the sauna and 
outdoor spa. Click into your skis or strap on a pair of snowshoes to explore 
the 60-square kilometre area of the reserve that is for guest-use only. Look 
out for moose, caribou and soaring eagles.

• Book it: +1 800 665 3091; sepaq.com/chc/en <http://www.sepaq.com/chc/en>; 
three-night stays start from C$697.50pp (£446), including all meals, transfers 
from Cap Chat, ski guide, all equipment and facilities.

Get there: Air Canada (0871 220 1111; aircanada.com <http://www.aircanada.com>
) flies London Heathrow to Montreal from around £300 return. A coach transfer 
from Montreal to Cap Chat costs around C$138 return (orleansexpress.com 
<http://www.orleansexpress.com>), excluding local taxes.

5. Iglu-Dorf, Grandvalira, Andorra
 Iglu-Dorf Igloo Villages 
For a stylish, low-impact sleep in the snow, you can't beat Iglu-Dorf in the 
Pyrenean resort of Grandvalira in Andorra, which opened last winter. Part of a 
chain of five sites across Germany and Switzerland, this cluster of 
intricately-carved snowdomes sleeps 34 guests, and while they are certainly 
cool (temperatures inside the igloos hover around 0°C) they are comfortable 
too, with big air mattresses and lots of blankets and candles. The standard 
igloos have space for six people, or for couples there are igloos-for-two, 
complete with sheepskins and private hot tub. After a morning's ski or 
snowshoeing, go on a husky sleigh ride or snowmobiling, before retreating to 
one of Iglu-Dorf's two bars, Jacuzzis or sauna.

• Book it: +376 89 18 00; iglu-dorf.com <http://www.iglu-dorf.com>; igloos 
start from €99pp per night, including transfers from Grau Roig, all meals, 
skiing and snowshoeing.

Get there: Take the Eurostar from London to Paris from £69 return, and take a 
connecting sleeper train from Paris to L'Hospitalet from £36 return, change 
here for a bus transfer (£17 return) to Pas de la Cas, where it's a short taxi 
ride Grau Roig. The train journey can be booked through Rail Europe (as before).

6. Mountain Living Residence Hotel Lagació, San Cassiano, Italy
 Mountain Living Residence Hotel Lagació, San Cassiano, Italy 
The small but stylish South Tyrolean village of San Cassiano, in the heart of 
the Italian Dolomites, was put firmly on the eco ski map last December, with 
the opening of this very cool hotel. The 24 apartments are as elegant as they 
are eco-friendly, built using local wood, slate, larch and spruce, with 
floor-to-ceiling thermally insulated windows. The hotel has a Finnish sauna and 
steam bath (TLC for those post-ski muscles), a ski shuttle service to and from 
the Alta Badia ski area, and all the food is organic. Even the hotel's water 
comes from the owner's own spring.

• Book it: +39 0471 849 503; lagacio.com <http://www.lagacio.com>; doubles 
from €180 (£162) per night for two people including breakfast.

Get there: EasyJet (0905 821 0905; easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies 
from London Gatwick, Bristol and Liverpool to Innsbruck from around £60 return; 
from the airport it's a two-hour drive to San Cassiano. Or, take a train from 
London to Innsbruck from £239 return through Rail Europe (0844 848 4070;
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>).

7. Nipika Mountain Resort, Canadian Rockies, Canada
 Nipika Mountain Resort, Canadian Rockies, Canada 
This wonderfully rustic resort is located in the Canadian Rockies, near the 
Kootenay National Park. Not only does it generate all its electricity via 
solar, micro-hydro and wind power, but dead wood, salvaged from the forest, is 
placed in a central boiler to provide heat and hot water to each of its seven 
beautiful log cabins and lodge (sleeping 13), all of which have fully-equipped 
kitchens. As well as skiing on the 50kms of ski trails, guests can go mountain 
biking, hiking or fish, canoe, kayak and raft in the nearby Kootenay River.

• Book it: +1 250 342-6516; nipika.com <http://www.nipika.com>; cabins 
(sleeping two) start from C$230 per night; full lodge rental starts from 
C$1,000 per night.

Get there: British Airways (0844 493 0787; ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies 
from London Heathrow to Calgary from around £500. Hire a car for the 250km 
drive to Nipika.

8. Aravis Lodge, La Clusaz, France
 Aravis Lodge, La Clusaz, France 
With the ski resort of La Clusaz right on its doorstep, this 100-year-old 
chalet is located in the small village of St Jean de Sixt in the Aravis 
Mountains. With 17 bedrooms, a gym, sauna and massage room, it takes its green 
credentials seriously: waste is composted or recycled, it has solar panels for 
heat and hot water, and it aims to source as much fair trade, local, and free 
range produce as possible (there's even a Vegetarian Society accredited menu). 
It also offsets its carbon emissions. Ski by day (the lodge runs twice-daily 
mini-buses to La Clusaz and Grand Bornand), and go sledging or snow-shoeing at 
night - laid on for free by the lodge.

• Book it: +44 (0)1202 661865; karibuni.co.uk <http://www.karibuni.co.uk>; 
from £650 per week, half-board, including Aravis region lift pass, evening 
entertainments and airport transfers from Geneva.

Get there: EasyJet (as before) flies from 10 UK airports to Geneva from around 
£40 return. Or visit theRail Europe <http://www.raileurope.co.uk> website.

9. Whitepod, Les Cerniers, Switzerland
 Whitepod, Les Cerniers, Switzerland 
When this camp of low-impact "pods" opened in 2005 it was one of the most 
innovative and exciting projects the ski world had seen. Last year, the pods 
relocated to a new site, perched above the village of Les Cerniers. The 15 pods 
are wonderfully cosy - think plush carpets, large comfy beds, wood stoves and 
Scandinavian-style bathrooms (sourced with warmed spring water) - and are a 
short walk from the base-camp, where there's a restaurant and spa. The camp has 
access to 10km of slopes (there are two private drag lifts), or for something a 
bit different try dog sledding or paragliding, both bookable through the camp.

• Book it: +41 24 471 38 38; whitepod.com <http://www.whitepod.com>; prices 
from €234 per pod per night.

Get there: easyJet (0905 821 0905; easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies 
from 10 UK airports to Geneva from around £40 return; then take a train to 
Aigle (it takes just over one hour). Free transfers from Aigle station to Les 
Cerniers are organised by Whitepod twice a day - otherwise the camp can 
organise a taxi.

10. Hotel Terra, Jackson Hole, USA 
 Hotel Terra, Jackson Hole, USA 
There is eco-friendly, and then there is Hotel Terra. From the 100% recycled 
roof shingles over your head to the organic carpets under your feet, and 
everything in between (lots of bamboo, marble, granite, crushed glass and 
stone), this hotel is as green as they come. It even generates all its 
electricity via solar, micro-hydro and wind power. Most of the rooms have 
oversized picture windows - perfect for gawping at those mountain views - and 
there's a rooftop spa, infinity pool and hot tub, too.

Book it: +1 307 739 4000; hotelterrajacksonhole.com 
<http://www.hotelterrajacksonhole.com>; doubles from $299 (£200) per night, 
room only.

Get there: American Airlines (+44 (0)20 7365 0777; americanairlines.co.uk 
<http://www.americanairlines.co.uk>) flies from London Heathrow and Gatwick to 
Jackson Hole (via Dallas) from around £450 return.

• For advice on taking the train to your ski resort see seat61.com 
<http://www.seat61.com/> and find more ideas in our interactive guide to 10 ski 
resorts by rail 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/interactive/2009/nov/06/skiing-railtravel-low-carbon-travel>
.
 