
The politics of hair has a lustrous and long history – from Margaret 
Thatcher’s 120 visits to the salon during a year as prime minister 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/margaret-thatcher/10541067/National-Archives-Margaret-Thatchers-120-hair-appointments-in-a-year.html>
 to the revelation thatFrançois Hollande spends around £7,600 a month on his 
hair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/bad-hair-days-for-francois-hollande-over-10000-coiffeur-bill>
. And now there’s the pob – AKA the political bob worn, in varyingways, by 
politicians ranging fromTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> and Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpob-power-haircut-women-theresa-may-political-bob%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a304b55effd8a24b2087ad3aa0a5598c7887ae%2F0_62_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20power%20of%20the%20political%20bob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpob-power-haircut-women-theresa-may-political-bob%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20power%20of%20the%20political%20bob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpob-power-haircut-women-theresa-may-political-bob%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a304b55effd8a24b2087ad3aa0a5598c7887ae%2F0_62_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon with a face-framing pob Photograph: 
Andrew Milligan/PA 
While Thatcher’s hair had that “this lady’s not for turning” rigidity, the pob 
is an update on hair that says “dependable, no-nonsense, tough on immigration”. 
May’s has a quick-blowdry-in-front-of-the-bathroom-mirror feel, while both 
Merkel’s and Sturgeon’s look like wash-and-go styles. Katie Allan, creative 
manager at Charles Worthington, says older women often have a variation on this 
haircut because it’s “faceframing … once you’re over 50 [as all pob wearers, 
bar Sturgeon, are], your hair is drier. You get it cut every six to eight 
weeks, and you’d only need to blowdry it once a week. Clients who get this cut 
have more important things to do but they want their hair to look nice – or 
that’s the impression this haircut gives, anyway.”

Indeed. There’s the implication that the pob wearer is not a woman who has 
time to worry about such fripperies as the differing benefits of Moroccan Oil 
and Kérastase Liquid Gold. IfKim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> requires a team for 
washing her hair (revealingher routine 
<https://intothegloss.com/2015/02/kim-kardashian-makeup/> earlier this year, 
she said “we start out with a blowout” implying several minions on Team Hair), 
the pob is the polar opposite: it’s low-maintenance chic.

Grey is great: why hair is the last bastion of vanity | Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/02/grey-hair-vanity-scientists-gene-hillary-clinton>
It can be more time-consuming than it looks, though. Clinton, as the American 
in the pob gang, is always going to have to pay more attention to her hair – 
the required levels of glamour increase stateside. After facing derision for
wearing a scrunchie 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2640710/Hillary-jokes-wished-called-book-The-Scrunchie-Chronicles.html>
, Clinton now has a personal hair stylist, Isabelle Goetz, who travels with 
her, styling her hair from 7am, and the presidential nominee was recentlyspotted
 <http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/04/hillary-clinton-amal-clooney-haircuts> 
at the John Barrett Salon at Bergdorf Goodman in New York, where a haircut 
costs more than £450.

The exciting adventures of President Trump's Hair – leader of the free world 
(and the moon) | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2015/dec/11/the-exciting-adventures-of-president-trumps-hair-leader-of-the-free-world-and-the-moon>
All this for, as Goetz said 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/07/hillary-clinton-haircut-hair-stylist-Isabelle-goetz.html>
 to New York magazine, an underwhelming end result: “I want to make sure her 
hair is never an issue”. This, of course, contrasts with her opponents. The 
Trumps look as if they have secrets in their just-stepped-out-of-the-salon hair 
– fromDonald <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s possible weave 
to Melania’s long, tonged waves and Ivanka’s GHD’d baby-blond style. Clinton has
called Trump 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/31/hillary-clinton-mocks-trump-id-hair-super-lgbt-new-york-fundraiser/>
 “an id with hair”, a barb that couldn’t really be directed at a pob wearer, 
the style is far too unassuming. Clinton knows she is on to a good cut. “I 
think she’d like to try more things with it,” said Goetz. “But for now, that 
look is a good look and she should stick with it.” In the politics of hair, the 
pob is the ultimate power play.
 