
Halfway through our lunch at the Mercer Kitchen in New York’s Soho, I try a 
little of Stella McCartney’s order, a plate of organic raw kale salad with 
parmesan and lemon. She keeps insisting I do, perhaps because I had been a 
little sceptical when she ordered it. (When I listen back to the tape I can 
hear myself squawk, “Raw kale?”, with a woeful lack of Manhattan sophistication 
in the modish greens arena, as the waitress takes our order.) She’s right, it’s 
delicious; but it nearly blows the roof of my mouth off. It could more 
accurately be described as raw jalapeño salad with kale. As I gulp down San 
Pellegrino, McCartney picks up her fork, cool as a cucumber. “Yeah, right? I’m 
actually dying inside. Can you put that in the piece, that I ate a plate of 
chillies while we were talking? I think you should ­mention that I can fricking 
master a jalapeño.”


I should have guessed. This is classic ­McCartney. You don’t get to hold your 
own in a 50/50 partnership with luxury giant Kering over 13 years, or to build 
a label with annual profits of £3.4m without using fur or leather in an 
industry built on bags and shoes, or to win three British Fashion Awards and an 
OBE, without having a steely core. It makes sense that beneath the kale – 
vegetarian, skinny, fashionable, totally on-brand – there is a kick.

Stella McCartney is a complicated brand. This, I suggest to her, is a key part 
of what makes it compelling. To make it in fashion’s premier league, as 
McCartney has done, you need to create more than beautiful clothes. You need to 
create a brand that has value in the name itself, so that the customer who 
spends £50 on a keyring or £80 on an iPhone cover feels they are buying a drop 
of that essence.Stella McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney> is principled and 
serious, but also beautiful and whimsical and fun. House codes range from 
masculine (a period spent training with Edward Sexton of Savile Row made an 
indelible impact on McCartney) to ultra-feminine (lace dresses and flourished 
hems are recurring motifs). There are city-slicker elements (the Falabella bag, 
with its chain hardware, is pure urban energy) and country-girl elements 
(horses, wild ­flowers, chunky lawn-picnic sandals). And it is these contrasts, 
these tensions, that women relate to, because being a woman in 2014 is – above 
all else – complicated. The brands that feel old-fashioned now are those that 
are one-dimensional, whether hearts-and-flowers romantic or pure 
power-dressing. Women do not see themselves in these simplified terms.


“I’m a woman designing for women, and there are so many layers to that,” 
McCartney says. “On the one hand, it brings an effortlessness but it also means 
that I think and overthink every detail, whether it’s physical or mental or 
even – in some sense – spiritual. I can debate for weeks whether a trouser 
should sit on the waist, or a centimetre below, or on the hip, whether it 
should have a zip or a button, because I find personally that a detail like 
that can have a massive impact on how I carry myself that day. If I wear a 
slouchy jean, that will affect my posture and my whole manner. What I’m 
projecting will be a reflection of that waistband, a detail you might not even 
notice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394107017474%2F43c53865-ce12-4c87-99f7-d7cc1b8d81f0-2060x1322.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394107017474%2F43c53865-ce12-4c87-99f7-d7cc1b8d81f0-2060x1322.jpeg>
 Stella McCartney photographed by Allison Michael Orenstein for The Fashion 
“Fashion is psychology, so there’s a whole holistic sense of self that I’m 
thinking about when I’m designing. And of course, I want the clothes to be 
modern and cool and relevant. And at the same time, they have got to be 
perfectly constructed in the most beautiful ­fabric, because I want them to 
last not just your lifetime but your daughter’s lifetime and her daughter’s 
lifetime. And that’s just scratching the surface, because inside of that I am 
trying to source those beautiful fabrics in a responsible way, I’m trying to 
show that it is possible to have a solid business in luxury fashion that is led 
by a woman. And yet I don’t want anyone to feel any of that. I want the woman 
who comes into my store to feel at ease, to see a dress and try it on and to 
love how it makes her feel. At that moment, what I want to do is uplift that 
woman. So, yes. There is a certain level of complexity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394101740231%2Fdc199925-eac1-4ee4-975f-40b180c2beac-690x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394101740231%2Fdc199925-eac1-4ee4-975f-40b180c2beac-690x720.jpeg>
 Stella McCartney photographed for the Fashion with looks from her SS14 
collection. Photograph: Allison Michael Orenstein 
McCartney’s world has never been what you might call one-note. She grew up the 
daughter of an impossibly wealthy, famous pop star, but living on an organic 
farm and attending the local state school. At 15, she interned with Christian 
Lacroix; by the time she completed her foundation course at Ravensbourne and 
enrolled at Central Saint Martins she had notched up placements at Vogue, Betty 
Jackson and Joseph. Hired by Chloé soon after graduating, she confounded 
critics with a series of well-reviewed collections; but in 2001, her star took 
a dive when the first own-name Stella McCartney show, featuring Cockney rhyming 
slang, took a critical battering. Since then, she has steadily built a business 
with an aesthetic that spans from sportswear (her Team GB designs grew out of a 
decade’s experience designing Stella McCartney for Adidas) to a growing 
presence in eveningwear. (Her name is increasingly dropped on the red carpet, 
despite the fact they don’t “actively compete” in that market, as her PR puts 
it. “We don’t pay people to wear dresses, is what he means,” McCartney chimes 
in.) Oh, and somehow in the midst of all this she has had two sons (Miller, 
nine, and Beckett, six) and two daughters (Bailey, seven, and Reiley, three) 
with Alasdhair Willis, whom she married 11 years ago. The family spend weekdays 
in west London and weekends at a Georgian manor house with horses, and 
home-grown kale, in the 400-acre garden.


McCartney has used fashion to build ­herself an environment – a wardrobe, in 
fact – that incorporates all of this: her background, her beliefs, the worlds 
of work and of being a mum, her London and country lifestyles. Today she is 
wearing an electric-blue sweatshirt with an embossed pattern over a silk shirt 
in deep french navy, with faded slouchy jeans and heels, all from her label. 
“I’m a head to ­toe-er. I don’t wear anything else. I wear my own ­lingerie, I 
wear Stella For Adidas socks. Some pieces are new and some are old – these 
jeans I’ve had for about five years, the shoes are brand new. But it’s all my 
stuff.” The only non-McCartney pieces she wears are the odd vintage piece from 
Linda, her late mother (“but not so much these days”) and wellies by Hunter, 
where ­Willis is creative director.

McCartney’s is a privileged life, but like that of any working mum it gets 
gritty at a granular level. She’s in New York to present her pre-fall 
collection; after our lunch, we will head uptown to the Park Avenue mansion 
where models will play hopscotch and throw shapes in miniature electric cars, 
and guests will include Patti Smith, Jerry Seinfeld, Liv Tyler and Susan 
Sarandon. But, discussing schedules, we discover we are both on the red-eye 
home to London, heading directly to the airport after the event. “Well, that’s 
because we’ve got kids,” she says. “But you just know, don’t you, that if we 
were men with children, we would fly home tomorrow. Why is it that as a mum, 
you don’t get to go back to your hotel and sleep?”

As a lunch companion, she has a standard level of food neuroses for a woman of 
our age. She demands that her male PR order a side of chips. But, he says, I 
don’t want fries. Yes, but we want some, McCartney says. “We’ve got to have 
something exciting on the table, right?” she appeals to me. (She has two, maybe 
three, chips.) She is slim with a honed body and looks young for 42, not in a 
Botoxed way, but because there’s something eternally childlike about that 
freckled, foxy colouring, and because money itself smooths years off the face.

The orthodoxy of the day around how to be a good mother while working hard is 
a spiel about being in the moment: when I’m at work I’m committed to work; when 
I’m with my kids I give them 100%. But McCartney, typically, questions this 
simplistic mantra. “It’s not really like that, is it? Because you’re reading 
the bedtime story and suddenly you remember a call you didn’t make. And when 
I’m dropping my kids at school I’m noticing what ­people are wearing. The idea 
that you can have no life outside of that one moment doesn’t make sense to me. 
When I had Miller, he came three weeks early, just before my fashion show. So 
the DJ was practically the first person to meet him, in the hospital room, 
talking about show music.” We discuss how, recently, high-profile examples have 
led to it becoming acceptable for female designers to take maternity leave. 
“It’s brilliant. I’m a bit annoyed I missed out. But really, I wouldn’t change 
a thing. My kids are great. Just great.”
Stella's greatest hits 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2014/feb/graphics-slideshow-master/index.html?0AhDtwXOtiI5edGxUS04taDFESFhfblBaWkczazJqOXc>
Most successful fashion designers start off approachable and normal, becoming 
neurotic and difficult as the skeins of the industry wind more tightly around 
them. With ­McCartney, it seems to have been the other way around, a spiky 
relationship with the media gradually mellowing. “It wasn’t easy navigating 
­publicity, when I started, because I grew up with ‘being famous’ and I’m just 
not into it, and I guess defensiveness gets read into that. And I didn’t get an 
easy ride at the beginning. But I think people have now accepted that I 
genuinely am a fashion designer, that I have only ever worked, and so I feel 
more comfortable.” Her designs for Team GB, while initially met with some 
scepticism, ended up casting the happy, patriotic Olympian glow over the 
McCartney name, drawing her closer to the British public. She is still awed by 
the experience. “Having the chance to be any small part of that historic moment 
was pretty life-changing.”


I am interested in unpicking the emotions behind the McCartney ethics. Stores 
are powered by renewable energy, with wood floors made from sustainably managed 
forests; ­fabrics are organic where possible (34% of denim, 36% of jersey); no 
leather or fur is used. Are animal rights what matters most? “It’s all one 
thing to me. I ride my horse and I’ll notice a tree coming into bud and connect 
that with the weather. I was brought up a vegetarian on an organic farm, so 
it’s a natural mindset for me. Fifty million animals are killed every year for 
bags and shoes. Even if you’re not interested in the cruelty aspect, there’s a 
huge environmental impact. Vast water resources, and grain that could otherwise 
be going into people’s mouths, are going through an animal in order to become 
an accessory.”
The hardest part is squaring principles with the relentless demands of a 
business of this scale. “There’s no doubt I would have a business five times 
bigger if we didn’t work like this, but doing it this way is so much more 
exciting to me. Luckily, I like a challenge.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394101880761%2F677f8fd0-378f-4bcc-bcd1-13ebfe121e39-1642x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20many%20faces%20of%20Stella%20McCartney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fmar%2F06%2F-sp-stella-mccartney-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F6%2F1394101880761%2F677f8fd0-378f-4bcc-bcd1-13ebfe121e39-1642x2040.jpeg>
 Stella McCartney photographed for the Fashion by Allison Michael Orenstein 
When I interviewed McCartney five years ago she was vociferous in her 
frustration at how few other fashion companies had followed her ethical lead; 
now, she seems resigned. “This industry is supposed to be about change, but 
it’s not changing much.” Fast-fashion companies such as H&M, Levi’s and Adidas 
are more engaged with the ethical debate, “because those bigger companies have 
more people to answer to. The luxury industry has no one to answer to and they 
literally get away with murder. But it’s complicated, because there’s an 
argument that better-made, better-quality clothing is itself more sustainable. 
Buying a dress for a fiver and throwing it away after a couple of weeks is not 
environmentally friendly, whatever the fabric.”


McCartney inherited her uncompromising spirit from her mum, Linda, who died in 
1998, when Stella was 26. “My mum had a massive influence on me, not just in 
what she wore and how she looked, but in her spirit. She was married to one of 
the most famous men in the world and she didn’t wear any makeup, ever. I mean, 
have you ever seen the wife of a man like that rock up with no makeup on? 
Because I haven’t, since. That courage, that inner confidence, is something 
I’ve never experienced in anyone else. I certainly haven’t got the balls to do 
it. I find everything about her pioneering, and amazing. She had a beautiful 
ease with herself.” That, she says, is her ideal. “That ease, that freedom and 
confidence. That’s what I want to help the Stella woman to find.”
 