
1) Takes up boxing after his bike is stolen (1954)

If it wasn’t for the lure of free food, Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali> may never have boxed. As the 
12-year-old Cassius Clay he pedalled on his red and white Schwinn bike to the 
Louisville Home Show, an exhibition for black businesses, for the free popcorn, 
hot dogs and candy. But when he left, his bike was gone. A stranger suggested 
he speak to a policeman, Joe Martin, at the nearby Columbia gym. As Ali later 
related in his autobiography, The Greatest: “I ran downstairs crying but the 
sights and sounds and smell of boxing excited me so much that I almost forgot 
about the bike.” As Clay left, Martin tapped him on the shoulder. “By the way, 
we got boxing every night, Monday through Friday, from six to eight. Here’s an 
application in case you want to join.”

Muhammad Ali dead at 74: reaction to death of a boxing icon – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-dead-age-74-live-updates>
2) Wins his first bout – and is hailed a future world champion (1954)

Clay was no out-of-the blocks natural. The first time he stepped into the 
ring, against an older fighter, he flailed wildly and within a minute his nose 
was bloodied and he had to be pulled out. As Martin put it, he “didn’t know a 
left hook from a kick in the ass”. But six weeks later the 6st 9lb Clay won his 
first bout by split-decision against another novice, Ronny O’Keefe, on Martin’s 
TV show Tomorrow’s Champions, which was shown all over Kentucky. Afterwards his 
father Cassius Clay Snr proclaimed: “My son is going to be another Joe Louis. 
The World Heavyweight Champion, Cassius Clay!”

3) Gold at the Rome Olympics (1960)
 Cassius Clay wins gold at the Rome Olympics. Photograph: Central Press/Getty 
Images 
Clay nearly didn’t travel to the Olympics because he was so afraid of flying, 
and he even bought a parachute from an army surplus store to wear on the plane. 
After comfortable victories in his opening three bouts, Clay found the 1956 
bronze medallist Zbigniew Pietrzykowski harder to fathom in the final,
struggling with his opponent’s southpaw stance before winning a unanimous 
verdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/mar/07/stunning-olympic-moments-cassius-clay>
. Later, in his autobiography, he claimed to have thrown his gold medal into 
the Ohio River, saying: “A few minutes earlier I had fought a man almost to 
death because he had wanted to take it from me … now I had thrown it in the 
river. And I felt no pain and regret. Only relief, and a new strength.” It was 
fiction. The truth was more mundane: he lost the medal.

4) Clay meets the wrestler Gorgeous George (1961)

After turning professional, Clay won six fights in six months. Then, on a Las 
Vegas radio show to promote his seventh contest, he met the wrestler ‘Gorgeous’ 
George Wagner, whose promotional skills got audiences coming to watch. As Ali 
later told his biographer Thomas Hauser: “[George] started shouting: ‘If this 
bum beats me I’ll crawl across the ring and cut off my hair, but it’s not gonna 
happen because I’m the greatest fighter in the world.’ And all the time, I was 
saying to myself: ‘Man. I want to see this fight’ And the whole place was sold 
out when Gorgeous George wrestled … including me … and that’s when I decided if 
I talked more, there was no telling how much people would pay to see me.”

5) Clay becomes a boxing Nostradamus (1962)

Ali soon started correctly predicting the round of victory – there was a run 
of seven times out of eight where he got it right – and when, in February 1962, 
he stopped Don Warner in four rather than the five forecast, he claimed he had 
finished the fight early because Warner had not shaken hands. Such promotional 
skills were paying off. When the boxing writer AJ Liebling arrived at Madison 
Square Garden 30 minutes before the first preliminary bout to Clay’s fight with 
Doug Jones he was shocked to find sold out signs and people being turned away.

6) Shows his heart against Henry Cooper (1963)
 Cassius Clay is felled by Henry’s Hammer in 1963 Photograph: Allsport/Getty 
Images 
Clay sauntered into Wembley like a monarch, with a gown emblazoned with 
‘Cassius the Great’ and a crown encrusted with imitation diamonds. And, having 
predicted Cooper would fall in five, Ali preferred slow death by a thousand 
cuts. But with five seconds remaining of the fourth round,Cooper swung a left 
hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2011/may/02/sir-henry-cooper-five-memorable-fights-pictures>
 – Henry’s Hammer – that smashed Clay flush. Clay was down and up as the bell 
sounded. But he was still groggy as Angelo Dundee, his trainer, alerted the 
referee to a tear in his glove and a cornerman poured ice over Clay’s lower 
extremities. No spare gloves were available, but the delay gave Ali had a few 
extra seconds to recover. A brutal attack ripped Cooper’s face to shreds and 
the fight stopped in the fifth – as forecast.

7) Earns himself a fight with Sonny Liston (1964)

Clay was fast, handsome and quick-tongued but he was also brave. Just before 
the second Sonny Liston v Floyd Patterson fight in 1963, Clay followed Liston 
to Vegas and, after watching him lose at craps, shouted to him: “Look at that 
big ugly bear, he can’t do anything right.” The promoter Harold Conrad told 
Thomas Hauser what happened next: “So Liston throws the dice down, walks over 
to Clay, and says: ‘Listen here you nigger faggot. If you don’t get out of here 
in 10 seconds I’m gonna pull that big tongue out of your mouth and stick it up 
your ass’.” Clay was scared. He walked. But later he drove to Liston’s house in 
Denver to holler at him from his driveway. Shortly afterwards the fight was 
signed. Ali had his world title shot.

8) “I shook up the world” – Clay wins world heavyweight title (1964)

Liston was a boxing dementor, those soulless eyes draining hope from 
opponents’ before his fists stole their consciousness. In 36 fights he had lost 
just once – and even then, after having his jaw broken, he didn’t quit. At the 
weigh-in, Clay’s pulse was double his normal rate. People thought he was 
scared. But as he explained to his doctor Ferdie Pacheco he had a plan: “Liston 
is scared of no man, but he is scared of a nut because he doesn’t know what I 
am going to do.” He soon found out. Clay was slicker and sharper and, after 
surviving a torrid fifth when some oil of wintergreen on Liston’s gloves set 
his eyes on fire,forced his opponent to quit at the end of the sixth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/23/muhammad-ali-sonny-liston>. 
Afterwards Clay told reporters he had “shook up the world … I am the greatest! 
… I am the prettiest thing that ever lived!” He was 22.

9) Cassius Clay becomes Muhammad Ali (1964)
 Malcolm X trains his camera on Muhammad Ali after he beat Sonny Liston to 
become the heavyweight champion of the world. Photograph: Bob Gomel/The LIFE 
Images Collection/Getty 
After the earthquake, the aftershock. Clay’s interest in the Black Muslims 
began in 1959 when he saw a man in Louisville selling newspapers shouting: 
“Muhammad speaks! Read it!” But it was only in March 1961 that he visited a 
temple and became deeply immersed in the religion. As Pacheco put it: “Until 
Ali came into camp the Black Muslims were considered a fringe lunatic group … 
[but] Ali understood you did not fuck with the Muslims. He liked their 
strength.” Clay held off announcing his conversion because he didn’t want to 
jeopardise his fight with Liston. But days beforehand his angry father, Cassius 
Clay Snr (who claimed the Black Muslims had threatened to kill him) confirmed 
that his son – later to be Cassius X, then Muhammad Ali – had indeed joined the 
Nation of Islam.

10) Ali shows his nasty side (1965 and 1967)
 Muhammad Ali drops Sonny Liston with a short hard right to the jaw on 25 May, 
1965, their second bout. Photograph: John Rooney/Associated Press 
After knocking out Liston in the first round of their rematch – a robust 
discussion continues over whether Liston, a mob fighter, took a dive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/story/0,3604,244097,00.html> – Ali faced 
Patterson, who had told Sports Illustrated: “The image of a Black Muslim as the 
world heavyweight champion disgraces the sport and nation.” Ali responded, 
first with his tongue – Patterson was “nothing but an Uncle Tom Negro” - and
then by torturing him for 12 rounds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pjCvY64Qy8>. In 1967, when Ali fought Ernie 
Terrell – who had referred to him Cassius Clay – he was just as vicious, 
demanding “What’s my name?”when he hit him on the way to a decision 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qkMlDuwBPY>. The writer Jimmy Cannon claimed: 
“It was a bad fight, nasty with the evil of religious fanaticism. This wasn’t 
an athletic contest. It was a kind of lynching.”

11) “I ain’t got no quarrel with them Vietcong” (1966)

Ali had twice sat and failed a military exam in 1964 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dLam_GiQ2Ww> - his army IQ score of 78 was 
well below the level required to be drafted. “I said I was the greatest not the 
smartest,” a stung Ali retorted. But in early 1966 the army relaxed their 
standards, leaving him eligible for the draft. After hours of questions from 
reporters, asking him where he stood on the Vietnam War, Ali erupted: “Man, I 
ain’t got no quarrel with them Vietcong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/apr/29/muhammad-ali-refuses-to-fight-in-vietnam-war-1967>
.” White America, who already hated him for being a Black Muslim, now accused 
him of being a draft dodger too.

12) Ali takes the heavyweight belt out of America (1966)

In five decades, from when Jack Johnson had lost his title to Jess Willard in 
Havana in 1915 to 1966, the heavyweight title had been contested only twice 
outside America. Yet with Ali finding it hard to fight in the US, he took his 
belt on the road: travelling to Canada to beatGeorge Chuvalo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRhBnojRQQM>, then to England to dispose of 
Henry Cooper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXo0FqZaRUE> – again – and Brian 
London <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zWnt4Z2Z9N0>, before hopping to Germany 
to beatKarl Mildenberger <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P8jcQbAimkU>. As 
Boxing Illustrated acknowledged: “He is a fine goodwill ambassador in foreign 
lands, well loved by the boxing public, who care nothing for his private 
beliefs.”

13) The Ali shuffle is unveiled (1966)

When Ali returned to America, he produced one of the great visual performances 
of his career, stopping Cleveland ‘Big Cat’ Williams in three rounds – although 
Williams, who had lost a kidney and needed four operations after being shot in 
1964, was an already broken shell. Ali knocked him over four times and debuted 
a series of blurring foot moves –the Ali shuffle 
<http://youtu.be/2sdnjg9xlfo?t=2m22s> – which he claimed was the hottest dance 
sensation since The Twist. Few now doubted his dominance. As Boxing Illustrated 
put it: “Many members of the press corps have found ways and means to find 
fault with Ali – he can’t punch, he can’t take a punch, he is too flashy, he 
makes a lot of amateurish mistakes. Anything to keep from giving his due … few 
doubters remain.”

14) Banned from boxing and thrown into jail (1967-68)

“How can I kill somebody when I pray five times a day for peace,” asked Ali, 
as over a few feverish months in 1967, he was stripped of his heavyweight title
and banned from boxing for refusing to join the US Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/04/muhammad-ali-vietnam-draft-richard-williams>
. A year later he had a 10-day spell in the Miami Dade County Jail, for driving 
without a valid license, where he served food to death row inmates. “The odour 
of urine and faeces is so strong I want to hold my nose,” he wrote. “The first 
man recognises me: ‘Well, I’ll be goddamned! They got the world heavyweight 
champion coming for dinner. The world must be ready to come to an end!’” The 
philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote to tell him: ‘The air will change. I sense 
it.” And it did.But it took until June 1970 before the supreme court ruled Ali 
could fight again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2010/oct/27/muhammad-ali-jerry-quarry-october-1970>
.

15) The Fight of the Century (1971)
 Muhammad Ali steps away from a punch thrown by boxer Joe Frazier during their 
heavyweight title fight at Madison Square Garden in 1971. Photograph: 
Bettmann/CORBIS 
By the time Ali came out of exile the public’s mood had shifted. As the boxing 
historian Jim Jacobs put it: “The exile … showed people that Ali was sincere. 
It made him an underdog. He became a symbol to people who had never been 
interested in boxing.” But it had eroded his skills. At Madison Square Garden, 
Ali and the new champion Joe Frazier threw everything at each other. But Ali 
was not quite as elusive or sharp, and increasingly Frazier caught up with him, 
before a left hook putting Ali on his pants in 15th round. It was the moment, 
as Norman Mailer put it, that Ali was “dumped into 50,000 newspaper photographs 
… singing to the siren in the mistiest fogs of Queer Street.”He got up but lost 
a unanimous decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/08/joe-frazier-muhammad-ali-1971>.

16) Wins back title in The Rumble in the Jungle (1974) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/oct/30/from-the-vault-poetry-rumble-in-jungle>
 Muhammad Ali watches as defending world champion George Foreman goes down on 
the canvas in the eighth round of the Rumble in the Jungle. Photograph: Red/AP 
Even Ali’s extended family of hangers-on didn’t expect him beat George 
Foreman. Sensing the mood in his dressing room he asked: “What’s wrong around 
here? Everybody scared? Scared? A little thing like this? This is like another 
day in the gym.” Foreman had destroyed Frazier in two rounds, and set out to 
dismantle the 32-year-old Ali in much the same way. But Ali sat back on the 
slack ropes – the famous ‘rope-a-dope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/nov/15/10-sporting-gambles>’ – inviting 
Foremanto expend his energy before picking him off 
<http://youtu.be/k99vwx450dw?t=40s>. By the sixth Foreman was exhausted with, 
as Mailer put it, “lumps and swellings all over his face, his skin equal to tar 
that has baked in the sun.” With 20 seconds remaining of the eighth, Ali 
unfurled a chain of punches and Foreman twirled and flopped and fell. On 
commentary David Frost announced: “The great man has done it! This is the most 
joyous scene ever seen in the history of boxing!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fgeorge-foreman-on-muhammad-ali-he-was-truly-beautiful-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Foreman%20on%20Muhammad%20Ali%3A%20he%20was%20truly%20beautiful%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fgeorge-foreman-on-muhammad-ali-he-was-truly-beautiful-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Foreman%20on%20Muhammad%20Ali%3A%20he%20was%20truly%20beautiful%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2Fgeorge-foreman-on-muhammad-ali-he-was-truly-beautiful-audio&media=>
George Foreman on Muhammad Ali: he was truly beautiful – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/04/george-foreman-on-muhammad-ali-he-was-truly-beautiful-audio>
17) Thrilla in Manilla (1975) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/12/from-the-vault-frazier-ali>

Before their first fight, Ali had called Frazier “The wrong kind of Negro. 
He’s not like me, ‘cause he’s the Uncle Tom. He works for the enemy.” Before 
their third fight, he was just as spiteful, calling Frazier “a dumb ugly 
gorilla”. The fight, held in the broiling 10am heat, was – depending on your 
view –either a brutal classic or, given what became of both men later, painful 
to watch <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/sep/04/features.sport16> as 
they slugged each other to a standstill. Ali was on top early, Frazier rallied 
but with his eye closed, he took a beating in the 13th. At the end of the 14th, 
Frazier’s trainer Eddie Futch stopped the fight, telling him: “No one will 
forget what you did here today”. Ali later claimed that this was the closest to 
dying he had ever been.

18) Ali becomes a three-time heavyweight champion (1978)

Muhammad Ali dies, aged 74
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-dies> 
By now Ali was 36, but in fighting years he was even older. In one of the more 
unmotivated performances of his career, he had lost his title to Leon Spinks, a 
seven-fight novice. But a few months later he was a little less ploddingas he 
won the rematch to become the first man to hold the heavyweight belt for a 
third time <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/11/boxing>. 
Afterwards Ali promised he would retire, adding: “I suffered and sacrificed 
more than I ever did. There’s nothing left for me to gain by fighting.”

19) A horrible night against Larry Holmes (1980) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/07/boxing.features>
 Heavyweight champion Larry Holmes and Muhammad Ali exchange blows during 
their world heavyweight title match in 1980. Photograph: Bettmann/CORBIS 
But like so many fighters, Ali couldn’t keep away. He signed up to fight 
Holmes, his former sparring partner and now the new champion, and having taken 
huge quantities of diuretics he looked the part entering the ring. But as Ali 
admitted afterwards, the drugs had drained him: “In the last two days I 
couldn’t jog a mile. I was dead tired after one round and there were 14 more to 
come.” At the end of the tenth, his trainer Angelo Dundee wanted the fight 
stopped, but Ali’s chief hanger-on Drew ‘Bundini’ Brown, fought for it 
continue. Dundee won out. Ali, head bowed, didn’t have the energy to protest. 
He had not won a single round on the judges’ cards.

20) Atlanta – and reappraisal (1996-present day)

Not everyone has bought into the Ali-as-saint narrative: in his book Ghosts of 
Manilla, the acclaimed writer Mark Kram claimed: “Ali was no more a social 
force than Frank Sinatra. The politically fashionable clung to his racial 
invective as if it were the wisdom of a seer. Today, such are the times, he 
would be looked upon as a contaminant, a chronic user of hate language and a 
sexual profligate.”Yet when Ali was revealed as the person lighting the Olympic 
flame in Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jan/16/muhammad-ali-70th-birthday>
, his left hand involuntarily shaking because of Parkinson’s disease, the crowd 
reaction – sustained noise, tears, and a huge outpouring of love – showed just 
how much Ali was now revered.
 